                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            A THEORY OF THE FIRM BASED ON PARTNER DISPLACEMENT

                                        Thomas F. Hellmann
                                           Veikko Thiele

                                        Working Paper 18495
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18495


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




We would like to thank Philippe Aghion, Florian Ederer, Bob Gibbons, Trond Olsen, Birger Wernerfelt,
Ralph Winter, seminar participants at the University of British Columbia and the University of Toronto,
and participants of the European Meeting of the Econometric Society (ESEM) in Malaga, and the
Annual Meeting of the European Association for Research in Industrial Economics (EARIE) in Rome
for valuable comments and suggestions. Funding support from SSHRC is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Thomas F. Hellmann and Veikko Thiele. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of the Firm based on Partner Displacement
Thomas F. Hellmann and Veikko Thiele
NBER Working Paper No. 18495
October 2012
JEL No. D23,D82,D86,L22,M20

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a new theory of the firm where asset owners sometimes want to change partners ex-post.
The model identifies a fundamental trade-off between (i) a “displacement externality” under non-integration,
where a partner leaves a relationship even though the benefit is worth less than the loss to the displaced
partner, and (ii), a “retention externality” under integration, where a partner inefficiently retains the
other. Renegotiation cannot eliminate these inefficiencies when agents are wealth constrained. When
there is more asset specificity, displacement externalities matter more and retention externality less,
so that integration becomes more attractive. Our model also predicts that integration always provides
stronger incentives for specific investments, and that wealthy owners actually want to commit to ex-post
wealth constraints. Our analysis differs from the received theories of the firm because of our emphasis
on dynamic partner changes.


Thomas F. Hellmann
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
CANADA
and NBER
hellmann@sauder.ubc.ca

Veikko Thiele
Queen's School of Business
Goodes Hall
143 Union Street
Kingston, Ontario
Canada K7L 3N6
vthiele@business.queensu.ca
1    Introduction
The central questions in the theory of the firm are why firms exist, why assets are sometimes
held under some form of common ownership, and why economic transactions are not always or-
ganized via markets. In this paper we explore the idea that integration (such as through joint as-
set ownership) may guarantee continued access to critical trading partners. We develop a model
of asset ownership that is based on a dynamic trade-off between the commitment to a trading
relationship (integration) versus the flexibility of seeking new relationships (non-integration).
    We consider an environment in which trading partners cannot take each other for granted,
and fear being displaced by alternative partners. In the presence of wealth constraints there can
be ex-post inefficiencies, where one partner’s gain from leaving the relationship does not out-
weigh the loss to the partner left behind. Joint asset ownership protects against such inefficient
partner displacements. Then, why does not every trading relationship involve integration? This
is because under joint ownership one partner can prevent the other from leaving the relationship,
even though leaving would be jointly more efficient.
    Our theory focuses on the dynamics of how asset owners match and possibly rematch with
each other. We show that integration generates a commitment that makes it more difficult, but
not impossible, to change trading partners. We explain how joint asset ownership endogenously
raises the costs of leaving a relationship, and how this can be beneficial under some circum-
stances and detrimental under others. We also introduce the idea that integration is a function
of the uncertainty that partners face about how the match with the current partner compares
against possible future matches.
    Our focus on partner changes is fundamentally different from the property rights perspec-
tive, associated with the seminal work of Grossman, Hart and Moore (see Grossman and Hart
(1986), Hart and Moore (1990), Hart (1995)). In their models, alternative partners create an
outside option that is never exercised in equilibrium. That is, property rights models always as-
sume that the current partner is and will remain the best possible match. Our model introduces
uncertainty about future matches, and shows how ex-post inefficiencies, such as displacement
and retention externalities, can affect the ex-ante integration decision. Our main insights also
do not rely on incentives for specific investments.
    Our model is also related to the transaction cost theories associated with Williamson (1975,
1979, 1985), who explicitly worries about ex-post inefficiencies. However, Williamson too fo-
cuses mostly on the current match, and worries mainly about opportunism and haggling costs.
We focus on different and potentially more important ex-post inefficiencies, related to the in-
efficient displacement or retention of trading partners. Interestingly, a central prediction of our



                                                1
theory is that asset specificity favor integration, although the reason is different than in standard
transaction cost economics.
     In our model there are two symmetric owner-managers with co-specialized assets. Ex-ante
they determine the optimal asset allocation. The base model deliberately ignores any specific
investments, although a model extension adds them back in. At some ex-post date uncertainty
is resolved about whether the original partners have found more attractive outside partners or
not. At that stage the original partners can stay together or part their ways.
     We allow for the possibility of ex-post inefficiencies in the process of switching partners.
One possibility is that a partner gets displaced even though staying together would be jointly
efficient – we will call this a displacement externality. Another possibility is that partners stay
together even though separating would be jointly efficient – we will call this a retention external-
ity. We endogenously derive these two new ex-post inefficiencies on the basis of two important
assumptions. First, we assume that all parties are wealth constrained – we discuss this be-
low. Second, we allow for a team moral hazard problem, where joint production requires the
partners to provide non-contractible inputs such as private efforts. The combination of wealth
constraints and private efforts generate a concave utility frontier where partners cannot freely
transfer utility to each other without affecting incentives and joint efficiency.
     We first show that whenever the two partners have symmetric outside options, the ownership
structure is irrelevant. Both parties either agree to stay together, or they agree to part ways, but
there is no disagreement. Asset ownership only becomes relevant when the two partners have
asymmetric outside options.
     Consider individual asset ownership and let us call the partners A and B. Suppose A found
an alternative partner (call him C) but B did not, so that A wants to leave B for C. There
can be what we call a displacement externality, where A’s gain from leaving is worth less than
B’s loss from being displaced. Obviously the two partners would like to renegotiate. Without
a wealth constraint this would be straightforward and renegotiation would ensure joint utility
maximization. With a wealth constraint, however, the two partners have to renegotiate along a
concave utility frontier. The weaker partner (B) may offer to give up some share of the profit to
the stronger partner (A), in order to convince him not to leave. There are two possible outcomes
in this renegotiation game. Either B’s best offer is not good enough to retain A, and despite
being jointly inefficient, displacement occurs in equilibrium. Or A accepts a higher profit share
and stays. The threat of displacement is then not realized in equilibrium, but the unequal profit
shares distort team incentives. The outcome after renegotiation is individually optimal, but fails
to maximize the sum of utilities.
     Joint asset ownership can give rise to the opposite problem. If A cannot leave without B’s
consent, there can be a retention externality. This occurs when A’s benefit from leaving is

                                                 2
higher than B’s benefit from retaining A. Without a wealth constraint, renegotiation would
again achieve ex-post efficiency. With a wealth constraint, however, the only way that A can
compensate B is to give him a stake in his new partnership with C. This requires a negotiation
among three parties. Again we obtain two possible bargaining outcomes. Either there simply
is no offer such that B is willing to let go of A, and A still finds it attractive to leave. In
equilibrium B retains A, even though it is jointly inefficient. Or it is possible to structure some
buyout deal, but the outcome does not maximize A’s and B’s joint utility. This is because B
receives a share of profits generated by A and C, without actually contributing any productive
inputs. The retention externality matters, irrespective of whether inefficient retention occurs, or
whether it gets renegotiated into some other outcome that still does not maximize the sum of
utilities.
     The optimal ex-ante allocation of asset ownership depends on the desirability of chang-
ing partners. The main result of our base model is that joint asset ownership is optimal when
displacement externalities loom large, whereas individual asset ownership is preferred when
retention externalities matter more. The relative importance of displacement and retention ex-
ternalities depends on how good the original match between partners is. The greater the asset
specificity, the greater the displacement externality, and also the smaller the retention external-
ity. A higher asset specificity therefore favors joint asset ownership. Our theory thus delivers
one of the key predictions from the transaction cost theory, without referring to the typical
ex-post problems emphasized by Williamson.
     Our base model deliberately omits specific investments. This allows us to generate a set of
predictions about optimal asset ownership that are orthogonal to the standard concerns of the
property rights theory. Once we put relation-specific investments back into the model, we find
that joint asset ownership always provides stronger incentives for specific investments. The key
intuition is that joint asset ownership is efficient when the internal match is good, but can cause
retention inefficiencies when the internal match is poor. By contrast, individual asset ownership
is efficient when the internal match is poor, but can cause displacement inefficiencies when the
internal match is good. Consequently joint asset ownership increases the utility gap between
the good and the bad match, whereas individual asset ownership actually narrows the gap.
     Our base model critically depends on binding wealth constraints. We submit that this is ac-
tually a realistic assumption for many owner-managed firms. Moskowitz and Vissing-Jørgensen
(2002) provide empirical evidence that on average 82 percent of the wealth of owner-managers
is tied up in their businesses. This implies that for a large number of owner-manager the avail-
able wealth for transfer payments is low to non-existent. Empirical plausibility apart, we pro-
vide a three-part defence of our base assumption. First, while it is true that large amounts of
wealth can always solve all the ex-post inefficiencies, we show that having a small amount of

                                                3
wealth sometimes doesn’t change the ex-post game at all. For example, a small transfer pay-
ment is simply not enough to retain a partner who has a clear preference for leaving. Second, we
obtain the surprising result that wealthy owners would always want to commit ex-ante to some
kind of ex-post wealth-constraint, either partial or complete. Having wealth turns out to be a
two-edged sword. On the one hand, wealth helps the partners to mitigate ex-post inefficiencies.
On the other hand, it weakens ex-ante incentives for specific investments, precisely because it
allows partners to mitigate ex-post inefficiencies when the quality of their match turns out to
be poor. Third, we show that wealth constraints are only one way of generating ex-post ineffi-
ciencies. The main trade-off of our paper also remains valid in a model where there is sufficient
wealth, but where there are costs associated with making transfer payments.
    Any new theory about the boundaries of firms stands on the shoulder of giants. The eco-
nomic theory of the firm is dominated by three main schools of thought: transaction cost eco-
nomics – associated mainly with the work of Williamson; the property rights perspective – asso-
ciated mainly with the work of Grossman, Hart and Moore; and the incentive theory perspective
– associated in particular with the work of Holmström, Milgrom and Roberts (see Holmström
and Milgrom (1994), Holmström and Roberts (1998), Milgrom and Roberts (1990)). Our the-
ory does not fit squarely into one of these schools. Instead it borrows a little from each, but
then focuses on the dynamics of partner displacement and retention – issues that do not feature
prominently in any of the existing schools of thought.
    Our theory makes predictions about asset specificity that are consistent with the predictions
of transaction cost economics. There is strong empirical support that asset specificity is asso-
ciated with integration – see Lafontaine and Slade (2007) for a comprehensive survey of the
empirical literature. Our theory provides a fresh interpretation as to why asset specificity leads
to integration. Transaction cost economics tends to provide verbal arguments about oppor-
tunism and ex-post price haggling as the main sources of inefficiencies under non-integration.
However, more formal theories have often dismissed these explanations, because rational agents
should be able to anticipate any distributional concerns ex-ante, and thus to resolve ex-post in-
efficiencies. Some recent exceptions are Bajari and Tadelis (2001), Tadelis (2002), Matouschek
(2004), and Casas-Arce and Kittsteiner (2011), who develop formal models with costly ex-post
adjustments. In our model it is the lack of transferable utility that endogenously creates ex-
post inefficiencies. Asset specificity increases the cost of displacement externalities, and also
lowers the cost of retention externalities – both of which favor integration. Our theory there-
fore combines the very definition of asset specificity, namely that an asset is worth more within
than outside a specific trading relationship, with the possibility that in equilibrium partners do
go outside the relationship, in order to generate a fresh insight as to why specific assets favor
integration.

                                                4
    In the property rights theory it is not the level of asset specificity, but the marginal incentive
to increase asset specificity through specific investments, that determines the optimal asset al-
location (see Whinston (2003)). Our model differs from the property rights approach in several
key aspects: (i) it does not rely on specific investments, (ii) it allows for ex-post inefficiencies,
(iii) it allows for partner switching in equilibrium, and (iv), it allows partners to contractually
specify prices ex-ante.4 Moreover, once we add specific investments to our base model we ob-
tain a clear-cut prediction: incentives for specific investments are always stronger under joint
than under individual asset ownership.5
    Our approach clearly differs from the incentive-based theories of the firm, which focus on
risk-aversion and multi-tasking. However, we borrow from these incentive-based theories by
incorporating the moral-hazard-in-teams problem (Holmström, 1982) into our production func-
tion. Together with the assumption of wealth-constrained agents (see also Sappington (1983)),
this allows us to endogenously derive a concave utility frontier which generates the ex-post
inefficiencies.
    Our model does not address differences between integration and relational contracting. In
fact, in our model all the outcomes under joint asset ownership can also be achieved using
binding long-term contracts. An explanation of relational contracts would require modeling
reputations in a repeated game environment. Interestingly, the main theories of relational con-
tracts, such as Baker, Gibbons and Murphy (2002), focus on a given set of partners, and do not
consider how in equilibrium agents may change their trading partners.6
    Our model is not the first to consider wealth constraints. Aghion and Bolton (1992) in-
troduce wealth constraints into a financial contracting model. In their model there are fixed
non-transferable private benefits that can lead to ex-post inefficient decisions, depending on the
allocation of control rights. The main difference to our model is that Aghion and Bolton look
   4
      The non-contractibility of prices is crucial for the property rights theory. We assume that prices are contractible
at all times. However, our model does have some contractual incompleteness concerning interim information that
allows partners to update their profitability forecasts. If these updates were verifiable, then the optimal alloca-
tion of assets becomes state-contingent. Even then the underlying trade-off between displacement and retention
externalities remains valid.
    5
      Another difference worth mentioning is that in the standard property rights model, joint asset ownership is
never optimal, and integration always consists of one agent owning both assets. Cai (2003) derives a model with
both specific and general investments, and shows that joint asset ownership becomes optimal when the two types
of investments are substitutes. Halonen (2002) provides conditions under which joint asset ownership is optimal
in a repeated game framework; see also Blonski and Spagnolo (2003). Our model provides an alternative reason
for the optimality of joint asset ownership: to prevent the dissolution of otherwise efficient partnerships.
    6
      One interesting exception is Board (2011), who considers relational contracting between a principal and an
agent, where the latter can be replaced in every period depending on changing production requirements. However,
Board does not address issues of asset ownership.


                                                           5
at a model with a single asset, and focus on the inherently asymmetric relationship between an
investor and entrepreneur. Our model is closer to the Grossman, Hart and Moore set-up with
two assets and two productive agents. In our model we also do not rely on fixed private ben-
efits, but instead consider renegotiation of ownership shares in the presence of moral hazard
and wealth constraints. In a related vein, Aghion and Tirole (1994) consider the importance
of wealth constraints in a model with a single asset. They focus on intellectual property as an
asset, and ask whether it should be owned by the developer or user of the innovation. None of
these models considers the possibility of switching trading partners at the ex-post stage.
    There is a prior literature that looks at ex-post inefficiencies.7 Of historic interest, in addi-
tion to their seminal 1986 paper, Grossman and Hart published a less known book chapter in
1987 with a model where there are ex-post inefficiencies and no specific investments (Grossman
and Hart, 1987). More recently, Hart (2009) examines asset ownership in a model of reference
points with ex-post irrational and inefficient behaviors. Dessein (2012) outlines a model with in-
efficient ex-post decisions, leading to a trade-off between adaptation and coordination. Aghion
et al. (2012) provide a model with ex-post asymmetric information, showing how the ex-ante
asset allocation plays a role over and above any contractual arrangements.
    Our paper is loosely related to the large literature on vertical foreclosure. Aghion and Bolton
(1987) examine how a seller can lock buyers into long-term contracts to reduce the threat of en-
try from a competing seller. Bolton and Whinston (1993) use a property-rights approach to
study how concerns about supply assurances can motivate vertical integration. Segal and Whin-
ston (2000) further examine how exclusive contracts may (or indeed may not) affect specific
investments. Matouschek and Ramezzana (2007) use a search model with sellers and buyers
to study how exclusive contracts can reduce ex-post inefficiencies arising from price haggling.8
One important difference to the literature on exclusive contracts is that our model focuses on
a set-up with two symmetric partners, who are both concerned about retaining their trading
partner.
    Our paper is also related to parts of the literature on partnerships. Hellmann and Thiele
(2012) consider the formation of entrepreneurial teams. De Frutos and Kittsteiner (2008) ex-
amine the efficient dissolution of partnerships.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next section features a simplified
and curiously romanticized version of our model that helps to bring out many of the key ideas
of the main model. Section 3 then introduces our main model. Section 4 examines how partners
make choices about staying versus leaving a relationship. Section 5 identifies the optimal allo-
   7
     Gibbons (2005) identifies them broadly as adaptation-based theories of the firm; Segal and Whinston classify
them as theories with imperfect bargaining.
   8
     See also Jing and Winter (2011) for an overview over the recent literature on exclusionary contracts.


                                                       6
cation of control rights over critical assets. We introduce specific investments in Section 6. In
Section 7 we consider the role of wealth in a partnership, and ask whether partners can benefit
from limited wealth. In Section 8 we discuss robustness properties of our model. Section 9
summarizes our main results, and explores avenues for future theoretical and empirical work.
All proofs are in the Appendix.


2    A Simplified Model
This self-contained section introduces a simplified version of our model which quickly estab-
lishes some of its key intuitions. The more technically-minded reader may go straight to Section
3 where we introduce our main model.
    Our theory on partner matching bears uncanny resemblances to marriage decisions. To make
the simplified model more memorable, let us tell the story in terms of a romantic couple that is
considering getting married.
    Alice and Bob are dirt poor, love each other, and derive a non-transferable utility θ from
being together (irrespective whether married or not). Unfortunately Alice is not sure if Bob is
really the love of her life. She assigns a probability q to the possibility that at a later point she
could meet the man of her dreams, let us call him Charles. Being with Charles would give Alice
a utility λ, where λ > θ. Bob too has his doubts; he still hankers after his childhood sweetheart
Dora. He thinks there is a probability q that she will come back to him, which would give him
a utility λ.
    Should Alice and Bob get married? We assume that once Alice and Bob are married, they
can only divorce each other by mutual consent. Suppose at some future date Alice met Charles
and Dora actually wanted to marry Bob too. Alice and Bob would mutually agree to a divorce,
and both live happily thereafter. However, suppose that Alice meets Charles, but that Dora con-
tinues to reject Bob. Without marriage, Alice can simply leave Bob. With marriage, however,
she needs Bob to agree to a divorce. Agreeing to a divorce gives Bob zero utility, but if he
refuses, then Alice stays which gives him θ – obviously Alice and Bob are rational economic
agents without feelings of remorse or jealousy. If married, Bob refuses to get divorced, and
since Alice is poor, she also cannot bribe Bob into changing his mind. It follows that marriage
matters for the case where only one of the two partners has an outside option. (The same is
obviously also true if Alice does not meet Charles, and Dora wants Bob).
    Tracing the utility through all the possible permutations of who can partner with whom, we
find that the expected utility from marriage is given by

                       EU (marriage) = (1 − q)2 θ + 2q(1 − q)θ + q 2 λ,

                                                 7
whereas the utility of remaining unmarried is

                         EU (no − marriage) = (1 − q)2 θ + q(1 − q)λ + q 2 λ.

Thus we find that

                    EU (marriage) − EU (no − marriage) = q(1 − q)(2θ − λ).

This says that marriage is optimal whenever 2θ > λ. In more romantic terms, Alice marries Bob
if she loves him more than half as much as Charles.9 Why is marrying Bob a good idea if Alice
prefers Charles over Bob? The answer is that Alice trades off the loss of flexibility – she will
need Bob’s permission to be with Charles – against the benefit of having Bob’s commitment –
she retains Bob in case she does not meet Charles.
    Things get a little more complicated if Alice and Bob are uncertain about how much they
really love each other. Suppose that they envision two possible scenarios, one where their love
remains strong, so that they get a utility θH with λ < 2θH , and one where their love fizzles
out, such that they get θL with λ > 2θL . If they knew that their love remains strong, they
should marry; if they knew that it will fizzle out, they should not. The uncertainty raises the
possibility of two types of inefficiencies. First, if they do not get married, Alice may leave Bob
even though they love each other. This happens for θH < λ < 2θH , where Alice loves Charles
more than Bob, but not twice as much. The break-up is inefficient since the loss to Bob (θH ) is
greater than the gain to Alice (λ − θH ). We will call this a displacement externality. Second, if
they get married and their love fizzles out, then there is a possibility of a retention externality.
For example, Bob may refuse to divorce Alice even though it would be jointly efficient, namely
when λ > 2θL .
    Our results depend on Alice and Bob being dirt poor. If they had sufficient wealth, they
could always buy themselves out of trouble. In fact, it is easy to show that marriage is irrelevant
with sufficient wealth.10 However, having a small amount of wealth may not change anything.
For example, if Bob wants to retain Alice (without marriage), he needs a minimum wealth of
w = λ − θ; otherwise even his best offer will not suffice to keep Alice. Moreover, if Alice and
Bob have sufficient wealth, but there are costs to making transfer payments – such as a tax on
transfers – then the key trade-off comes back. In the Appendix we show that as soon as there are
   9
     Interestingly, this result does not depend on the value of q, provided that there is some uncertainty (0 < q < 1).
  10
     If Alice and Bob are married, and Alice wants a divorce that is jointly efficient (i.e., λ > 2θL ), then there
exists a transfer payment from Alice to Bob tAB ∈ [θL , λ − θL ] such that both are better off with such a divorce
settlement. And if Alice and Bob are not married, and Alice wants to inefficiently leave Bob for Charles (i.e.,
λ < 2θH ), then there exists a transfer payment from Bob to Alice tBA ∈ [λ − θH , θH ] such that both are better off
staying together.


                                                          8
         Date 0                   Date 1              Date 2                   Date 3            Date 4


                                  Relation‐specific                            Private efforts
                                  investments
         Decision on                                  A and B may find                           Returns realized
         ownership structure                          alternative partners
         (individual vs. joint)                       (C and D)/
                                                      stay together or split


                                           Figure 1: Timeline Base Model

any costs of making transfers, inefficient leaving (under no-marriage) and inefficient retention
(under marriage) can occur in equilibrium. And once again, it is optimal for Alice and Bob to
get married whenever 2θ > λ.
     Our model hardly provides the most nuanced description of the marriage decision.11 The
purpose of this simplified model is to convey some key intuitions of our main model in the
simplest possible way. One may ask why we even need the main model? First, our marriage
model takes utilities as given, but in our theory of the firm we want to model the underlying
value-creation process. Second, the simplified model is based on fully non-transferable utilities
(i.e., private benefits); for our theory of the firm we want to allow for transfer prices and own-
ership shares that, even though imperfect, still transfer some utility across partners. Third, we
want to look at a wider array of contractual structures and renegotiation possibilities than in the
simplified model. Hence we now turn to the fully specified theory model.


3        The Base Model
Consider an initial match of two risk-neutral economic agents A and B, called partners. For
example, B can be an upstream firm selling an input to A as downstream firm, which A needs
to manufacture an end product. The value of their initial outside options is normalized to zero.
Each partner initially owns a co-specialized asset that only he can operate.
    The two partners face constraints on any ex-post transfer payments (non-transferable utility).
We model this by assuming that both partners have zero wealth. We relax this assumption in
Section 7, where we show that a wealth constraint can arise endogenously in our framework.
    11
   Our objective here is to illustrate the key intuitions for our main model, not to provide a fully-fledged marriage
model. For more sophisticated models of the marriage decision see, e.g., Brien, Lillard and Stern (2006) and
Matouschek and Rasul (2008).



                                                          9
    There are five dates; see Figure 1 for a graphical overview. At date 0, both partners decide on
an optimal ownership structure for both assets. While we consider all ownership structures, the
key decision will be whether partners keep individual asset ownership, or whether they agree on
joint asset ownership. As discussed in Section 8.1, we can also think of this difference in terms
of short-term versus long term contracts. At date 1, both partners can make relation-specific
investments to improve the value of joint production. However, to show that our base results
do not depend on specific investments, we deliberately shut down this part of the model until
Section 6. At date 2, A and B may find alternative partners. They then decide whether to stay
with their original partner, or to leave and form a new partnership. Partners may also renegotiate
any division of surplus. At date 3, partners exert private effort to produce output. Finally, at
date 4, all returns are realized.
    Suppose A and B want to engage in joint production at date 3. This requires the use of
both A’s and B’s assets, as well as the partners’ private efforts, which we denote eA and eB . A
partner’s disutility of effort is c(ei ), i ∈ {A, B}, with c0 (ei ) > 0, c00 (ei ) > 0, and c(0) = c0 (0) =
0. Production either generates a joint profit at date 4 (success), or no profit at all (failure). The
success probability is given by µ(eA eB ), which is increasing and concave in its argument eA eB ,
with µ(0) = 0. Thus, partner efforts are complementary, and success requires that both partners
apply strictly positive efforts (i.e., eA , eB > 0).
    In case of success, the realized profit at date 4 is denoted by y. We assume that y is verifiable,
and that it has a distribution Ωin (y) over some interval y ∈ [y, y] with 0 ≤ y < y ≤ ∞. We
                                        Ry
denote the expected value by π = y ydΩin (y), and refer to it as the inside prospect. That is, π
measures the expected profit in case of success, and therefore reflects the quality of the match
between A and B. In the base model we assume that there is no learning about the distribution
of y until its realization at date 4. In Section 5.2 we add learning, where there is updating on
the expected value π at date 2.
    The realized profit y at date 4 can be divided between the two partners according to any
sharing rule where A obtains αy and B receives βy, with α + β = 1. Depending on the
ownership structure this sharing rule can be implemented in different ways. Under joint asset
ownership, we think of α and β as a division of ownership shares from the jointly owned
venture. Under individual asset ownership there are no ownership shares, so the division of
surplus comes from some transfer price – we provide a more formal discussion in Section 8.1.
Because of the wealth constraint, α and β are always non-negative.12
  12
     In principle it is possible to make α and β functions of y. In the case of joint asset ownership, it is easy to
verify that for any division of surplus with variable α and β, there exists an equivalent division of surplus with a
constant α and β. W.l.o.g we can therefore focus on constant α’s and β’s. In the case of individual asset ownership,
α and β depend on how transfer prices are specified, i.e., how they depend on the realization of y. to keep our


                                                        10
     The initial partners A and B can break away from their original partnership and match with
alternative partners. Specifically we assume that at date 2, A finds an alternative partner, called
C, with probability q > 0. We assume symmetry so that B discovers an alternative partner,
called D, with the same probability q.13 The outside option of each alternative partner, C and
D, is normalized to zero. Alternative partners have the same disutility of effort, and the same
probability of success. However, in an alternative partnership the profits y in case of success
                                                                     R
have a distribution Ωout (y). We denote the expected value by σ = ydΩout (y), which we refer
to as the outside prospect.14
     Ownership defines control rights over the productive assets. We assume that A and B ini-
tially have full rights of control over their respective assets. We refer to this scenario as indi-
vidual asset ownership. In this case there is no need to write a contract at date 0; A and B
simply wait until date 2 to see whether in fact they want to partner up.15 If they do, they nego-
tiate a transfer price which determines their profit shares (α, β) at that time. Alternatively, the
partners can agree at date 0 to share control rights over both assets, which we refer to as joint
asset ownership. This requires that A and B negotiate the ownership shares α and β at date
0. Ownership matters because it affects the ability of a partner to leave: Under individual asset
ownership, a partner with a superior outside option can always leave without the consent of the
other. Under joint asset ownership, the two partners share control rights over both assets, so that
leaving requires consent of the other partner.
     At date 0, the two partners A and B determine asset ownership. Bargaining can also occur
at date 2, where it may involve two or more parties. Because of the wealth constraint, we need a
bargaining solution for games with non-transferable utilities. We adopt the bargaining protocol
of Hart and Mas-Colell (1996), where in each round one member at the bargaining table is se-
lected at random to make a proposal, and where there is a small probability that a partner whose
proposal was rejected, is permanently eliminated from the bargaining. This is a multi-player
generalization of the breakdown game by Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky (1986). This
bargaining protocol generates the Maschler-Owen consistent NTU value, which is a generaliza-
tion of the Shapley value for games with non-transferable utility (Maschler and Owen, 1992).
notation simple we focus on the case of constant α’s and β’s. This is w.l.o.g since all that matters is the expected
profit share at date 2.
   13
      Recall that A and B have complementary assets which both are needed for production. This excludes the
possibility of A partnering with D, or B partnering with C.
   14
      An alternative interpretation is that A and B always find alternative partners, but that the outside prospect is
then σH (= σ) with probability q, and σL = 0 with probability 1 − q.
   15
      This specific aspect is due to our simplification that no production occurs between the dates 0 and 2. If the two
partners were to produce at the earlier stage, then they would write a short-term contract for the early production
period, but retain the right to leave the relationship over the long term.



                                                         11
For bilateral bargaining games, the Maschler-Owen consistent NTU value reduces to the Nash
bargaining solution.16 We assume that the only members at the bargaining table are those who
have the control rights to affect a decision. This means that under individual asset ownership,
bargaining takes place between the two partners who want to engage in joint production. Under
joint asset ownership, however, leaving requires the consent of the other partner. A new partner
(C or D) therefore has to engage in trilateral bargaining with both of the original partners (A
and B). In Section 8.3 we discuss alternative bargaining protocols.


4          Optimal Partner Changes
In this section we determine whether, for a given ownership structure, a partner remains in the
relationship, or switches to a new partner. We first assume that the inside prospect π is constant;
we relax this assumption later in Section 5.2. Moreover, we ignore relation-specific investments
until Section 6. We only focus on two key ownership structures: individual versus joint asset
ownership. Section 8.1 shows why we can limit ourselves to those two ownership structures.
     We proceed in four steps. First, we consider the joint production of A and B in the absence
of any outside partners. Second, we examine the case where A and B have symmetric outside
options, i.e., either both or none of them found an alternative partner at date 2. For both types of
asset ownership we identify (i) the optimal choice of A and B between staying and leaving, and
(ii), the equilibrium division of profits. We then repeat this analysis for the case where A and
B have asymmetric outside options, i.e., only A or only B found an alternative partner. Finally
we identify the optimal asset ownership at date 0 when the presence of alternative partners is
still unknown to both A and B.


4.1         Joint Production
We first examine the joint production process for A and B, explaining how profit shares affect
incentives, success probabilities, and partner utilities. The analysis is analogous for joint pro-
duction with a new partner (C or D) except that the inside prospect π is to be replaced by the
outside prospect σ.
    16
         For a more extensive discussion of this, see also Hart (2004).




                                                            12
                   Figure 2: Utility-possibility Frontier for Joint Production

    In our model there is team production. Because of the binary nature of outcomes (success
or failure), there is no possibility for budget breaking as in Holmström (1982). Partners choose
their respective efforts eA and eB to maximize their expected utilities:

                              UA (α; π) = αµ(eA eB )π − c(eA )

                              UB (β; π) = βµ(eA eB )π − c(eB ).

The optimal effort levels, denoted eA (α) and eB (β), are characterized by the first-order condi-
tions

                                  αµ0 (eA eB )eB π = c0 (eA )                                  (1)

                                   βµ0 (eA eB )eA π = c0 (eB ).                                (2)

It is straightforward to show that de∗i /dπ > 0, i = A, B. That is, a higher inside prospect π
motivates both partners to exert more effort.
     The division of joint profit, as reflected by α and β, affects the effort of each partner, and
thus their expected utilities. The next lemma lays the foundation for our analysis by identifying
the division of profits that maximizes total surplus, and the division preferred by an individual
partner. For this we define V ≡ UA + UB as the total surplus from joint production. Moreover,
we denote αmax and β max as the individually optimal profit shares for A and B, respectively.

Lemma 1 The joint surplus V is maximized when α = β = 1/2. By contrast, the individually
optimal profit shares αmax and β max satisfy 1/2 < αmax = β max < 1.


                                                13
    Figure 2 illustrates the utility-possibility frontier for joint production for different profit
shares α and β = 1 − α. The frontier is backward bending because every partner relies on
the productive effort of his co-partner. If one partner exerts no effort (which occurs when
α ∈ {0, 1}), joint production never succeeds (µ(0) = 0), and A and B both get a zero utility.
We can also see from Figure 2 that the total surplus is maximized when each (symmetric)
partner gets exactly half of the expected profit π (α = β = 1/2). However, each partner prefers
to get more than half of the expected profit (as αmax = β max > 1/2). We also note that any
bargaining outcome is always located on the downward sloping part of the utility-possibility
frontier. Thus, any equilibrium division of profit, denoted by α∗ and β ∗ = 1 − α∗ , satisfies
α∗ ∈ [1 − β max , αmax ].
    Under joint asset ownership, shares are negotiated upfront. At date 0 the two partners A
and B are perfectly symmetric. It is easy to see that the optimal ownership shares satisfy
α∗ = β ∗ = 1/2; we formally prove this in the Appendix. Under individual asset ownership, we
assume that profit shares are also negotiated upfront, but that they can be renegotiated at date
2.17 Because of symmetry, equilibrium profit shares naturally satisfy α∗ = β ∗ = 1/2.


4.2    Symmetric Outside Options
Suppose that neither A nor B found an alternative partner at date 2, which occurs with probabil-
ity (1 − q)2 . Joint production is then the only option, regardless of the asset ownership structure.
Because of symmetry, both partners share the profits equally: α∗ = β ∗ = 1/2.
     Now suppose that A and B each found an alternative partner, which occurs with probability
  2
q . A and B can either stay together, or split in order to form new partnerships with C and D.
If A and B decide to stay together, symmetry implies α∗ = β ∗ = 1/2. The expected utility of
partner i = A, B is then given by
                                             1
                                     Ui (π) = µ(e∗A e∗B )π − c(e∗i ).                                     (3)
                                             2
We henceforth suppress the subscript of U whenever the expected utilities of A and B are
identical. Alternatively, A and B can decide to match with C and D respectively. Under
individual asset ownership they can do so directly; under joint asset ownership they first need to
dissolve their partnership. Each of them bargains with his alternative partner, C or D, over the
division of the expected profit σ from the new partnership. Recall that the alternative partners
C and D both have zero outside options. The same applies to A and B during the bargaining.
This is because once A and B approach their new partners, they expect to close a deal with that
  17
    Because there is no production between the dates 0 and 2, we could also assume that profit shares are only
negotiated at date 2. This alternative interpretation generates identical results.

                                                     14
new partner, and are therefore no longer available as a fall-back option.18 The Nash bargaining
solution then suggests that a partner gets exactly half of the profits from his new partnership.
We denote the profit shares for A and B in their new partnerships by α    b = βb = 1/2.19 The
expected utility of partner i = A, B then becomes
                                      1
                               U (σ) = µ(e∗i e∗k )σ − c(e∗i ),        k ∈ {C, D}.                                (4)
                                      2
Using the Envelope Theorem one can show that dU (π)/dπ > 0 and dU (σ)/dσ > 0. Moreover,
we can infer from (3) and (4) that U (π) = U (σ) when π = σ. Thus, A and B stay together
as partners as long as π ≥ σ. Otherwise they dissolve their partnership, and match with their
alternative partners C and D. And because leaving is mutually beneficial for σ > π, it is
irrelevant whether they agreed on individual or joint asset ownership at date 0. We summarize
these observations in the following lemma:

Lemma 2 Suppose A and B each found an alternative partner at date 2. They then stay to-
gether with α∗ = β ∗ = 1/2 (joint production) if π ≥ σ; otherwise they dissolve their partner-
ship.


4.3     Asymmetric Outside Options
The most interesting scenario arises when only one partner, say A, found an alternative partner,
C. This occurs with probability q(1 − q). The case where only B found an alternative partner
is symmetric and also occurs with probability q(1 − q). The allocation of control rights over the
two assets then matters as it defines A’s freedom to leave the partnership with B. We discuss
the implications of individual and joint asset ownership separately.

4.3.1    Individual Asset Ownership

Suppose A and B agreed on individual asset ownership at date 0, and only A found an alternative
partner, C. Clearly, A can then unilaterally take his asset and form a new partnership with C
without B’s consent. In the bargaining game between A and C, A’s outside option is to go
back to B, who does not have an alternative partner to bargain with. According to the Hart and
  18
      Technically, under the Hart and Mas-Colell protocol, there is an ε probability that the bargaining fails. Thus,
with probability ε, A has the fall-back option of going back to B, and vice-versa. The Hart and Mas-Colell protocol
then assumes that ε → 0, implying that A’s and B’s outside options converge to zero.
   19
      Throughout the paper we use an asterisk (∗ ) to indicate equilibrium profit shares under joint production (A
and B match); a hat (b) indicates the equilibrium profit shares in alternative matches (either A and C match, or B
and D match).


                                                        15
Mas-Colell bargaining protocol, this outside option would only be realized if the bargaining
between A and C breaks down, so that A loses C as a potential trading partner. In this case,
both A and B would have zero outside options, so that they split the equity in half. The outside
option of A when bargaining with his alternative partner C is thus given by U (π). Let α    bI denote
the equilibrium profit share for A, where the subscript ‘I’ indicates individual asset ownership.
Using Nash bargaining, α  bI maximizes [UA (b αI ; σ) − U (π)]1/2 [UC (1 − α
                                                                           bI ; σ)]1/2 . It is easy to
see that for any U (π) > 0 we have α bI ∈ (1/2, 1), with db  αI /dπ ≥ 0. The expected utility of A
then becomes
                               UA (b
                                   αI ; σ) = α
                                             bI µ(beA ebC )σ − c(b
                                                                 eA ).                             (5)
If A displaces B with C in this manner, B’s expected utility becomes UB = 0. This is clearly
smaller than his expected utility UB (π) under joint production with A. Thus, A imposes a
displacement externality on B when displacing him with the alternative partner C.
    Displacing partner B for C may not always be in the best interest of A. He could also stay
but use his better outside option to renegotiate a higher profit share, denoted by αI∗ . A would
then only use his outside option of matching with C if the bargaining with B breaks down.
Again, according to the Hart and Mas-Colell bargaining protocol, A would then lose B as a
potential trading partner. In that case, A and C would both have zero outside options, and they
would split the surplus in half. The outside option of A when renegotiating the profit shares
with B is therefore given by U (σ). Using Nash bargaining, A’s new profit share αI∗ maximizes
[UA (αI∗ ; π) − U (σ)]1/2 [UB (1 − αI∗ ; π)]1/2 . The renegotiation at date 2 under individual asset
ownership thus leads to the following expected utilities for A and B:

                           UA (αI∗ ; π) = αI∗ µ(e∗A e∗B )π − c(e∗A )                              (6)

                           UB (αI∗ ; π) = (1 − αI∗ )µ(e∗A e∗B )π − c(e∗B ).                       (7)

Again, for any U (σ) > 0 we have αI∗ ∈ (1/2, 1), with dαI∗ /dσ ≥ 0. Relative to the equal
division of profits with α = β = 1/2, this outcome is more favorable to A, and less favorable to
B. Most importantly, it is jointly inefficient since joint surplus is maximized at α = β = 1/2.
And because both partners have zero wealth in the base model, it is also impossible for them to
eliminate this inefficiency through side-payments.
    Our concept of ‘joint efficiency’ looks at whether A and B maximize the sum of their ex-
ante utilities. This differs from the concept of ‘social efficiency’, which would also take into
account the utilities of the alternative partners C and D. We briefly discuss in Section 5.1 how
our main results based on joint efficiency compare to social efficiency.




                                                 16
    We can now identify the optimal choice of the partner with the better outside option between
(i) switching to his alternative partner, and (ii), staying but negotiating a higher than equal profit
share.

Lemma 3 Consider individual asset ownership and suppose that A and B have asymmetric
outside options. Then, there exists a threshold σ
                                                bI (π) = π such that the partner with the better
                             bI (π). Otherwise, if σ ≤ σ
outside option leaves if σ > σ                         bI (π), he stays but renegotiates his share
on the joint profit π.

   Joint production between A and B is the outcome under individual asset ownership with
asymmetric outside options, whenever the outside prospect σ is sufficiently low (σ ≤ σ    bI (π)).
The partner with the better outside option then renegotiates the division of surplus, which is op-
timal from a selfish perspective but compromises the efficiency of joint production. Displace-
ment, on the other hand, occurs whenever the alternative partnership is sufficiently attractive
(σ > σbI (π)). This imposes a displacement externality on the partner without outside option.

4.3.2   Joint Asset Ownership

Now consider joint asset ownership, where both partners share control rights over their two as-
sets. This has two implications: First, joint ownership prevents Pareto-inefficient renegotiation
between A and B, so that α∗ = β ∗ = 1/2 as long as they both prefer to stay together. Second,
leaving requires the permission from the other partner, which will necessitate an appropriate
compensation.
    Suppose again that only A found an alternative partner (C) at date 2, and wants to leave
B. Without adequate compensation B refuses to let go of A. The question is whether B can
structure some deal to buy himself free. Because he has no wealth, A can offer B only a share
on the future return σ from his new partnership with C. Productive effort is then only applied
by A and C, so that B is a shareholder who does not add any value. We define α      bJ and βbJ as
the equilibrium shares on the return σ for A and B, respectively. The equilibrium share for
C is denoted by γ bJ , where efficiency requires γbJ = 1 − α   bJ − βbJ . We provide a complete
characterization of α
                    bJ , βbJ , and γ
                                   bJ in the Appendix, using the Maschler-Owen consistent NTU
value. Leaving under joint asset ownership leads to the following expected utilities for A and
B, assuming that only A found his alternative partner C:

                              UA (b
                                  αJ ; σ) = α    eA ebC )σ − c(b
                                            bJ µ(b             eA )                               (8)

                              UB (βbJ ; σ) = βbJ µ(b
                                                   eA ebC )σ.                                     (9)


                                                 17
   We can now characterize the equilibrium outcome under joint asset ownership with asym-
metric outside options.

Lemma 4 Consider joint asset ownership and suppose that A and B have asymmetric outside
options. Then, there exists a threshold σ
                                        bJ (π), with σ
                                                     bJ (π) > π, such that the partner with the
                                                 bJ (π). Otherwise, if σ ≤ σ
better outside option leaves with consent if σ > σ                         bJ (π), he stays with
 ∗      ∗
α = β = 1/2.

    Joint production between A and B is the equilibrium outcome as long as the outside prospect
σ is sufficiently low (σ ≤ σbJ (π)). Both partners then split everything in half (α∗ = β ∗ = 1/2),
so that total surplus is maximized. In contrast, both partners agree to break up whenever the
alternative partnership is attractive enough (σ > σ  bJ (π)). The partner without outside option
then gets a stake in the new partnership in exchange for relinquishing his control rights over the
two assets.
    Overall we note that while joint asset ownership prevents inefficient displacement, it can
lead to a retention externality. This occurs whenever the partner without outside option refuses
to let go of the partner with outside option, even if leaving maximizes their joint utility. Rene-
gotiation requires that the productive partner, say A, gives up part of the future returns from
his joint production with C, in order to compensate B. This buyout arrangement impairs effort
incentives, and thus lowers the expected payoff of A’s partnership with C. Thus, the profit share
βbJ offered to B may not suffice to buy his consent, so that A is forced to stay despite leaving
being jointly efficient. And because both partners have zero wealth, A cannot eliminate this
inefficiency by making a direct payment to B.


5     Optimal Asset Ownership
In this section we identify the partners’ optimal decision at date 0 whether to retain full control
over their assets (individual asset ownership), or to share their control rights (joint asset own-
ership). We first stick to our base model where the inside prospect π remains constant between
the dates 0 and 2. We then relax this assumption and allow for some learning at date 2.


5.1    Constant Inside Prospect
Suppose the inside prospect π does not change between the dates 0 and 2. We first state the
expected utility functions under the two ownership structures. Consider individual asset own-
ership. For convenience we adjust our notation for the asymmetric case as follows: For joint
production, we now denote the profit share of the partner with the outside option by αI+ , and the

                                                18
profit share of the partner without an outside option by αI− , where αI− = 1 − αI+ . In case the
partner with the outside option leaves, his equilibrium profit share is then denoted by α
                                                                                        bI . The
expected utility of a partner at date 0 is thus given by:

           EUI (π, σ) = q 2 max{U (π), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (π) + q(1 − q)VI (π, σ),             (10)

where                            
                                  U (b
                                      αI ; σ)                    if σ > σ
                                                                        bI (π)
                   VI (π, σ) =
                                  U (α+ ; π) + U (α− ; π)       if σ ≤ σ
                                                                        bI (π).
                                       I            I

Note that VI (π, σ) is the total expected utility of a partner in case of asymmetric outside options.
Due to symmetry, VI (π, σ) is also the joint surplus when the two partners have asymmetric
outside options.
    Now consider joint asset ownership. For convenience we adopt the following notation for
the asymmetric case: When the original partnership is dissolved, the partner with the outside
option gets the profit share α  bJ in the new partnership, while the partner without an outside
option gets βbJ as compensation. The expected utility of a partner at date 0 is then given by

           EUJ (π, σ) = q 2 max{U (π), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (π) + q(1 − q)VJ (π, σ),             (11)

where                             
                                   U (b
                                       αJ ; σ) + U (βbJ ; σ)    if σ > σ
                                                                       bJ (π)
                    VJ (π, σ) =
                                   2U (π)                      if σ ≤ σ
                                                                       bJ (π)
is the total expected utility of a partner in case of asymmetric outside options.
     When comparing the expected utilities EUI (·) and EUJ (·) under individual and joint asset
ownership, we immediately see that the expected payoffs are the same in case of symmetric
outside options. In equilibrium there is joint production with an equal split of profits, unless
both partners strictly benefit from dissolving their partnership (case of two alternative partners
and σ > π).
     For asymmetric outside options, however, the allocation of control rights matters. Individual
ownership provides flexibility to dissolve an inefficient partnership, but can also lead to an
inefficient partner displacement. Joint ownership, on the other hand, protects a partner without
outside option from opportunism, but hampers the dissolution of inefficient partnerships, thus
creating a retention externality.
     The next proposition identifies the optimal asset ownership that the two partners agree on at
date 0.



                                                 19
                                 individual asset
                                    ownership        joint asset
                                                     ownership




                                    Figure 3: Optimal Asset Ownership

Proposition 1 For a given inside prospect π,- there exists a threshold σ
                                                                       bV (π) such that the two
partners A and B choose joint asset ownership at date 0 if σ ≤ σ   bV (π), and individual asset
ownership if σ > σbV (π). The threshold σ bV (π) satisfies σbI (π) < σbV (π) < σ bJ (π), and is
increasing in π.

    Figure 3 illustrates the insights from Proposition 1. As long as the outside prospect σ is
sufficiently low (σ ≤ σbV (π)), the two partners choose joint asset ownership at date 0. Otherwise
they prefer individual asset ownership in order to retain the flexibility to switch to a superior
outside partner (σ > σ bV (π)).20
    The rationale behind Proposition 1 becomes clear when comparing the outcomes under
joint and individual asset ownership for the different parameter regions in Figure 3. This figure
presumes that A and B have asymmetric outside options. Region (I) contains the highest
outside prospect σ (on the vertical axis), relative to the inside prospect π (on the horizontal
axis). Under individual asset ownership, the partner with outside option would always leave,
which is jointly efficient. Under joint asset ownership, however, the partner with outside option
has to buy himself free, which compromises effort incentives in his new partnership. Region
(II) still contains a high outside prospect, so that leaving under individual asset ownership is
jointly efficient. Under joint asset ownership, however, there are not enough expected profits
with the outside prospect to warrant a buyout. As a consequence the partner without outside
option inefficiently retains the other. Thus, regions (I) and (II) both suffer from a retention
  20
     Recall that only the ex-post inefficiencies associated with asymmetric outside options matter for the optimal
ownership structure. Ex-ante A and B know that they will have asymmetric outside options at date 2 with proba-
bility 2q(1 − q). Thus, asset ownership matters as long 0 < q < 1, so that outside options will be asymmetric with
a strictly positive probability. However, the specific value of q is then irrelevant (as long as 0 < q < 1), because
both A and B have the same chance of finding an alternative partner.


                                                        20
externality under joint asset ownership. The difference is that in region (II) inefficient retention
occurs in equilibrium, whereas in region (I) it leads to renegotiation that ultimately results in
an inefficient buyout. Obviously, these retention inefficiencies can be avoided with individual
asset ownership.
     Regions (III) and (IV ) both have a sufficiently low outside prospect so that A and B’s
joint utility is maximized when they remain together. Under individual asset ownership there
is a displacement externality. In region (III), the outside prospect is sufficiently attractive so
that the partner with outside option simply leaves without renegotiation. In region (IV ), the
partner with outside option merely uses his opportunity to switch as a bargaining chip. Both
of these outcomes are ex-post inefficient from a joint perspective. These inefficiencies can be
avoided with joint asset ownership, where the two partners always remain together without
renegotiation.
     The analysis focuses on maximizing joint efficiency, which is precisely what the two part-
ners try to achieve. However, one may also ask how the outcomes rank in term of social ef-
ficiency, when also accounting for the utilities of alternative trading partners. Because of the
moral-hazard-in-teams problem at date 3, we note that there will always be deviations from the
first-best outcome. Let us therefore accept that any outcome has some inefficient effort incen-
tives, and focus instead on the question of socially efficient partner choices. In regions (I) and
(II) of Figure 3, the alternative partnership is more efficient than the original one, so switch-
ing is socially efficient. Recall that the original partners (A and B) also prefer individual asset
ownership in these two regions, which results in partner switching. Thus, total surplus is also
maximized in regions (I) and (II). In region (IV ) the alternative partnership is less efficient,
and A and B prefer joint asset ownership. Partner switching does then not occur in equilibrium,
so that the outcome is again socially efficient.
     The interesting case concerns region (III) where σ ∈ (π, σ   bJ ). Since σ > π, the alternative
partnership is more efficient than the original one, so that switching is socially efficient. This
would occur in equilibrium under individual asset ownership. However, A and B actually prefer
joint asset ownership in this region, and they stay together. In region (III) we therefore find
a divergence between the jointly optimal partner choice of staying together, versus the socially
efficient choice of switching partners.


5.2    Learning about the Inside Prospect
So far we considered a simple setting where the inside prospect π remained constant between
date 0 and date 2. We now extend our base model by allowing for some learning about the
distribution of potential profits y. This introduces the notion that A and B learn not only about


                                                21
possible outside opportunities, but also about the strength of their existing relationship. We
consider the simplest possible extension where at date 2 the expected profit (or insight prospect)
π can take on two values: π ∈ {πL , πH }, with πH > πL > 0. The inside prospect π will be high
with probability p (π = πH ), and low with probability 1 − p (π = πL ). We treat the probability
p as exogenous for now, but endogenize it in Section 6.21
    For our subsequent analysis it is useful to express the condition from Proposition 1 in terms
of the inside prospect π: With asymmetric outside options, dissolving the partnership between A
and B is jointly efficient if π < πbV (σ); otherwise joint production with an equal split of profits
maximizes joint surplus. We then need to consider three scenarios: (i) π    bV (σ) ≤ πL < πH , (ii)
πL < π H < π    bV (σ), and (iii), πL < π bV (σ) ≤ πH . In scenario (i) joint production with an
equal split of profits is always jointly optimal; A and B therefore choose joint asset ownership
at date 0. In scenario (ii) dissolving the partnership is efficient as soon as either A or B (or
both) found an alternative partner; A and B thus choose individual asset ownership at date 0 to
facilitate efficient leaving. In scenario (iii) individual asset ownership is optimal if the inside
prospect π turns out to be low (π = πL < π      bV (σ)), but joint asset ownership is optimal if the
inside prospect turns out to be high (π = πH ≥ π     bV (σ)). From now on we focus on the most
interesting third scenario where πL < π  bV (σ) ≤ πH .
    If the internal learning process is based on verifiable signals so that an ex-ante contract
can distinguish between π = πL and π = πH , then a contingent ownership structure is op-
timal. Specifically, A and B would write a contingent contract which stipulates individual
asset ownership at date 2 whenever π = πL < π         bV (σ), and joint asset ownership whenever
                     22
π = πH ≥ π   bV (σ).
    The assumption that the inside prospect π ∈ {πL , πH } is verifiable is arguably too strong.
Assuming that π is non-verifiable seems more plausible, given that learning about the inside
prospect is specific to the collaboration of the two partners. It is not based on objective past
performance, but instead, is based on expectations about the benefits of a future joint produc-
tion. Obviously there is also the theoretical possibility of using mechanism design ex-ante,
which might allow the two partners to reveal the observable state through a cleverly designed
revelation game, in the spirit of Moore and Repullo (1988) or Maskin and Tirole (1999). We do
not pursue this approach for several reasons. From an applied perspective, these mechanisms
seem somewhat remote from the contracts used in the ‘real world’. From a purely theoretical
  21
      We assume that there is no updating at date 1 and date 3. Allowing for further updating would considerably
complicate the analysis without generating much additional insight.
   22
      Note that such a contingent contract does not require the outside prospect σ to be verifiable at date 2. As
shown, the ownership structure only matters in case of asymmetric outside options. Depending on the inside
prospect π, the optimal contingent contract stipulates the allocation of control rights which then maximizes the
joint surplus.

                                                       22
perspective, the mechanism of Maskin and Tirole relies on risk-aversion and the ability to im-
plement large punishments. In our model we have risk-neutral players. Most importantly, we
have a wealth constraint that prevents large punishments that are central to these implementa-
tion games. Moreover, the recent work by Aghion et al. (2012) shows that subgame perfect
implementation games are not robust to even small deviations from the common knowledge
assumption.
    For the remainder of this paper we assume that the inside prospect π ∈ {πL , πH } is observ-
able but not verifiable at date 2. Without verifiability of π at date 2, partners cannot rely on
contingent contracts. This implies that the ex-ante decision over asset ownership now involves
a trade-off between the flexibility of individual asset ownership versus the commitment value
of joint asset ownership.
    The expected utility of a partner at date 0 under individual asset ownership (EUI (p)) and
joint asset ownership (EUJ (p)) is given by

                  EUk (p) = pEUk (πH , σ) + (1 − p)EUk (πL , σ),     k = I, J

where EUI (π, σ) and EUJ (π, σ) are defined by (10) and (11), respectively. Clearly, both part-
ners A and B agree on joint asset ownership at date 0 whenever EUJ (p) ≥ EUI (p). For a com-
parison we note that ∆H ≡ VJ (πH , σ) − VI (πH , σ) > 0 and ∆L ≡ VJ (πL , σ) − VI (πL , σ) < 0
         bV (σ) ≤ πH . Simple algebra leads to the following proposition.
for πL < π

Proposition 2 Define
                                            −∆L
                                       pb =          .
                                         −∆L + ∆H
Then, A and B choose joint asset ownership at date 0 whenever p ≥ pb; otherwise they choose
individual asset ownership.

    The intuition behind Proposition 2 is that both partners choose joint asset ownership if the
inside prospect π is likely to be high (p ≥ pb), because preserving the partnership is likely to
be valuable. Otherwise they choose individual asset ownership in order to retain the flexibility
to dissolve a likely inefficient partnership (p < pb). Thus, the threshold pb balances (i) the
risk of preserving inefficient partnerships (joint ownership with π = πL ), and (ii), the risk of
compromising otherwise efficient partnerships (individual ownership with π = πH ).
    In the model with non-verifiable learning about the inside prospect, the ex-ante optimal
allocation of control rights can lead to ex-post inefficiencies. Under individual asset ownership
there can be a displacement inefficiency, associated with regions (III) and (IV ) in Figure 3.
Under joint ownership there can be a retention inefficiency, associated with regions (I) and
(II).

                                               23
6        Relation-specific Investments
In this section we extend our model by allowing both partners A and B to make relation-specific
investments at date 1. We then examine how the allocation of control rights over critical assets
affects the partners’ incentives to invest in their relationship.
    Suppose that A and B can invest in their relationship at date 1 to improve the distribution of
potential profits y. For simplicity we focus on improvements that make a high inside prospect
πH more likely. Specifically we assume that p = p(rA , rB ), where p is concave increasing in
the partners’ relation-specific investments rA and rB . Specific investments are non-contractible,
and impose convex private costs ψ(ri ), i = A, B, with ψ(0) = ψ 0 (0) = 0. To ensure interior
solutions we assume that p(0, 0) = 0 and ∂p(·)/∂ri |ri =0 = ∞, i = A, B. We also assume that
the cross-partial is not too negative: ∂ 2 p(·)/(∂rA ∂rB ) > −κ, where κ > 0. This ensures that
the reaction functions of both partners are well-behaved.23
    Consider individual asset ownership. At date 1 partner i = A, B chooses his specific invest-
ment ri to maximize his expected utility:24

 EUI (ri , rj ) = p(ri , rj ) q 2 max{U (πH ), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (πH ) + q(1 − q)VI (πH , σ)
                                                                                             


                       +(1 − p(ri , rj )) q 2 U (σ) + (1 − q)2 U (πL ) + q(1 − q)VI (πL , σ) − ψ(ri ),
                                                                                           

                                                                  ∗        ∗
where j ∈ {A, B} and j 6= i. The equilibrium investment levels rA(I)  and rB(I) under individual
asset ownership are then characterized by the first-order conditions:

                                    ∂p(rA , rB )
                                                 ΦI = ψ 0 (ri ), i = A, B,
                                       ∂ri
where

                           q 2 max{U (πH ), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (πH ) + q(1 − q)VI (πH , σ)
                                                                                          
            ΦI =

                       − q 2 U (σ) + (1 − q)2 U (πL ) + q(1 − q)VI (πL , σ) .
                                                                          

                                                                  ∗         ∗
Because A and B are symmetric at date 1, their investment levels rA(I) and rB(I) must be also
symmetric in equilibrium. We define rI∗ ≡ rA(I)∗       ∗
                                                  = rB(I) as the equilibrium relation-specific
investment of a partner under individual asset ownership.
    23
      A sufficient and intuitive assumption is that specific investments rA and rB are (weak) strategic complements,
so that ∂ 2 p(·)/(∂rA ∂rB ) ≥ 0.
   24
      Note that U (σ) > U (πL ) when A and B each found an alternative partner; thus, max{U (πL ), U (σ)} = U (σ).




                                                        24
   Now consider joint asset ownership. The expected utility of partner i = A, B at date 1 is
then given by

 EUJ (pi , pj ) = p(ri , rj ) q 2 max{U (πH ), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (πH ) + q(1 − q)VJ (πH , σ)
                                                                                             


                    +(1 − p(ri , rj )) q 2 U (σ) + (1 − q)2 U (πL ) + q(1 − q)VJ (πL , σ) − ψ(ri ).
                                                                                        

                                                                               ∗         ∗
The following first-order conditions define the equilibrium investment levels rA(J) and rB(J)
under joint asset ownership:

                                  ∂p(rA , rB )
                                               ΦJ = ψ 0 (ri ) i = A, B,
                                     ∂ri
where

                        q 2 max{U (πH ), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (πH ) + q(1 − q)VJ (πH , σ)
                                                                                          
          ΦJ =

                    − q 2 U (σ) + (1 − q)2 U (πL ) + q(1 − q)VJ (πL , σ) .
                                                                       

                                                                  ∗
Again, the Nash equilibrium is symmetric; we thus define rJ∗ ≡ rA(J)      ∗
                                                                       = rB(J) as the equilibrium
relation-specific investment of a partner under joint asset ownership.
    The next proposition compares the partners’ incentives to make specific investments under
individual versus joint asset ownership.

Proposition 3 Joint asset ownership provides greater incentives for relation-specific invest-
ments, i.e., rJ∗ > rI∗ .

    The key intuition for this result is as follows. Incentives for specific investments stem from
the difference in the utility levels associated with a low versus high inside prospect. With joint
asset ownership, the partner combination is always efficient when the inside prospect is high,
but leads to inefficient retention when the inside prospect is low. The latter inefficiency of joint
asset ownership widens the difference in utilities between a low and a high inside prospect.
With individual asset ownership, the partner combination is always efficient when the inside
prospect is low, but causes displacement problems when the inside prospect is high. The latter
inefficiency of individual asset ownership narrows the difference in utilities between a low and
a high inside prospect. We therefore find that joint asset ownership provides stronger incentives
for specific investments, precisely because the inefficiency then arises when the partners have
failed to develop a strong internal relationship.




                                                   25
7        The Role of Wealth
An important feature of our model is that partners define ownership ex-ante, knowing that there
will be some ex-post inefficiencies. And partners cannot smooth out these ex-post inefficiencies
because of our assumption that they are perfectly wealth-constrained. We now augment our
analysis by allowing both partners A and B to have some initial wealth w ≡ wA = wB > 0. In
Section 7.1 we examine how the initial wealth w affects the partners’ payoffs under individual
versus joint asset ownership (date 2). In Section 7.2 we derive the effect of wealth on partners’
incentives to invest in their relationship (date 1). In Section 7.3 we characterize the optimal
asset allocation for different levels of wealth (date 0), as well as the optimal level of wealth that
partners would want to commit to. Section 7.4 briefly discusses alternative sources of wealth
for transfers.


7.1      Renegotiation among Wealthy Partners
Consider date 2. We showed in Section 4.2 that the joint surplus V = UA + UB is always
maximized when A and B have symmetric outside options. The presence of initial wealth w
is then irrelevant for joint efficiency. It is only if the partners have asymmetric outside options
that their initial wealth matters. With individual asset ownership, there can be a displacement
externality when the inside prospect is high (π = πH ). And with joint asset ownership, there
can be a retention externality when the inside prospect is low (π = πL ). The question is whether
and how initial wealth affects these inefficient ex-post outcomes.
    It is easy to see that with unlimited wealth all the ex-post inefficiencies can be completely
eliminated. In the Appendix we characterize the minimum amount of wealth that is required to
fully eliminate any ex-post inefficiencies (see Proof of Proposition 4). We denote this amount
by wI for individual asset ownership, and by wJ for joint asset ownership. It is easy to show
that for any w ≥ max{wI , wJ } asset ownership is irrelevant; this is because the equilibrium
outcomes are always the same. Moreover, from an ex-ante perspective, the expected transfer
payments always cancel out each other because of symmetry.
    Next we ask what minimum wealth is required to affect the renegotiation outcomes? Con-
sider first individual asset ownership. We define wI as the lower bound above which wealth
actually changes the renegotiation outcome. Using the insights from Lemma 3 we can charac-
terize wI as follows:25

Lemma 5 Consider individual asset ownership with a high inside prospect (π = πH ).
    25
     The threshold π
                   bI (σ) in the next lemma follows from expressing the condition in Lemma 3 in terms of the
inside prospect π.


                                                    26
  (i) For πH < πbI (σ), renegotiation without wealth leads to inefficient displacement. In this
      case wI > 0, so that a small amount of wealth does not affect the renegotiation outcome
      at all.

 (ii) For πH ≥ π bI (σ), renegotiation without wealth leads to no displacement but unequal profit
      shares. In this case wI = 0, so that any small amount of wealth changes the renegotiation
      outcome.

    Likewise, we define wJ as the minimum amount of wealth that is required under joint asset
ownership to change the renegotiation outcome. Using Lemma 4 we get the following charac-
terization of wJ :26

Lemma 6 Consider joint asset ownership with a low inside prospect (π = πL ).

  (i) For πL > πbJ (σ), renegotiation without wealth leads to inefficient retention. In this case
      wJ > 0, so that a small amount of wealth does not affect the renegotiation outcome at all.

 (ii) For πL ≤ π
               bJ (σ), renegotiation without wealth leads to an inefficient buyout. In this case
      wJ = 0, so that any small amount of wealth changes the renegotiation outcome.

    The two lemmas generate the surprising insight that sometimes having a small amount of
wealth makes no difference at all. In fact, this is true whenever renegotiation does not occur
in the absence of any wealth, corresponding to regions (II) and (III) in Figure 3. To get the
intuition, consider the case of displacement under individual asset ownership, represented by
region (III) in Figure 3. The partner with the outside option, say A, has a strict preference
for working with C, rather than accepting B’s most generous retention offer (α = αmax ).
Sweetening the retention offer with a small transfer payment is therefore not enough to win
over A. However, if renegotiation occurs in the absence of wealth (as in region (IV )), then
we have a problem of unbalanced incentives. B can then use his wealth to pay A in order
to retain a greater profit share. This in turn improves the incentive balance. The intuition is
similar for joint asset ownership. In the case where retention occurs in equilibrium (region
(II) in Figure 3), a small amount of wealth is not enough for A to persuade B to let him go.
However, if renegotiation results in a buyout (region (I)), then A uses his wealth to make a
transfer payment to B, thereby preserving his profit share in the new partnership with C.
  26
       Note that the threshold π
                               bJ (σ) follows directly from the condition in Lemma 4.




                                                         27
           ‫ݎ‬                                      ‫ݎ‬




                      Figure 4: Wealth and Relation-specific Investments

7.2    Wealth and Specific Investments
The previous section shows that for w ∈ (wI , wI ) and/or w ∈ (wJ , wJ ) wealth can be used to
obtain a more efficient renegotiation outcome ex-post. In a model without specific investments,
more wealth always improves the joint efficiency. The interesting question is whether this result
carries forward to the model with specific investments. For this we first examine how wealth
affects the partners’ incentives to make relation-specific investments at date 1.

Proposition 4

  (i) Under individual asset ownership, relation-specific investments rI∗ are increasing in the
      partners’ wealth w. Formally, drI∗ (w)/dw > 0 for wI ≤ w < wI .

 (ii) Under joint asset ownership, relation-specific investments rJ∗ are decreasing in w. For-
      mally, drJ∗ (w)/dw < 0 for wJ ≤ w < wJ .

(iii) For sufficiently high wealth w, relation-specific investments are identical and constant
      under individual and joint asset ownership. Formally, rI∗ (w) = rJ∗ (w) for all w ≥
      max{wI , wJ }.

    Figure 4 illustrates the insights from Proposition 4. If both partners have zero wealth, we
know from Lemma 3 that joint control over critical assets provides stronger incentives to invest
in the relationship (rJ∗ (0) > rI∗ (0)). The question is what happens to specific investments when
both partners have some initial wealth w > 0? Under individual asset ownership, wealth allows
the partners to smooth out ex-post inefficiencies in the good state π = πH . This improves the
marginal benefit of specific investments, so that rI∗ (w) is increasing in w. Under joint asset own-
ership, wealth helps the partners to correct ex-post inefficiencies in the bad state π = πL . This

                                                28
makes the difference between the bad and the good state relatively smaller, and therefore com-
promises the partners’ incentives to make relation-specific investments. Thus, rJ∗ (w) decreases
in w.
    The partners can eliminate all ex-post inefficiencies for sufficiently high wealth levels (w ≥
max{wI , wJ }). That is, with enough wealth, they can always dissolve their partnership in the
bad state (πL ), so that V (πL ) = U (σ); and they can always agree on staying together with an
equal split of profits in the good state (πH ), so that V (πH ) = 2U (π). The allocation of control
rights is then irrelevant, and the marginal incentives for specific investments are the same. This
explains why rI∗ (w) = rJ∗ (w) for w ≥ max{wI , wJ }.
    Figure 4 provides another interesting insight: Relation-specific investments are maximized
under joint asset ownership with zero wealth. This is an important and surprising result. Under
joint asset ownership, wealth allows the partners to mitigate ex-post inefficiencies in the bad
state π = πL . However, this compromises the marginal benefit of specific investments at date
1. Thus, incentives for specific investments are maximized under joint asset ownership when
partners have no wealth at all.


7.3     Optimal Asset Ownership with Wealth
The previous two sections identified two distinct facets of wealth. On the one hand, having
wealth allows the partners to mitigate potential inefficiencies arising from asymmetric outside
options; and doing so is always optimal ex-post. On the other hand, having wealth affects
the partners’ incentives for relation-specific investments. While more wealth leads to more
specific investments under individual asset ownership, it compromises incentives under joint
asset ownership. We now complete our analysis by asking two related questions. First we ask
how the optimal asset ownership decision depends on the initial level of wealth. Second we ask
whether partners would want to commit ex-ante to limit the use of their wealth ex-post.
    To answer these questions we first consider individual asset ownership, and examine how
the presence of wealth affects the partners’ expected utilities at date 0.27

Lemma 7 Under individual asset ownership, the expected utility of a partner at date 0, denoted
by EUI (w), has three distinct segments:

  (i) For w < wI , EUI (w) is constant in w.

 (ii) For wI ≤ w < wI , EUI (w) is strictly increasing in w.
  27
    The expected utility is obviously increasing in wealth itself, so we focus on the expected utility from the
productive activities, net of initial wealth. This expected utility still depends on wealth, since wealth affects both
incentives and ex-post payoffs (asymmetric outside options).

                                                         29
(iii) For w ≥ wI , EUI (w) is constant in w.

    Under individual asset ownership the ex-post efficiency effect of wealth and the incentive
effect of wealth both go in the same direction. More wealth improves the renegotiation outcome.
Because the inefficiencies are associated with a high inside prospect, this also improves ex-
post incentives. The expected utility EUI (w) is therefore increasing in wealth w in the range
w ∈ [wI , wI ), and constant everywhere else.
    We now turn to joint asset ownership. For the next lemma we define wJ∗ as the wealth level
which maximizes the expected utility of a partner at date 0.

Lemma 8 Under joint asset ownership, the expected utility of a partner at date 0, denoted by
EUJ (w), has the following properties:

  (i) For w < wJ , EUJ (w) is constant in w.

                                                 bH such that wJ∗ = wJ for all πH ≥ π
 (ii) For wJ ≤ w < wJ , there exists a threshold π                                  bH , and
       ∗
      wJ ∈ (wJ , wJ ) for all πH < π
                                   bH .
         If wJ∗ = wJ , then EUJ (w) is strictly decreasing in w for w ∈ [wJ , wJ ).
         If wJ∗ > wJ , then EUJ (w) is strictly increasing in w for w ∈ [wJ , wJ∗ ), and strictly
         decreasing in w for w ∈ (wJ∗ , wJ ).

(iii) For w ≥ wJ , EUJ (w) is constant in w.

    Lemma 8 shows that a partner’s expected utility under joint asset ownership is not necessar-
ily monotone in wealth. This is because wealth has two opposite effects: It allows two partners
with asymmetric outside options to improve their ex-post payoffs in the bad state π = πL .
However, this concurrently compromises the partners’ ex-ante incentives to invest in their re-
lationship (see Proposition 4). Which effect dominates then depends on the importance of
relation-specific investments, as reflected by the parameter πH . For sufficiently high values
of πH (πH ≥ π     bH ), the incentive effect always dominates. In this case the expected utility
EUJ (w) is decreasing in w, and reaches its maximum at zero wealth.28 For lower values of πH
(πH < π  bH ), the incentive effect does not always dominate. In the Appendix we show that the
expected utility EUJ (w) then first increases in wealth, and then decreases.
    The key insight from Lemmas 7 and 8 is that the effect of wealth on the partners’ expected
utilities depends on assets ownership. Under individual asset ownership, having wealth (up to
wI ) is always good, because it mitigates ex-post inefficiencies as well as improves incentives
  28
       If wJ > 0, there is a range [0, wJ ] where EUJ (w) is maximized.


                                                         30
      Figure 5: Wealth and Expected Utility under Individual and Joint Asset Ownership

for specific investments. Under joint asset ownership, however, having more wealth reduces
specific investments ex-ante.
    We now identify a condition so that partners prefer joint asset ownership at date 0. For
parsimony we define w ≡ max{wI , wJ }.

Proposition 5 There always exists a critical wealth level w0 , with w0 ∈ [0, wJ∗ ], such that the
partners strictly prefer joint over individual asset ownership for all w ∈ (w0 , w).

    Figure 5 compares the expected utility levels under individual versus joint asset ownership,
using the insights from Lemmas 7 and 8, and Proposition 5. Consider first the left graph where
πH > π   bH . If the partners have sufficient wealth (w ≥ w), they can eliminate all ex-post
inefficiencies in case of asymmetric outside options. The specific ownership structure is then
irrelevant (i.e., EUI (w) = EUJ (w) for w ≥ w). For w < w, however, there is a divergence
between individual and joint asset ownership. In fact, there always exists a region where joint
asset ownership is preferred to individual asset ownership. This region extends all the way
down to w0 . In some cases we have w0 = 0, so that joint asset ownership is optimal for all
levels of wealth. In other cases we have w0 > 0, so that joint asset ownership is only optimal
for intermediate levels of wealth; see the right graph of Figure 5.
    Our final proposition considers what wealthy partners would like to do if they can commit
ex-ante to a wealth constraint ex-post, i.e., if they can commit to limiting the amounts that can
be used for ex-post transfer payments.

Proposition 6 If partners with unlimited wealth can commit to limiting the wealth available for
ex-post transfer payments, then they always choose joint asset ownership and commit to being
wealth constrained at w = wJ∗ .

                                               31
    This proposition follows immediately from the above, and can be seen directly off Figure 5.
The maximum of the expected utilities, EU max = max{EUI (w), EUJ (w)}, is always reached
at EUJ (wJ∗ ). This implies that the combination of joint asset ownership with a wealth constraint
at wJ∗ achieves the best trade-off between ex-ante incentives for specific investments and ex-
post efficiency. Interestingly, in the case of πH ≥ π  bH , we even have wJ∗ = 0. The optimal
arrangement for wealthy partners is then joint asset ownership with the commitment to a zero
wealth constraint ex-post.


7.4    Alternative Sources of Wealth
Our analysis showed the various effects of initial wealth on specific investments and ex-post
payoffs. We now briefly discuss the use of alternative sources of wealth that can be used for
transfer payments.
    First we note that wealth is only required at date 2. For simplicity there is no production
between dates 0 and 2. If we allowed for it, any surplus (losses) generated between date 0 and
date 2 would need to be added (subtracted) to our measure of wealth w.
    A second source of wealth concerns a potential liquidation value of the assets themselves.
In our model partners cannot liquidate their assets at date 2. However, it is conceivable that the
assets have some residual value at date 4, even in the case of failure. The liquidation value of
the assets can then be harnessed at date 2 by obtaining some securitized debt financing, where
an outside investor receives a fixed and safe claim on the liquidation value. In the Appendix
we briefly outline how the partners need to structure such debt claims; see also Hellmann and
Thiele (2012) for a more extensive discussion in a related model.
    One may also ask whether, over and beyond any securitized liquidation value, it is possible
to relax the wealth constraint by bringing in outside investors? The answer is no! Outside
investors cannot fix the partners’ wealth constraint, because they themselves have to take profit
share in return for their investments. These profit shares generate a distortion that is very similar
to the very distortions they are trying to solve. To see this, suppose an outside investor provides
funding in exchange for a profit share τ . Under individual asset ownership, outside capital can
be used to retain the partner with the better outside option. However, giving the outside investor
a profit share τ > 0 weakens the partners’ effort incentives (as α + β < 1), and therefore
diminishes their joint surplus. In equilibrium the partner receiving the cash would in fact want
to use it to buy back profit shares. Similarly, outside capital can be used to buy out a partner
under joint asset ownership. However, the outside investor would get exactly the same stake in
the new partnership as the original partner that needs to be bought out. This essentially means
replacing one unproductive partner with another. Overall we note that using outside capital to


                                                 32
address ex-post inefficiencies is not a substitute for wealth; it either does not improve ex-post
efficiency at all (joint asset ownership), or even impairs the total surplus from a partnership
(individual asset ownership).


8     Robustness
8.1    Alternative Ownership Structures
So far we focused on individual and joint asset ownership as the only possible ownership struc-
tures. We now briefly explain why we can safely ignore all other ownership structures.
     The main alternative ownership structure is full asset ownership in the hands of one of the
two partners. This ownership structure plays a large role in the property rights literature. With
ex-ante symmetric partners, it does not matter which partner owns both assets; w.l.o.g. we
assume it is A. It is easy to verify that whenever A finds an alternative partner and B does not,
then the model behaves just like under individual asset ownership. And if B finds an alternative
partner and A does not, then the model behaves just like under joint asset ownership. From
Proposition 1 we know that either individual or joint asset ownership is optimal; thus, mixing
individual and joint ownership is never optimal.
     In fact, asymmetric asset ownership creates additional inefficiencies. If both A and B find
alternative partners, then A can hold up B before releasing B’s asset. Thus, B would have to
share some of the profits from his new partnership with D, which is clearly inefficient. At the
ex-ante stage, B would also not relinquish his asset for free. In fact, A would have to give B a
larger profit share ex-ante, which would lead to further inefficiencies. Asymmetric ownership
is therefore never optimal.
     From Proposition 2 it is immediate that randomization among the symmetric ownership
structures is suboptimal (except for the special case of p = pb where it is a matter of indifference).
Giving ownership to outsider is not optimal in our model either, since owner-managers want
to retain maximal effort incentives. Moreover, the type of outside ownership suggested by
Gans (2005) is not an equilibrium, because we allow asset owners to coordinate on joint asset
ownership. Finally, because there are no sequential investments in our model, there is no role
for options on ownership as in Nödelke and Schmidt (1998).


8.2    Joint Ownership versus Long-term Contracts
Can long-term contracts be used instead of joint asset ownership? Long-term contracts are often
associated with reputational concerns in infinitely repeated games, which we do not consider


                                                 33
in our model. However, even in our finite horizon model we can look at long-term contracts.
Indeed, our main trade-off between individual versus joint asset ownership can also be recast as
a trade-off between short-term versus long-term contracts.
     To see this, suppose that the two partners retain individual asset ownership at date 0, but
commit to a contract that specifies the price at which they transact at date 4. If the contract
is only structured as an option without commitment, then it obviously has no effect at all.
However, if the contract is binding, then the two partners face a very similar renegotiation game
as under joint asset ownership: If they want to switch partners, they cannot do so without the
consent of their original trading partner.
     The only difference between a long-term contract and joint asset ownership concerns the
division of surplus. Under joint asset ownership, the two partners get a constant fraction of
the profits, as defined by α and β. With a long-term contract the partners agree on a pre-
specified price (or pricing formula) that determines the division of surplus. What matters for
the model is not the actual distribution at date 4, but the expected distribution at dates 2 and
3. Consider the easiest example where a seller offers a single good to a buyer. Let ve be the
value of the good for the buyer at date 4, and e    c be the cost of the seller. The joint profit is then
given by y = ve −e   c. We conveniently denote the joint distribution of ve and e  c by Ωvc (e
                                                                                             v, e
                                                                                                c), so that
R                R
   ydΩin (y) = (e    v −ec)dΩvc (e
                                 v, e
                                    c). Let λ be the transfer price specified in the long-term contract.
This price can be made contingent on verifiable information, in this case on the realizations of
ve and ec at date 4.
     In the model without learning, it is easy to see that for every α there exists a unique transfer
price λ that leads to the same expected utilities at date 2 as joint asset ownership.29 Alternatively,
it is possible to define a pricing schedule that actually achieves the identical utilities at date 4.
The flexible pricing schedule must then satisfy αy = ve − λ, which can always be achieved with
λ = (1 − α)e    v + αe  c. By construction this pricing schedule continues to implement the same
outcomes as joint asset ownership, even in the model with interim learning about the inside
prospect. We thus find that long-term contracts can always be structured such that they generate
the same ex-ante utilities as joint asset ownership. Our model is therefore consistent with an
interpretation of the integration decision as either joint asset ownership or long-term contracts.


8.3    Alternative Bargaining Protocols
Our model uses the bargaining protocol of Hart and Mas-Colell (1996), which generates the
Maschler-Owen consistent NTU value. A natural question is whether our results are sensitive
  29
                          R                  R                                        R
                            v−e
   Specifically, we have α (e c)dΩvc (e
                                      v, e     v − λ)dΩvc (e
                                         c) = (e           v, e
                                                              c), or equivalently, λ = vedΩvc (e  c) −
                                                                                               v, e
 R
   v−e
α (e   c)dΩvc (e v, e
                    c).


                                                    34
to alternative bargaining solutions. We now explain that alternative bargaining solutions may
generate different levels of utility, but they do not affect the boundaries between the four key
regions in Figure 3. Consequently they do not change the basic logic of how partners make
optimal asset ownership decisions.
     If both partners have zero outside options, they are perfectly symmetric. Any reasonable
bargaining solution then suggests an equal split of surplus. Similarly, if A and B both found
alternative partners, then we have two pairs of symmetric partners. Again we note that an equal
split of surplus is the most reasonable bargaining outcome. Alternative bargaining protocols
therefore only matter for the case of asymmetric outside options. We distinguish between the
bargaining games under individual versus joint asset ownership.
     Consider first the bargaining game under joint asset ownership, where A wants to leave B
to partner with C. Because the agreement of all three parties is required, any reasonable bar-
gaining involves trilateral bargaining. While there may be many bargaining protocols that affect
the distribution of rents between the three parties, the key insight is that the critical threshold
σ
bJ (π) from Lemma 4 does not depend on the specific distribution of these rents. This threshold
only depends on the feasibility of obtaining an agreement between A, B and C that satisfies
all three participation constraints. Specifically, at σ = σbJ (π) both A and B are indifferent be-
tween dissolving their partnership and staying together (each getting U (π)), while C receives
the minimum equity stake γ = 1 − αmax . For any σ < σ      bJ (π) it is impossible to get a tripartite
agreement, and for any σ ≥ σ    bJ (π) it is always possible get such an agreement. As a conse-
quence, the specific bargaining protocol actually does not matter for the partners’ decision to
stay together or to do a buyout.
     Under individual asset ownership, we know from Lemma 3 that there exists a critical thresh-
old σbI (π) = π, such that A leaves B whenever σ > π, and stays whenever σ ≤ π. Again we
argue that reasonable alternative bargaining protocols may generate different utilities, but the
critical threshold remains unaffected. One important restriction of the bargaining protocol by
Hart and Mas-Colell (1996) is that at any point in time only one party can make an offer. Con-
sider relaxing this assumption, and suppose that there can be simultaneous offers. In particular
assume that the unique partner (A) can hold an auction for offers from the non-unique partners
(B and C). Such an auction game results in a standard Bertrand pricing. It is easy to show that
these Bertrand offers are more favorable to A than the bargaining outcome under the Hart and
Mas-Colell protocol. However, since the auction is always won by the player with the highest
valuation, it continues to be true that A teams up with B whenever σ ≤ π, and with C whenever
σ > π. Again we find that the critical threshold σ  bI (π) = π remains unaffected by the specific
bargaining protocol.



                                                 35
8.4       Costly Transfers Payments
For our main model we derive ex-post inefficiencies on the basis of binding wealth constraints.
In this section we briefly sketch a model where partners do not face wealth constraints and
cannot commit to limiting their wealth, but where any ex-post transfer payments are costly. We
show that our central trade-off between displacement and extension externalities continue to
hold.
    Suppose that for any transfer of wealth, T , there is a cost τ T . That is, if one partner pays T ,
the other only gets (1 − τ )T . The simplest interpretation is that transfer payments are taxed at
a rate τ . One can also think of financial intermediation costs, or transaction costs more broadly.
For simplicity we focus on costs that are linear in T , but it is easy to extend our analysis to the
case of non-linear costs (including fixed costs).
    In our model the ownership decision at date 0 is solely driven by the ex-post inefficiencies
associated with asymmetric outside options. We therefore focus on the asymmetric case, and
assume that A found an alternative partner at date 2. Consider the case of individual asset
ownership.30 If A leaves B, then he gets the utility U (σ) from his new relationship with C. If A
stays and renegotiates with B, he gets some shares α(τ ), as well as a transfer payment TBA (τ )
from B. We are interested in the cutoff level σ   bI (τ, π), below which it is possible for A and B
to come to an agreement, and A therefore stays.
    Figure 6 provides a graphical analysis for how σ    bI (τ, π) depends on τ . In the renegotiation,
A is asking B for a more favorable deal than the status quo of α = β = 1/2. We can see from
Figure 6 how costly transfer payments affect the utility frontier between A and B. Giving A
a higher utility can initially be done by increasing his profit share α. A then receives a higher
share, up to some α∗ (τ ) > 1/2 where the marginal rate of substitution satisfies dUA /dUB =
−(1 − τ ). Beyond this point is would be inefficient to offer an even higher share α, since the
incentive costs exceed the costs of making transfer payments. B then prefers to transfer more
utility to A through costly transfer payments, so that the utility frontier has a slope of −(1 − τ ).
The maximum transfer TBA    max
                                that B is willing to offer, satisfies UB (1 − α∗ (τ ); π) − TBA
                                                                                             max
                                                                                                  = 0.
                                 ∗                       max                           ∗
This gives A the utility UA (α (τ ); π) + (1 − τ )TBA , or equivalently, UA (α (τ ); π) + (1 −
τ )UB (1 − α∗ (τ ); π). The cutoff σbI (τ, π), below which it is possible for A and B to reach an
agreement, therefore satisfies

                            UA (σ) = UA (α∗ (τ ); π) + (1 − τ )UB (1 − α∗ (τ ); π).

   For τ = 1 the model reverts back to our main model with perfect wealth constraints. The
highest utility that A can get from staying with B is then given by UA (αmax ; π), and the cutoff
  30
       The case of joint asset ownership follows a similar logic.


                                                          36
       Figure 6: Utility-possibility Frontier for Joint Ownership with Ex-post Transfers

bI (τ = 1, π) satisfies UA (σ) = UA (αmax ; π) as before. This point is represented by σ1 in Figure
σ
6.
    For τ = 0 we have a model with perfectly efficient ex-post wealth transfers. The highest
utility that A can get from staying with B is then given by UA (α∗ (τ ); π) + UB (1 − α∗ (τ ); π),
where α∗ (τ = 0) = 1/2. And the cutoff σ      bI (τ = 0, π) satisfies UA (σ) = V (α = 1/2; π);
the cutoff is thus equivalent to the efficient level, i.e., σ
                                                            bI (τ = 0, π) = σ bV (π). This point is
represented by σ3 in Figure 6.
    The most important insight is that for any τ ∈ (0, 1), the maximum utility that A can get
from B lies somewhere between the two extremes σ1 and σ3 . In Figure 6 we denote this point
by σ2 . Relative to the model with perfect wealth constraints, the range where renegotiation suc-
ceeds is increased from σ1 to σ2 . However, relative to the model with perfect wealth transfers,
there is a region between σ2 and σ3 where the joint utility would be maximized if A stayed with
B, but transfer costs prevent renegotiation so that A leaves. Put differently, as long as trans-
fer payments are costly, there is a region σ ∈ (σ2 , σ3 ) where inefficient displacement occurs.
Moreover, even though displacement does not occur for σ < σ2 , there are still some inefficien-
cies whenever τ > 0. This is because the profit share for A remains above the efficient level
α = 1/2, and because B may need to make some costly transfers in equilibrium.
    Overall we note that even a small cost of making ex-post transfers is enough to generate the
trade-off between displacement externalities (individual ownership) and retention externalities


                                                37
(joint ownership). Thus, while we consider binding wealth constraints a natural choice for the
base model, our key insights do not depend on this assumption. In fact, the trade-off between
the benefit of retaining flexibility under individual asset ownership versus the benefit of com-
mitment under joint asset ownership, carries over to a model with unlimited wealth but costly
transfer payments.


9    Conclusion
This paper develops a new theory of the firm, based on how partners dynamically switch in and
out of relationships. The model identifies a fundamental trade-off between two ex-post ineffi-
ciencies. Under non-integration (i.e., individual asset ownership) there can be a displacement
externality, where a partner may leave, even though the benefit is worth less than the loss to
the displaced partner. Under integration (i.e., joint asset ownership) there can be a retention
externality, where a partner may hold on to the other, even though the benefit to the departing
partner would exceed the loss to the remaining partner. These inefficiencies arise endogenously
in our model with wealth-constrained agents and team incentive problems, and are robust to
renegotiations. Optimal firm boundaries are determined by the relative importance of displace-
ment and retention externalities: The greater the asset specificity in a given relationship, the
greater the displacement and the smaller the retention externality, and hence the more attractive
is integration.
     Our main model does not rely on relation-specific investments; but when added to the model,
we find that joint asset ownership always provides stronger incentives for specific investments.
Moreover, when relaxing the assumption of binding wealth constraints, we find that wealth
has two distinct effects. Ex-post, wealth mitigates the displacement and retention externalities.
However, ex-ante wealth reduces incentives for specific investments. A surprising result is that
wealthy owners would always want to commit ex-ante to limiting ex-post transfer payments.
     Our model draws on insights from several of the leading theories of the firm, including
transaction costs, property rights, and incentive-based theories. However, it differs in terms of
focusing on the dynamics of how partners change relationships. This allows us to provide a
fresh perspective on some of the existing explanations for integration. In particular, our model
generates the traditional prediction from transaction cost economics that asset specificity fa-
vors integration. However, while the verbal arguments of Williamson typically require different
explanations for the advantages of integration and non-integration, we provide a unified frame-
work where one underlying force generates the trade-off. Moreover, while transaction cost
economics typically relies on problems of ex-post opportunism and price haggling, we focus
instead on the problems of displacement and retention as the main sources of ex-post ineffi-

                                               38
ciencies. This allows us to go directly to the core of asset specificity, namely that the primary
concern of the owner of a specific asset is to be not displaced by another.
    Our model also allows us to derive some new empirical predictions about the boundaries
of the firm. Most of the theoretical work has focused on comparative statics, and consequently
most of the empirical work has focused on cross-sectional determinants of the integration de-
cision. Our theory suggests an empirical research agenda about the time-series properties of
integration.
    For a given level of asset specificity, our model predicts that dynamic partner switching is
more common under individual than under joint asset ownership. The same applies to short-
term versus long-term contracting. It seems highly intuitive that switching to an outside supplier
or outside buyer is more rare in a vertically integrated setting, so we would be surprised if this
prediction was not found in the data. The interesting point here is actually that this simple
prediction cannot be obtained from theories with ex-post efficiency, such as the property rights
theories. This is because in those models all efficient partner changes always occur in equilib-
rium, irrespective of asset ownership.
    Our model predicts that non-integration (or short-term contracting) is more common in en-
vironments with considerable uncertainty about what the best trading partners are. Previous
empirical work typically focused on general measures of uncertainty, often with mixed results
(see Lafontaine and Slade, 2007). We contend that these measures fail to distinguish between
uncertainty about production and demand, versus uncertainty about partner choices. Moreover,
our theory suggests that the dynamics of partner choices also depends on the internal match
quality, i.e., the interim learning about how well partners are suited for each other.
    Our analysis suggests avenues for further theoretical work. We focus on team incentives and
wealth constraints as source of ex-post inefficiencies; but there may be other sources of ineffi-
ciencies, such as asymmetric information (Aghion et al., 2012). Future research may examine
how alternative ex-post inefficiencies affect the dynamic properties of firm boundaries. For
analytical tractability we impose ex-ante symmetry of partners, but it would be interesting to
explore the role of ex-ante asymmetries. Moreover, in this paper we chose the simplest possible
dynamic specification where partners have at most one opportunity to switch partners. A worth-
while future research agenda is to extend the model to an infinite horizon. This would allow for
a more comprehensive analysis of how asset ownership affects the timing and frequency of part-
ner changes. Such a model might also look at the process of wealth accumulation, and at how
partners dynamically trade-off ex-post benefits versus ex-ante costs of having wealth. Overall
we believe that looking at the dynamics of asset ownership constitutes a new and promising
direction in the theory of the firm.



                                               39
Appendix
Marriage Example with Imperfect Ex-post Transfers.
     Suppose that Alice and Bob both have sufficient wealth, but for any ex-post transfer T there
is a cost τ T . That is, if the sender pays T , the receiver only gets (1 − τ )T . As shown, the
marriage decision is only relevant in the case of asymmetric outside options, which we now
focus on. Suppose that Alice found Charles, but Dora continues to reject Bob. Recall that
staying together is then jointly efficient if λ ≤ λV ≡ 2θ.
     Consider the case without marriage. If Alice leaves Bob for Charles, she gets λ, and Bob
gets 0. To retain Alice, Bob can offer her the transfer TBA ; Alice then gets θ + (1 − τ )TBA ,
                                                                                          max
while Bob gets θ − TBA . Thus, the maximum transfer that Bob is willing to offer is TBA        = θ.
                                                       max
Alice then gets the utility UA (τ ) = θ + (1 − τ )TBA = (2 − τ )θ. Thus, Alice stays with
Bob if UA (τ ) ≥ λ, or equivalently, λ ≤ λN o−M (τ ) ≡ (2 − τ )θ. We can immediately see that
λN o−M (τ ) < λV for τ > 0. Thus, for λ ∈ (λN o−M (τ ), λV ) Alice will leave Bob even though it
is jointly inefficient.
     Now consider the case of marriage. If Alice stays with Bob each gets θ. However, Alice
can also buy herself out by offering Bob the transfer TAB . Alice would then get λ − TAB , while
                                                    max
Bob gets (1 − τ )TAB . The maximum transfer TAB         that Alice is willing to offer Bob satisfies
      max                 max                                                 max
λ−TAB      = θ, so that TAB   = λ−θ. Bob would then get UB (τ ) = (1−τ )TAB        = (1−τ )(λ−θ).
Thus, Bob would only let Alice go if UB (τ ) > θ, or equivalently, λ > λM (τ ) ≡ θ(2−τ )/(1−τ ).
Note that τ = 0 implies λM (τ = 0) = λV . Moreover, it is straightforward to show that
dλM (τ )/dτ > 0 for τ ∈ (0, 1). Thus, λV < λM (τ ) for η > 0. This implies that for λ ∈
(λV , λM (τ )) , Alice stays with Bob even though leaving would be jointly efficient.
     Finally we note that λN o−M (τ ) < λV < λM (τ ). For λ ≤ λV = 2θ we know that staying to-
gether is then jointly optimal for Alice and Bob in case they have asymmetric outside options. In
fact, staying is then the equilibrium outcome when Alice and Bob are married (as λV < λM (τ )).
Without marriage, either inefficient leaving can occur in equilibrium (λN o−M (τ ) < λ ≤ λV ), or
staying together requires costly transfer payments (λ ≤ λN o−M (τ )). For λ > λV = 2θ, leaving
the partner is jointly optimal in case of asymmetric outside options. This is then indeed the
equilibrium outcome when Alice and Bob are not married (λN o−M (τ ) < λV ). With marriage,
either leaving requires costly transfer payments (λ > λM (τ )), or one partner inefficiently re-
tains the other (λV < λ ≤ λM (τ )). Thus, marriage is optimal whenever 2θ > λ; and for 2θ ≤ λ
Alice and Bob are better off without marriage.




                                                40
Proof of Lemma 1.
   Recall that A and B implement the effort levels e∗A (α) and e∗B (β) as defined by (1) and (2).
Using β = 1 − α, the joint surplus is given by

                     V (α; π) = µ(e∗A (α)e∗B (α))π − c(e∗A (α)) − c(e∗B (α)).

The jointly optimal profit share αJ satisfies the first-order condition
                               ∗
                                          de∗B ∗              de∗          de∗
                                                  
                     0 ∗ ∗     deA ∗
                 πµ (eA eB )       eB +        eA = c0 (e∗A ) A + c0 (e∗B ) B .                (12)
                                dα         dα                  dα          dα

Symmetry implies de∗A /dα = −de∗B /dα and e∗A = e∗B at α = 1/2. Thus, (12) is satisfied for
α = β = 1/2. The solution αJ = β J = 1/2 is also unique due to convexity of c(ei ), i = A, B.
Thus,
                             dUA             dUB
                                       =−               > 0.
                              dα α=1/2        dα α=1/2
Moreover, e∗A (0) = e∗B (1) = 0. This implies 1/2 < αmax = β max < 1.
    Now consider the bargaining at date 0, and suppose that partner A gets the profit share
α > 1/2 with probability 1/2, and 1 − α < 1/2 otherwise. A’s expected utility at date 0 is then
given by UA (α; π)/2 + UA (1 − α; π)/2. However, from the above we note that A’s expected
utility is maximized when α = 1/2 (symmetric for B). Thus, at date 0 both partners A and B
agree on splitting the expected joint surplus in half: α = β = 1/2.                          2

Proof of Lemma 3.
    Under individual asset ownership, partner A is indifferent between staying (and renegotiat-
ing his profit share α) and leaving, if

                                     UA (αI∗ ; π) = UA (b
                                                        αI ; σ).                               (13)

Recall that B and C both have zero outside options. The bargaining protocol à la Hart and Mas-
Colell (1996) then implies that (13) is satisfied for π = σ. Thus, σ ≤ π implies UA (αI∗ ; π) ≥
UA (bαI ; σ). For σ > π the opposite holds: UA (αI∗ ; π) < UA (b
                                                               αI ; σ). Finally we define σ
                                                                                          bI (π) = π
as the threshold above which A is better off leaving B (σ > σ   bI (π)).                          2

Profit Shares under Joint Ownership with Asymmetric Outside Options.
    W.l.o.g. suppose that only A found an alternative partner, C. We denote a coalition by S,
with S ⊂ 3. Let κ = (κA , κB , κC ) be a vector which measures the rate at which utility can be
transferred. Moreover, ηT ∈ V (T ) denotes the payoff vector for the subcoalition T .


                                                 41
    According to Hart (2004), the Maschler-Owen consistent NTU value can be derived by the
following procedure: First, for all i ∈ S, let the payoff vector z ∈ RS satisfy
                                                                             
                            1              X                  X
                  κi zi =        vκ (S) −        κj ηS\i (j) +     κi ηS\j (i) ,
                           |S|
                                            j∈S\i             j∈S\i

where the maximum possible value vκ (S) is defined by
                                    (                             )
                                      X
                     vκ (S) = sup         κi Ui : (Ui )i∈S ∈ V (S) .
                                           i∈S

Second, if z is feasible, then the payoff vector is given by ηS = z.
   The coalition functions for our setting are as follows:

     V{A} = V{B} = V{C} = 0

                     (UA (α; π), UB (β; π)) ∈ R{A,B} : α + β ≤ 1; α, β ≥ 0
                 
   V{A,B} =

   V{A,C} = {0, 0}

   V{B,C} = {0, 0}

                     (UA (α; σ), UB (β; σ), UC (γ; σ)) ∈ R{A,B,C} : α + β + γ ≤ 1; α, β, γ ≥ 0 ,
                 
 V{A,B,C} =

where V{A,C} = {0, 0} follows from the fact that A cannot leave without B’s consent under joint
ownership. Note that the bargaining outcome must satisfy α∗ ∈ (0, αmax ) and β ∗ ∈ (0, β max )
for the (A, B) coalition, and α∗ ∈ (0, αmax ), β ∗ ∈ (0, β max ), and γ ∗ ∈ (0, γ max ) for the grand
coalition (A, B, C). Thus, dUA /dα > 0, dUB /dβ > 0, and dUC /dγ > 0 for the relevant
values of α, β, and γ. This implies that the inverse of each utility function exists. We define
α(UA ) ≡ UA−1 (α), β(UB ) ≡ UB−1 (β), and γ(UC ) ≡ UC−1 (γ). Pareto efficiency then requires

                                   α(UA ) + β(UB ) = 1 for V {A,B}

                         α(UA ) + β(UB ) + γ(UC ) = 1 for V {A,B,C} .

The payoffs for the single-player coalitions are given by η1 (A) = η1 (B) = η1 (C) = 0. For
the two-player coalitions, the equilibrium payoffs satisfy the Nash bargaining solution. Due to
symmetry, the payoffs are given by

                                    η2 (A, B) = (U (π), U (π))

                                    η2 (A, C) = (0, 0)

                                    η2 (B, C) = (0, 0) .

                                                    42
   It remains to derive the payoff vector η3 (A, B, C) for the hyperplane game. For a vector
z = (zA , zB , zC ) the equation of the hyperplane is

                            α0 (UA )zA + β 0 (UB )zB + γ 0 (UC )zC = r,                    (14)

where
                            r = α0 (UA )UA + β 0 (UB )UB + γ 0 (UC )UC .                   (15)
Using the payoffs for the two-player coalitions, we can now define the equilibrium payoffs for
the grand coalition (A, B, C):
                                                           1
                             η3 (A) = UA (α; σ) =            [U (π) + zA ]
                                                           3
                                                           1
                             η3 (B) = UB (β; σ) =            [U (π) + zB ]
                                                           3
                                                 1
                             η3 (C) = UC (γ; σ) = zC ,
                                                 3
where, using (15),
                                 1           0                0                  r
                     zA =             [r − β   (U B ) · 0 − γ   (UC ) · 0] =
                             α0 (UA )                                        α0 (UA )
                                  1           0               0                    r
                     zB =              [r − α   (UA ) · 0 − γ   (U C ) · 0] =
                             β 0 (UB )                                        β 0 (UB )
                                1
                     zC =                [r − α0 (UA )U (π) − β 0 (UB )U (π)] .
                             γ 0 (UC )
Using the Inverse Function Theorem we get α0 (UA ) = (dUA /dα)−1 , β 0 (UB ) = (dUB /dβ)−1 ,
and γ 0 (UC ) = (dUC /dγ)−1 . The equations for the fixed point for the grand coalition are thus
given by
                                              
                      1             dUA (α; σ)
        UA (α; σ) =       U (π) + r                                                         (16)
                      3                 dα
                                              
                      1             dUB (β; σ)
        UB (β; σ) =       U (π) + r                                                         (17)
                      3                 dβ
                                    "           "            −1               −1 ##
                      1 dUC (γ; σ)                 dUA (α; σ)         dUB (β; σ)
        UC (γ; σ) =                   r − U (π)                   +                      , (18)
                      3     dγ                        dα                  dβ

where, using (15),
                            −1                         −1                         −1
                  dUA (α; σ)                   dUB (β; σ)                   dUC (γ; σ)
 r = UA (α; σ)                   + UB (β; σ)                  + UC (γ; σ)                  .
                     dα                           dβ                           dγ

                                                    43
The equilibrium payoff vector η3 (A, B, C) = (U  bA (α; σ), U
                                                            bB (β; σ), U
                                                                       bC (γ; σ)) thus satisfies the
system of three equations, (16), (17), and (18), which also defines the equilibrium profit shares
α
bJ , βbJ , and γ
               bJ .

Proof of Lemma 4.
   Under joint asset ownership, partner A stays with an equal split of profits if

                                       UA (π) ≥ UA (b
                                                    αJ ; σ).                                   (19)

Note that (19) is satisfied with strict inequality when π > 0 and σ = 0. Moreover, dUA (b   αJ ; σ)/dσ >
0, with limσ→∞ UA (b  αJ ; σ) = ∞ > UA (π) for any finite π. Thus, there exists a threshold σ   bJ (π)
such that (19) is satisfied for σ ≤ σ bJ (π). Now consider the case where both A and B found al-
ternative partners (symmetric outside options). They then stay together if U (π) ≥ U (σ), which
is equivalent to π ≥ σ. Recall that U (σ) > UA (b   αJ ; σ) for all σ > 0 because βbJ > 0 and e∗B = 0
in case of asymmetric outside options. Thus, σ    bJ (π) > π.                                       2

Proof of Proposition 1.
    Recall that the ownership structure is irrelevant for the partners’ joint surplus in case of
symmetric outside options. We can thus focus on the case with asymmetric outside options.
Moreover, note that maximizing a partner’s expected utility at date 0 is equivalent to maximizing
the joint surplus of A and B.
    W.l.o.g. suppose that only A found an alternative partner at date 2 (the case where only
B found an alternative partner is symmetric). According to Lemma 1 the joint surplus for the
A−B match is maximized when α = β = 1/2. The joint surplus is then given by 2U (π). When
A leaves, the joint surplus of A and B is maximized when B, as unproductive partner, does not
get a stake in the new A − C partnership. The joint surplus is then given by UA (b    α; σ). Thus,
staying together (with α = β = 1/2) and dissolving the partnership are both jointly efficient if

                                       2U (π) = UA (b
                                                    α; σ).                                     (20)

Note that dUA (b  α; σ)/dσ > 0, with UA (bα; 0) = 0 and limσ→∞ UA (bα; σ) = ∞ > 2U (π) for any
                                         bV (π) such that 2U (π) ≥ UA (b
finite π. Thus, there exists a threshold σ                             α; σ) for σ ≤ σ
                                                                                     bV (π).
    Next, we identify the optimal ownership structure which guarantees the jointly efficient
outcome in case of asymmetric outside options. Suppose σ > σ       bV (π), so that dissolving the
partnership is jointly optimal. Under individual asset ownership, A would leave if σ > σ   bI (π),
where σ bI (π) is defined by
                                      UA (αI∗ ; π) = UA (b
                                                         αI ; σ).                            (21)


                                                44
Note that 2U (π) > UA (αI∗ ; π), whereas the right-hand sides of (20) and (21) are identical. Thus,
σ
bI (π) < σbV (π), which implies that individual asset ownership always ensures the dissolution of
the partnership for σ > σbV (π) in case of asymmetric outside options. Now suppose σ ≤ σ    bV (π),
so that staying together with α = β = 1/2 is jointly optimal in case of asymmetric outside
options. Under joint asset ownership, A stays (with α = β = 1/2) if σ ≤ σ       bJ (π). Recall that
σ
bJ (π) is defined by
                                        U (π) = UA (b
                                                    αJ ; σ).                                   (22)
To show that σbJ (π) > σ                  bJV (π) as the value of σ under joint asset ownership
                        bV (π), we define σ
where staying together (with α = β = 1/2) and dissolving the partnership (with βb > 0) lead to
the same joint surplus:
                               2U (π) = UA (bαJ ; σ) + UB (βbJ ; σ).                       (23)
Note that UA (b
              α; σ) > UA (bαJ ; σ) + UB (βbJ ; σ), whereas the left-hand sides of (20) and (23) are
                 bJV (π) > σ
identical. Thus, σ         bV (π). Moreover, we can write (23) as

                            U (π) + U (π) − UB (βbJ ; σ) = UA (b
                                                               αJ ; σ),                        (24)
                                    |       {z         }
                                              ≡χ

where, according to the Maschler-Owen consistent NTU value, χ < 0. Thus, the left-hand
side of (24) is smaller than the left-hand side of (22), while their right-hand sides are identical.
Hence, σ          bJV (π). This in turn implies that σ
         bJ (π) > σ                                   bJ (π) > σ bV (π). Consequently, joint asset
ownership always preserves the partnership with α = β = 1/2 for σ ≤ σ       bV (π).               2

Proof of Proposition 3.
   We define
                                       ∂p(rA , rB )
                              F ≡                   Φ − ψ 0 (rA ) = 0
                                          ∂rA
                                       ∂p(rA , rB )
                              G ≡                   Φ − ψ 0 (rB ) = 0,
                                          ∂rB
where Φ ∈ {ΦI , ΦJ }. Applying Cramer’s Rule we get
                                           ∗
                                         drA   det(X1 )
                                             =
                                         dΦ    det(X2 )

where                                         !                                !
                                − ∂F
                                  ∂Φ
                                        ∂F
                                        ∂rB
                                                                ∂F
                                                                ∂rA
                                                                         ∂F
                                                                         ∂rB
                      X1 =                              X2 =                       .
                                − ∂G
                                  ∂Φ
                                        ∂G
                                        ∂rB
                                                                ∂G
                                                                ∂rA
                                                                         ∂G
                                                                         ∂rB




                                                   45
Because Ui (·), i = A, B, is concave, X2 must be negative definite, so that det(X2 ) > 0. Thus,
  ∗
drA /dΦ > 0 if
                                          ∂F ∂G     ∂G ∂F
                             det(X1 ) = −         +           > 0.
                                          ∂Φ ∂rB    ∂Φ ∂rB
                                 ∗
The second-order condition for rB  implies dG/drB < 0. Moreover,
                     ∂F   ∂p(rA , rB )                  ∂G   ∂p(rA , rB )
                        =              >0                  =              > 0,
                     ∂Φ      ∂rA                        ∂Φ      ∂rB
and
                                       ∂F       ∂ 2p
                                            =          Φ.
                                       ∂rB    ∂rA ∂rB
          ∗
Thus, drA   /dΦ > 0 for ∂ 2 p(·)/(∂rA ∂rB ) > −κ, where −κ is the lower bound of the cross-
                                                     ∗
partial satisfying det(X1 ) = 0. Symmetry implies drB  /dΦ > 0.
    Finally, ΦJ > ΦI is equivalent to

                       VJ (πH , σ) − VI (πH , σ) > VJ (πL , σ) − VI (πL , σ).

Recall that VJ (πH , σ) > VI (πH , σ) and VJ (πL , σ) < VI (πL , σ). Thus, ΦJ > ΦI . This, in con-
junction with drA∗
                   /dΦ > 0 and drB  ∗
                                      /dΦ > 0, implies that rJ∗ > rI∗ .                         2

Proof of Proposition 4.
                                                                          ∗             ∗
   With wealth w the equilibrium levels of relation-specific investments rA(k) (w) and rB(k) (w),
k ∈ {I, J}, are characterized by
                                    ∂p(rA , rB )
                           F ≡                   Φk (w) − ψ 0 (rA ) = 0
                                       ∂rA
                                    ∂p(rA , rB )
                           G ≡                   Φk (w) − ψ 0 (rB ) = 0.
                                       ∂rB
where, using VI (πL , σ) = U (σ) and VJ (πH , σ) = 2U (πH ),

        ΦI = q 2 max{U (πH ), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (πH ) + q(1 − q)VI (w, πH , σ)
                                                                               


                  − q 2 U (σ) + (1 − q)2 U (πL ) + q(1 − q)U (σ)
                                                                

                   2
                   q max{U (πH ), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (πH ) + q(1 − q)2U (πH )
                                                                               
         ΦJ =

                  − q 2 U (σ) + (1 − q)2 U (πL ) + q(1 − q)VJ (w, πL , σ) .
                                                                        

By applying Cramer’s Rule we get
                                       ∗
                                     drA(k) (w)        det(X1 )
                                                  =             ,
                                         dw            det(X2 )

                                                  46
where                                        !                             !
                               − ∂F
                                 ∂w
                                       ∂F
                                       ∂rB
                                                               ∂F
                                                               ∂rA
                                                                     ∂F
                                                                     ∂rB
                      X1 =       ∂G    ∂G
                                                      X2 =     ∂G    ∂G
                                                                               .
                               − ∂w    ∂rB                     ∂rA   ∂rB
Because Ui (·), i = A, B, is concave, X2 must be negative definite, so that det(X2 ) > 0. Thus,
  ∗
drA(k) (w)/dw > 0 if
                                          ∂F ∂G     ∂G ∂F
                             det(X1 ) = −         +           > 0.
                                          ∂w ∂rB    ∂w ∂rB
                                 ∗
The second-order condition for rB(k) (w) implies ∂G/∂rB < 0. Moreover,
                                      ∂F     ∂ 2 p(·)
                                          =           Φk (w)
                                      ∂rB   ∂rA ∂rB
and
                       ∂F   ∂p(·) dΦk (w)             ∂G   ∂p(·) dΦk (w)
                          =                              =               ,
                       ∂w   ∂rA dw                    ∂w   ∂rB dw
where
                             dΦI (w)            dVI (w, πH , σ)
                                     = q(1 − q)
                               dw                    dw
                               dΦJ (w)                   dVJ (w, πL , σ)
                                           = −q(1 − q)                   .
                                  dw                          dw
For individual asset ownership, recall that dVI (w, πH , σ)/dw > 0 for w ≥ wI , which im-
                                                                  ∗
plies that ∂F/∂w > 0 and ∂G/∂w > 0 for w ≥ wI . Thus, drA(I)           (w)/dw > 0 for w ≥ wI and
  2
∂ p(·)/(∂rA ∂rB ) > −κ, where κ is the lower bound of the cross-partial satisfying det(X1 ) = 0.
                          ∗                    ∗
Symmetry implies drA(I)       (w)/dw = drB(I)     (w)/dw. For joint asset ownership, recall that
dVJ (w, πL , σ)/dw > 0 for w ≥ wJ , so that ∂F/∂w < 0 and ∂G/∂w < 0 for w ≥ wJ .
            ∗
Thus, drA(J)    (w)/dw < 0 for w ≥ wJ and ∂ 2 p(·)/(∂rA ∂rB ) > −κ. Due to symmetry,
    ∗                  ∗
drA(J)  (w)/dw = drB(J)     (w)/dw.
      Finally recall that VI (w, πH , σ) (individual ownership) and VJ (w, πL , σ) are both (weakly)
increasing in w. We define wI as the minimum value of w which satisfies VI (w, πH , σ) =
2U (πH ) (individual ownership), and wJ as the minimum value of w which satisfies VJ (w, πL , σ) =
U (σ) (joint ownership). Because VI (w, πH , σ) = 2U (πH ) for w ≥ wI , and VJ (w, πL , σ) =
U (σ) for w ≥ wJ , we have ΦI (w) = ΦJ (w) for w ≥ max {wI , wJ }. This implies rI∗ (w) =
rJ∗ (w) for w ≥ max {wI , wJ }.                                                                   2

Proof of Lemma 7.
   Under individual asset ownership the expected utility of partner A at date 0 is given by

  EUIA (p∗ , w) = p∗ q 2 max{U (πH ), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (πH ) + q(1 − q)VI (w, πH , σ)
                                                                                          


                     +(1 − p∗ ) q 2 U (σ) + (1 − q)2 U (πL ) + q(1 − q)VI (πL , σ) − ψ(rA(I)
                                                                                        ∗
                                                                                 
                                                                                             ),

                                                 47
with p∗ ≡ p(rA(I)
             ∗       ∗
                  , rB(I) ) and VI (πL , σ) = U (σ). The expected utility of partner B is symmetric.
Applying the Envelope Theorem we get
                                                     ∗
              dEUIA (p∗ , w)   ∂EUIA (p∗ , w) drB(I)               ∂VI (w, πH , σ)
                             =                       + p∗ q(1 − q)                 .
                  dw             ∂rB(I)        dw                       ∂w

Note that ∂EUIA (·)/∂rB(I) > 0. We need to consider three cases: (i) w ≤ wI , (ii) w > wI ;
                                                                 ∗
and (iii), wI < w ≤ wI . For the first two cases we know that drB(I)  /dw = 0 and ∂VI /∂w = 0;
           A ∗                                                    ∗
thus, dEUI (p , w)/dw = 0. For wI < w ≤ wI we know that drB(I) /dw > 0 and ∂VI /∂w > 0;
thus, dEUIA (p∗ , w)/dw > 0. This also implies that EUIA (p∗ , w) is maximized for w ≥ wI . 2

Proof of Lemma 8.
   Under joint asset ownership the expected utility of partner A at date 0 is given by

 EUJA (p∗ , w) = p∗ q 2 max{U (πH ), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (πH ) + q(1 − q)VJ (πH , σ)
                                                                                      


                    +(1 − p∗ ) q 2 U (σ) + (1 − q)2 U (πL ) + q(1 − q)VJ (w, πL , σ) − ψ(rA(I)
                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                   
                                                                                               ),

with p∗ = p(rA(J)
             ∗       ∗
                  , rB(J) ) and VJ (πH , σ) = 2U (πH ). The expected utility of partner B is
symmetric. Applying the Envelope Theorem yields
                                                 ∗
          dEUJA (p∗ , w)   ∂EUJA (p∗ , w) drB(J)                     ∂VJ (w, πL , σ)
                         =                       + (1 − p∗ )q(1 − q)
              dw             ∂rB(J)        dw                             ∂w
                                                ∗
                                    ∂p(·) drB(J)                     ∂VJ (w, πL , σ)
                           = ΦJ (w)              + (1 − p∗ )q(1 − q)                 ,
                                    ∂rB(J) dw      |              {z      ∂w       }
                             |        {z       }
                                        ≡ψ1                           ≡ψ2


where
                        2
                        q max{U (πH ), U (σ)} + (1 − q)2 U (πH ) + q(1 − q)2U (πH )
                                                                                   
         ΦJ (w) =

                       − q 2 U (σ) + (1 − q)2 U (πL ) + q(1 − q)VJ (w, πL , σ) > 0.
                                                                             

                                                                            ∗
By definition, ∂p(·)/∂rB(J) > 0. Moreover, recall from Proposition 4 that drB(J) /dw < 0 for
wJ ≤ w < wJ . Thus, ψ1 < 0 for wJ ≤ w < wJ . Furthermore, ∂VJ (w, πL , σ)/∂w > 0 for
wJ ≤ w < wJ , so that ψ2 > 0 for wJ ≤ w < wJ . We define wJ∗ as the wealth level which
satisfies dEUJA (p∗ , w)/dw = 0 for wJ ≤ w < wJ , and thus maximizes A’s expected utility
at date 0. Note that wJ ≤ wJ∗ < wJ because drB(J)
                                               ∗
                                                    /dw = 0 and ∂VJ (w, πL , σ)/∂w = 0 for
w < wJ and w ≥ wJ . To summarize, (i) dEUJ (·)/dw = 0 for w ≤ wJ , w ≥ wJ , and w = wJ∗
                                             A

(as ψ1 + ψ2 = 0), (ii) dEUJA (·)/dw > 0 for wJ < w < wJ∗ (as ψ1 + ψ2 > 0); and (iii),
dEUJA (·)/dw < 0 for wJ∗ < w < wJ (as ψ1 + ψ2 < 0).

                                                48
    Finally note that limπH →∞ ΦJ (w) = ∞ as dU (πH )/dπH > 0 with limπH →∞ U (πH ) = ∞.
This implies that limπH →∞ ψ1 = −∞ for wJ ≤ w < wJ , while sup(ψ2 ) < ∞. Thus, there
                   bH such that dEUJA (·)/dw < 0 for all πH ≥ π
exists a threshold π                                          bH and w ∈ (wJ , wJ ), which
                                ∗
implies a corner solution with wJ ≤ wJ .                                                2

Proof of Proposition 5.
    Suppose w ≥ w = max {wI , wJ }. Under individual asset ownership, VI (w, πH , σ) =
2U (πH ) for w ≥ wI . Under joint asset ownership, VJ (w, πL , σ) = VI (πL , σ) = U (bαI ; σ) for
                                                        ∗         ∗
w ≥ wJ . Moreover, recall from Proposition 4 that rI (w) = rJ (w) for all w ≥ w. Thus,
EUI (rI∗ , w) = EUJ (rJ∗ , w) for w ≥ w.
    Next, recall from Lemma 7 that dEUI (·)/dw > 0 for wI < w ≤ wI , where EUI (·) is
maximized for w ≥ wI . Moreover, we know from Lemma 8 that dEUJ (·)/dw > 0 for wJ <
w < wJ∗ , and dEUJ (·)/dw < 0 for wJ∗ < w ≤ wJ , where EUJ (·) is maximized when w = wJ∗ .
This implies that EUJ (·) > EUI (·) for w ∈ [wJ∗ , w).
    Finally we examine whether EUI (·) > EUJ (·) for some w < wJ∗ . Suppose πH → πL . We
can then immediately see that rI∗ (w) = rJ∗ (w) = 0, and hence, EUI (·) > EUJ (·). We define
w0 as the critical wealth level so that EUJ (·) > EUI (·) for w ∈ [w0 , w). Note that w0 < wJ∗
because EUJ (·) > EUI (·) for wJ∗ ≤ w < w. Moreover, w0 ≥ 0 because, when πH is suffi-
ciently high, EUJ (·) > EUI (·) even for w = 0. Thus, joint asset ownership is strictly optimal
for w0 ≤ w < w, with w0 ∈ [0, wJ∗ ]. According to Lemma 8, the optimal wealth level is then
wJ∗ ∈ [0, w), with wJ∗ ≤ wJ for all πH ≥ πbH .                                                 2

Liquidation Value of Assets and Debt Claims.
    Suppose the partnership between A and B generates a minimum payoff π > 0, with π <
πL < πH . The payoff π reflects the liquidation value of any tangible or intangible assets other
than the partners’ two original assets (the ones required for joint production). The liquidation
value π accrues to the partners whenever they choose to dissolve their partnership, or their
joint production fails (which occurs with probability 1 − µ(·)). This allows the partners to
define debt claims at date 0 or date 2, which we denote dA and dB . One can easily show that a
partner’s expected utility is linear in his debt claim di , i ∈ {A, B}. Thus, a positive liquidation
value enables two wealth-constrained partners to transfer utility without affecting their effort
incentives.
    Ex-ante symmetry implies d∗A = d∗B = π/2. However, when do A and B agree on changing
the division of π? Only if they have asymmetric outside options! Suppose that only A found an
alternative partner, and consider individual asset ownership. B can then offer A up to dB = π/2
in order to (i) prevent A from leaving, and (ii), retain a higher profit share for himself (which

                                                49
strengthens B’s effort incentives). Under joint asset ownership, A can relinquish his debt claim
dA = π/2 to buy out B, instead of giving B a stake in his new partnership with C (which
improves A’s effort incentives). All this implies that a positive liquidation value acts like wealth
in our model, and thus helps the partners to mitigate ex-post inefficiencies in case of asymmetric
outside options.




                                                50
References
Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton (1987). Contracts as a Barrier to Entry. American Eco-
nomic Review, 77(3), 388-401.

Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton (1992). An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial
Contracting. Review of Economic Studies, 59(3), 473-494.

Aghion, Philippe, Drew Fudenberg, Richard Holden, Takashi Kunimoto, and Olivier Tercieux
(2012). Subgame Perfect Implementation Under Information Perturbations and the Hold-Up
Problem. Mimeo. Havard University.

Aghion, Philippe, and Jean Tirole (1997). Formal and Real Authority in Organizations. Journal
of Political Economy, 105(1), 1-29.

Bajari, Patrick, and Steven Tadelis (2001). Incentives versus Transaction Costs: A Theory of
Procurement Contracts. RAND Journal of Economics, 32(3), 387-407.

Baker, George, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy (2002). Relational Contracts and the
Theory of the Firm. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), 39-84.

Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein, and Asher Wolinsky (1986). The Nash Bargaining Solution in
Economic Modelling. RAND Journal of Economics, 17(2), 176-188.

Blonski, Matthias, and Giancarlo Spagnolo (2003). Relational Contracts and Property Rights.
Working Paper.

Board, Simon (2011). Relational Contracts and the Value of Loyalty. American Economic Re-
view, 101(7), 3349-3367.

Bolton, Patrick, and Michael D. Whinston (1993). Incomplete Contracts, Vertical Integration,
and Supply Assurance. Review of Economic Studies, 60(1), 121-148.

Brien, Michael J., Lee A. Lillard, and Steven Stern (2006). Cohabitation, Marriage, and Di-
vorce in a Model of Match Quality. International Economic Review, 47(2), 451-494.



                                             51
Cai, Hongbin (2003). A Theory of Joint Asset Ownership. RAND Journal of Economics, 34(1),
63-77.

Casas-Arce, Pablo, and Thomas Kittsteiner (2011). Opportunism and Incomplete Contracts.
Working Paper.

Dessein, Wouter (2012). Incomplete Contracts and Firm Boundaries: New Directions. Forth-
coming:Journal of Law, Economics, & Organizations.

de Frutos, María-Angeles, and Thomas Kittsteiner (2008). Efficient Partnership Dissolution
under Buy-Sell Clauses. RAND Journal of Economics, 39(1), 184-198.

Gans, Joshua (2005). Markets for Ownership. RAND Journal of Economics, 36(2), 433-455.

Gibbons, Robert (2005). Four Formal(izable) Theories of the Firm? Journal of Economic Be-
havior & Organization, 58, 200-245.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart (1986). The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A
Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration. Journal of Political Economy, 94(4), 691-719.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart (1987). Vertical Integration and the Distribution of
Property Rights, in: Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (Eds.), Economic Policy in Theory and
Practice, Macmillan Press, 504-546.

Halonen, Maija (2002). Reputation and the Allocation of Ownership. Economic Journal,
112(481), 539-558.

Hart, Sergiu (2004). A Comparison of Non-transferable Utility Values. Theory and Decision,
56(1), 35-46.

Hart, Sergiu, and Andreu Mas-Colell (1996). Bargaining and Value. Econometrica, 64(2), 357-
380.

Hart, Oliver (1995). Firms, Contracts and Financial Structure. Clarendon Press. Oxford.




                                             52
Hart, Oliver (2009). Hold-Up, Asset Ownership, and Reference Points. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 124(1), 267-300.

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore (1990). Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm. Journal of
Political Economy, 98(6), 1119-1158.

Hellmann, Thomas F., and Veikko Thiele (2012). Contracting among Founders. Working Paper.

Holmström, Bengt (1982). Moral Hazard In Teams. Bell Journal Of Economics, 13(2), 324-
340.

Holmström, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom (1994). The Firm as an Incentive System. American
Economic Review, 84(4), 972-991.

Holmström, Bengt, and John Roberts (1998). The Boundaries of the Firm Revisited. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 12 (4), 73-94.

Jing, Ran, and Ralph Winter (2011). Exclusionary Contracts. Working Paper.

Lafontaine, Francine, and Margaret Slade (2007). Vertical Integration and Firm Boundaries:
The Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature, 45(3), 629-685.

Maschler, Michael, and Guillermo Owen (1992). The Consistent Shapley Value for Games
without Side Payments. In: R. Selten (ed.), Rational Interaction, New York: Springer-Verlag,
5-12.

Maskin, Eric, and Jean Tirole (1999). Unforeseen Contingencies and Incomplete Contracts.
Review of Economic Studies, 66(1), 83-114.

Matouschek, Niko (2004). Ex Post Inefficiencies in a Property Rights Theory of the Firm. Jour-
nal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 20(1), 125-147.

Matouschek, Niko, and Paolo Ramezzana (2007). The Role of Exclusive Contracts in Facilitat-
ing Market Transactions. Journal of Industrial Economics, 55(2), 347-371.




                                             53
Matouschek, Niko, and Imran Rasul (2008). The Economics of the Marriage Contract: Theo-
ries and Evidence. Journal of Law and Economics, 51(1), 59-110.

Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts (1990). Bargaining Costs, Influence Costs and the Organi-
zation of Economic Activity. In: James E. Alt and Kenneth A. Shepsle (eds.), Perspectives on
Positive Political Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 57-89.

Nöldeke, Georg, and Klaus M. Schmidt (1998). Sequential Investments and Options to Own.
RAND Journal of Economics, 29(4), 633-653.

Moore, John, and Rafael Rapullo (1988). Subgame Perfect Implementation. Econometrica,
56(5), 1191-1220.

Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen (2002). The Returns to Entrepreneurial
Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle? American Economic Review, 92(4), 745-778.

Segal, Ilya R., and Michael D. Whinston (2000). Exclusive Contracts and Protection of Invest-
ments. RAND Journal of Economics, 31(4), 603-633.

Tadelis, Steven (2002). Complexity, Flexibility, and the Make-or-Buy Decision. American Eco-
nomic Review, 92(2), 433-37.

Whinston, Michael D. (2003). On the Transaction Costs Determinants of Vertical Integration.
Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 19(1), 1-23.

Williamson, Oliver E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications.
The Free Press, New York.

Williamson, Oliver E. (1979). Transaction-cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual
Relations. Journal of Law and Economics, 22(2), 233-261.

Williamson, Oliver E. (1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. The Free Press, New
York.




                                             54
