                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE EXTENT AND SOURCES OF COST
                    AND EFFICIENCY DIFFERENCES
                    BETWEEN U.S. AND JAPANESE
                       AUTOMOBILE PRODUCERS




                          Melvyn Fuss


                        Leonard Waverman




                     Working Paper No. 1849




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 1986




Financial support from the Ontario Council and National Science
Foundation (Grant No. SES—8420937) is gratefully acknowledged. We
are indebted to Jeremy Rudin and Richard Knabl for excellent
research assistance. We have also benefitted from the comments of
E. Berndt, W.E. Diewert, M. Denny and C. Morrison but alone are
responsible for any errors or omissions. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Productivity. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #1849
                                              March 1986




     The Extent and Sources of Cost and Ffficiencv Differences
          Between U.S. and Japanese Autondile Producers



                              ABSTRPCT



     In this paper we present for the first time estimates of cost and
efficiency differences between U.S. and Japanese producers based on an
econometric cost function methodology rather than the accounting
frameworks previously used. We demonstrate that the cost difference
estimates for 1979 which were influential in the debate that resulted in
the Voluntary Restraints Agreements of 1981—85 were substantial
overestimates of the Japanese advantage. While our estimate of the
Japanese cost advantage for 1980 is similar to previous estimates, we
attribute most of this advantage to short-run phenomena -
underutilization of U.S. production capacity and an undervalued yen. In
a previous paper we have shown that the Japanese TFP growth rate was much
faster than the U.S. rate during the 1970's. However we estimate the
long-run underlying Japanese efficiency advantage as of 1980 to have been
only 1-2%, much less than previously estimated. This results from the
fact that Japan began the 1970's with a long—run efficiency disadvantage
of over 20%, and the decade of the 1970's represented a catch-up period
for Japanese producers.




Melvyn A. Fuss                                Leonard Waverman
Department of Economics                       Department of Economics
University of Toronto                         University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada                               Toronto, Canada
M5S lAl                                       M5S lAl
                                    1


1.   Introduction

     Published studies of the Japanese cost advantage in automobile

production (Abernathy, Harbour and Henn (1981), Abernathy, Clark and

Kantrow (1983), Federal Trade Commission (1983)) have estimated that

Japanese manufacturers enjoyed a $1,500—$2,000 lower cost of producing an

automobile compared with U.S. manufacturers during the 1979-80 period.1

These studies also attributed a substantial portion of the cost advantage

to superior efficiency characteristics of Japanese production processes.

Studies of this type, especially Abernathy, Harbour and Henn (1981), were

influential in the debate that resulted in the Voluntary Restraints

Agreements (VRA) of 1981-85 which reduced significantly the supply of

Japanese—produced automobiles available for purchase in the United

States. They also played an important role in the F.T.C.'s approval of

the General Motors—Toyota California joint venture in automobile stamping

and assembly despite substantive anti-trust concerns.

      The cost data contained in Abernathy, Harbour and Hem   (1981) and

Abernathy, Clark and Kantrow (1983) have been criticized by Gomez-tbanez

and Harrison (1982), Federal Trade Commission (1983), and Fuss and

Waverman (1985b) as substantial overestimates of the Japanese cost

advantage. The problems with these estimates include double—counting of

U.S. cost data, ad hoc adjustments for vertical integration and product

mix, and the inability to separate out factor price effects from

efficiency effects and short-run phenomena from long-run underlying

trends.

      Many of the problems with these earlier studies arise because they

are essentially accounting studies which do not employ rigorous methods
                                    2

of analysis. In this study we utilize an econometric cost function and

the decomposition analysis proposed by Denny and Fuss (1983) to measure

the extent and sources of cost and efficiency differences between

U.S. and Japanese automobile producers. This methodology permits us to

overcome two major shortcomings of previous studies -   the   inability to

disentangle adequately factor price effects from efficiency effects, and

the inability to account correctly for short-run disequilibrium.2

     Short-run disequilibrium in the automobile industry is primarily due

to variations in capacity utilization. The automobile industry is

characterized by quasi—fixed factors such as capital plant and equipment

and white collar labour and by product-specific manufacturing

facilities. Hence swings in consumer tastes among different products can

lead to variations in capacity utilization which greatly affect measured

cost and efficiency differences. The shift to small cars in the

U.S. after 1978, along with the downturn in the U.S. economy, left

U.S. producers with substantial underutilized capacity, especially during

1980—83. Our empirical estimates suggest that while Japanese producers

enjoyed a 34.4% unit cost advantage in 1980 — a number which is similar

to previous estimates (e.g. Federal Trade Commission (1983)) -     that
advantage would have been reduced to 11.9% had U.S. producers attained

the Japanese levels of capacity utilization. Similarly, according to our

estimates, the Japanese efficiency advantage in 1980 was 22.4%, but this

advantage would have fallen to 1.4% had U.S. producers been utilizing

capacity at a normal (i.e. designed) rate.

     The most striking feature of our empirical results is the extent to

which we attribute the Japanese cost advantages of 6.7% in 1979 and 34.4%
                                    3

in 1980 to short-run phenomena. At comparable "normal" capacity

utilization rates in both countries, the Japanese cost advantage becomes

2.9% in 1979 and 11.9% in 1980.   If we adjust factor prices to take

account of the undervalued yen (relative to its purchasing power parity

rate), then the U.S. would have actually had a cost advantage of 0.9% in

1979 and its 1980 disadvantage falls to 5.2%. On the other hand,

underlying efficiency difference trends were not so favourable to

U.S. producers. During the period 1970—80, long-run total factor

productivity growth was 4.3% per annum in Japan and only 1.6% per annum

in the U.S. (Fuss and Waverman (1985a)). This disparity is reflected in

the current study by the fact that although during the period 1970-72

U.S. producers had a long—run efficiency advantage of 21.6%, by 1980 this

advantage had become a 1.4% disadvantage. During the 1970's Japanese

producers caught up to U.S. producers in efficiency of production.

However, the large efficiency advantage attributable to Japanese

producers by some earlier studies based on 1979 data is inconsistent with

our results.

     As noted above, our empirical results are obtained from an estimated

cost function and a decomposition analysis. Sections 2 and 3 present the

formal model underlying the empirical results. Included in Section 3 is

a discussion of the way in which capacity utilization effects are

captured through a somewhat novel application of the Viner-Wong envelope

result. The specific empirical results are contained in Section 4.     In

Section 5 we conclude the paper with some summary remarks.
                                     4

2.   The Cost Function Approach to the Analysis of Cost and Efficiency

     Differences

2.1 Cost Comparisons - A Decomposition Analysis

      Utilizing the duality between cost and production under the

assumption of cost-minimizing behaviour, we specify that the automobile

production process can be represented indirectly by the cost function



                       =                                                  (1)
                           G1t(wt, QIft)

where Ct is the total cost of production in country      i   at time t,

it is a vector of factor prices, Q         is a scalar of output and 'it

is a vector of technological conditions which could be viewed as the

'characteristics" of the production process. Examples of characteristics

to be used in this study are an index of Research and Development

expenditures (a proxy for technical change) and capacity utilization.

The use of this characteristics approach was proposed by McFadden (1978)

and has been app'ied to telecommunications [Denny, et al. (1981a, b)],

trucking [Spady and Friedlaender (1978), Kim (1984)] and U.S. automobile

production [Friedlaender, Winston and Wang (1983)]. The logarithm of the

cost function (1) will be appproximated by a quadratic function in the

logarithms of               'it and 0; i.e.,



        log C1t =   G(log it' log Q, log       0)                         (2)




where G is a quadratic function and D is a vector of country-specific

dummy variables. Applying the Quadratic Lemma3 to (2) yields
                                                              5

Alog C =            log C5 - log C0

-
—
        2       [       3DIi
                                  I1 [0
                                    3D110J
                                                  -D



                             2
                                                          +        ____
                                 k [slog WkIwk=Wkis                alog WkIWkWkOtJ

                                                          [log Wkis - log WkOt]

                            +1 13G                    +             3G            1
                             2 [alog Q QQ                          slog '
                                                          [log Q15 — log


                             a                                     G
                        +
                             2   [aG
                                  [alog TQ TT15
                                                      +
                                                                  alog TJTT0tj
                                                                                  1




                                                      .[log         T15 - log TQOt]   (3)


where               i       indexes the country
            t,s index the time period
                    k       indexes the factors of production

                            indexes characteristics
            =1              if the observation is in              country i   0

            =   0 otherwise
and country 0 is the "reference" or "base" country. Assuming
price—taking behaviour in factor markets and utilizing Shephard's Lemma,
(3) can be written as


    iog C                          [Skis + S0][log Wkjs - log WkOt]
                                               6


                          [ECQ1 + ECQ0][1og i5 - log Qo1
                +


                    1\,                                            log TQQt
                + . L [ECTQIS + ECT0][1og T5 -


                + 0i0                                                                       (4)


where


              e10 z                  +         .
                                                             -
                                                                                            (5)
                                                   [D1           D01




        ECQ =   elasticity      of cost with respect to output

        ECT     elasticity of cost with respect to the

                technol ogi cal characteristic




        For a particular point in time, t=s and equation (4) provides a

decomposition of the index of average cost difference between countries

i   and o at time t:



        Alog (C/Q) =
                            lvL          + sQ][log Wki -            log   WkO]


                                                                           -
                            +     [ECQ1 + ECQ0 -   2]    .
                                                                 [log          log   Q0]


                            +       [ECT + ECTQ] . [log T1 - log                     TQ0]

                            +9.10                                                           (6)


where the time subscript t has been suppressed for simplicity.

Following Denny and Fuss (1980), the index of cost efficiency difference

between countries           i   and o at any point in time is given by
                                           7



               =
                   log   (C/Q) -   lvL
       CEO10                             [Ski +    SkO][log wkl - log         wkOl   (7)


     The expression for CEO in equation (7) is just the dual formulation

of the translog index of interspatial productivity difference introduced

by Jorgenson and Nishimizu (1978).

     Rearranging equation (7), we obtain an alternative equation for

Alog (C/Q):



     ilog (C/Q) =        L [Ski + Sko]     [log Wki -          log WkO] + CED        (8)




Combining (7) and (8) we obtain an expression for CED in terms of

efficiency sources:



          CEDO =         [ECQ1 + ECQ0 -   2]   .
                                                   [log   Q1
                                                               - log   Q0]


                     +                              [log T1 - log
                            [ECT1 + ECTQ] .                                  T]
                    +e.10                                                            (9)


Equations (6), (8) and (9) provide the formulas for decomposing unit cost

differences and efficiency differences into their various sources.

     Consider equation (6). The left hand side is the average cost

difference between two countries at a point in time. This difference is

due to differences in factor prices (the first row on the right hand

side), the effects of scale economies (the second row), the effects of

technological characteristics (the third row) and th (the fourth

row). The term           measures any systematic cost difference between

the two countries not accounted for by factor prices, scale, and
                                                 8


technology.          It will be called the country—specific efficenc affect,

and is presumably a combination of managerial and environmental effects.

        Now consider equation (8). The average cost difference between

the two countries is due to differences in factor prices (the first

term), and differences in cost efficiency (the second term). Finally

consider equation (9). The cost efficiency difference between two

countries is due to scale effects (the first row), technological effects

(the second row) and country-specific efficiency differences (the third

row).




2.2 Specification and Estimation of the Econometric Cost Function

        The cost function (1) is approximated by a translog (quadratic)

function of the form (2). Writing out (2) in detail for the i-th country

yields



                                 V
  log C =             +         +L        +
                                               akDl)log   Wkit


             +
                     ( + 1.D.)log        Qft


                 V
             +L       (ei   + eD1)log     TQIt



             +                   wt) + p1(log Q)2

             + (log            TQIt)2]

                 VV
             +        L ókm log wklt log wmit
                 k<m
                                                       9




                  +
                                 log L1t log Tt


                  +/      A<1 log   Wkit   log   Qft


                  +
                       vv
                              kl log wd log T11t

                  + L TQ log Qft log T1t                                                  (10)


Utilizing Shephard's Lemma results in the cost share equations

                                                           V
         =
  Skit                 + kiDi + ókk log Wkit + L Ok log Wmit


                       Akl log        +A           log     Tk                  1,... ,K   (11)



Estimates of the parameters of the system are obtained by estimating
simultaneously (using maximum likelihood techniques) the cost function
(10) and K-l equations from (11), imposing the constraints

   V                     V                 V
  L ak
             =    1,     L ak = 0,         L mk = 0,           'mk       km'
   k                      k                m




                 = 0,          Aki = 0,            = 0,              =                    (12)
                                    10

3.   Incorporating Capacity Utilization Effects into the Cost Function -

     An Application of the Viner—Wong Envelope Theorem

     As noted in the introduction, the automobile industry is

characterized by quasi—fixed factors and yearly fluctuations in demand

for its products. These features result in variations in capacity

utilization which cannot be captured by a long—run equilibrium model.

There are two possible approaches to this problem. First, a variable

cost function with exogenous quasi-fixed factors could be specified and

capacity utilization rates determined endogenously. An example of such

an approach is Berndt and Fuss (1986). Second, capacity utilization,

rather than the quasi-fixed factors, could be treated as exogenous. In

this case the demands for quasi-fixed factors are determined

endogenously.4 An example of this second approach is Cowing, Small and

Stevenson (1981). While we intend to pursue the first approach in

subsequent research, in this study we adopt the second approach. This

particular approach is likely to be successful when plants are designed,

ex ante, to produce a "normal" flow of output which can be relatively

easily measured. The major components of the automobile industry-vehicle

assembly and the manufacture of engines, transmissions and transaxies

satisfy this requirement.5 Specifying capacity utilization rather than

the levels of quasi-fixed factors as exogenous from the point of view of

the model has two advantages. One, the identity of the quasi-fixed

factors does not need to be determined a priori. Two, the analysis can

proceed without the assumption that the quasi—fixed factors are fixed in

the short run.6
                                      11

     The approach adopted in this paper can be linked to the short-run

optimization problem faced by the firm in the presence of quasi—fixed

factors, and hence quasi-fixed capacity output. The firm is assumed to

minimize the cost of producing actual output observed from a flow of

factor services (unobserved) generated from the quasi-fixed stocks of

factors. The per unit prices of these services are unobserved shadow

prices, depending on the actual market price of the stocks and the

relationship between actual and capacity output. The higher is actual

output, the lower are the shadow prices of factor services from

quasi—fixed inputs, since the fixed costs of the stocks are spread over

more units of output (and hence more units of inputs). The unobserved

variables are linked to observed variables by the fact that the total

cost of a particular factor, whether it be an unobserved flow or an

observed stock, is always observed. The mathematical details can be

found in Fuss and Waverman (1985b).

     The existence of capacity utilization as an argument of the cost

function implies that the output argument should be capacity output.

Capacity output should be thought of as that flow of output per unit time

which is vietd as TMnormal't by the firm, in the sense that if the output

flow is sustained over time the firm has no incentive in the long run to

adjust the levels ofits quasi—fixed factors. Normal capacity

utilization then occui when actual and designed (normal) output flows

per unit time are equal.

     Output increases which affect unit costs can occur in two ways.

Existing capacity can be utilized uore intensively, or capacity can be

increased, utilization held constant. In this setting the Viner-Wong
                                       12


envelope result between short—run and long-run average costs (Viner

(1952)) implies a set of constraints on the parameters of the translog

cost function for envelope consistency to be maintained.

     Fuss and Waverman (1985a) show that envelope consistency is

maintained if the cost—capacity output and cost—capacity utilization

elasticities satisfy the following relationships:



                ECQ, normal capacity utilization
     ECT1
     ECT1 < ECQ, below normal capacity utilization                      (13)

     ECT1 > ECQ, above normal capacity utilization



where ECT1 is the cost-capacity utilization elasticity and ECQ is

the cost—capacity output elasticity.

     Fuss and Waverman (1985a) also demonstrate that, if the capacity

utilization rate is normalized so that it equals unity when capacity and

actual outputs are equal, then the envelope consistency conditions (13)

imply the following constraints on the parameters of the translog cost

function:




          =
              li
          =                                                             (14)

    Akl       Akl
          =
              p11



When the equalities (14) are imposed, ECT1 -       ECQ
                                                         =   - T31).log T.
Hence for the envelope inequality in (13) to hold, it must be the case
                                                        13

that           >

       Unfortunately, imposition of the envelope consistency constraints

renders the second order translog function less flexible than is
           7                      aSk                             aSk
desired.           Since                    = A
                                                  ki
                                                         A
                                                             kl
                                                                           ,   factor   cost shares
                                  alog 11                         alog Q
change to the same extent when output increases, independent of whether

the output increase is due to increased capacity utilization or increased

capacity. Given the quasi—fixed nature of capital, capital cost shares

should decline (and other input cost shares rise) when capacity

utilization increases relative to when capacity increases. To permit

this possibility, third order terms must be added to the cost function.

A parsimonious, sufficiently flexible specification is obtained by adding

terms of the form


           1        V     V       V
                    L     L
                    k i=l j=l
                                  L kij     log Wk log I. log T



                              =
                                            kll        log Wk (log 11)2                        (15)



to the cost function. As a result of (15), a term of the form

                        k11 (log T1)2                                                          (16)



is added to the k-th cost share equation.

       The addition of (15) to the cost function implies that the

allocation formulas of section 2 must also be altered. By applying the

theoretical framework developed by Denny and Fuss (1983), it can be shown

that an interaction term of the form



                   kll [log Wki - log wko].[log Tli - log 11012                                (17)
                                   14



must be added to the right hand side of the decomposition formulas (6)

and (9). Finally, the condition required for the envelope inequality

in (13) to hold becomes



       11 +     k11 log k   > ll                                       (18)
                                        15

4. Empirical Results

4.1 Cost Function Estimation

     The cost function was estimated using annual pooled three digit SIC

automobile production data (vehicle assembly +          parts   production) from

Canada (1961-80), United States (1961-80) and Japan (1968-80). The

exogenous variables were specified as follows:



      input prices (K=3) —    capital   (1); materials (2); labour (3)

      output —   constant   dollar capacity (normal or designed) production

                        of vehicles and parts

      technological conditions (L3) -        capacity    utilization (1);

                        technological change proxy index—index of

                        real stock of R & D expenditures (2);

                        index of product mix (3)



A description of the data used to construct these variables is contained

in the Data Appendix.

     Equations (10 + 15) and (11 + 16) were estimated, with constraints

(12) and (14) imposed, using the Zeliner iterative tectinique to obtain

maximum likelihood estimates. Initial estimation results implied that

the regularity conditions for the cost function were not satisfied at a

number of data points. The cost function was not concave for Canada (16

observations) and non—monotone in the technical change index (Canada (9

observations) and U.S. (4 observations)). The minimal parameter

constraints necessary to ensure local regularity over the sample were

imposed.8 In the case of the concavity constraints, this implied
                                   16

different second order parameters 11,c' 33,c' 12,c' 613,c and

23,c for Canada. Since the regularity constraints are not nested in

the basic specificatiort, no formal testing was undertaken. However, the

imposition of the constraints led to only a moderate decline in the

log-likelihood function (from 545.17 to 536.29).

     One additional set of constraints was imposed on the parameters. As

described in more detail in Fuss and Waverman (1985b), the product mix

variable (T3) was computed as an index where typical weights are assigned

to different classes of automobiles (sub—compact, compact, intermediate,

etc.) and an average weight for actual production computed. This

variable fluctuated fairly tightly around 2500 for Japan and 3500 for

Canada and U.S. Hence it almost served as a dichotomous dummy variable

for Japan versus North America. From initial estimation results it

became clear that second order parameters involving T3 could not be

estimated and were set to zero. This had the effect of constraining the

cost-product mix elasticity to be a constant over time for each country,

although the elasticity could differ among countries.

     The lengthy list of parameter estimates are not presented due to

space limitations. These parameter estimates, along with asymptotic

standard errors and the usual diagnostic summary statistics can be found

in Fuss and Waverman (1985a). However, in order that the reader have

some feel for the estimated production structure, Tables 1 and 2 present

estimates of factor price elasticities, elasticities of substitution and

other elasticities of interest.

     Using the parameter estimates we verified that the inequality

condition (18) required by envelope consistency is satisfied at each data
                                   17

point in the sample. The importance of including the third order

capacity utilization terms is readily evident from the empirical results.

Each of the parameters k11 k1,2,3 is statistically significant, and

the ones relating to capital and labour substantially so. The signs of

the parameters are the correct ones, indicating that as underutilized

capacity is utilized more intensively, the cost share of capital declines

and the cost shares of labour and materials increase.

     Table 2 demonstrates that production in both the U.S. and Japan is

subject to increasing returns to scale at the mean data point. The

capacity utilization elasticity shows that costs increase proportionately

less than actual output, (designed output held constant) so that there

are short-run economies of fill. Any increase in research and

development expenditures appears to have more of a cost-reducing impact

in Japan than in the U.S., although since the elasticities vary with the

data, this cannot be determined for certain from the mean elasticities.

     The cost-product mix elasticities are very small. This is not

surprising since the output variable has been calculated from value and

price data so that it is denominated in 'standard" units (see Fuss and

Waverman (1985b) for details concerning the construction). If the

long-run marginal cost of producing a vehicle is proportional to category

weights,9 then the cost-product mix elasticity would be zero. If there

are economies of scale (i.e., non—proportionality) in producing larger

(heavier) automobiles then the elasticity would be negative.
                                    18

4.2 The Extent and Sources of Cost and Efficiency Differences

     In this section we present the empirical results on cost and

efficiency level comparisons between the United States and Japan using

equations (6), (8), and (9), as modified in Section 3. The results are

presented in Tables 3 — 11.   Table 3 contains the percentage unit

production cost differences (in a common currency) between U.S. and

Japanese automobile producers over the 1970 to 1980 period. The

production cost difference for the periods 1970-72 and 1977-79 are three

year averages. The first column in Table 3 indicates that the

U.S. automobile unit production cost was 8.5% higher in the 1970-72

period than the Japanese unit cost. This disadvantage declined to less

than 1% by 1977-79. However in 1980 there was a rapid deterioration in

the U.S. position, leading to the result that the Japanese advantage rose

sharply to 34.4%. This table also presents the conventional "sources of

difference" percentages obtained from ratios of logarithmic derivatives.

This method of decomposition has the advantage of showing explicitly the

interaction effect, but the very large percentages in the sources of

difference cells make inteFpretation very difficult. We believe it is

more interesting to consider the discrete comparative statics analysis

which results from varying the exogenous variables one at a time, holding

all other exogenous variables constant. Such an analysis is contained in

Table 4 and all subsequent decomposition tables other than Table 7.

     The numbers in the cells under the "Sources of Difference" columns

in Table 4 have the following interpretation. The number 27.2 under the

column "Price of Labour" in the first row of Table 4 implies that if all

variables affecting costs, other than the price of labour, were equal in
                                     19

 the two countries at the geometric average of their values in the two

 countries in the years 1970, 1971 and 1972, then unit production cost in

 the United States would have been 27.2% higher than in Japan (due to the

 actual differences in labour prices). Similarly, the number -15.2 under

 the column "Country Specific Efficiency" implies that if all variables

 except the technical change variable and the country dummy variable had

 been equal in the two countries, unit production costs would have been

 15.2% lower in the United States than in Japan during the 1970 to 1972

period. In the Data Appendix we argue that the technical change variable

 is properly viewed as a method of tracking the country-specific

unexplained technical change. From this point of view consistency

requires that we aggregate the technical change effect with the country

specific efficiency effect into a single decomposition effect which we

will call the country-specific efficiency effect. That is what has been

done in creating the tables in this section.

     The specific sources of the production cost advantage to Japan

demonstrate that there were two primary effects (at least through 1979)

which worked in opposite directions. First, factor price advantages to

Japan declined sharply over this period. For example, if only the price

of labour differed between the two countries, the Japanese advantage

would have been 27.2% with respect to unit production costs in 1970-72

and only 13.0% in 1979.   If only the price of materials differed between

the two countries, a Japanese cost advantage of 16.5% in 1970-72 would

have changed to a 3.9% disadvantage by 1979. On the other hand, had all

prices of factors of production, output levels, product mix, and capacity

utilization rates been the same in the two countries, Japanese production
                                   20

costs, relative to those in the U.S., would have been 15.2% higher in

1970-72 and 1.5% lower in 1979. This result is consistent with the

finding in Fuss and Waverman (1985a) that during the 1970-80 period long

run productivity growth was 4.3% per annum in Japanese automobile

production and only 1.6% per annum in U.S. auto production.

     The year 1980 was a year in which all major sources of cost

differences moved against the United States. The major source of the

sharp increase in the Japanese unit cost advantage can be attributed to

the deterioration in relative capacity utilization in North American auto

production.

     It is instructive to isolate changes in cost differences which are

due to exchange rate fluctuations from those due to relative movements in

factor prices and efficiencies within each country, since exchange rate

fluctuations can be viewed as a source of short—run disequilibrium. To

do so, we need to establish 'standard" exchange rates to measure

fluctuations around, and we need to adjust the allocation formulae so

that fluctuations of the exchange rate around this standard rate becomes

another source of unit cost differences. We established "equilibrium"

exchange rates based on the concept of a fundamental equilibrium exchange

rate (FEER) as calculated by Williamson (1983). The FEER's between Japan

and the U.S. were combined with relative rates of price inflation (as

measured by wholesale price indices) to produce purchasing—power parity

currency exchange rates, denoted the "equilibrium' rates. A comparison

of costs calculated at the equilibrium rates with those calculated at

actual exchange rates provides a measure of the cost difference

attributable to exchange rate fluctuations away from the equilibrium
                                   21

rates. Table 5 presents the actual and equilibrium exchange rates

between U.S. and Japan for the period 1977-80. Earlier data could not be

obtained since Williamson did not calculate FEERs before 1977. Details

of the calculation and the methods for adjusting the allocation formulae

are contained in Fuss and Waverman (1985b).

     The result of this adjustment is to provide factor price effects

which measure cost differentials when factor prices are computed at

equilibrium exchange rates.

     We now turn to Table 6 which separates out the exchange rate

fluctuation effect. The interpretation of this table is as follows. The

number 12.8 under the heading "Price of Labour" implies that had the

U.S.-Japanese exchange rate been at its purchasing power parity or

equilibrium level during 1977—79, and all effects other than the price of

labour been equal between the two countries, unit production cost would

have 12.8% higher in the U.S. than in Japan. The number 4.3 under the

heading "Exchange Rate Fluctuation" means that had all factors affecting

cost differences been the same in the two countries, where factor prices

are evaluated at the equilibrium exchange rate, unit production cost

would have been 4.3% higher in the U.S. than in Japan in 1977-79 due to

exchange rate fluctuation away from the equilibrium exchange rate. From

Table 6 it can be seen that the sharp rise in the U.S. production cost

disadvantage between 1979 and 1980 was partially caused by a devaluation

of the yen relative to its equilibrium value (see Table 5). As noted

earlier, the major determinant of this increase was the capacity

utilization effect. Comparing Tables 4 and 6, we see that the apparent

worsening of relative capital and materials prices, from the U.S. point
                                   22

of view, was an exchange rate phenomenon. Table 6 demonstrates that

U.S. production costs, relative to Japanese production costs, were higher

throughout the 1977-80 period partially due to a Japanese yen which was

devalued relative to its equilibrium level.

     Tables 7 and 8 present cost efficiency differences (CED) between

U.S. and Japanese auto production. Table 7 presents the conventional

sources of differences accounting, analogous to Table 3 previously

discussed. It is included to indicate the magnitude of the interaction

effect. Table 8 presents the comparative statics analysis analogous to

Table 4. We will concentrate on Table 8. The most striking feature of

Table 8 is the very substantial deterioration in U.S. cost efficiency

relative to the Japanese cost efficiency over the 1970-80 period. From

this table we can see that in the 1970-72 period the United States had a

cost efficiency advantage over Japan of the order of 20%. This

deteriorated throughout the period. By 1979 Japan had caught up to the

U.S. This adverse inter—temporal effect was due almost entirely to a

deterioration in the U.S. country—specific efficiency versus the Japanese

country-specific efficiency. In the 1970—72 period, had country-specific

efficiency been the only source of cost efficiency difference between the

two countries, the U.S. would have had a 15.2% advantage. By 1979 this

advantage would have switched to a 1.5% disadvantage. The jump in the

U.S. cost efficiency disadvantage between 1979 and 1980 from 0.3% to

20.6% is caused partially by an increased disadvantage in

U.S. country-specific relative efficiency, but is caused mainly by the

capacity utilization effect discussed earlier.
                                     23

     Although as we have seen in the above tables, exchange rate

fluctuations and variations in capacity utilization can have important

impacts on the relative levels of unit production costs and cost

efficiency, for many purposes it is more important to look at the long

run underlying trends in these cost differences. We can do this by

setting the levels of capacity utilization equal to normal capacity

utilization rates and by setting exchange rates at their equilibrium

levels. Table 9(a) presents unit production cost differences and the

sources of these differences when capacity utilization rates are normal.

Table 9(b) presents analogous information when, in addition, exchange

rates are equilibrium rates. We call these cases equilibrium cases and

present two versions since the calculations leading to equilibrium

exchange rates are inherently subjective calculations over which

reasonable observers may disagree.    Because we do not have equilibrium

exchange rates earlier than 1977, we can only consider the 1977 to 1980

period for the second version (Table 9(b)). From Table 9(a) we see that

U.S. producers began and ended the 1970's with a production cost

disadvantage, at normal capacity utilization rates. The changes in unit

production cost differences over this period were not as large as the

changes in the sources. For the U.S., favourable movements in factor

prices were offset by unfavourable movements in relative efficiency.

However, during the 1977-80 period both a worsening of factor price

effects and cost efficiency effects contributed to the U.S. relative

decline in equilibrium unit cost. Table 9(b) tells essentially the same

story for 1977-80 (when adjustments are also made for exchange rate

fluctuations). It is striking to note that while U.S. producers had a
                                   24

34.4% actual unit cost disadvantage in 1980 (Table 6), the equilibrium

unit cost disadvantage in that year was only 11.9% or 5.2%, depending on

the equilibrium calculation. This result demonstrates the substantial

influence on relative inter-country production costs of short-run

phenomena such as variations in capacity utilization and exchange rate

fluctuations.

     In summary, although in 1980 U.S. producers suffered large actual

cost disadvantages relative to Japanese producers, their underlying

equilibrium situations were much more favourable, due primarily to lower

capital and materials prices. Offsetting these U.S. advantages were

higher labour prices and marginally less efficient production processes.

     Table 10 decomposes the cost efficiency difference displayed in

Table 9. From Table 10 we see that a U.S. underlying advantage of 21.6%

in the 1970-72 period had become a disadvantage of 1.4% by 1980. This

large reversal of U.S. fortunes was the result primarily of a substantial

deterioration in the U.S. country—specific efficiency effect, and a

smaller deterioration in the U.S. advantage due to scale economies.
                                   25

5. Conclusions

     The results presented in this study go a long way towards clarifying

the Japanese competitive threat to U.S. automobile production. A

Japanese relative cost advantage vis a vis U.S. producers is not a recent

phenomenon. U.S. producers began the decade of the 1970s with a unit

production cost disadvantage. The cost disadvantage at that time was due

primarily to the existence of lower factor prices in Japan since

U.S. producers enjoyed a large efficiency advantage over Japanese

producers. However by the end of the decade the U.S. efficiency

advantage had disappeared, to be replaced by a small efficiency

disadvantage (at normal capacity utilization rates).

     Our results also shed light on the very large actual unit production

cost increases in the United States between 1979 and 1980 which led to

quotas on Japanese imports beginning in 1981. To some extent, these

production cost increases reflected a continuing deterioration in the

U.S. position with regard to long run efficiency differences. However

the bulk of the sharp change in U.S. fortunes could be attributed to

cyclical phenomena. The very low levels of capacity utilization

experienced in 1980 in the U.S. and (to a lesser extent) the devaluation

of the Japanese yen relative to its equilibrium level were major causes

of the cost deterioration. Cost competitive problems caused by low

levels of capacity utilization are not really a reflection of

inappropriate production techniques in some long run sense. The major

problem faced by North American producers was the fact that these

producers could not sell as many cars as their plants were designed to

produce. In 1980 the primary place where North American producers could
                                   26

not compete with the Japanese was in the design of automobiles with

appropriate quality and size characteristics, rather than in relative

production costs.

     In the 1980s U.S. producers took the steps that this study has

determined were necessary to become more cost-competitive: they closed a

number of plants and shifted the product mix produced in the remaining

plants toward a higher proportion of small automobiles. Both adjustments

improved capapcity utilization, the major source of the U.S. cost

disadvantage. In addition, U.S. producers began implementing Japanese

production techniques in order to blunt the Japanese total factor

productivity growth advantage which had so severely eroded the U.S. cost

efficiency advantage that existed in the early 1970s.

     Finally, it is useful to compare our results on United States-Japan

unit cost differences with the earlier studies discussed in the

Introduction. Table 11 presents the relevant data, where the Japanese

dollar cost advantage calculated by other studies has been put into

oercentage form so that it can be compared with our results.

     As expected from our earlier discussion, Abernathy et al (1981,

1983) substantially overestimate the Japanese cost advantage in 1979,

whereas the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) results are relatively close

to ours.1° A comparison of the results for 1980 shows once again the

importance of decomposing any observed cost advantage into its underlying

causes. Failure to do so will often lead to confusion between short run

effects (in this case capacity utilization variations and fluctuations in

exchange rates) and longer run underlying effects due to secular

movements in factor prices and cost efficiency (productivity) levels.
                                   27

The U.S. automobile industry was not in some fundamental cost crisis

during 1979—80 from which it could not recover, as some earlier studies

have suggested. At the same time however the long—run trends in relative

efficiency levels were not favourable to U.S. producers and required

corrective action, action which was begun during the early 1980s.
                                   28

                                FOOTNOTES



1.   Abernathy, Clark and Kantrow (1983) present 1981 estimates, but

     these are based primarily on 1979 data extrapolated to 1981.

2.   Since we use 3 digit SIC aggregate data rather than individual

     company data, double counting of U.S. cost data alone does not

     occur. No adjustment for differing degrees of vertical integration

     is necessary since, while this will result in different capital,

     labour and materials factor intensities in the two countries even

     if they fact the same factor prices, our econometric model

     specification allows for this possibility.

3.   For a description of the Quadratic Lemma see Diewert (1976) and

     Denny and Fuss (1983). The specific decomposition formula (3) can

     be found in Denny and Fuss (1980) and Denny, Fuss and May (1981).

4.   Of course neither quasi-fixed factors nor utilization rates are

     truly exogenous to the firm's decision process. What is meant by

     "exogenous' in this context is that the observed variables are not

     in long-run equilibrium; i.e., the levels of quasi-fixed factors are

     not necessarily chosen to equate the marginal rate of factor

     substitution to the current ratio of factor prices, and the rate of

     actual output flow is not necessarily equal to the designed (or

     normal) rate of flow.

5.   See Miller and Bereiter (1985) for a discussion of the case of

     vehicle assembly.

6.   The main disadvantage of the approach taken in this paper is that

     the only disequilibrium feature which can be captured is the
                                   29

     deviation of actual from designed output. While this is by far the

     most important source of disequilibrium in the automobile industry,

     disequilibrium due to fluctuations in factor prices can only be

     captured by the variable cost function model

7.   This problem is similar to the one encountered when separability

     restrictions are imposed on the translog functional form (Denny and

     Fuss (1977)).

8.   The constraints were minimal in the sense that the concavity

     condition was satisfied over the complete sample with only one data

     point (Canada, 1974) being subject to a binding constraint.

     Similarly, the monotonicity conditions were satisfied with only two

     binding constraints (Canada, 1961 and U.S., 1961). To some extent

     this result was fortuitous since no formal inequality restrictions

     algorithm was attempted. For an example of the use of such a formal

     procedure, see Hazilla and Kopp (1985).

9.   This is a fact widely believed in the industry.

10. The FTC strict and liberal weight results bracket our results, with

     our results being somewhat closer to the FTC liberal weights

     version. This fact provides support for the FTCs contention that

     the liberal weights analysis is closer to the correct analysis. The

     difference between the strict and liberal weights versions depends

     on the interpretation of the way in which Japanese automobiles

     compete with U.S. autos, and the value to consumers of the

     additional weight of U.S. produced autos. For more details, see FTC

     (1983) or Fuss and Waverman (1985b).
                                        30

                                    REFERENCES



Abernathy, W.J., Clark, K.B. and Kantrow, A.M., (1983), Industrial

     Renaissance, Basic Books, New York.

Abernathy, W.J. ,   Harbour,   J.E. and Henn, J.M. ,   (1981),   Productivity and

     Comparative Cost Advantages: Some Estimates for Major Automobile

     Producers, draft report to the U.S. Department of Transportation,

     Transportation Systems Center, February 1981.

Berndt, E. and M. Fuss (1986), "Productivity Measurement with Adjustments

     for Variations in Capacity Utilization and Other Forms of

     Temporary Equilibrium", Department of Economics, University of

     Toronto Working Paper No. 8602, forthcoming Journal of

     Econometrics.

Cowing, T., J. Small and R. Stevenson (1981), "Comparative

     Measures of Total Factor Productivity in the Regulated Sector: The

     Electric Utility Industry" Ch. 7 in:        T. Cowing and R. Stevenson,

     eds., Productivity Measurement in Regulated Industries (Academic

     Press, New York) pp. 162-177.

Denny, M. and M. Fuss (1977), "The Use of Approximation Analysis to Test

     for Separability and the Existence of Consistent Aggregates",

     American Economic Review, June, pp. 404—418.

Denny, M. and M. Fuss (1980), "Intertemporal and Interspatial

      Comparisons of Cost Efficiency and Productivity", Institute for

      Policy Analysis Working Paper No 8018, Dec., University of Toronto,

      Toronto.

Denny, M. and M. Fuss (1983), "A General Approach To Intertemporal and
                                   31


     Interspatial Productivity Comparisons', Journal of

     Econometrics, December, pp. 315-330.

Denny, M., M. Fuss and J.D. May (1981), "Intertemporal Changes in

     Regional Productivity in Canadian Manufacturing", Canadian Journal

     of Economics, Aug. pp. 390—408.

Denny, M., M. Fuss, C. Everson and L. Waverman (1981a),

     "Estimating the Effects of Diffusion of Technological Innovations in

     Telecommunications: The Production Structure of Bell Canada",

     Canadian Journal of Economics, vol. 14, pp. 24-43.

Denny, M. M. Fuss and L. Waverman, (1981b), "The Measurement and

     Interpretation of Total Factor Productivity in Regulated Industries,

     with an Application to Canadian Telecommunications", Ch. 8 in:   T.


     Cowing and R. Stevenson, eds., Productivity Measurement in Regulated

     Industries (Academic Press, New York) pp. 179-218.

Diewert, W. Erwin (1976), "Exact and Superlative Index Numbers", Journal

     of Econometrics 4, pp. 115—145.

Federal Trade Commission (1983), Report of the Bureaus of

     Competition and Economics Concerning the General Motors/Toyota Joint

     Venture, Washington, D.C., (3 volumes), mimeo.

Friedlaender, P., C. Winston and K. Wang (1983), "Costs,

    Technology and Productivity in the U.S. Automobile Industry", Bell

    Journal of Economics, Spring, pp. 1-20.

Fuss, M. and L. Waverman (1985a), "Productivity Growth in the Automobile

     Industry, 1970—1980: A Comparison of Canada, Japan and the United

     States", National Bureau of Economic Research Paper No. 1735,

    December; forthcoming in C. Hulten and J.R. Norsworthy
                                   32

     (eds.) Productivity Growth in the United States and Japan,

     N.B.E.R. Studies in Income and Wealth, University of Chicago Press.

Fuss, M. and L. Waverman (1985b), The Productivity Dilemma in the

     Automobile Industry: A Cost Function Analysis of Production in the

     U.S.A., Canada, Japan and Germany, Reported submitted to the Ontario

     Economic Council, Toronto, Canada, mimeo.

Gomez-Ibanez, J.A. and D. Harrison (1982), "Imports and the Future of the

     U.S. Automobile Industry", American Economic Review, May,

     pp. 317-323.

Hazilla, M. and R. Kopp (1985), "Testing for Separable Functional

     Structures in the Presence of Disequilibrium", Resources for the

     Future, Washington, D.C., July, mimeo, forthcoming, Journal of

     Econometrics.

Jorgenson, D.W. and M. Nishimizu (1978), "U.S. and Japanese Economic

     Growth, 1952—74: An International Comparison", Economic Journal,

     88, pp. 707—726.

Kim, M. (1984), "The Beneficiaries of Trucking Regulation Revisited",

     Journal of Law and Economics, April, pp. 227—241.

Levy R. and J. Jondrow (1983), "The Adjustment of Employment to

     Technical Change in the Steel and Auto Industries", Professional

     Paper No. 382, The Public Research Institute, Alexandria, Virginia,

     May.

McFadden, D. (1978), "Cost, Revenue and Profit Functions", ch. 1.1 in

     M. Fuss and D. McFadden (eds.), Production Economics: A Dual

     Approach to Theory and Applications, North-Holland Publishing

     Company, Amsterdam.
                                      33

Miller, S. and S. Bereiter (1985), "Modernizing to Computer-Integrated

     Production Technologies in a Vehicle Assembly Plant: Lessons for

     Analysts and Managers of Technological Change', presented at the

     NBER U.S.-Japan Productivity Conference, Cambridge, Mass., Aug.

     26—28, 1985.

Norsworthy, J.R. and D.H. Malmqvist, "Input Measurement and Productivity

     Growth in Japanese and U.S. Manufacturing", American Economic

     Review, December, pp. 947—967.

Spady, R. and A. Friedlaender (1978), "Hedonic Cost Functions for the

     Regulated Trucking Industry", Bell Journal of Economics,

     Spring, pp. 159-79.

Toder, E.J. (1978), Trade Policy and the U.S. Automobile Industry, New

     York: Prager.

Viner, J. (1952), "Cost Curves and Supply Curves", in AEA Readings in

     Price Theory, ed. by G.J. Stigler and K.E. Bouldirig, Homewood, Ii.,

     Irwin.

Williamson, J. (1983), The Exchange Rate System, Institute for

     International Economics, Washington, D.C.; M.I.T. Press, Cambridge.
                                 A.l



       APPENDIX: DATA SOURCES AND METHODS OF DATA CONSTRUCTION



     In this Appendix we present a brief description of the data sources

and methods of data construction. More extensive descriptions can be

found in the Data Appendix to Fuss and Waverman (1985a) and especially

Chapter 4 of Fuss and Waverman (1985b).



A.1 General Sources of Data

     The major source of data was the Annual Surveys (or Census) of

Manufacturers in each country, which provided data on motor vehicles

production at the 3 digit SIC level.

     Nominal gross output was computed as the sum of value added plus

cost of materials and converted to real output by applying the

appropriate price deflators available in the U.S.A. from the Bureau of

Industrial Economics, and in Japan from the Bank of Japan.

     Three inputs are assumed to be used as factors of production -

materials,   labour and capital. Materials price deflators were available

for both countries. The total compensation (rather than just the money

wage) of labour has been calculated. Hours worked were estimated for

production and non-production workers for the U.S. but not for Japan

where the total number of workers was not disaggregated. Real capital

stock data were available for the U.S. (Levy and Jondrow (1983)), but had

to be estimated for Japan using data from the Annual Census and the

perpetual inventory method.

     The appropriate price of capital for our purposes is the ex ante

user cost of capital services. The automotive industry-specific capital

service price series which were available for the U.S. had been estimated
                                 A.2


by the residual method, which is an inappropriate ex ante measure for

such a highly cyclical industry. We have instead utilized a user cost

of capital series for U.S. total manufacturing (which would not be

subject to such cyclical variations) presented in Norsworthy and

Malmquist (1983). This series is available only to 1977 and was updated

to 1980 using internal U.S. Bureau of the Census capital service price

data. The capital service price for Japan is an extrapolation of the

series for Japanese total manufacturing also presented in Norsworthy and

Malmquist (1983). That series was available through 1978. Our

extrapolation involved using the change in the Japanese prime interest

rate beyond 1978 (DRI Japan Survey) and the changes in the price deflator

for plant and equipment for Japanese manufacturing. (Source: Price

Indexes Annual).

     Capacity utilization rates were calculated from data for vehicle

assembly. Maximum (potential) output was measured in the U.S. as the

maximum weekly nameplate output and in Japan as the maximum monthly

output. The "normal", or designed, capacity utilization rate was defined

as the average utilization rate (ratio of actual to maximum output) for

Japan over the period 1969-80. Actual capacity utilization rates were

normalized so that this average rate was equal to unity. Capacity

(normal) output was defined as the actual output divided by the

normalized capacity utilization rate.

     We have estimated a technological change indicator —   the   'capital

stock' of Research and Development. This stock is constructed by

converting annual R & D expenditures to a real capital stock utilizing

the perpetual inventory method, the country-specific CPI, and a

depreciation rate of 15%. Our data on R & D expenditures for Japan began
                                    A.3



in 1966. Therefore, we needed a benchmark R & 0 stock. We assumed that

in 1966 the technology available to Japan could be represented by the R &

D stock per automobile produced in North America. We multiplied this

value by the automobile production is Japan in 1966 to arrive at our

benchmark. Since automobile production in Japan in 1966 was quite small

relative to North America, the above procedure assigns a small value to

the technical change index to Japan in 1966. Because of the way in

which the R & D index was constructed, it has only a tentative link to

the effect of R & D expenditures on costs. We believe it is more

properly viewed as a method of tracing the country-specific unexplained

technical change. From this point of view, the variable is similar to a

time trend and was utilized because it consistently outperformed a time

trend in the regression analysis.



A.2 Construction of Inter-Country Price Level Comparisons

     The output price deflators used to convert nominal into real output

are indices which are normalized to be unity in a particular year for

each country. The same normalization occurs for materials and capital

services prices.

     In order to obtain inter—country level comparisons of cost and

efficiency, benchmark prices must be calculated in a particular year to

bridge the individual country price indices.   In the following three

sections we discuss the calculation of the benchmark data. We begin with

the inter-country output price deflator.
                                 A.4



A.3 Calculation of the Inter-Country Output Price Deflator

     We used 1979 as the benchmark year for output price comparisons

because detailed price data for Japan and the United States was available

for 1979 from F.T.C. (1983). We first categorized all automobile

production in the two countries into twelve categories. These categories

were standard and luxury automobile versions of each of: mini,

sub—compact, compact, mid—size, full-size and large. Average wholesale

prices for each of these twelve categories were calculated in a manner

described below, and translog relative aggregate price indices were

calculated from the price and quantity data on the twelve categories.

     Calculation of price data for the twelve individual categories was

problematic because there existed no production data in a number of

categories for at least one of the countries. Thus it was necessary to

create price prediction equations which would predict the price that

would have existed in a particular country had the automobile of the

particular class actually been produced in that country. Price

prediction equations were formed by using relatively simple hedonic—like

price relationships between price and category-weight (FTC (1983)).

     The price prediction equations were estimated from observations on

individual models of automobiles. Consumer Reports (1979) was used to

obtain information on automobile retail prices, classification

information, and typical retail/wholesale margins for automobiles sold in

the United States. Retail prices and category weights for

Japanese—produced automobiles was kindly provided by M. Ohta from his

unpublished database.

     Finally, to complete the benchmark construction, we assumed

inter-country relative prices of all automobile products other than
                                 A.5


automobiles in 1979 were in the same proportion as the comparable average

automobile price.



A.4 Calculation of the Inter-Country Service Price of Capital Data

     The benchmark for the capital service price was constructed as

follows. We computed the real gross return to capital in each year for

the two countries using the residual method (excluding 1980 for the

U.S). The year in which the real return per unit capital most closely

approximated the average real return over the sample for each country

(1976) was determined. For that year the residual return was assumed to

be the user cost of capital services.

     For each country the user cost of capital for other years was

obtained by linking the national cost of capital index to the benchmark

year. The above procedure contains an implicit assumption and an

implication. The assumption is that the returns to scale elasticities

are equal across the countries so that no adjustment to the residual

method is require. Our empirical results indicate that this assumption

is essentially satisfied. The implication is that the user cost of

capital for a particular country contains any excess (long run average)

profits which result from the exercise of market power by firms in the

automobile industry.



A.5 Calculation of the Inter-Country Materials Price Data

     There exists no direct source of U.S.-Japan materials price

comparisons. We constructed a U.S.-Japan comparison for 1974 in the

following way. Toder (1978) presents data on relative U.S.-Japan prices

of non-automotive materials for 1974. To obtain a price comparison of
                                 A.6



the intra-country, intra-industry materials flow in 1974, we assumed that

the relative price was proportional to the relative industry output

price. The relative shares of inter and intra industry material flows

for the U.S. can be obtained from census data. We utilized 1977

U.S. census data to obtain the required weights.



A.6 Calculation of the Product Mix Variable

     Japanese automobile producers produce a much larger proportion of

small automobiles than do U.S. producers. If there are economies of

producing large automobiles, where automobiles are measured in standard

units (as is done in this study), then a variable which would control for

this effect is required. ll U.S. and Japanese automobile production

over the sample period used in the estimation was divided into the six

size class categories discussed in Section P.2. Each of these categories

was assigned a category weight corresponding to the classification in

F.T.C. (1983). For the U.S., average category weights were computed by

finding the weighted average of the production of the various size

classes from actual production figures. This average weight number will

increase when the number of large cars produced increases and decline

when the proportion of large cars produced declines. For Japan a

slightly more complicated procedure was adopted. Detailed production

data were available only for the years 1978—80. For all other years

individual production data by models were not available. However,

production data by cylinder size category were available for all years

from JAMA Motor Vehicle Statistics. The detailed Japanese automobile

data described above which was used in the construction of an output

price index was also used to preduct weight categories from cylinder size
                                 A.7



categories by regressing category weight on cylinder size. The details

of this calculation are contained in Fuss and Waverman (1985b). Data for

1978 and 1979 were computed by both methods to be certain that the margin

for error in the indirect calculation of category weights was not too

large. The margin of error was in the range of 2% and was deemed

satisfactory.
                          Ti



                        TABLE la
              Factor Own Price Elasticities
   (computed at the mean data point for each country)

Input                          United States       Japan

Capital                          -0.33           -0.40
Materials                        —0.17           —0.17
Labour                           -0.53           -0.42




                        TABLE lb
       Elasticities of Substitution (Allen-Uzawa)
   (computed at the mean data point for each country)

inputs                           United States     Japan

Capital—Materials                        0.35       0.52
Capital-Labour                           0.58       0.47
Labour-Materials                         0.67       0.48
                            T2


                           TABLE 2


   Cost-Output Elasticities, Scale Elasticities, Capacity
Utilization Elasticities, Technical Change Elasticities, and
                 Product Mix Elasticities

     (computed at the mean data point for each country)




   Elasticity                        United States   Japan




   Cost-Output                           0.93         0.92

   Scale                                 1.07         1.09

   Cost-Capacity Utilization             0.82         0.92

   Cost-Technical Change                -0.24        -0.35

   Cost-Product Mix                      0.02        -0.02
                                                               TABLE    3


                                  Unit Production Cost Difference and   Its   Sources   -                   -
                                                                                            United States       Japan


        -           Unit                             SOURCES OF DIFFERENCE (% Contribution)
     Time        Production
    Period          Cost
                 Difference   rice of   Price ofPrice of Product    Scale    Capacity             Country                      Estimation
                    (%)*      Labour    Capital Material Mix       Economie Utilization          Specific        Interaction    Residual
                                                                                                 Efficiency



1970-72                 8.5    293.0    -90.5      187.3     0.0       -109.2      32.7           -182.1            -13.0        -18.3




1977-79              0.6      2150.4                                                                                                        —I
                                        -704.4     -970.0    0.2    -800.9         189.7           -14.5           -31.4         252.0




                        6.7    185.3     -47.0     -60.8     0.0        -65.0      42.9            34.2             -7.4          17.7




                    34.4        49.3      -9.5     -8.2     0.0         -12.0      57.1            35.9            -17.7          5.2



*
     ____    X    100
                                                                           TABLE   4


                                          Unit Production Cost Difference and Its :Sources -              United States - Japan


             Unit                                            SOURCES OF DIFFERENCE        (%    Contribution)
          Production
              Cost
          Difference rice                 of   Price of   Price of Product     Scale           Capacity      Country
              (%)*                Labour        Capital Material    Mix        Economie        Utilization Specific
                                                                                                            Efficiency




1970-72        8.5                 27.2          -7.0       16.5     0.0           -8.5           3,3           -15.2



                                                                                                                                  —1

1977-79        0.6                 13.5          -4.0       -5.5     0.0           -4.6           1.2            -0.2




               6.7                 13.0          -3.0       -3.9     0.0           -4.2           3.1             1.5




              31.1                 17.1          -2.        -2.1     0,0           -3.!           21.9            ?,!


*                    —        x   100%
    1U.S. Cost           1)
    'Japan   Cost
                           T5




                         Table 5

       ACTUAL AND EQUILIBRIUM EXCHANGE RATES 1977-80

        Actual Exchange Rate    Equilibrium Exchange Rate
Year          (Yen/$)                   (Yen/$)




1977            267                        236

1978            208                        217

1979            218                        210

1980            225                        212
                                                             TABLE   6

                    Unit Production Cost Difference and Its Sourc, Including Exchange Rate Fluctuations
                                                   Unitd States - Japan



             Unit                              SOURCES OF DIFFERENCE (%)
          Production
             Cost
          Difference       ce of   Price of Price of Product     Scale      Capacity     Country   Exchange
             (%)
                       riLabour
                                    Capital Material Mix        Economie    Utilization Specific    Rate
                                                                                        Efficiency luctuation


1977-7g      0.6         12.8       -4.6      -8.1     0.0           -4.6      1.2        -0.2        4.3



                                                                                                                —1



             6.7         12.3        -3.6     -6.3     0.0           -4.2      3.1         1.5        3.9




            34.4         15.9        -3.6     —6.3     0.0           -3.5     21.9         2.5        6.3
                                                         TABLE   7


                           Cost Efficiency Differences and Its Sources       -   United States   -
                                                                                                     Japan



                                                                     SOURCES OF DIFFERENCE (% Contribution)


 Time         Cost Efficiency       Product      Scale                                                             Estimation
                                                                Capacity             Country
Period          Difference*          Mix       Economies      Utilization                            Interaction    Residual
                                                                                     Specific
                    (%)                                                             Efficiency



1970-72          -21.0               -0.0        37.7                -11.3            62.8             4.5            6.3




1977-79             -2.2             -0.0        213.0               -50.4             -3.9            8.3           -67.0




 1979                1.5              0.0       -288.6               190.7            151.9          -32.7            78.6




 1980               22.4              0.0        -17.5                83.4             52.4           -25.9            7.5




          X   100
* U.S.
  Japan
                                                  TABLE_

                         Cost Efficiency Differences and Its Sources   —   United States   -
                                                                                               Japan




                                                      SOURCES OF DIFFERENCES      (%)


     Time            Cost Efficiency   Product    Scale          Capacity                Country
    Period             Difference*+     Mix      Economies     Utilization               Specific
                          (%)                                                           Efficiency


    1970-72             -19.8            0.0       -8.5          3.3                       -15.2




    1977-79              -3,6            0.0       -4.6          1.2                        -0.2
                                                                                                       -
    1979                  0.3           0.0        -4.2          3.1                           1.5




    1980                20.6            0.0        -3.5         21.9                           2.5



*   ••       x 100
    Japan
+   Calculated from the estimated cost function
                                                    TABLE
                                                                      —   United States   -
                  Unit Production   Cost Difference and Its Sources                           Japan
                        (Equilibrium Not Adjusting for Exchange Rate Fluctuations)




                                                        SOURCES OF DIFFERENCES


     Time            Unit Productio,    Price of     Price of             Price of            Cost Efficienc
    Period          Cost Difference      Labour      Capital              Materials             Difference
                          (%)*



    1970-72              7.4              26.1         -6.9                16.7                  -21.6




    1977-79             -1.9              13.2         -4.0                -5.6                  -4.4          -I

    1979                 2.9              12.4         -2.9                -•                    -1.8




    1980                11.9              15.9        -2,3                 -2.5                    1.4


*
              X
      ••
     Japan
                  100
                                                                        TABLE 9(b)
                               Unit Production Cost Difference and              Its    Sources   -   United States   -
                                                                                                                         Japan
                                                        -               for Exchange Rate Fluctuations)
                                  (Equilibrium              Adjusting

                                                               Sources of Difference



 Time          Unit Production             Price of             Price of      Price of       Cost Efficiency
Period         Cost Difference              Labour               Capital     Materials          Difference
                         (%)*




1977-79                  -5.7                    12.5             -4.6         -8.1




1979                     -0.9                                                                        -1.8
                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                 cD
                                                 11.7              -3.5         -6.4




1980                     5.2                     14.8              -3.2         -6.5                  1.4




 *      U.S.   X   100
       Japan
                                                 TABLE 10

                   Cost Efficiency Differences and   Its    Sources   —   United States   —
                                                                                               Japan
                                              (Equilibrium)



                                                     SOURCES OF DIFFERENCES


 Time             Cost Efficiency   Product                                       Country Specific
Period              Difference*      Mix          Scale Economies                    Efficiency




    1970-72           -21.6           0.0                  -8.4                       -14.4




    1977-79            -4.4           0.0                  -4.6                               0.2




         1979          -1.8           0.0                  -4.1                               2.3




         1980           1.4           0.0                  -3.3                               4.8




*   II
Japan
         ..x100
                                     T12



                                   Table 11

                 A Comparison of U.S.-Japan Unit Production

               Cost Calculations (% Japanese Cost Advantage)a



      Study                                                    1979       1980

Abernathy, Harbour and Henn (1981)                             50.0

Abernathy, Clark and Kantrow (1983)                        [36.6, 435Jb

Federal Trade Commission (1983) -     strict    weights        -0.3       15.0

Federal Trade Commission (1983) -     liberal    weights       16.3       34.7

This study (Table 4)                                            6.7       34.4

This study -   equilibrium   calculations

    (i) Table 9(a)                                              2.9       11.9

   (ii) Table 9(b)                                             -0.9        5.2




a (U.S. Cost -1) x 100%
    Japan Cost

o Based on a mixture of 1979 and 1981 data. The range reflects the
   fact that no single number can be computed from the data. These
   numbers are calculated from Table 5.2 of Abernathy, Clark and
   Kantrow. Transportation costs are excluded from the non-manu-
   facturing costs of Japanese producers.
