                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    CARBON MARKETS: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

                                         Richard G. Newell
                                          William A. Pizer
                                           Daniel Raimi

                                        Working Paper 18504
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18504


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




Dallas Burtraw, Denny Ellerman, Suzi Kerr, Robert Stavins, and Jonathan Wiener provided invaluable
comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Richard G. Newell, William A. Pizer, and Daniel Raimi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Carbon Markets: Past, Present, and Future
Richard G. Newell, William A. Pizer, and Daniel Raimi
NBER Working Paper No. 18504
November 2012, Revised January 2013
JEL No. Q48,Q54,Q58

                                              ABSTRACT

Carbon markets are substantial and they are expanding. There are many lessons from experiences over
the past eight years: fewer free allowances, better management of market-sensitive information, and
a recognition that trading systems require adjustments that have consequences for market participants
and market confidence. Moreover, the emerging international architecture features separate emissions
trading systems serving distinct jurisdictions. These programs are complemented by a variety of other
types of policies alongside the carbon markets. This sits in sharp contrast to the integrated global trading
architecture envisioned 15 years ago by the designers of the Kyoto Protocol and raises a suite of new
questions. In this new architecture, jurisdictions with emissions trading have to decide how, whether,
and when to link with one another, and policymakers overseeing carbon markets must confront how
to measure the comparability of efforts among markets and relative to a variety of other policy approaches.


Richard G. Newell                                    Daniel Raimi
Nicholas School of the Environment                   101 Gross Hall
Duke University                                      140 Science Dr., Box 90467
Box 90227                                            Durham, NC 27708
Durham, NC 27708                                     daniel.raimi@duke.edu
and NBER
richard.newell@duke.edu

William A. Pizer
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90312
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
billy.pizer@duke.edu
1. Why Carbon Markets?
        The 1980s and 1990s witnessed a growing awareness of climate change risks and the
associated need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Beginning with the first World Climate
Conference in 1979, attention culminated with the signing of the UN Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. In that agreement, 166
(now 194) nations acknowledged the need to limit the accumulation of greenhouse gases (GHGs)
in the atmosphere to a level that will “prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the
climate system.”1
        During that same period, emissions trading began emerging as a practical and
increasingly popular policy tool to address pollution control, particularly with the successful
phasedown of lead in gasoline and creation of the acid rain trading program in the United States
(Tietenberg 1985; Stavins 1998). On the international scene, the Montreal Protocol on
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, signed in 1987, laid clear groundwork for the idea of
targets and timetables for emissions levels in different countries, and it included a limited
amount of emissions trading. It is therefore not surprising that there was considerable enthusiasm
for using this tool to address climate change as countries grappled with how to design the 1992
UNFCCC and then meet its objectives in the 1990s. Indeed, advocacy for international GHG
emissions trading began in the late 1980s and early 1990s: the United States initially promoted it
in the UNFCCC treaty negotiations, and the idea of “joint implementation” as an informal
version of emissions trading ultimately appeared in the UNFCCC (Wiener 2001).2
        This enthusiasm for emissions trading ultimately overcame various objections and led to
the signing of the Kyoto Protocol in 1997.3 The Kyoto Protocol was the first vehicle for
emissions trading in greenhouse gases—or what we will call carbon markets.4 Kyoto set up a
system of emissions limits for a basket of six GHGs for developed countries, mechanisms for
those developed countries to trade their emissions limits, and mechanisms for developed
countries to offset their emissions by financing emissions reductions in developing countries.
While the Kyoto Protocol itself has led to a very small number of trades directly among
countries, the European Union and a variety of other jurisdictions have since pursued emissions
trading to reduce their regional GHG emissions. Carbon markets are now the largest class of
environmental or emissions trading markets in the world in terms of both volume and market
value, by a very wide margin.
        But how effective has emissions trading been at addressing climate change? What are the
distinguishing features of trading in emissions of greenhouse gases compared to, for example,
conventional air or water pollution? What have we learned as carbon markets have been


1   See Article 2 of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.
2Joint implementation refers to one nation financing (partly or in whole) an emissions reduction project in another
nation.
3Objections included an early focus on emissions taxes in the European Union (Barrett 1998) as well as more
general issues related to emissions trading (e.g., Sandel 1997).
4 We use the term “carbon market” because carbon dioxide is the dominant gas in terms of its overall contribution to
global warming and because the units of trade are denominated in terms of carbon dioxide equivalent.




                                                              3
designed, implemented, and operated? The purpose of this paper is to answer these questions and
highlight new emerging issues that now need to be confronted. After eight years of carbon
market experience following the creation of the EU Emissions Trading System in 2005 (see
Figure 1)—experience that includes growing market volumes, market value, and emissions
coverage—at least part of that answer must be, yes, carbon markets can work effectively.
However, we have learned a lot, and there are important lessons for current and future
policymakers, analysts, and researchers.
        The next section provides an overview of the normative theory of carbon market design,
beginning with a description of some of the relevant attributes of GHGs. Section three discusses
actual experience with existing and proposed emissions trading program design, while section
four describes and draws lessons from operational experience in those markets. Section five
looks forward and describes key issues facing emissions trading policies.

2. Normative Theory of Policy Design for Carbon Markets
         There are a number of distinguishing attributes of the climate problem that are relevant to
the design of carbon markets and that differentiate them from most other emission or resource
markets. The first is the global nature of the climate problem. GHGs are one of the few examples
of a global, uniformly mixed pollutant: GHG emissions throughout the world have the same
consequences regardless of where they are emitted.5 Put another way, GHG emissions have
exactly the same externality properties across countries that many conventional emissions have
within a local jurisdiction. It is insufficient to control the GHG emissions from a particular
source or region to reduce the risks to that region. This feature of the climate problem requires
that, ultimately, an internationally coordinated approach must be taken, with implications for
carbon markets that make them unusual if not unique among environmental markets.
        Second, GHGs are long-lived stock pollutants, remaining in the atmosphere on the order
of decades to centuries. It is the accumulated global atmospheric concentration of GHGs, rather
than an amount emitted at a particular point in time, that is linked to global warming and climatic
change. Along the same lines, the capital stock that produces, distributes, and consumes GHGs
also tends to be long-lived; cars and major appliances can last over a decade, while power plants
and buildings last several decades. It is therefore important to keep in mind a long-term global
perspective when addressing the climate problem, even when considering particular near-term
regional policies.
        Third, while carbon dioxide is the major GHG, there are numerous GHGs of varying
potency (quantified in terms of the amount of heat energy trapped by a given amount of each
gas) and longevity, from methane, with a lifetime of 12 years, to sulfur hexafluoride, with a
lifetime of 3,200 years.
        Fourth, GHGs are pervasive in the economy, rather than being identified with a particular
set of sources, sectors, or technologies. Carbon dioxide, the dominant GHG, is a fundamental
product of the combustion of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and natural gas) for energy production.


5   Ozone-depleting substances are one other example.




                                                        4
Energy is used everywhere, and fossil fuels are the source of over 80 percent of U.S. and global
energy consumption. As a consequence, the potential market size is much larger than other
existing environmental markets. For example, in 2008, fossil fuel combustion accounted for
about 30 billion metric metric tons of global carbon dioxide emissions (Boden et al. 2011). The
market value of one year of allowances for these emissions at $10 per metric ton would be $300
billion; at $25 per metric ton it would be $750 billion. For higher allowance prices, or when
aggregated across several vintages of allowances, the value is easily in the trillions of dollars. As
another example, the estimated market value of allowances that would have been created, just in
the United States, by proposed Senate legislation in the 110th Congress was $6–7 trillion
(Samuelsohn 2008).
        A related point is that while stabilization of GHG concentrations in the atmosphere
eventually implies driving net greenhouse gas emissions to near zero, the foreseeable future
likely entails significant continued emissions. The pervasive economic role of fossil energy use
coupled with limited alternatives and continued global economic growth means that GHG
emissions will not be reduced in the same way that ozone-depleting substances were virtually
eliminated in the 1980s and 1990s (Sunstein 2007). In scenarios with limited to moderate
emissions reductions, total mitigation costs tend to be a small fraction of the allowance value
(Burtraw & Evans 2009). This leads to different distributional consequences than more typical
situations where mitigation is a significant share of total emissions.
        A fifth important feature is that options exist for offsetting GHG emissions, thereby
negating or at least significantly reducing their impact on the atmosphere. Generally speaking,
offsets include any approved methods for reducing emissions or removing GHGs directly from
the atmosphere (e.g., through forestry) that are not otherwise covered under a particular cap. In
principle, offsets can occur within or outside of the jurisdiction covered by an emissions cap. On
a related note, carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies offer an end-of-pipe solution,
avoiding atmospheric emissions by capturing carbon dioxide from process or combustion gases
and storing it underground. While end-of-pipe approaches are quite common in conventional air
and water pollution control, CCS is considered a relatively advanced approach in the climate
context and is still in the development stage. Nonetheless, as is the case with offsets, well-
designed policy would need a mechanism for crediting CCS.
        Given the degree of complexity and long timeframes inherent in the climate problem,
uncertainty along several dimensions—including the effectiveness of different approaches, the
cost of mitigation, the evolution of technology, and the climate risks themselves—tends to be an
overarching and pervasive aspect of policy analysis, construction, and implementation.
        When placed in the context of the economic paradigm, the above attributes of the climate
problem have a number of implications for carbon market design. We discuss the most important
of these in this section, including the importance of compliance flexibility for cost-effectiveness;
the significance of benefit and cost features for efficient instrument design; and the link between
allowance allocation, government revenue and use, distributional impacts, and international
competition. For further detail on several of these design issues, Aldy et al. (2010) provide a
thorough review of the literature on designing climate mitigation policy.




                                                      5
2.1   Cost-effectiveness, Comprehensiveness, and Flexibility
        Cost-effectiveness, or achieving a given aggregate GHG mitigation target at the lowest
possible cost, tends to be a top-tier concern for market-based policy design. To theoretically
enable cost-effectiveness (although not empirically guarantee it), the above characteristics tend
to point to the design of carbon markets that have comprehensive coverage (i.e., across all gases,
sectors, sources, and technologies), can take advantage of mitigation opportunities at a global
scale, and have a long-term time horizon and structure that supports integrated decisionmaking
across time. This is sometimes referred to as “what, where, and when flexibility,” which
underpins a normative tendency toward comprehensiveness and minimal barriers to trading
opportunities across space, time, and mitigation activity.
         “What flexibility” relates to the comprehensiveness of any carbon market, with theory
guiding design toward inclusion of as many types of GHGs (e.g., carbon dioxide, methane,
nitrous oxide, and fluorinated compounds), sectors (e.g., electricity, transport, industry, and
agriculture), and technologies (e.g., fuel switching, CCS, and forestry and other biosequestration)
as is feasible. One caveat is that it is important to consider what happens outside of a global
trading system when only some jurisdictions are pursuing emissions trading. In particular,
“leakage” can occur when regulation within one jurisdiction leads to increased imports from
another, unregulated jurisdiction—a phenomenon that may apply to a variety of environmental
policies, not simply carbon markets. Leakage tends to be concentrated in energy-intensive, trade-
sensitive sectors and has both emissions and economic consequences as economic activity shifts
across regions. There are a variety of ways to address these concerns (Fischer & Fox 2009).
        “Where flexibility” speaks to the significant variation in the costs of GHG mitigation
across regions and countries. When focused on designing a carbon market for any specific
region, it is therefore important to consider the extent to which allowances and/or offsets from
other regions will be permitted to be used for compliance. So long as the validity of such
allowances can be established, cost-effectiveness would tend to point toward open trade in
allowances across jurisdictions. However, this type of linkage can face practical and political
hurdles, in part due to the associated resource transfers, as we will discuss below (see Section
5.1).
        Finally, given the stock pollutant nature of GHGs, emissions on any particular day,
month, or year are not consequential for climate impact. As a result, allowing “when flexibility”
through banking or borrowing of allowances across time tends to increase cost-effectiveness
without additional harm to the climate. So long as the full range of mitigation options across
space and time is available to the market system, trading will in principal lead to a cost-effective
allocation of pollution control actions through the elimination of opportunities for arbitrage.

2.2   Efficiency and Instrument Design
        In addition to cost-effectiveness, which implies equalization of marginal pollution control
costs, overall economic efficiency requires balancing the marginal benefits and marginal costs of
GHG mitigation. One of the advantages of a market-based cap-and-trade approach to pollution
control is that—for a given emissions target—it does not require any ex-ante knowledge of
pollution control costs or benefits. However, if there is interest in balancing the marginal cost
and benefits of the policy, economic information is required for both sides of this ledger.



                                                     6
        This raises additional issues related to estimating the costs of mitigation, the monetized
value of climate damages (Interagency 2009; National Research Council 2010), and the design of
policy instruments that are efficient in the face of uncertainty over costs and benefits. The early
economic literature on climate policy instrument choice under uncertainty (Pizer 2002; Newell &
Pizer 2003) pointed to the advantage of price-based (i.e., a carbon tax) over quantity-based
instruments (i.e., cap-and-trade) based on a modified Weitzman-type argument (Weitzman 1974)
and assuming compliance had to be achieved on an annual basis. This earlier work also showed
that price-like modifications within a cap-and-trade program—ceilings and floors on the
allowance price or otherwise adjusting the cap to accommodate cost shocks—could achieve the
same outcome as a carbon tax (Newell et al. 2005; Murray et al. 2009). Moreover, recent work
has shown that ordinary banking provisions—which are included in virtually all emissions
trading programs—may come close to the efficiency of a carbon tax without further
modifications (Fell et al. 2012).
         One of the thorny issues raised by the potential movement of allowances across time is
determining the trading ratio to be applied to banked or borrowed allowances and deciding how
to apply it. Theory suggests that the optimal trading ratio between periods is equal to one plus the
discount rate minus the desired rate of change in permit prices (Leiby & Rubin 2001). In addition
to this formula, a discount rate is required, which raises a distinct set of analytical challenges for
both the estimation of damages and the rate at which the carbon price should rise (Interagency
2009; Aldy et al. 2010; National Research Council 2010).
        Due to the long-term nature of the climate problem, incentives for technological
innovation in GHG mitigation technologies are also important for efficiency (Newell 2010).
With respect to carbon market design, a key issue for technology innovation and deployment is
setting carbon market stringency at a level that generates the optimal incentive through the price
mechanism. In the presence of innovation spillovers, one might be tempted to boost stringency
beyond the level dictated simply by the climate externality. However, a more economically
efficient approach is to recognize the need for more than one policy instrument to address these
multiple market imperfections and include direct innovation policy (Jaffe et al. 2003). Instrument
design in the context of multiple market imperfections and multiple policy instruments can
become complex, as the optimal level of stringency of any particular instrument depends on the
levels of the others (Fischer & Newell 2008).

2.3   Allowance Allocation: Distributional Impacts and Efficiency
        As with other market-based programs, GHG allowances can be auctioned, allocated for
free, or designed with some combination of the two. Allowance allocation has distributional and
efficiency consequences, and these can be large—on the order of hundreds of billions of
dollars—given the sizable economic rents at stake. As noted above, because of the relatively
small ratio of mitigation to emissions in most carbon trading regulation to date, payment of these
rents tends to be the dominant distributional cost.




                                                      7
        In many key carbon-emitting sectors, we would expect competitive pressure to lead
product prices to reflect carbon content, regardless of any free allocation.6 Consequently, end
users of energy would ultimately end up paying these rents. In turn, there can be significant
distributional impacts to alternative free allocation approaches and formulas that distribute these
rents, with implications for feasibility and equity across firms, income groups, regions, and
generations. Unless utility or other regulation intervenes, free allowance allocations tend to
accrue to firms and result in higher equity values, to the benefit of higher income groups and at
the expense of lower income groups (Dinan & Rogers 2002).
        Even without the potential equity impact of free allocation, it is fairly well established
that carbon pricing (through either an auctioned allowance market or tax) disproportionately
harms low-income households in developed countries (Hassett et al. 2009). While higher-income
households tend to spend more on energy than do low-income households, they spend less as a
fraction of income. A number of mechanisms have been proposed to ameliorate the
regressiveness of carbon pricing, including lump-sum rebates (e.g., so-called cap-and-dividend),
allocations to electricity distributors, and parallel offsetting changes to income or social security
taxes (Burtraw et al. 2010). From an efficiency point of view, better compensation mechanisms
tend to avoid lowering energy prices (to preserve appropriate incentives) and take advantage of
opportunities to lower other distortionary taxes.
         Absent a global trading program, free allowance allocations for energy-intensive
industries are often a key mechanism to address political feasibility as well as to avoid emissions
leakage for marginal producers. For moderate policies, some research on this issue has found
that, in the United States, only about 15–20 percent of free allowances are needed to compensate
energy intensive industries for their loss of producer surplus (Bovenberg & Goulder 2001).
However, other research has shown that there is significant variation in compliance costs within
energy intensive sectors—creating both winners and losers under a carbon market—so that it can
require a several times higher fraction of allowances to compensate the losers than would be
indicated by the average loss in producer surplus (Burtraw & Palmer 2008).
         Efficiency issues arise principally with respect to how much revenue is raised through
auctions and how much of this revenue is recycled to offset other distortionary taxes or used for
other purposes (e.g., technology programs, adaptation, or energy efficiency programs). The
literature tends to support the view that revenue-neutral full auctioning and the use of proceeds to
lower other distortionary taxes both offer a significant potential gain in efficiency relative to free
allocation or lump sum redistribution of revenues (Aldy et al. 2010).
        There are any number of other ways that carbon allowance auction revenues could be
used, and the potential need for resources to support complementary GHG mitigation efforts—
such as funding energy efficiency programs and technology research, development, and
demonstration—has linked these programs to carbon market design. It is not clear there is any
efficiency advantage to this linkage, but from a practical point of view, the use of carbon market
revenue to support other GHG mitigation programs has had appeal to policymakers and has


6 Exceptions to such pass-through could include utilities under cost-of-service regulation (where such pass-through
is prohibited) and industries facing strong international competition (and thus world prices).




                                                              8
shown up as a prominent feature of both proposed and implemented carbon market design.
However, interactions between carbon markets and other policies aimed at reducing emissions
may—under certain circumstances—result in decreased emission reductions, reduced cost-
effectiveness, and/or a decrease in the market’s allowance prices (Goulder & Stavins 2012).

3. Program Overview and Key Design Choices
        GHG emissions trading programs have been established at the international, regional,
national, and sub-national levels, as highlighted in Figure 1. Though the normative theory
discussed above focuses on cost-effectiveness, regulators developing each program have had to
grapple with significant stakeholder interest in many design choices. The most contentious issues
have revolved around which sectors to include; how to minimize competitive losses to firms;
how to limit consumer price increases; whether and how to employ emissions offsets; and the
extent to and manner in which firms trade allowances.
        This section explores those key questions, summarizing the initial design choices in a
variety of emissions trading programs and highlighting notable design elements. Table 1 gives a
broad overview of central design elements in a variety of past, present, and (for the United
States) proposed carbon trading systems.
        Additionally, this section touches on the institutional and political histories of major
programs. Although we cannot do full justice to the broad array of political and economic
choices leading to each decision, we note some key factors that affected initial design choices.
While all carbon trading programs are relatively young, some have changed substantially since
launching. We describe those major changes, and the market experiences that prompted them, in
section four as we discuss market experience more generally.

3.1      Program Overview

3.1.1 Kyoto Protocol
        The Kyoto Protocol, adopted in 1997, established the first non-voluntary carbon market,
committing certain nations to meet GHG emissions reduction targets and establishing a
framework for allowance trading across international borders. The protocol entered into force in
February 2005. Thirty-seven industrialized signatories, known as Annex-I nations, are
responsible for reducing emissions by specified targets (United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change 2012b). If a nation cannot meet its target, it may either purchase allowances
(called Assigned Amount Units, or AAUs) from a fellow Annex-I nation or purchase emissions
offsets from projects that decrease emissions in other parts of the world.7
        The Kyoto Protocol established two major mechanisms to offset emissions: the Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM) and Joint Implementation (JI). CDM projects, which reduce
emissions in developing nations, earn one Certified Emissions Reduction credit (CER) per metric
ton of GHG emissions reduction, which may be purchased by nations or firms to meet their


7   As predicted by Hahn and Stavins (1999), the widespread trading of AAUs has generally not been effective.




                                                              9
obligations under the protocol. JI projects also earn one credit per metric ton of emissions
reduction (called Earned Reduction Units, or ERUs) and come primarily from projects in the
former Soviet Union. Both project types seek to encourage clean energy investment and learning
while allowing Annex-I nations flexibility in meeting their emissions targets (United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change 2006).
        While these offset programs continue to function, the future of the Kyoto Protocol as a
framework for reducing emissions is uncertain. Negotiations in Durban, South Africa, in late
2011 ended with nations agreeing to agree by 2015 on a comprehensive plan to reduce emissions
that would take effect by 2020 under the broader UNFCCC. In 2012, negotiations in Doha, Qatar
resulted in the extension of the Kyoto Protocol from 2013-2020. However, the United States
never ratified the protocol; China (the world’s largest emitter) is not required to reduce emissions
under it; and Canada, Japan, and Russia have not agreed to take on additional commitments
under Kyoto after 2012 (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 2012b).
Australia has committed to modest emissions reductions by 2020, promising to enact deeper cuts
if the world’s other major emitters commit to an “ambitious global deal” (United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change 2011). New Zealand has stated that it will not make
any commitments under the second round of the Kyoto Protocol, though it remains committed to
its overall emission reduction goals.
        These varying commitments paint an uncertain picture moving forward. Nonetheless, a
variety of governments have developed market-based programs to reduce their GHG emissions
within or outside of the Kyoto framework. Why these governments have chosen to act absent a
strong international framework is a question we do not focus on; instead readers should see work
by Aldy et al. (2007) on international climate architectures, and Victor (2008) and Nordhaus
(Nordhaus & Boyer 1998) on problems with the Kyoto approach. The following section
provides a review of major programs.8

3.1.2 EU Emissions Trading System
       Although most European nations favored a carbon tax going into the Kyoto negotiations,
the European Union has created by far the world’s largest market-based system to reduce GHG
emissions: the EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS). In fact, the EU ETS began operating in
2005, three years before Kyoto’s first commitment period began. The program has operated in
phases, with a pilot phase from 2005 to 2007 covering the power sector and certain heavy
industry, a second phase from 2008 to 2012 expanding coverage slightly, and a third phase set
for 2013–2020 that adds a significant range of industrial activity along with several new gases
(Ellerman et al. 2010; European Commission 2012a).
       Under the first two phases, each of 27 EU nations (later expanded to 30) submitted
National Allocation Plans (NAPs) to the European Commission.9 Each NAP set an emissions

8   For more details on other proposed and existing programs, see Hood (2010).
9Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Esmetric tonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. The program later added Iceland, Liechtenstein, and
Norway.




                                                             10
target for covered sectors and was reviewed by the Commission, which had the power to adjust
the number of allowances allocated to each EU member. The program’s initial design was highly
decentralized, and once the NAPs were finalized, nations had significant discretion on how to
distribute emissions credits to different sectors of their economies .
        The pilot phase was something of a test during which governments and the private sector
could develop a better understanding of how the trading program would function as the cap
tightened in future phases. NAPs were developed under tight deadlines, and the Commission’s
adjustments to each national proposal were hampered by shortages of time and data. Despite the
difficulty of calculating business-as-usual (BAU) projections with incomplete data, the
Commission developed targets based on a modest emissions reduction goal (Ellerman et al.
2010).
        Even with modest reduction targets, member nations worried that pricing carbon could
harm industrial sectors subject to international competition and raise consumer costs for
domestic electricity. As a result, the vast majority of European Union Allowances (EUAs) were
allocated free of charge in the pilot and the second phases. Each nation, through its NAP,
determined the level and distribution of free allocation to different sectors through 2012 . NAPs
also specified the number of offset credits emitters in each nation could purchase from CDM or
JI projects, with limits ranging from 0 to 20 percent (European Commission 2009).
       Market experience and research and analysis in the EU ETS have led to significant
changes as the program enters its third phase in 2013. We discuss that experience and changes in
allowance allocation, offset rules, and the ability to bank credits in section four.

3.1.3 United States
        The United States, which signed but never ratified the Kyoto Protocol, has seen dozens of
legislative efforts to address GHG emissions. Although the effectiveness of an emissions trading
approach was first demonstrated on a large scale by the United States’ sulfur dioxide and nitrous
oxide programs under the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments, the U.S. Congress has not passed a
GHG trading program (Burtraw et al. 1998; Meckling 2011).
        Building on a variety of past efforts beginning as early as 2003’s Climate Stewardship
Act (cosponsored by Senators Joseph Lieberman and John McCain), the U.S. House of
Representatives narrowly passed the American Clean Energy and Security Act in 2009 (better
known as the Waxman-Markey bill, after the bill’s cosponsors).10 The Waxman-Markey bill
would have established an economy-wide emissions trading program, which focused initially on
the power and industrial sectors, expanding after several years to include transportation, and
allowing emitters to offset up to 30 percent of their caps from either U.S.-based or international
offset projects (Larsen et al. 2009). However, political opposition doomed the legislation in the
Senate, where it was never taken up (Meckling 2011). Despite the absence of a nationwide
system, several regions had already put in place or developed plans to implement their own GHG
trading programs.


10
 For details on a variety of U.S. emissions trading proposals, see Aldy and Pizer (2008). For details on the 2003
McCain-Lieberman Act, see Pizer and Kopp (2003).




                                                             11
        In 2005, seven northeastern states became the first collection of jurisdictions in the
United States to agree to an emissions trading program: Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, and Vermont. Maryland joined in 2006, Massachusetts and
Rhode Island joined in 2007, and New Jersey withdrew at the end of 2011. Known as the
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI, pronounced as “Reggie”), this program only covers
large electricity generators, and nearly 100 percent of allowances are auctioned. Revenues from
allowance auctions go to state governments, which are required to invest at least 25 percent of
those funds toward energy efficiency or renewable energy programs. Offsets for emitters are
limited to just 3.3 percent and come from projects mostly within RGGI states, though no offset
projects have yet been used for compliance (Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative Inc. 2012).
       A second U.S.-based emissions trading system began in California in 2013. Arizona,
California, New Mexico, Oregon, and Washington initiated the Western Climate Initiative (WCI)
in 2007, later adding Utah and Montana as well as British Columbia, Ontario, Manitoba, and
Quebec (we discuss these Canadian provinces below). However, no WCI states in the U.S. other
than California have implemented an emissions trading program (Craig 2011). The WCI has
developed detailed policy proposals to coordinate future programs implemented by its members,
with an eye toward linking state programs under one umbrella.11 California’s emissions trading
program, mandated by legislation, uses provisions developed by the state’s Air Resources Board
in consultation with the WCI and will auction roughly two-thirds of its allowances in 2013 .
California’s program will initially cover the power sector and large industrial sources,
accounting for roughly 37 percent of the state’s GHG emissions, and expand to cover 85 percent
by 2015, including transportation fuels (California Code of Regulations 2011).
        A final regional agreement, the Midwestern Greenhouse Gas Reduction Accord
(MGGRA), was signed in 2007 by six governors. The accord, which included Illinois, Iowa,
Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Manitoba along with several observer states, was
to function like the WCI, helping its members establish programs by 2012. In 2010, MGGRA
released a detailed model rule for member states to adapt and use. The proposal covered the
power sector, major industrial emitters, and transportation fuel distributors, with most allowances
being allocated free of charge at the discretion of member states (Midwest Greenhouse Gas
Reduction Accord 2010). Despite the MGGRA’s progress, new political leadership and shifting
economic priorities ended the effort in early 2011 (Volvovici 2011).

3.1.4 Canada
        Canada ratified the Kyoto Protocol in 2002 but never passed comprehensive legislation to
regulate emissions. Driven by strong economic growth and a booming natural resources sector,
CO2 emissions exceeded their targets, and Canada withdrew from the Kyoto Protocol in 2011
(Canadian Government 2011b). Many Canadian policymakers are reluctant to act on climate
change without the United States taking comparable action. Nonetheless, several provinces have
made independent efforts to reduce GHG emissions (Canadian Government 2011a; De Souza
2011).



11   For details, see www.westernclimateinitiative.org and www.wci-inc.org.




                                                             12
        Quebec is currently on track to implement a GHG emissions trading program starting in
2013 . Since nearly all of its electricity comes from non-carbon-emitting hydropower, the
program will not affect most electricity generators but will apply to industrial sources (Centre for
Energy 2012). Quebec developed the system using provisions developed under the WCI,
allowing it to link with California (for a more detailed discussion on linking, see section 5.1).
British Columbia (which implemented a carbon tax in 2008), Manitoba, and Ontario, also WCI
members, plan to adopt trading programs in the future but have not specified dates (Western
Climate Initiative 2012). Manitoba was also a member of the now-defunct MGGRA.
         The resource-rich province of Alberta, which produces over 40 percent of Canada’s GHG
emissions, has adopted an approach based on reducing energy intensity. Large emitters,
including oil producers, must reduce their emissions per unit of output by 12 percent against a
varying baseline measurement between 2007 and 2010. If they cannot meet these targets,
emitters can comply by one of three mechanisms: purchase excess credits from another emitter,
purchase Alberta-based offsets, or pay C$15 per metric ton toward an energy/climate technology
fund . Most allowances are allocated freely to emitters, and, as of 2010, the program covered 97
facilities that accounted for roughly 50 percent of Alberta’s GHG emissions (Alberta
Government 2011a, b, 2012). The program’s modest intensity reduction targets means that even
if emitters meet their targets, overall GHG emissions may well increase (for a critical discussion
of this issue, see Doluweera et al. (2011)).

3.1.5 New Zealand and Australia

        New Zealand launched an emissions trading program in 2008 which was designed to
cover almost all New Zealand emissions with caps based on its 2008-2012 commitment under
the Kyoto Protocol.12 Since New Zealand is a small economy, the program was built around the
idea of linking to other markets; this initially includes the Clean Development Mechanism but
could be expanded to other national or regional carbon markets (such as the EU or Australia).
This feature has made the program vulnerable to international policy uncertainty and to issues
surrounding the CDM. The program covers a relatively small number of large emitters who must
reduce emissions, purchase domestic or international offsets, or pay $25 (New Zealand) per ton
of emissions. The program has no price floor and prices have steadily declined through 2012,
generally following the movements of CDM prices. Industries facing international competition,
horticulture, and fishing receive up to 90 percent free allocation, but the power sector,
transportation, and forestry do not (New Zealand Government 2012a).
        In Australia, after a long and contentious political process in which the prime minister
reversed her public position, a series of bills became law in 2011 that will begin an emissions
trading program in 2015. In the meantime, major carbon emitters will pay a steadily increasing
carbon tax set by the legislation. Government revenues from this tax and auctions beginning in
2015 will go to new spending on efficiency, renewables, and technology, with at least 50 percent
of revenues going to increased pension payments, increased tax credits, and decreased income


12 New Zealand has not renewed its commitments under the 2013-2020 period of the Kyoto Protocol. However, its
carbon market will continue to seek reductions based on negotiataions within the UNFCCC framework.




                                                          13
taxes for households (Australian Government 2012b). In August 2012, Australia announced that
its program will link with the EU ETS, allowing emitters to surrender EUAs to comply with up
to 50 percent of their requirements (Australian Government 2012a; Reklev 2012a). Additionally,
European emitters may use Australian allowances for compliance as early as 2018. However,
Australia’s current opposition party has made repealing the carbon price “the top priority” on its
agenda, calling into question the policy’s viability moving forward (Australia Liberal Party
2012).

3.1.6 Other Markets, Including Voluntary Markets
        Recent legislation passed in South Korea and Mexico has laid the groundwork for new
national-level programs beginning in 2015. Much about these programs remains to be decided,
but one interesting feature of Korea’s program is that it will not allow international offsets for
compliance until at least 2020 (Reklev 2012b). Additionally, some have speculated that
Mexico’s new president, Enrique Peña Nieto, is unlikely to implement much of the recently
passed climate legislation (Teixeira 2012). China has established a series of local and regional
pilot programs, while programs under discussion in India, Japan, Vietnam, and Thailand indicate
an interest in cap and trade across much of Asia. Other emissions trading proposals are currently
under discussion or development in Brazil and Chile, among others (Hood 2010).
        Finally, voluntary carbon markets refer to a variety of organizations that allow
individuals or businesses to purchase offsets from emissions reduction projects. Since 2002,
voluntary markets have grown from $43 million in revenues to a peak of $705 million in 2008;
they stood at $572 million as of 2011 (Ecosystem Marketplace and Bloomberg New Energy
Finance 2008-2012). Dozens of organizations offer voluntary carbon offsets, and their standards
for evaluating and monitoring GHG reduction projects are typically less stringent than those used
for the CDM or JI. One benefit of less stringent standards is reduced bureaucracy and the
potential for lower project costs; however, weaker standards could also lead to certification of
projects that do not provide their stated benefits (Benessaiah 2012).

3.2   Key Design Choices

3.2.1 Setting the Cap and Comparability Issues
        A fundamental question for any cap-and-trade program is the level of the cap.
Jurisdictions have taken a variety of approaches to setting reduction targets and measuring
progress. As noted in Table 1, some programs explicitly base cap levels on the Kyoto Protocol
targets and 1990 base year, but many have developed alternative targets and base years. Absent a
common approach to setting targets, sharing responsibility for emissions reductions across
jurisdictions, or measuring progress, it is difficult to compare the goals of one program to the
next without controversy.
        Adding to the comparability challenge is the fact that most programs do not cover all
economic activity. For example, a 21 percent reduction in the cap specified by the EU ETS does
not represent a 21 percent GHG emissions reduction across the entire economy. Instead, the EU
ETS is one of several tools implemented by the EU to reach its Kyoto Protocol targets. Australia
and New Zealand, on the other hand, cover all or almost all economic activity with their trading
systems and will attempt to reach their pledges under the 2011 Copenhagen Accord almost
entirely through emissions trading. Most sub-national programs in the United States and Canada


                                                   14
neither cover the entire economy (with the notable exception of California, which will do so) nor
explicitly link their reduction goals to any international agreement.
       Clearly, researchers face a variety of challenges in comparing regional, national, and sub-
national programs, especially when those programs are designed to address a global problem.
We explore this issue further in section 5.3.

3.2.2 Regulated Sectors and Allocation
        Since greenhouse gas emissions occur as a by-product of virtually every form of
economic activity, governments face the crucial questions of which sectors to regulate and
whether to auction allowances or allocate them free of charge. After an early tendency to provide
free allocations, new programs and the revised EU ETS have moved toward auctioning
allowances (we discuss some reasons for this in section 4.4).
        The EU ETS, RGGI, and other programs have focused on covering large point sources
such as power plants and factories. Such sources have relatively low monitoring costs and—from
a political perspective—are often easier to target for regulation than sources such as
transportation. Additionally, most electric power markets do not face substantial competition
from foreign firms, meaning that many power producers can pass along costs to consumers. As a
consequence, electricity generators in most programs receive fewer free allowances than other
types of emitters. The NZ ETS, for example, gives no free allowances to the power sector, and
RGGI has given just 4 percent in its 2009-2011 period.
        Heavy industrial processes (e.g., cement, aluminum, lime, and fuel refiners) are covered
by every system other than RGGI, but, fearing economic dislocation, governments have given
substantial free allocations to these firms. In every trading program that includes them, these
typically trade-sensitive industrial sectors receive up to 95 percent free allocation. Regulators
generally calculate a sector or firm’s level of free allocation based on formulas including
exposure to foreign competition and each sector’s ability to reduce their emissions intensity. It is
worth noting that a substantial share of these free allowances may be going to producers who do
not require free allocation in order to continue operating domestically. As a result, these
producers reap “windfall profits.”

3.2.3 Cost and Volatility Containment
        We begin the discussion of costs by noting that market-based emissions reduction
programs typically offer substantial savings over traditional standards-based regulation (Stavins
1998; Carlson et al. 2000). Among market-based programs, normative theory emphasizes the
value of either fixing or constraining prices, as noted in section 2.2. Yet the political debate and
press coverage has put more focus on avoiding high prices. This may be unsurprising, given that
a market-based program inevitably broadcasts prices much more transparently than standards-
based regulation. Regardless of the motivation, significant uncertainty over abatement costs has
led program designers to include mechanisms to prevent allowance prices from exceeding
economically and politically tolerable levels.
        The emissions trading programs discussed above have typically turned to one or more of
the following three types of cost containment. First, regulators can impose a price ceiling,
allowing emitters to purchase allowances directly from the government at the ceiling price. For



                                                     15
example, participants in California or Quebec’s program will be able to purchase credits for $40–
$50/ metric ton, essentially capping trading prices (Western Climate Initiative 2012).
       Second, emitters may be allowed to bank or borrow allowances from past or future
compliance periods. This option allows emitters greater flexibility in meeting emissions
reduction targets over time without forcing them to precisely achieve each interim target (as
noted in section 2.1, this type of flexibility is justified on cost-effectiveness grounds alone). The
EU ETS, which began with no banking or borrowing between phases, now allows unlimited
banking of credits (Ellerman et al. 2010). Although it would also reduce compliance costs,
borrowing provisions have been less widely adopted (Fell & Morgenstern 2009).
         Third, high market prices can trigger provisions that relax the constraints of the
program.13 In RGGI, for example, if carbon prices reach $7/ metric ton, emitters are allowed to
purchase more carbon offsets to meet their compliance needs. If prices reach $10/metric ton,
emitters may purchase still more offsets to reach their targets (Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative Inc. 2012).
        Some programs also employ price floors to prevent market prices from falling below a
certain level. Auction price floors are used in RGGI and California along with anticipated
programs in Australia and Quebec. These floors are not implemented as an allowance buy-back,
but instead set a price below which allowances will not enter the market. Price floors may seek
to accomplish two goals: one, to maintain prices at a level where firms have an incentive to
invest in emissions reduction technology, or two, to provide a steady source of revenue for
governments.

3.2.4 Offsets
        International emissions offsets offer a very large potential pool of mitigation
opportunities, providing industrialized nations a lower-cost option for GHG reductions relative to
reducing emissions within their own borders (Weyant & Hill 1999). Domestic or local offsets
can also offer cost savings relative to opportunities within a given cap-and-trade program, but
represent a smaller universe of activities compared to international offsets. Although specific
provisions and restrictions vary, all programs to date employ offsets in some capacity.
        Offsets from the CDM and JI play a major role in the EU ETS, with some nations
allowing up to 20 percent of emissions reductions to be met with offsets. (Ellerman et al. 2010).
Participants in the EU ETS may not purchase CDM or JI offsets from forestry or land-use change
projects, due largely to questions over the permanence of carbon sequestration in forestry
projects (Kim et al. 2008). Additionally, some have raised concern over potential harm to
indigenous peoples due to forestry projects (Stickler et al. 2009).
        While international offsets have played by far the largest role to date, regional or local
offset programs to reduce emissions exist in several established and emerging trading programs.
The notion that offsets should take place within a program’s borders, instead of from

13 Exactly how these latter mechanisms might affect behavior is sometimes unclear, particularly when specific
actions trigger a significant and well-understood price decline. With banking, such an expected decline is at odds
with a typical no-arbitrage condition.




                                                              16
international CDM or JI projects, has taken hold in some cases. Offset projects based within a
program’s borders ensures that the associated investment stays close to home, to the benefit of
local economies. On the other hand, local offset projects may cost more than offsets provided
abroad, implying higher costs for locally regulated industries.
        In New Zealand’s program, where no auctions are held, emitters comply with any unmet
reduction goals by purchasing offsets, either from New Zealand-based forestry offsets or from
CDM or JI projects (New Zealand Government 2012b; Point Carbon 2012b). Regional programs
in North America, such as RGGI, California, and Quebec, have thusfar avoided the CDM,
instead giving preference to offsets from regional or domestic emissions reduction projects.
These North American programs allow offsets to make up just a small share of compliance, so
firms do not need to draw on the millions of metric tons of offsets available from the CDM or JI.
Perhaps more importantly, CDM and JI credits have only been available to parties with
commitments under the Kyoto Protocol.

3.2.5 Market Monitoring and Oversight
         After the 2008 financial crisis, virtually all financial markets came under new scrutiny.
Carbon markets were no exception, and new proposals for trading programs in the United States
came with calls for strong oversight. In fact, the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reform and
consumer protection bill created an interagency working group to conduct a study on
maintaining and increasing transparency for carbon markets (Interagency Working Group for the
Study on Oversight of Carbon Markets 2011). Similarly, an EU directive adopted in 2011 (the
Markets in Financial Instruments Directive, or MiFID) will significantly expand oversight of
carbon markets (European Commission 2012b). Primary goals for market oversight include
facilitating price discovery, ensuring transparency and access to information, and preventing
manipulation or abuse in the marketplace.
         Monitoring and oversight occurs in the primary (first purchase or issuance), secondary,
and derivatives markets. In primary markets, regulators typically seek to track initial ownership
of allowances, the conduct of allowance auctions, and the creation and verification of offset
credits. As an example, RGGI tracks allowance ownership through its CO2 Allowance Tracking
System (COATS), employs an independent monitor to review auctions, and requires member
states to verify emissions offset programs (Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative 2010).
        Oversight of secondary markets, where spot transactions occur and futures contracts are
created, presents a different set of challenges. Equal access to information is vital to ensure an
unbiased marketplace, and programs seek to ensure this by announcing new market data at pre-
determined intervals. Additionally, regulators may seek to limit market power of any single
entity by limiting positions, as seen in California and Quebec’s forthcoming programs .
        Derivatives based on emissions allowances are typically subject to the same market
oversight as other derivatives instruments. In the United States, oversight of these instruments
and exchanges falls under the purview of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(Interagency Working Group for the Study on Oversight of Carbon Markets 2011).




                                                    17
4. Market Experience and Lessons
       Having explored the initial design features associated with different carbon markets, we
now turn to market experience and evolution. We focus on the EU ETS, CDM, and RGGI, for
which there are at least several years of data (see Figure 1), but we also include recent
information on New Zealand and California, where futures contracts began trading in 2011. We
draw a number of lessons based on the experience to date, highlighting price levels, market
operation, banking, allocation and revenues, leakage, and offsets.
        We do not focus directly on the Kyoto Protocol, as its primary compliance instrument,
called Assigned Amount Units (AAUs), are typically traded in one-off transactions, negotiated
and sold directly from one Annex-I nation to another (Aldrich & Koerner 2012). Although
nations have traded millions of AAUs in these transactions, standardized exchanges have not
emerged. Instead, the Kyoto Protocol’s primary contribution to emissions trading markets has
been the development of the EU ETS and the CDM, which we do explore below.14
        Figures 2 and 3 provide basic information on carbon prices and volumes. Carbon prices
in all markets have been falling since 2008 in response to the current economic recession.
Nonetheless, volumes have been increasing, both in terms of activity within markets as well as
the creation of new markets. The EU ETS has dominated the marketplace, with far greater
volumes, liquidity, and price volatility than any other market. The EU ETS is also the largest
outlet for CDM and JI credits. Additionally, the EU system is the only one where a significant
secondary market has developed, with market participants buying and selling standardized
contracts up to five years in advance on a variety of exchanges. While trading in the EU ETS
began mostly with non-standardized over-the-counter (OTC) transactions, exchange-based
trading likely surpassed OTC volumes sometime in 2008, indicating increased levels of
standardization and liquidity (Ellerman et al. 2010).

4.1   Lesson: Positive Prices Imply Emissions Abatement, But How Much Is
      Unclear
        The mere presence of a consistently positive price on carbon suggests that these trading
programs are having at least some impact on behavior with regard to emissions levels. Program
design, underlying fuel prices, and larger economic forces all impact behavior of market
participants, but due primarily to the youth of the EU ETS and other programs, research on the
extent of each of these impacts relative to the carbon price remains limited.
         One way to approach the abatement question is to estimate emissions reductions based on
elasticities derived from related analyses. A rough analysis of projections from the proposed U.S.
Waxman-Markey legislation suggests emissions semi-elasticities of 0.0015–0.0061 in the year
2015.15 That is, for each $10/ metric ton increase in the price of U.S. CO2 allowances, emissions


14Note that the EU ETS provides for corresponding adjustments in AAUs as EU allowances are transferred among
EU countries. See EU Directive 2003/87/EC.
15Author’s analysis of data from Energy Information Administration, “Energy Market and Economic Impacts of
H.R. 2454, the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009.”




                                                         18
during 2012–2015 would fall between 1.5 and 6 percent compared with a scenario with no price
on CO2 emissions. If similar economic dynamics are at play in the EU ETS, an allowance price
of $16/metric ton (the Phase I average for the EU ETS) would suggest that the program resulted
in reductions of 2–9 percent compared with BAU.
        Existing research falls in line with this rough calculation. Empirical research on Phase I
of the EU ETS suggests that during 2005–2007, emissions fell by 2–5 percent compared with
BAU (Ellerman et al. 2010; Anderson & Di Maria 2011). If accurate, this level of abatement is
consistent with the notion that Phase I of the EU ETS was less an ambitious carbon-reduction
plan than an attempt to gain experience for future emissions reduction efforts (indeed, the Kyoto
Protocol did not take effect until 2008). Since Phase II of the ETS has only recently concluded,
we lack empirical research on abatement for 2008–2012. However, using the semi-elasticities
noted above, the $20/metric ton average price of EUAs from 2008 through mid-year 2012
implies a reduction of 3–12 percent compared to a BAU scenario with no emissions trading
system in phase I or II. With prices falling to one-third of that level at the beginning of 2013, the
potential for emission reductions in phase III remain to be seen.
        A key question—and sometime criticism—of current market-based policies is the degree
to which they encourage long-term investment in new technologies rather than solely short-term
fuel-switching and energy conservation. Much has been written about the importance of long-
term investment to address climate change and the potential effectiveness of market-based
policies to drive it (Jaffe 2002; Newell 2010). However, markets for CO2 may be too new to
fully inspire the long-term confidence to make those investments, and early research into the EU
ETS suggests that such investments may be limited (Leiter et al. 2011). In the case of RGGI,
emissions have fallen well below the cap due to fuel switching and weak economic growth,
which likely limits investment in long-term emission reductions.

4.2   Lesson: Despite Some Rough Patches, Markets Have Generally Matured and
      Operated Effectively
       Given the youth of the carbon markets, some learning and evolution is to be expected.
Despite the exceptions noted below, markets have generally functioned well, enabling price
discovery, increasing market transparency, and reflecting larger economic trends. Although
smaller markets like RGGI (where the cap has been non-binding) and New Zealand do not see
high volumes of trading, market depth and liquidity in the EU ETS is extensive.
        One initial challenge in the EU ETS was the availability and quality of baseline emissions
data. The EU ETS’s pilot phase caps were constructed under time pressure and with a shortage
of reliable data . When the first tranche of actual emissions data was released in 2006 by the
European Commission, market participants were surprised by the low emissions levels vis-à-vis
allowance supply, which sparked a dramatic fall in prices. This issue was also related to the
inability to bank credits, which we discuss below in section 4.3. Large price swings directly
related to data problems appear to be mostly absent since 2006–2007. However, governments
have come under some criticism for not releasing timely and detailed data on individual
allowance trades and holdings (de Perthius 2011).
       A second issue affecting the EU ETS has been the types of offsets allowed under the
CDM, which we discuss in section 4.6. Thirdly, the EU ETS has faced three high-profile cases of
market manipulation, two of which were not specific to emissions trading markets. One of these


                                                     19
two cases involved traders manipulating value-added tax (VAT) laws in different countries to
defraud governments of over €1 billion from 2008 to 2009, while the second involved
cyberattacks that likely stole over €50 million worth of allowances on spot exchanges in 2011
(de Perthius 2011; Frunza et al. 2011). The one major controversy unique to emission markets
occurred when CDM credits previously collected by the Hungarian government for compliance
re-entered the market. It appears that the Hungarian government simply swapped the CDM
credits for another type of carbon asset under the Kyoto Protocol that it needed to sell. While the
swap was completely legal under the Kyoto Protocol, it was surprising to many participants in
the European Emissions Trading System and created the appearance of credit “recycling” that
would have negated relevant carbon reductions and diminished the integrity of the trading
system (de Perthius 2011).
        After each instance of market manipulation, the European Commission revised its rules
to address the specific problem. For the VAT fraud and CER recycling issues, the Commission
has increasingly centralized oversight of the EU ETS, making it harder for individuals to take
advantage of differences between national-level laws and regulations. The cyberattacks, which
forced a multi-day suspension of spot trading, prompted the Commission to re-examine the
security measures put in place by the various exchanges that facilitate trading (European
Commission 2010).
        As for RGGI, the program’s independent market monitor has found no major
irregularities since trading began in 2008 (Potomac Economics 2009, 2010, 2011). Market and
auction data is released by RGGI regularly, and allowance holdings are traceable online through
the program’s CO2 Allowance Tracking System (COATS).16
         A final issue for market behavior has been uncertainty stemming from the central role of
policy. Since emissions markets (excluding voluntary markets) are created by governments,
changes in policy have the potential to dramatically impact those markets. As the EU ETS enters
its third phase, the European Commission is reportedly considering a delay in auctioning
millions of EUAs, which would likely drive up short-term prices (Allan 2012; Szabo 2012).
However, unless those allowances are retired permanently, they eventually would come into the
market, suppressing future prices. Additionally, program changes intended to reduce the supply
of EUAs may decrease the level of certainty market participants can expect from the European
Commission, potentially deterring investors from participating in the futures market or from
banking allowances.
        Carbon markets in the United States and Australia also face major uncertainty over
policy. RGGI saw a decrease in the size of its market when New Jersey withdrew from the
program in 2011. As mentioned earlier, Australia’s opposition Liberal Party has vowed to
eliminate that country’s proposed emissions trading program if it gains control of the
government in 2013 (Australia Liberal Party 2012). In New Zealand, rules were revised to allow
one allowance to be surrendered for two metric tons of emissions during a transition phase
(Fallow 2009). We return to this issue in section 5.2.



16   See www.rggi-coats.org for details.




                                                    20
4.3   Lesson: Banking Matters
        As noted above, the first release of actual EU ETS emissions data in 2006 showed
emissions levels charting a course well below their Phase I cap. Because EUAs in Phase I could
not be banked and could only be used between 2005 and 2007, an oversupply of permits meant
that prices were likely to drop—and drop they did.17 In the first quarter of 2006, spot EUAs
traded at €25/ metric ton. By the final quarter of 2007, spot prices were essentially zero, at
€0.06/metric ton (see figure 2).
        This precipitous drop did not represent the underlying price of carbon, nor was it solely a
problem of limited data; rather, it reflected the inability of market participants to bank
allowances for use in future phases. Had emitters been able to use their remaining Phase I credits
in Phase II of the EU ETS, prices would still have dropped in response to news of a current-
period oversupply but certainly would not have approached the near-zero levels seen in late
2007. The rationale for not allowing banking was the desire to separate Phase II, which
coincided with the first Kyoto compliance period, from the EU ETS’ Phase I trial period—but
the consequences of this decision were clear. Spot prices for Phase I allowances approached
zero, even while contract futures prices for Phase II EUAs hovered above €20/metric ton (Point
Carbon 2012a). The European Commission, as well as designers of future programs, took careful
note. In current and future phases of the EU ETS, as well as all other major emissions trading
programs, unlimited banking of permits between phases is permitted.
        An emerging question is exactly how much banking an emissions trading system can
(and should) support. Analyses of the failed Waxman-Markey bill suggested that by 2022 (10
years after trading’s hypothetical start date), firms would have accumulated banked credits of 7–
12 billion metric tons of allowances, 140 to 240 percent of the program’s 2022 cap of roughly 5
billion metric tons (Energy Information Administration 2009). Recent EU ETS estimates suggest
compliance entities, banks, and other market participants are banking nearly 2.5 billion
allowances, roughly 119 percent of Phase II’s annual cap for carryover into Phase III (Neuhoff et
al. 2012).
        From a normative perspective, we would want market participants to be as well informed
as possible about the direction of future policy and to bank accordingly. However, if
policymakers behave in the unexpected ways noted at the end of section of 4.2, this may have
consequences. For example, New Zealand’s late decision to allow one allowance to count for
two metric tons of emissions effectively halves compliance prices. The reverse would be true if
the EU chooses to hold back auctioned allowances. Even if temporary, these experiences of
having the government step into the market will influence the way market participants view the
rigidity of the emissions cap and consequent allowance prices. An important, unanswered
question is the degree to which governments ought to be disciplined or flexible in the face of
various events.




17While 2005–2007 EUAs could not be banked, CDM credits could be moved forward. However, few CDM credits
had to this point in the program been issued.




                                                      21
4.4   Lesson: Allowance Allocation Can Involve Large Revenues and
      Distributional Impacts
        Every major emissions trading program allocates at least some free allowances to heavy
industry and, in some cases, power generators. In Phase I of the EU ETS, most NAPs compelled
power generators to reduce their emissions more than other sectors. Concerned about a
consequent rise in consumer electricity prices and encouraged by industry, regulators and elected
officials allocated the power sector a large share of allowances at no charge (Markussen &
Svendsen 2005). In competitive markets such as Germany, power generators passed along the
opportunity costs of these free allowances to their customers, allowing generators to extract rents
roughly comparable to their proportion of freely allocated allowances (Sijm et al. 2008; Ellerman
et al. 2010). Put simply, power companies effectively charged customers for permits they
received for free.
        This predictable market outcome demonstrated that free allocation did not necessarily
protect consumers but did have distributional consequences, and was not warmly received by
some observers (Gow 2006; Harrison 2009). The European Commission has responded by
revising the program’s guidelines, limiting free allocations and increasing the proportion of
allowances sold at auction. Because heavy industry faces significant international competition,
which tends to prevent firms from passing on allowance or abatement costs, heavy industry firms
will continue to receive substantial free allocations. In contrast, power generators will receive
limited free allowances, and only in specified nations.
        Despite well-known public finance arguments against earmarking, governments may also
seek to put rents extracted from emissions trading programs to particular purposes. In many
programs (such as in Alberta, Australia, California, and RGGI), governments must put a share of
revenues raised from auctioning emissions toward low-carbon energy projects. These
investments include renewable energy projects, carbon capture and storage technology, and
efficiency programs. RGGI states, for example, invested over 60 percent of their auction
revenues (roughly $480 million) toward energy efficiency and renewable energy programs
between 2008 and 2010. Other revenues from RGGI went toward direct energy assistance to
households, and a small share went to non-related government projects (Regional Greenhouse
Gas Initiative Inc. 2011).

4.5   Lesson: Significant Competitiveness Impacts and Emissions Leakage Are
      Not Inevitable
        In the absence of a global regime, reduced economic competitiveness of covered sectors
is often mentioned as a key concern with carbon taxes or emissions trading programs. Two
distinct issues arise in this context. First, an emissions trading program entails economic costs
and can redistribute economic activity—both jobs and capital—away from regulated sectors,
particularly emission-intensive manufacturing. These costs and redistribution are economic
issues. In addition, some of this manufacturing activity may shift to unregulated jurisdictions,
with domestic emissions reductions reappearing elsewhere in the world. In addition to
amplifying the economic issues, such emissions leakage is an environmental issue. If significant,
leakage draws into question the underlying environmental rationale for emissions trading
programs. However, a review of the (limited) empirical literature indicates that, at least for the




                                                    22
early phases of the EU ETS and RGGI, competitive losses and leakage appear to have been small
in the few sectors where it has occurred.
        Ellerman et al (2010) found “no observed impact” on competitiveness in the oil refining,
cement, aluminum, or steel sectors during Phase I of the EU ETS. Demailly and Quirion (2008)
found that Phase I of the EU ETS created only a small loss of competitiveness in the iron and
steel sectors. Lacombe (2008) found a similar limited impact on the EU refining sector during
Phase I. An analysis of the EU aluminum sector by Reinaud (2008) found no statistical evidence
of negative competitiveness impacts from the program but notes that information gaps remain.
        However, one survey of firm managers suggests larger competitive impacts and
associated leakage in certain sectors. For example, 55 percent of survey respondents in metals
manufacturers, and 44 percent of pulp and paper and cement, lime, and glass manufacturers,
stated they have either moved or are considering moving out of the EU ETS compliance zone,
while only 14 percent of other firms stated they have moved or are considering such a move
(Point Carbon 2011). There are reasons to regard such survey results with caution. First, the
survey consists of a fairly small sample size (215 respondents for the entire EU economy).
Second, respondents may not disaggregate the cost of CO2 from the overall cost of electricity,
potentially leading to an overemphasis on the weight of carbon prices.
        If the lower estimates from the EU are accurate, these minimal competitiveness impacts
and leakage rates may reflect the modest GHG reduction targets implemented in the first phase
of the EU ETS. Additionally, uncertainty over emissions reduction policies around the world
may delay firms from making decisions on moving to jurisdictions where GHG policies could
enter into effect after the firms’ relocation.
        These observed competitiveness impacts and leakage generally fall below the levels
predicted by some analyses of emissions pricing in the United States. Aldy and Pizer (2008)
estimated that a $15/metric ton carbon price in 2012 would result in decreased heavy industrial
production by 1.6–3.4 percent. Ho, Morgenstern, and Shi (2008) estimated that a $10/metric ton
price would decrease production of most trade-exposed heavy industry by between 1 and 3
percent, though some industries would see decreases up to 7.7 percent. A U.S. interagency
analysis of the proposed Waxman-Markey bill (Interagency Competitiveness Analysis Team
2009) estimated that the legislation would result in an increase in marginal production costs of
between 0 and 4 percent. Finally, Fischer and Fox (2009) estimated that a high ($50/metric ton)
carbon price could result in leakage rates of up to 27 percent for some energy-intensive sectors.
        Leakage and competitiveness issues in RGGI have also been a concern. Since RGGI
states operate in an electricity market integrated with non-RGGI states, the potential for leakage
in the power sector clearly exists. Some research has suggested leakage rates ranging from 28
percent with $3/metric ton prices to 90 percent with $7/metric ton prices (Chen 2009; Wing &
Kolodziej 2009; Kindle et al. 2011).
        However, low carbon prices resulting from a weak economy and historically low natural
gas prices may have prevented extensive leakage in RGGI. One 2008–2010 empirical study in
New York State suggests that allowance prices were too low to cause leakage (Kindle et al.
2011).




                                                    23
4.6      Lesson: Offsets Can Work, But They Are Complex
        The Kyoto-established CDM and JI mechanisms have supported tens of thousands of
emissions reduction projects in the developing world, allowing the EU ETS and other trading
programs to reduce costs while supporting mitigation efforts in developing countries. We will
focus here on the CDM, as CDM projects have outnumbered JI projects by over 12 to 1 from
2007 to 2011 (Fenhann 2012). Exactly which types of projects should receive offset credits has
received the most attention. For offsets to truly reduce emissions, credits can only be given to
projects that would not have occurred without the offset credit program. That is, projects must
provide additional emissions reductions compared with a world where the CDM did not exist.
        Although much research indicates that the CDM has resulted in real emissions
reductions, a variety of researchers have described cases where non-additional projects received
credits under the program (Wara 2008; Elsworth & Worthington 2010; Lambert 2011; Zhang &
Wang 2011). The most problematic project type in the past has been HFC-23, a refrigerant used
in industrial processes that has roughly 10,000 times the global warming potential of carbon
dioxide (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 2012a). Because of its high
global warming potential, projects that reduce HFC-23 receive large amounts of credits.
        Figure 4 shows how, despite a very small proportion of projects, HFC-23 reduction
projects received a large share of reduction credits from 2005 to 2006. Lambert (2011) finds that
inadequate baseline measurements helped create a perverse incentive, encouraging HFC-23
emitters to temporarily increase their emissions, allowing them to later reduce HFC-23 output
and claim thousands of valuable credits. In the wake of such research, the European Commission
voted in 2011 to disallow credits from projects reducing HFC-23 (European Commission 2011).
Additionally, the CDM Executive Board revised its guidelines regarding HFC-23 and other
similar gases, leading to an increased number of rejected project proposals.18 Figure 4 shows the
result: HFC-23 projects have received far fewer offset credits since 2006.
        The number of proposed and implemented CDM projects has grown substantially, led by
renewable energy such as wind, solar, or biomass. Still, overall issuance of CDM credits has
decreased steadily since 2007. This trend likely reflects stricter rules established by the CDM
Executive Board, as well as the fact that many planned renewable projects have not yet begun
receiving offset credits.
        In Phase II of the EU ETS, the usage of offsets varied considerably among EU nations,
ranging from a low of 0 percent in Malta and Liechtenstein to 13 and 18 percent in Spain and
Lithuania respectively. Overall, the use of CERs for compliance across all EU nations from 2008
through mid-2012 was roughly 6 percent, totaling 456 million CERs. When ERUs earned from JI
projects are included, the figures reach over 7 percent, or roughly 555 million international
offsets.19 However, Phase II NAPs allowed EU nations to use offsets for an average of 11
percent of their emissions reductions, meaning that emitters have chosen not to use their



18   Author’s analysis of CDM data from Fenhann (2012). “CDM projects,” accessed via www.cdmpipeline.org.
19Author’s analysis of data from European Environment Agency, http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-
maps/data/data-viewers/emissions-trading-viewer.




                                                           24
maximum number of offsets. Germany and the United Kingdom, the region’s two largest GHG
emitters, have used fewer than half of their allowed offsets for compliance through Phase II.20
         This limited use of offsets in Phase II is likely related to the ability of firms to bank their
ability to use offsets into Phase III of the EU ETS. If firms expect allowance prices to rise (or
credit prices to fall), they may refrain from using offsets in the current period.
         The CDM has also presented a variety of distributional questions due to the associated
transfer of resources from Annex-I nations to developing nations. Through 2011, by far the
largest share of projects and credits were going to China and India. In fact, between 2006 and
2011, over half of each year’s CDM credits went to projects in China (topping out at 75 percent
in 2007) (Fenhann 2012). Since China is the world’s largest carbon emitter, it is not surprising
that a large share of GHG reduction projects would flow there. However, nations or political
stakeholders that believe China should commit to a more stringent emissions reduction plan, or
see China as a competitor, may object to the transfers enabled by the CDM .
       Most researchers agree that the CDM has successfully produced real emissions
reductions, but whether the projects are meeting broader development objectives, such as
economic growth or technology transfer, remains uncertain (Lecocq & Ambrosi 2007; Olsen
2007; Sutter & Parreno 2007; Dechezlepretre et al. 2008; Schroeder 2009; Popp 2011).
         In light of the concerns described above, and coupled with rapidly falling prices (see
figure 2), rules for CDM projects continue to evolve. Currently, a variety of CDM project types
face review from the CDM Executive Board and the EU ETS, where over 7,900 CDM or JI
projects have been approved, and nearly 3 billion offset credits have been allocated (CDM & JI
Monitor 2012; Fenhann 2012). Meanwhile, members of the European parliament have called for
restrictions on CDM credits for certain types of projects (McGarrity 2012).
        It is impossible to conclude a discussion of offsets without at least noting the collapse of
the CDM market at the end of 2012. After remaining around €10-15 range for most of 2009,
2010, and the first half of 2011, CDM prices fell steadily to less than €1 in November and
December of 2012. This has been ascribed to increased limitations on the use of CDM credits in
the European Union, uncertainty about future demand, and increasingly robust supply – issues
that will need to be sorted out for investors to continue to have confidence in offset markets.

5. The Future of Carbon Markets: New Issues
       We are now at a very different place than we were fifteen years ago. In the late 1990s,
most intellectual and stakeholder debate focused on a single global trading program being
designed as the vehicle to address global climate change.21 The key issues were the design of that
program. Today, that form of top-down global program seems far away, if not impossible.


20Percentage of offsets allowed through NAPs from Ellerman et al (2010). This may reflect lingering benefits of the
UK shift from coal to natural gas and German re-unification, both of which led to significant emission reductions
against 1990 baselines.
21Hahn and Stavins (1999), for example, consider how an international trading system will interact with domestic
policies that may or may not involve emissions trading.




                                                            25
Instead, we see a multiplicity of national and even sub-national trading programs emerging.
Moreover, we now have real experience with these carbon markets. At the same time, the future
of national climate change policy in the United States—the largest developed country emitter
and original protagonist of emissions trading—is uncertain. If a comprehensive U.S. policy does
emerge, it is not clear whether that policy will be in the form of an emissions trading program, an
emissions tax, a tradable performance standard, or traditional regulation. This raises a number of
new issues that have received little attention in the previous literature and that in some cases
were not fully anticipated or understood during the design stages of existing carbon market
systems.

5.1    Linking Carbon Markets
        Front and center in the new discussion of carbon markets is how, whether, and when
different markets can be linked so that regulated entities in one jurisdiction can use allowances or
credits from another jurisdiction for compliance, and possibly vice-versa (Jaffe et al. 2009).
There are a variety of motivations for these kinds of linkages: achieving global cost savings and
gains to trade, reducing domestic market volatility, lowering domestic compliance costs, creating
momentum for global action, addressing potential concerns of major trading partners, and
creating the framework to become a net exporter of emissions credits, among others. At the same
time, there are challenges to linking, most notably the risk to environmental integrity, the need to
harmonize features (and corresponding loss of sovereignty over program design), and the
distributional consequences of higher (or lower) prices.
        Much of the linking work has focused on the mutual gains to trade. Indeed, the early
analysis of the Kyoto Protocol focused on how much cheaper a global trading system would be
compared to a system of autarkic systems (Weyant & Hill 1999). As domestic emissions trading
proposals began incorporating features like price caps, additional work began to show that
certain features in one system could lead to increased emissions if two systems were linked. For
example, Fischer (2003) shows that linking a system that is indexed to output with an ordinary
capped system almost always increases emissions. As linking discussions have become more
serious, people have begun to think about exactly which features have to be aligned to avoid
such issues and which do not (Mace et al. 2008).
        In practice, linkages may be one-way or two-way (Mehling & Haites 2011). In a one-way
linkage, credits in one system can be used for compliance in another, but not vice-versa. In a
two-way linkage, both systems mutually allow the other’s credits to be used for compliance.22 It
is useful to further distinguish within each direction of linkage between the buy- and sell-linkage
decisions and how they relate to aforementioned concerns (recognizing that any buy-linkage
decision by one actor represents a sell-linkage decision, explicit or implicit, by the seller). A buy-
linkage represents the decision by one trading system to accept for compliance allowances or
credits created and offered for sale by another system. Sell linkages represent an implicit or


22 Linkages can also be indirect: if A links to B and B links to C, A will have an indirect linkage with C. For
example, A’s credits can be used for compliance in B, freeing up B’s credits to move into C. The net result would be
credits leaving A and entering C.




                                                             26
explicit decision by one jurisdiction to allow or encourage other jurisdictions to use its
allowances or credits for compliance.
        Concerns about environmental integrity typically arise in the buying system (Mace et al.
2008). The buying system is the one deciding that the seller’s credits or allowances are valid for
compliance in the buying system (the selling system has already decided to use their own credits
for compliance). Concerns about harmonizing features can arise in either system, depending on
who has more power in the linking negotiation; this is frequently a function of the relative
market size. Currently, for example, the EU set the terms for Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein
to enter the EU ETS, and California’s provisions have influenced the design of Quebec’s market,
which is expected to link with California. Meanwhile, the CDM as a seller of credits remains
independent, although the EU has set certain conditions on the kinds of CDM credits it will
accept.
        Finally, distributional concerns tend to arise in the selling system. For the buying system,
linking lowers prices with the same environmental outcome—something many programs desire.
Lower prices generally mean less redistribution among various market agents. For the selling
system, linking raises prices. There are still gains to trade for the selling system as a whole, but
higher prices generally mean more redistribution among buyers and sellers within the selling
system. For this reason, Australia initially planned to restrict international sales of its
allowances—despite the net gains from trade—though it now plans to sell allowances into the
EU market in 2018 (Jotzo & Betz 2011).
       One of the more interesting (and unanswered) questions is how delinking might work.
Recent events in Europe, with Greece contemplating an exit from the Eurozone, should certainly
make stakeholders think twice about what might happen down the road. So long as linked trading
systems maintain distinct units of account, however, the better analogy is a pegged currency
system rather than a currency union. In that case, it would appear to be not too problematic
should delinking be necessary.

5.2   New Information and Revision
         The discussion of linking and possibly delinking, as well as the carbon market experience
discussed in the previous section, highlights that policies very clearly will be revised and even
overhauled as time passes. The EU’s reported consideration of holding back allowances in Phase
III and the New Zealand decision to allow one allowance for every two metric tons of emissions
during 2010–2012 are prime examples. Unlike conventional regulation, where the financial
consequences of policy revisions are limited to impacts on the value of physical investment,
revisions to carbon market rules (or carbon taxes, for that matter) affect the value of financial
liabilities. They also affect the value of financial assets – government receipts or, in the case of
free allocation, the value of future free allocations. Banking provisions in most carbon trading
programs lead all of these effects to occur much sooner: While policy changes may not take
effect for several years, any future change to allowance prices will immediately affect current




                                                     27
prices. An expected price decline in the future means current allowances are less valuable to
hold while an expected price increase means the reverse.23
        While desirable from a dynamic efficiency point of view, such changes in market value
imply financial impacts and consequences regardless of whether the contemplated change
happens. If the holders of the allowances tend to be exactly the same people who face
compliance obligations, the net effect of changes in market value could be relatively small, as the
market value of allowances will fluctuate along with the cost of their future compliance
obligation. However, exactly how allowances are valued on balance sheets can create problems
even for these businesses.24 Of course, if individuals without obligations are holding allowances,
the consequences could be quite dramatic. It is unclear whether such impacts on speculative
holdings should be viewed as fair or unfair, but there are clear impacts.
        What do these market impacts imply for the broader issue of policy revision? First, policy
revision still must happen. One of the defining characteristics of climate change is uncertainty
about impacts. Coupled with the interdependence of policies in different jurisdictions, revisions
to carbon market policies are essential to long-term efficiency (Murray et al. 2009). While
markets and affected stakeholders may crave certainty, governments cannot guarantee certainty
where it does not fundamentally exist.
        Second, governments should strive for transparent and orderly policy revisions. Many
government agencies, from central banks, to regulators, to courts, make decisions on a regular
basis that have significant market consequences. Regulatory agencies, courts, and legislatures all
need to pursue market-sensitive decisions in a way that allows all market participants equal
access to information as well as advance notice of the sequence and timing of the decision
process. This is one area where the EU ETS has recently been criticized (Allan 2012; Szabo
2012).
        Finally, and most relevant to the topic of policy design, there may be ways that emissions
trading policies can be made more amenable to necessary revisions. For example, one legislative
proposal in the United States would have implemented a very specific schedule for periodic five-
year reviews and revisions, with presidential submission of recommendations shortly after the
compliance year ends and expedited Congressional action within six months.25




23 This is a significant difference between pollution taxes and emissions trading. Changes in future tax rates affect
future liabilities while changes in future emissions trading rules, through price arbitrage, can affect the current price
and hence immediate liabilities. Both can affect current asset values and both can be fueled by speculation.
However, this distinction of price arbitrage in carbon markets, but not with carbon taxes, implies that jurisdictions
have more latitude to attenuate the financial consequences of future policy changes by using carbon taxes and
announcing changes well in advance.
24 For example, under the Dodd-Frank Act, certain types of transactions have capital and margin requirements,
though it is unclear whether these requirements would apply to a carbon market were it to emege (Epifani et al.
2012).
25   Low Carbon Economy Act of 2007, S. 1766, 110 th Congress. See §102(b), §501(b), and §501(c).




                                                                28
        Another option is to put these decisions into the hands of an oversight entity, similar to a
central bank.26 Such an entity would be responsible for periodic reviews and changes to the
emissions limit or other rules and would have the flexibility to do so deliberatively and outside
the explicitly political sphere of legislatures. Given experiences with central banks and monetary
policy, this approach has some appeal. However, it would be more challenging to take this
approach with climate change because of the continuing divergence of views about the
appropriate level of response, even among experts.

5.3      Alternative Policies and Comparability
         The halting history on emissions trading in the United States highlights the fact that we
are heading into a world not only of decentralized, bottom-up emissions trading regimes with
varying rules but one in which some jurisdictions may set aside emissions trading altogether and
pursue emissions taxes or more traditional regulation. In late 2012, for example, there was an
unusual confluence of interest in carbon taxes to address climate change and the burgeoning U.S.
deficit (Chemnick 2012). South Africa has also shown interest in a carbon tax (RSA 2010).
Meanwhile, policy-related emissions reductions in the United States over the past few years (and
likely in the near term) have arisen from tighter regulations on automobile fuel economy and
tailpipe GHG emissions, renewable electricity capacity additions associated with federal and
state subsidies and mandates, and new power plant emissions regulations under the
Environmental Protection Agency.27
        This diversity of policy approaches was not altogether unexpected. Under the Kyoto
Protocol, there is no requirement to implement a domestic emissions trading program. The EU
ETS, which sits at the apex of the carbon market discussion, only covers roughly half of
European emissions, with traditional regulation or taxes used elsewhere (a number of European
nations also levy a tax on GHG emissions). And in the United States, where concerns about
competitiveness dominated the emissions trading debate, the Waxman-Markey bill did not seek
to require trading partners to have an emissions trading program, only a “nationally enforceable
and economy-wide greenhouse gas emissions reduction commitment for that country that is at
least as stringent as that of the United States.”28
        What this immediately raises, however, is the need to measure the comparability of
policies. Comparability is important for carbon markets because, among trading programs,
comparability is necessary for jurisdictions to consider linking. In addition, among the broader
suite of policies, comparability is necessary to avoid escalating concerns over competitiveness
and emissions leakage that could threaten the sustainability of emissions trading. The Kyoto
Protocol solved this issue by having countries negotiate agreed targets for one another based on a
1990 baseline. During the lead-up to the Copenhagen Accord, there was considerable debate


26   See discussion in Pizer and Tatsutani (2008) and Newell et al (2005).
27 The economic downturn and low natural gas prices have had a further downward impact on emissions over the
last few years.
28American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009, H.R. 2454 as passed by the House of Representatives,
§767(c)(1).




                                                               29
over this with regard to various countries’ pledges.29 Most discussions look at emissions
reduction efforts in one of five ways: (1) emissions reductions versus a historic baseline (percent
reductions compared to 1990, 2005, etc.); (2) emissions reductions versus a business as usual
baseline (e.g., percent reductions compared to forecast levels in 2020); (3) reductions in
emissions intensity (percent reductions in emissions per unit of gross domestic product, energy
use, or power generation against a historical baseline or future projection); (4) reductions in
emissions per capita; or (5) the realized carbon price. However, there is no agreement on which
metric is best. Many raise practical issues (e.g., conversion among currencies or calculation of
business-as-usual forecasts), and different metrics yield dramatically different views.
        This question of comparability is only compounded when evaluating actual
implementation of policies and their outcomes as opposed to economy-wide emissions pledges.
That conversation is only just beginning as countries embark on negotiations over a new climate
change agreement, one based on the 2011 Durban Platform for Enhanced Action, and as they
grapple with domestic stakeholders who are frequently concerned about whether other major
emitters, particularly their economic competitors, are undertaking their fair share. Unlike the
situation in Kyoto, where the dimension of comparability was a relatively narrow range of
deviations from 1990 emissions levels, future comparability discussions will undoubtedly be
much more complex.30

5.4      International Negotiations
        What does this imply for future international negotiations concerning carbon markets?
Unlike earlier, Kyoto-style negotiations that focused on a sequence of top-down, larger-to-
smaller emissions trading issues—national emissions caps, trading rules, and further details such
as the CDM—the new, post-Durban negotiations will necessarily focus on the tools for a bottom-
up approach. On the one hand, a new agreement will need to support concerns over
comparability and transparency of effort. Those countries pursuing and already engaged in
carbon markets will want assurances that other jurisdictions will do their fair share. This is
important if support in those countries for carbon markets is to continue, and such assurances
will guide future responses to competitiveness concerns.
         On the other hand, a new agreement will need to focus on ways to provide institutional
support for markets themselves. Aside from spurring the creation of the EU ETS and other
trading programs, the CDM is arguably one of the most important contributions coming out of
the Kyoto Protocol. Despite the various challenges it continues to face, the CDM has an
institutional structure that allows it to evolve and benefits significantly from the credibility
afforded to it by its role in the agreed international architecture. The negotiations could look for


29   See, for example, Levin and Bradley (2009); Pew (2011); and Jotzo (2010).
30 Targets under the Kyoto Protocol ranged from 8 percent below 1990 emissions levels for the European Union to
10 percent above 1990 emissions levels for Iceland (http://unfccc.int/kyoto_protocol/items/3145.php). The targets
were somewhat renegotiated in the Marrakech Accords, which established limitations on the use of forestry sinks for
compliance with the original targets (http://unfccc.int/methods_and_science/lulucf/items/3063.php). This relatively
narrow range of targets had dramatically different consequences for countries facing different growth rates or other
structural changes after 1990.




                                                             30
ways that a wider variety of country contributions can be supported. For example, some
developing countries may want something like “model rules” for establishing a domestic trading
program that would presumptively link to developed country programs already utilizing the
Clean Development Mechanism. While rules for carbon markets and other abatement programs
can and may emerge organically without an anchor in international agreements, creating model
rules could be valuable, particularly for the many countries that will be too small to pursue an
entirely customized approach. There are also questions about the future of the CDM itself.
Decisions in December 2012 will limit future access to the CDM to countries participating in the
next phase (2013-2020) of the Kyoto Protocol. This approach steers the CDM away from a role
in a decentralized global carbon market by limiting its relevance to the subset of Kyoto
participants. To achieve efficiency, future negotiations should be creating opportunities for
linkages, not blocking them.

6. Summary
        The overarching messages from this survey are that carbon markets are sizable, they have
been expanding rather than contracting, market rules are evolving and not static, and a new
architecture based on a more organic, bottom-up international design raises a suite of new
questions. A global emissions trading system has not emerged as the linchpin policy solution for
climate change in the way it may have been envisioned in the mid- to late-1990s. Other policy
tools—carbon taxes and traditional regulation—are being implemented or considered in a variety
of sectors and jurisdictions.
        The design of carbon markets is benefiting from experience. Experience with windfall
profits from free allowance allocation has led to an increased use of auctions. Jurisdictions are
learning to handle market-sensitive information in a more transparent and orderly manner, but
there is still progress to be made. Efforts to moderate high and low prices are providing lessons
on what works and what does not while also making the simple point that prices matter. Perhaps
most importantly, we are seeing that carbon allowance trading can support emissions reductions
and send market signals for future investment. However, the strength of those signals for future
investment hinge on confidence in the emissions market, the underlying regulatory framework
and its stringency, and the broader investment climate.
       The evolving nature of carbon markets and associated design changes imply that
confidence in the market cannot be one hundred percent. Governments cannot provide certainty
where it does not fundamentally exist. Looking forward, however, authorities need to be clearer
and more orderly about policy revisions and recognize the consequent impacts on market price,
market participants, and future market confidence.
        Among the many issues facing markets in the future, the emergence of multiple
emissions trading programs has put front and center the question of how, whether, and when
these programs will be linked together. While a variety of motivations drive interest in linking,
and there are a variety of ways to create links, three key concerns have limited linking so far.
Buyers tend to be concerned about environmental integrity, as the buying system is establishing
that purchased allowances are valid for compliance in their system. The necessary harmonization
of certain design features also means that one or the other system is giving up some sovereign
control. Perhaps most importantly for sellers, selling systems will generally see increases in



                                                   31
allowance prices, with potentially adverse distributional consequences (despite overall gains
from trade). For this reason, linkages among trading systems have proceeded relatively slowly.
        What is the role of international negotiations regarding carbon markets in this emerging,
bottom-up world? One role is to address the issue of comparability among different trading
systems as well as among emissions trading, taxes, and traditional regulation. Comparability
among trading systems supports linking, and comparability more generally can help avoid
escalating competitiveness concerns. The latter concerns, related to both emissions and economic
leakage, represent one of the greatest challenges to the long-term sustainability of carbon
markets. In addition to comparability, it will be useful to explore how international institutions
can more directly support carbon markets in a more decentralized regime. The CDM is a
significant contribution; perhaps there are others.
        Fifteen years after the signing of the Kyoto Protocol and the creation of the first vehicle
for carbon markets, the Kyoto model of a top-down, global carbon trading system is essentially
over. Carbon markets are not, however, over. The challenge now is to figure out how they can
work in a much more complex—but clearly more realistic—world.




                                                     32
Tables and Figures




                     33
                                                  Table 1. Selected Emissions Trading Program Provisions
                         ~Size
                         (metric
                         metric     Basis for
                         tons)      cap level        Covered sectors       Allowance allocation       Cost containment       Offsets
                                                                                                                             Up to 12.5 percent
                                     5 percent       Power sector, most    Auctions begin in                                 CDM/JI in 2015. Up
                                     below 2000      heavy industry,       2015. A$23/metric ton      No price floor.        to 100 domestic
            Australia




                                     levels by       transport, waste.     tax in 2012. In 2015,      Ceiling set at         offsets after 2015; 50
                                     2020. Based     Agriculture and       66–95 percent free         A$20/metric ton        percent may be
                                   6
                                     on Kyoto        deforestation are     allocation to heavy        above expected         CDM/JI. No offsets
                         0M          targets.        exempt.               industry.                  EUA price.             2012–2015.
                                                     2013: power
                                                     sector, large         ~2/3 of permits            Auction floor of       Restricted use of
                         160M
            California




                                    15 percent       industrial. 2015:     auctioned in 2013.         $10/metric ton.        CDM/JI. Four types of
                         in 2013
                                    below 2012       fuel distributors     Some free allowances       Effective ceiling of   domestic offsets OK.
                         400M       levels by        (transport, nat.      to electricity, industry   $40–50/metric ton      Up to 8 percent
                         in 2015    2020.            gas).                 decreasing over time.      in 2012.               offsets.
      (2005–2007)




                                                                           10 percent maximum                                CDM/JI OK. 0–20
      EU Phase I




                                                                           auctioned. Up to 100                              percent offsets
                                    National                               percent free allocation                           allowed. No forestry
                                    Allocation       Power sector, most    and power sector and       No price               or nuclear project
                         2.2B       Plans.           heavy industry.       industry.                  ceiling/floor.         credits.
                                                     New industrial
      EU design




                                    EU burden-       activity added in     ~50 percent auctioned
      changes




                                    sharing (II)     2008; more added      in 2013. Free                                     Roughly 6–7 percent
                                    and linear       in 2013. Aviation     allocations mostly                                offsets OK through
                         2.1B       decline (III).   added in 2012.        phased out by 2020.        No change.             2020.
                                                                                                                             CDM/JI OK, but
                                    No explicit                            No auctions. 60–90         No price floor.        mostly domestic
      Zealand




                                    cap. Based       All sectors of the    percent free allocation    Effective              offsets to this point.
      New




                                    on Kyoto         economy phased in     to industry based on       $25/metric ton         All reduction goals
                         8.2M       targets.         by 2015.              energy intensity.          ceiling in 2012.       met with offsets.
                                                     2013: Power           ~10 percent auctioned                             No CDM/JI in first
                                                     sector, large         in 2012, up to 50          Auction floor of       phase; could be
                                    15 percent       industrial. 2015:     percent by 2013. Some      $10/metric ton.        introduced later. Up to
            Quebec




                                    below 2005       Fuel distributors     free allowances to         Effective ceiling of   8 percent of entity's
                                    levels by        (transport, natural   electricity, industry      $40–50/metric ton      allocation may be
                         5M         2020.            gas).                 decreasing over time.      in 2012.               offset.
                                                                                                      Price floor at
                                                                                                      $1.93/metric ton in    No CDM/JI. 3.3
                                                                                                      2012. $7–              percent maximum
                                    10 percent                                                        10/metric ton price    offsets in 2012. 5–10
            RGGI




                                    below 2009                                                        ceiling triggers       percent maximum if
                                    levels by                                                         additional offset      price ceiling is
                         150M       2018.            Power sector only.    No free allocations.       allowances.            reached.
                                    17 percent                             ~27 percent auctioned
                                    below 2005                             in first year. Free
  (H.R. 2454)*




                                    levels by                              allocations to power       $10/metric ton         30 percent max offsets
  Waxman-




                                    2020, 83         Power sector, large   sector, trade-exposed      floor. Effective       per entity. CDM/JI
  Markey




                                    percent          fuel processors.      industry, and others       $28/metric ton         OK unless program
                                    below 2005       Large industry by     based on energy            ceiling for first      administrator deems
                         2.3B       by 2050.         2014.                 intensity.                 year.                  otherwise.
Note: *Waxman-Markey bill (H.R. 2454) as passed by the U.S. House of Representatives in 2009.

                                                                               34
                  Figure 1. Timeline for Selected GHG Emissions Trading Programs

             EU                Phase I        Phase II                 Phase III
         RGGI
   California
New Zealand
       Quebec
      Australia
      S. Korea

              2002      2004     2006      2008       2010      2012      2014      2016          2018   2020

                                             Passed      Implemented

       Figure 2. CO2 Prices (Annual Average Price Per Metric ton CO2, Nominal US$)
$35
$30
$25
$20
$15
$10
 $5
 $0
      2005           2006       2007           2008          2009          2010            2011          2012*

                        EU        CDM          Voluntary        RGGI          NZ           Cal.

Note: Exchange-traded prices are through June 30, 2012 as reported by the following sources: Point Carbon, RGGI
                    COATS, and Ecosystem Marketplace/Bloomberg New Energy Finance.




                                                      35
                                                    Figure 3. Volume of CO2 Allowance Trades (Daily Average)
                                  100000
CO2 allowances (1,000 tons)



                                   10000


                                       1000


                                        100


                                         10
                                           2005          2006       2007          2008          2009        2010          2011         2012

                                                          EU       CDM            Voluntary        NZ           RGGI

Note: Exchange-traded volumes are through June 30, 2012 as reported by the following sources: Point Carbon,
              RGGI COATS, and Ecosystem Marketplace/Bloomberg New Energy Finance.



                                       Figure 4. Number of CDM Projects (Bars) and Credits Issued (Area), by Project
                                                                     Type
                                 700                                                                                             2500

                                 600




                                                                                                                                        Number of projects by type (bars)
                                                                                                                                 2000
Millions of CERs issued (area)




                                 500

                                                                                                                                 1500
                                 400

                                 300
                                                                                                                                 1000

                                 200
                                                                                                                                 500
                                 100

                                   0                                                                                             0
                                          2004         2005     2006       2007          2008     2009       2010         2011

                                              Fuel switching            Energy efficiency              Renewable energy
                                              Methane capture           Affor/refforestation           HFC, PFC, N2O reduction

                                         Note: Data are from Fenhann (2012). Up to 3 percent of 2011 projects may be pending validation.




                                                                                         36
References
Alberta Government, 2011a. Alberta results demonstrate responsible, clean energy production.
       Environment A (Ed.), Ottowa
Alberta Government, 2011b. Climate Change Update. URL
       http://environment.gov.ab.ca/info/library/8416.pdf
Alberta Government, 2012. Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development:
       Report on 2010 Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Secretariat CC (Ed.), Edmonton, Alberta
Aldrich, E.L., Koerner, C.L., 2012. Unveiling Assigned Amount Unit (AAU) Trades: Current
       Market Impacts and Prospects for the Future Atmosphere 3, 229-245
Aldy, J.E., Krupnick, A.J., Newell, R.G., Parry, I.W.H., Pizer, W.A., 2010. Designing Climate
       Mitigation Policy. Journal of Economic Literature 48, 903-934
Aldy, J.E., Pizer, W.A., 2008. Issues in Designing U.S. Climate Change Policy. Resources for
       the Future Discussion Paper 08-20
Aldy, J.E., Stavins, R.N., 2007. Architecture for Agreement. Cambridge University Press.
Allan, A., 2012. Market split on impact of EU price support plan. URL
       http://www.pointcarbon.com/news/1.1937474
Anderson, B., Di Maria, C., 2011. Abatement and Allocation in the Pilot Phase of the EU ETS.
      Environmental and Resource Economics 48, 83-103
Australia Liberal Party, 2012. Our Plan to Abolish the Carbon Tax. URL
       http://www.liberal.org.au/Pages/Our-Plan-to-Abolish-the-Carbon-Tax.aspx
Australian Government, 2012a. Australia and European Commission agree on pathway towards
       fully linking Emissions Trading Systems. URL
       http://www.climatechange.gov.au/media/whats-new/linking-ets.aspx
Australian Government, 2012b. Securing a clean energy future: The Australian Government’s
       Climate Change Plan. Climate Change and Energy Efficiency (Ed.), Canberra
Barrett, S., 1998. Political economy of the Kyoto Protocol. Oxford Review of Economic Policy
        14, 20-40
Benessaiah, K., 2012. Carbon and Livelihoods in Post-Kyoto: Assessing voluntary carbon
      markets. Ecological Economics 77 (May), 1-6
Boden, T., Marland, G., Andres, B., 2011. Global CO2 Emissions from Fossil-Fuel Burning,
       Cement Manufacture, and Gas Flaring: 1751-2008. Carbon Dioxide Information
       Analysis Center (Ed.), Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Bovenberg, A.L., Goulder, L.H., 2001. Neutralizing the Adverse Industry Impacts of CO2
      Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost? In: Carraro C & Metcalf GE (eds.) Behavioral
      and Distributional Effects of Environmental Policy. University of Chicago Press,
      Chicago, pp. 45-85.
Burtraw, D., Evans, D.A., 2009. Tradable rights to emit air pollution. Australian Journal of
       Agriculture and Resource Economics 53, 59-84


                                                   37
Burtraw, D., Krupnick, A., Mansur, E., Austin, D., Farrell, D., 1998. Costs and Benefits of
       Reducing Air Pollutants Related to Acid Rain. Contemporary Economic Policy 16, 379-
       400
Burtraw, D., Palmer, K., 2008. Compensation rules for climate policy in the electricity sector.
       Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 27, 819-847
Burtraw, D., Walls, M., Blonz, J., 2010. Distributional Impacts of Carbon Pricing Policies in the
       Electricity Sector. In: Metcalf GE (ed.) U.S. Energy Tax Policy. Cambridge University
       Press.
California Code of Regulations, 2011. Subchapter 10 Climate Change. p. Sections 95800 to
       96023. State of California
Canadian Government, 2011a. Parallel Paths: Canada-U.S. Climate Policy Choices. NRTEE
      (Ed.), Ottowa
Canadian Government, 2011b. Statement by Minister Kent. URL
      http://www.ec.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=FFE36B6D-1&news=6B04014B-54FC-
      4739-B22C-F9CD9A840800
Carlson, C., Burtraw, D., Cropper, M., Palmer, K.L., 2000. Sulfur Dioxide Control by Electric
       Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade?” Journal of Political Economy 108, 1292-1326
CDM & JI Monitor, 2012. CDM Board Rejects coal projects, major EU ETS role unlikely. In:
     Point Carbon
Centre for Energy, 2012. Quebec. URL
       http://www.centreforenergy.com/factsstats/mapscanada/qc-energymap.asp
Chemnick, J., 2012. All sides agree a carbon tax could be included in expected tax code
     overhaul. In: Environment and Energy Daily, Washington
Chen, Y., 2009. Does a regional greenhouse gas policy make sense? A case study of carbon
       leakage and emissions spillover. Energy Economics 31, 667-675
Craig, G., 2011. Six US states leave the Western Climate Initiative. URL
       http://www.platts.com/RSSFeedDetailedNews/RSSFeed/ElectricPower/6695863
de Perthius, C., 2011. Carbon markets regulation: The case for a CO2 Central Bank. Climate
       Economics Chair Information and Debates Series vol. 10
De Souza, M., 2011. Canada won’t jump into cap-and-trade carbon market on its own: Kent. In:
      Vancouver Sun, Vancouver
Dechezlepretre, A., Glachant, M., Meniere, Y., 2008. The Clean Development Mechanism and
      the international diffusion of technologies: An empirical study. Energy Policy 36, 1273-
      1283
Demially, D., Quirion, P., 2008. European Emission Trading Scheme and competitiveness: A
      case study on the iron and steel industry. Energy Economics 30, 2009-2027
Dinan, T.M., Rogers, D.L., 2002. Distributional Effects of Carbon Allowance Trading: How
       Government Decisions Determine Winners and Losers. National Tax Journal 55, 199-222




                                                   38
Doluweera, G.H., Jordan, S.M., Moore, M.C., Keith, D.W., Bergerson, J.A., 2011. Evaluating
      the role of cogeneration for carbon management in Alberta. Energy Policy 39, 7963-7974
Ecosystem Marketplace and Bloomberg New Energy Finance, 2008-2012. State of the Voluntary
       Market Reports.
Ellerman, D.A., Convery, F.J., Perthius, C.d., 2010. Pricing Carbon. Cambridge University
       Press, Cambridge, UK.
Elsworth, B., Worthington, B., 2010. International Offsets and the EU 2009: An update on the
       usage of compliance offsets in the EU ETS. Sandbag UK
Energy Information Administration, 2009. Energy Market and Economic Impacts of H.R. 2454,
      the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009. Washington
Epifani, L., Danish, K., McClellan, M., 2012. Joint CFTC and SEC Rule Adopts Final Definition
       for “Swap;” Delineates Exclusion for Certain Energy Transactions. URL
       http://www.vnf.com/news-alerts-741.html
European Commission, 2009. EU action against climate change: The EU Emissions Trading
      Scheme, 2009 edition. Brussels
European Commission, 2010. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament,
      the European Council, the Council, the European Central Bank, the Economic and Social
      Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Reinforcing economy policy coordination.
      p. 11, Brussels
European Commission, 2011. Emissions trading: Commission welcomes vote to ban certain
      industrial gases. URL http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/11/56
European Commission, 2012a. Climate Action. URL
      http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/clima/mission/index_en.htm
European Commission, 2012b. Ensuring the integrity of the European carbon market. URL
      http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/oversight/index_en.htm
Fallow, B., 2009. Business backs emission plan changes. In: New Zealand Herald, Aukland
Fell, H., MacKenzie, I., Pizer, W., 2012. Prices versus quantities versus bankable quantities.
        Resource and Energy Economics 34, 607-623
Fell, H., Morgenstern, R.D., 2009. Alternative Approaches to Cost Containment in a Cap-and-
        Trade System. 09-14, Resources for the Future Discussion Paper
Fenhann, J., Jacob Ipsen Hansen, Maija Bertule, 2012. CDM Projects. Program UNE (Ed.), Riso
      Centre
Fischer, C., 2003. Combining rate-based and cap-and-trade emission policies. Climate Policy
       3S2, S89-S109
Fischer, C., Fox, A., 2009. Comparing policies to combat emissions leakage: Border tax
       adjustments versus rebates. Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 09-02
Fischer, C., Newell, R., 2008. Environmental and technology policies for climate mitigation.
       Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 55, 142-162



                                                    39
Frunza, M.-C., Guegan, D., Lassoudiere, A., 2011. Missing trader fraud on the emissions market.
       Journal of Financial Crime 18, 183-194
Goulder, L.H., Stavins, R.N., 2012. Interactions between State and Federal Climate Change
      Policies. In: Fullerton D & Wolfram C (eds.) The Design and Implementation of US
      Climate Policy. University of Chicago Press, National Bureau of Economic Research, pp.
      109-121.
Gow, D., 2006. Power Tool: European energy groups involved in carbon capture are
      manipulating the scheme for profit. In: The Gaurdian, UK
Hahn, R.W., Stavins, R.N., 1999. What Has the Kyoto Protocol Wrought? The Real Architecture
       of International Tradable Permit Markets. The AEI Press, American Enterprise Institute,
       Washington D.C.
Harrison, P., 2009. Carbon windfall profits seen for EU industry. In: Reuters
Hassett, K.A., Mathur, A., Metcalf, G.E., 2009. The Incidence of a U.S. Carbon Tax: A Lifetime
       and Regional Analysis. Energy Journal 30, 155-177
Ho, M.S., Morgenstern, R., Shih, J.-S., 2008. Impact of Carbon Price Policies on U.S. Industry.
      Resources for the Future Discussion Paper DP-08-37
Hood, C., 2010. Reviewing Existing and Proposed Emissions Trading Systems. International
      Energy Agency, Vienna
Interagency Competitiveness Analysis Team, 2009. The effects of H.R. 2454 on international
       competitiveness and emission leakage in energy-intensive trade-exposed industries. U.S.
       E.P.A., Washington, D.C.
Interagency Working Group for the Study on Oversight of Carbon Markets, 2011. Report on the
       Oversight of Existing and Prospective Carbon Markets. Commission CFT (Ed.),
       Washington, D.C.
Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon (Interagency), 2009. Social cost of carbon
       for regulatory impact analysis under Executive Order 12866. Department of Energy,
       Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Washington, D.C.
Jaffe, A.B., Newell, R.G., Stavins, R.N., 2003. Technological Change and the Environment. In:
        Maler KG & Vincent JR (eds.) Handbook of Environmental Economics. Elsevier
        Science, Amsterdam, pp. 217-223.
Jaffe, A.B., Richard G. Newell, Robert N. Stavins, 2002. Environmental Policy and
        Technological Change. Environmental and Resource Economics 22, 41-69
Jaffe, J., Ranson, M., Stavins, R.N., 2009. Linking tradable permit systems: A key element of
         emerging international climate policy architecture. Ecological Law Quarterly 36, 789-808
Jotzo, F., 2010. Comparing the Copenhagen emission targets. In: Environmental Economics
        Research Hub, Canberra: ANU
Jotzo, F., Betz, R., 2011. Australia's emissions trading scheme: opportunities and obstacles for
        linking. Climate Policy 9, 402-414
Kim, M.-K., McCarl, B.A., Murray, B.C., 2008. Permanence discounting for land-based carbon
      sequestration`. Ecological Economics 64, 763-769


                                                   40
Kindle, A.G., Shawhan, D.L., Swider, M.J., 2011. An Empirical Test for Inter-State Carbon-
       Dioxide Emissions Leakage Resulting from the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative. New
       York Independent Systems Operator
Lacombe, R.H., 2008. Economic Impact of the European Union Emission Trading Scheme:
     Evidence from the Refining Sector. MIT.
Lambert, R.S., 2011. Perverse incentives under the CDM: an evaluation of HFC-23 destruction
      projects. Climate Policy 11, 851-864
Larsen, J., Kelly, A., Heilmayr, R., 2009. WRI Summary of H.R. 2454, the American Clean
       Energy and Security Act (Waxman-Markey). World Resources Institute
Lecocq, F., Ambrosi, P., 2007. The Clean Development Mechanism: History, Status, and
      Prospects. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1, 134-151
Leiby, P., Rubin, J., 2001. Intertemporal Permit Trading for the Control of Greenhouse Gas
       Emissions. Environmental and Resource Economics 19, 229-256
Leiter, A.M., Paolini, A., Winner, H., 2011. Environmental regulation and investment: Evidence
        from European industry data. Ecological Economics 70, 759-770
Levin, K., Bradley, R., 2009. Comparability of Annex I Emission Reduction Pledges.
       Washington: WRI
Mace, M.J., Millar, I., Schwarte, C., Anderson, J., Broekhoff, D., Bradley, R., Bowyer, C.,
      Heilmayr, R., 2008. Analysis of the legal and organizational issues arising in linking the
      EU Emission Trading Scheme to other existing and emergin emission trading schemes.
      World Resources Institute, Washington, D.C.
Markussen, P., Svendsen, G.T., 2005. Industry lobbying and the political economy of GHG trade
      in the European Union. Energy Policy 33, 245-255
McGarrity, J., 2012. EU lawmakers urge U.N. to ban landfill gas projects. URL
      http://www.pointcarbon.com/news/1.1939382
Meckling, J., 2011. Carbon Coalitions: Business, Climate Politics, and the Rise of Emissions
      Trading. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Mehling, M., Haites, E., 2011. Mechanisms for linking emissions trading schemes. Climate
      Policy 9, 169-184
Midwest Greenhouse Gas Reduction Accord, 2010. Final Model Rule for the Midwestern
     Greenhouse Gas Reduction Accord.
Murray, B.C., Newell, R.G., Pizer, W.A., 2009. Balancing Cost and Emissions Certainty: An
      Allowance Reserve for Cap-and-Trade. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy
      3, 84-103
National Research Council, 2010. Chapter Five. In: Climate Change in Hidden Costs of Energy:
       Unpriced Consequences of Energy Production and Use. The National Academies Press,
       Washington, DC.
Neuhoff, K., Schopp, A., Boyd, R., Stelmakh, K., Vasa, A., 2012. Banking of Surplus
      Emisssions Allowances: Does the Volume Matter? DIW Berlin, Berlin



                                                   41
New Zealand Government, 2012a. The New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme. URL
      http://www.climatechange.govt.nz/emissions-trading-scheme/
New Zealand Government, 2012b. NZ ETS 2011-Facts and Figures. Ministry for the
      Environment, Wellington
Newell, R.G., 2010. The role of markets and policies in delivering innovation for climate change
      mitigation. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 26, 253-269
Newell, R.G., Pizer, W.A., 2003. Regulating Stock Externalities Under Uncertainty. Journal of
      Environmental Economics and Management 45, 416-432
Newell, R.G., Pizer, W.A., Zhang, J., 2005. Managing Permit Markets to Stabilize Prices.
      Environmentand and Resource Economics 31, 133-157
Nordhaus, W.D., Boyer, J.G., 1998. Requiem for Kyoto: An Economic Analysis of the Kyoto
      Protocol. Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 1201
Olsen, K.H., 2007. The clean development mechanism’s contribution to sustainable
       development: a review of the literature. Climactic Change 84, 59-73
Pew Center on Global Climate Change (Pew), 2011. Common Metrics: Comparing Countries'
      Climate Pledges. Washington: C2ES
Pizer, W.A., 2002. Combining price and quantity controls to mitigate global climate change.
       Journal of Public Economics 85, 409-434
Pizer, W.A., Kopp, R.J., 2003. Summary and Analysis of McCain-Lieberman "Climate
       Stewardship Act of 2003.". Resources for the Future
Pizer, W.A., Tatsutani, M., 2008. Managing Costs in a U.S. Greenhouse Gas Trading Program.
       Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 08-23
Point Carbon, 2011. Carbon 2011. Tvinnereim E, et al (Ed.)
Point Carbon, 2012a. EU ETS Market Data. URL
       http://www.pointcarbon.com/news/marketdata/euets/forward/eua/
Point Carbon, 2012b. New Zealand ETS Market Data. URL
       http://www.pointcarbon.com/news/marketdata/nzets/prices/
Popp, D., 2011. International Technology Transfer, Climate Change, and the Clean Development
       Mechanism. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 5, 131-152
Potomac Economics, 2009, 2010, 2011. Annual Report on the Market for RGGI CO2
      Allowances.
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, 2010. Fact Sheets. URL
      http://www.rggi.org/design/fact_sheets
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative Inc., 2011. Investment of Proceeds from RGGI CO2
      Allowances.
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative Inc., 2012. Program Design. URL
      http://www.rggi.org/design




                                                  42
Reinaud, J., 2008. Climate Policy and Carbon Leakage: Impacts of the European Emissions
      Trading Scheme on Aluminum. International Energy Agency, Vienna
Reklev, S., 2012a. Australia to link with EU CO2 market, drops price floor. URL
       http://www.pointcarbon.com/news/1.1967394
Reklev, S., 2012b. Korea bans CERs in domestic CO2 market to 2020. URL
       http://www.pointcarbon.com/news/1.1941926
Republic of South Africa National Treasury, 2010. Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions: The
      Carbon Tax Option. In: Discussion Paper for Public Comment
Samuelsohn, D., 2008. Lieberman-Warner substitute represents 'consensus' among many
      senators--Boxer. URL
      http://www.eenews.net/EEDaily/2008/05/21/archive/2?terms=summary+of+funding+und
      er+boxer+substitute+to+the+lieberman
Sandel, M., 1997. It's immoral to buy the right to pollute. In: New York Times
Schroeder, M., 2009. Utilizing the clean development mechanism for the deployment of
      renewable energies in China. Applied Energy 86, 75-90
Sijm, J., Hers, S., Lise, W., Wetzelaer, B., 2008. The impact of the EU ETS on electricity prices.
        European Commission, Brussels
Stavins, R.N., 1998. What Can We Learn from the Grand Policy Experiment? Lessons from SO2
       Allowance Trading. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, 69-88
Stickler, C.M., Nepstad, D.C., Coe, M.T., McGrath, D.G., Rodriguess, H.O., Walker, W.S.,
        Soares-Filho, B.S., Davidson., E.A., 2009. The potential ecological costs and cobenefits
        of REDD: a critical review and case study from the Amazon region. Global Change
        Biology 15, 2803-2824
Sunstein, C., 2007. Of Montreal and Kyoto: A tale of two protocols. Harvard Environmental
       Law Review 31, 1-29
Sutter, C., Parreno, J.C., 2007. Does the Current Clean Development Mechanism deliver its
        sustainable development claim? An analysis of officially registered CDM projects.
        Climactic Change 84, 75-90
Szabo, M., 2012. EU CO2 permit auction delay illegal: German lawyer. URL
       http://www.pointcarbon.com/news/1.1929012
Teixeira, M., 2012. Mexico’s climate law to face challenge under new president. URL
       http://www.pointcarbon.com/news/1.1941779
Tietenberg, T.H., 1985. Emissions Trading. Resources for the Future, Washington.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2006. Report of the Conference of
       the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol on its first session,
       held at Montreal from 28 November to 10 December 2005: Decisions adopted by the
       Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol.
       URL http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2005/cmp1/eng/08a01.pdf




                                                     43
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2011. Compilation of economy-
       wide emission reduction targets to be implemented by Parties included in Annex I to the
       Convention. Bonn, Germany
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2012a. Global Warming Potential.
       URL http://unfccc.int/ghg_data/items/3825.php
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2012b. Kyoto Protocol. URL
       http://unfccc.int/kyoto_protocol/items/2830.php
Victor, D.G., 2008. The collapse of the Kyoto Protocol and the struggle to slow global warming.
        Princeton University Press.
Volvovici, V., 2011. Midwest US ditches carbon market, focuses on jobs. URL
      http://www.pointcarbon.com/pages/shop/1.1510367
Wara, M., 2008. Measuring the Clean Development Mechanism’s Performance and Potential.
      UCLA Law Review 55, 1759-1803
Weitzman, M.L., 1974. Prices vs. Quantities. Review of Economic Studies 41, 477-491
Western Climate Initiative, 2012. History. URL http://www.westernclimateinitiative.org/history
Weyant, J.P., Hill, J., 1999. The Costs of the Kyoto Protocol: A Multi-Model Evaluation,
      Introduction and Overview. The Energy Journal Special Issue on the Costs of the Kyoto
      Protocol: a Multi-Model Evaluation, vii-xliv
Wiener, J., 2001. Something borrowed for something blue: Legal transplants and the evolution of
      global environmental law. Ecological Law Quarterly 27, 1295-1371
Wing, I.S., Kolodziej, M., 2009. The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative: Emission Leakage and
       the Effectiveness of Interstate Border Adjustments. Boston University Dept. of
       Geography and Environment Working Paper, Boston
Zhang, J., Wang, C., 2011. Co-benefits and additionality of the clean development mechanism:
       An empirical analysis. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 62, 140-
       154




                                                  44
