NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRUST AND CHEATING
Jeffrey V. Butler
Paola Giuliano
Luigi Guiso
Working Paper 18509
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18509

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

Paola Giuliano appreciates the support of a UCLA Senate Grant. We thank Martin Dufwenberg, Uri
Gneezy and Roland Benabou as well as seminar participants at EIEF and conference participants at
the Sciences Po/IZA Workshop on Trust, Civic Spirit and Economic Performance, the 2011 Florence
Workshop on Behavioural and Experimental Economics and the 2011 SITE Summer workshop at
Stanford University for many helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jeffrey V. Butler, Paola Giuliano, and Luigi Guiso. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Trust and Cheating
Jeffrey V. Butler, Paola Giuliano, and Luigi Guiso
NBER Working Paper No. 18509
November 2012
JEL No. A1,A12,D01,Z1
ABSTRACT
When we take a cab we may feel cheated if the driver takes an unnecessarily long route despite the
lack of a contract or promise to take the shortest possible path. Is our decision to take the cab affected
by our belief that we may end up feeling cheated? Is the behavior of the driver affected by his beliefs
about what we consider cheating? We address these questions in the context of a trust game by asking
participants directly about their notions of cheating. We find that: i) both parties to a trust exchange
have implicit notions of what constitutes cheating even in a context without promises or messages;
ii) these notions are not unique – the vast majority of senders would feel cheated by a negative return
on their trust/investment, whereas a sizable minority defines cheating according to an equal split rule;
iii) these implicit notions affect the behavior of both sides to the exchange in terms of whether to trust
or cheat and to what extent. Finally, we show that individual's notions of what constitutes cheating
can be traced back to two classes of values instilled by parents: cooperative and competitive. The first
class of values tends to soften the notion while the other tightens it.

Jeffrey V. Butler
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance
Via Sallustiana 62 - 00187
Rome, Italy
jeff.butler@eief.it
Paola Giuliano
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu

Luigi Guiso
Axa Professor of Household Finance
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance
Via Sallustiana 62 - 00187
Rome, Italy
luigi.guiso@eief.it

1

Introduction

When taking a cab we may expect the driver to use a reasonably short route even if neither
we nor the driver make explicit mention of it. Despite the lack of explicit contract or
promise, we may still feel cheated or disappointed if the taxi driver takes an unnecessarily
long route. Similarly, when we ask for …nancial advice the advisor does not typically spell
out that he will act in our best interest, but we may still judge cheating according to this
metric. When we book a vacation through a travel agent, search for the best medical
insurance at a broker or take our cars to a mechanic, we act on an implicit notion of what
the behavior of the travel agent, broker or mechanic should be, perhaps feeling cheated or
let down when behavior fails to live up to these standards.
Situations like these come up frequently in our daily economic lives: opportunities for
mutually bene…cial exchanges where complete contracts or agreements about what is expected from each side of the exchange are either impossible or infeasible. Considering only
our …rst example above, according to one source over 600; 000 taxi rides are taken daily in
New York city alone constituting about $1 billion in fares paid per year.

1

And New York is

not alone: about one million people use taxis every day in Hong Kong,2 while a staggering
three to four million taxi rides are taken every day in Lima, Peru (Castillo, et al., 2012).
Our second example— …nancial advice from professionals— is also pervasive. According to
a broad survey of retail investors in Germany, more than 80 percent of investors consult a
…nancial advisor. Overall, in the UK 91% of intermediary mortgage sales are "with advice"
(see Chater, Huck and Inderst (2010)). In the US, 73% of all retail investors consult a
…nancial adviser before purchasing shares (Hung et al., (2008)).3
In light of their ubiquity, understanding precisely what drives behavior in such situations is an important undertaking. In this paper, we focus on one intuitively plausible
yet under-explored determinant of behavior on both sides of such exchange opportunities:
individuals’personal, subjective, notions of what constitutes cheating. We investigate the
role of cheating notions in the context of a trust game (Berg, Dickhaut and McCabe, 1995),
a two-player sequential moves game of perfect information. In this game, the sender moves
…rst by deciding whether to send some, all or none of a …xed endowment to a co-player, the
1

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transportation_in_New_York_City.
http://www.gov.hk/en/about/abouthk/factsheets/docs/transport.pdf
3
See also Inderst and Ottaviani (2012) for a general review on …nancial advice.
2

2

receiver. Any amount sent is increased by the experimenter before being allocated to the
receiver, who then decides whether to return some, all or none of this (increased) amount
to the sender. While highly stylized, the trust game is an appropriate context because it
captures the essential nature of our motivating examples: a pareto-improving exchange is
possible, but comes with the risk of opportunistic counterparty behavior which cannot be
eliminated through pre-play promises or contracts.
The timing of our experiment is as follows: …rst, we have participants play a (slightlymodi…ed) trust game; after playing the trust game, we ask participants directly about their
implicit cheating notions;4 …nally, we elicit participants’ beliefs about others’ strategies
and cheating notions as well as their (second-order) beliefs about what others’expect from
them. We complement the data from our trust game experiment with data on the values our
participants’parents emphasized during their upbringing. We use these data to investigate
one potential source of cheating notions.5
In this spec…c setting we test several hypotheses. At the most basic level, we test whether
such situations do indeed engender implicit cheating notions. Whether or not this will be
the case is not a priori obvious: cab drivers, mechanics and …nancial advisors may very well
choose to ignore or downplay the possibility that their customers could ever feel cheated in
order to reconcile opportunistic behavior with a positive self-image.6 Secondly, conditional
on an a¢ rmative answer to our …rst question we test the hypothesis that these implicit
cheating notions have an impact in determining behavior in a trust-exchange situation.
We …nd that the vast majority of participants articulate a cheating notion even when
they can easily refrain from doing so, suggesting they are genuine. We document these
notions, showing they are roughly bi-modal: many participants de…ne cheating by a positive
return on investment rule, as assumed but not tested by Berg, Dickhaut and McCabe (1995);
while, contrary to the assumptions of much of the trust game literature, a sizable minority of
senders (around 30% of participants) de…ne cheating by a more demanding notion requiring
fully half of their co-players’total earnings in order to not feel cheated.7
4

We realize that asking about cheating notions directly gives rise to concerns about priming. We check for
the robustness of directly-revealed cheating notions in additional robustness sessions where cheating notions
are elicited indirectly in a way that reduces the likelihood of priming e¤ects.
5
The data were collected for a previously-conducted, unrelated, experiment.
6
For evidence that individuals choose their beliefs to avoid cognitive dissonance, we refer the interested
reader to the discussion in Akerlof and Dickens (1982).
7
Because of the way we modi…ed the trust game, this latter rule can be distinguished from previously
documented fairness rules such as equal surplus division. For details, see the experimental design section.

3

On our second point, we …nd that the notion of cheating strongly a¤ects behavior on
both sides of the potential exchange. On the sender side, we …nd an inverse relationship
between beliefs about the likelihood of being cheated and the amount sent. On the other
side, we …nd that receivers’ behavior varies signi…cantly with their beliefs about senders’
cheating notions. When studying receivers’ behavior, we de…ne “intentional cheating” as
occuring when a receiver sends back strictly less than the receiver him/herself believes the
sender needs back in order to not feel cheated. We …nd that the return amounts of receivers
who do not intentionally cheat vary one-to-one with their beliefs about senders’ cheating
notions, while the return amounts of those who do intentionally cheat are consistently about
half as sensitive to their beliefs about others’cheating notions.
Put simply, even receivers who choose to cheat do not go all the way to returning nothing;
rather they typically return something. If they choose not to cheat then they give back the
absolute minimum amount that allows them to avoid the psychic cost of cheating— i.e. the
amount dictated by the expected cheating notion of the trusting person in the exchange.
Having shown the importance of implicit cheating notions for behavior, we go one step
further and investigate their determinants. In our investigation of intentional cheating, we
discovered that receivers with higher standards— i.e., those who would feel cheated unless
they are given back a lot when playing as senders— were consistently less likely to cheat
irrespective of send amount. This suggests that own cheating notions may be related to
the intensity with which individuals care about good behavior. We test this intuition
using responses from an unrelated survey asking participants about the values their parents
instilled during their upbringing. We classify instilled values into two categories: cooperative
and competitive. In the cooperative category we place values that might promote fair
exchange, such as “always give others their fair share.” The competitive category includes
values that encourage individuals to compare themselves and their actions to others. An
example of the latter category is “always seek to be better than others.” Consistent with
the idea that cheating notions proxy for concern for good behavior, we …nd that both types
of values matters for individuals’cheating notions. Controlling for both categories of values
simultaneously, we …nd that they pull in opposite directions: instilled cooperative values
tend to decrease the amount of money one needs back in order to not feel cheated; while
emphasis on competitive values tends to increase own cheating notions. Hence, di¤erences
across individuals in cheating notions are partly a re‡ection of the relative emphasis parents

4

place on these two classes of values.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses closely related literature; Section 3 details the experimental design; Section 4 presents the results; Section 5
provides a more general discussion of our …ndings together with a simple analytical framework to interpret them. The …nal section concludes and suggests avenues for future research.
Additional experimental treatments, analyses conducted to address the robustness of elicited
cheating notions, and a comparison between behavior in our main experiment— conducted
on-line— and a smaller study conducted in a more traditional laboratory environment can
be found in Appendix I. Appendix II provides instructions for our main experiment.

2

Closely related literature

Our paper is closely related to the huge literature investigating behavior in the trust game.8
The bulk of this vast literature focuses on trust game senders’ behavior, interpreting the
amount senders send as “trust,”whence the label “the trust game”stems. What, precisely,
senders are trusting receivers to do is typically left unspeci…ed, but a common assumption—
made explicitly in Berg, Dick and McCabe (1995)— is that senders are trusting that receivers
will send back at least as much money as they sent. To the best of our knowledge, this
assumption has never been tested directly. Our paper contributes to the trust game literature by shedding light on what it is, exactly, that senders are trusting receivers to do.
Furthermore, by controlling for senders’beliefs about being cheated according to senders’
own cheating notions, we provide novel evidence that the trust game actually involves trust
which is a surprisingly contentious point.9 The most closely related papers in this vein are
Bohnet and Zeckhauser (2004) and Cox (2004), which both provide indirect evidence that
senders’ behavior in the trust game measures trust. Bohnet and Zeckhauser (2004) show
that the extensive margin of trust (whether to send anything) depends on expected cheating or betrayal, while we extend this …nding to show that the the intensive margin of trust
(how much to send) varies with expected cheating. Cox (2004) decomposes the standard
trust game into three closely related, but simpler, games and shows that sender behavior
8

The trust game literature is too large and spans too many disciplines to be summarized here, but for
an excellent review see Camerer (2003) and the references therein.
9
Trust is, itself, notoriously di¢ cult to de…ne precisely. In making this statement, we rely on a broad
de…nition stemming from an inter-disciplinary (including economics) review of the trust literature: trust
is the sender’s “...intention to accept vulnerability based upon positive expectations of the intentions or
behavior of others...” (Rousseau, et. al., 1998).

5

in the trust game cannot be solely attributed to risk preferences or altruism. We extend
this result by directly showing that, controlling for risk preferences, altruism and a host of
demographics, senders’decisions are motivated by expectations of non-malign counterparty
behavior and hence involve trust.
A second literature closely related to our inquiry focuses on what constrains opportunistic behavior of the entrusted in situations like the trust game. An in‡uential literature
models this behavior as being driven by an aversion to guilt arising from disappointing
others (Dufwenberg and Gneezy, 2000; Charness and Dufwenberg, 2006; Battigalli and
Dufwenberg, 2007). Disappointment is de…ned relative to (…rst order) beliefs about what
others will do and, consequently, guilt is de…ned with respect to individuals’second-order
beliefs about what others expect from them. This “guilt aversion” literature, however,
leaves unspeci…ed what determines …rst- and second-order beliefs about others’actions and
expectations. We contribute to this literature in two ways: i) by providing evidence that,
while conceptually distinct from …rst- and second-order beliefs, implicit cheating notions
are in fact highly correlated with individuals’ beliefs about what others will do and what
others expect them to do;10 and ii) by showing that an important source of cheating notions,
and hence …rst- and second-order beliefs concerning others’actions, is parentally instilled
values.
More generally, our results contribute to the debate over how non-pecuniary preferences
a¤ect behavior and where these preferences come from. Receivers in the trust game face a
stark trade-o¤ between their pecuniary preferences and moral behavior. Our …nding that
receivers’behavior is a¤ected by their beliefs about what constitutes cheating lends support
to the view put forward by Gneezy (2005): moral preferences are a¤ected by the magnitude
of damage that immorality in‡icts on others.11 However, because our experiment involves a
game with neither communication nor unambiguous moral standards, and hence no literal
lying nor deception, we extend Gneezy’s …ndings by showing that the moral forces at work
operate outside of the speci…c context of deception. We inquire why people act this way,
10

Notice that if senders’expectations of receivers’behavior vary with senders’implicit notions of cheating—
for whatever reason— this provides a channel for receivers’ beliefs about senders’ cheating notions to enter
into receivers’(second order) beliefs about what senders expect from them.
11
Many popular and intuitive models of moral preferences are inconsistent with this pattern in behavior.
For an elaboration of the inconsistencies, see Gneezy (2005). As but the most obvious example, notice
that …xed-cost-of-immorality models imply that increasing the bene…t of immorality increases immorality
irrespective of damage to others which is at odds with observed patterns in behavior in both our experiment
and in Gneezy’s experiments.

6

identifying values instilled by one’s parents as an important reason.

3

Experimental Design

A total of 428 individuals participated in our main study, all of whom were students in Rome,
Italy, enrolled at one of two universities: LUISS Guido Carli University or the University
of Rome, La Sapienza. All sessions were conducted on-line.
This experiment consisted of three phases. First, participants played a slightly modi…ed
trust game. Responses were collected using the strategy method, so that each participant
submitted decisions in both the sender and receiver role before knowing which role they
would be assigned. Next, they were asked about their subjective cheating notions from
the point of view of the sender role. Finally, we elicited participants’beliefs about others’
behavior and others’cheating notions in the trust game. During each of these three phases,
participants were unaware of the existence of any of the subsequent phases.

3.1

Our mostly-standard trust game

In our trust game speci…cation, players are assigned one of two roles— sender or receiver.
Each sender is endowed with 10.5 euros and randomly and anonymously paired with another
participant— the receiver— who is given no endowment. The sender moves …rst and chooses
whether to send some part of his or her endowment to the receiver, or to keep the entire
endowment. Feasible send amounts consist of any integer between 0 and 10, inclusive. Any
money sent is increased by the experimenters according to a concave function before being
allocated to the receiver. If the sender sends S euros, the receiver receives (approximately)
8S 0:5 euros.12 The receiver then chooses how much, if any, of the received amount to send
back to the sender and the game ends.
The main di¤erence between our game and the standard trust game is our concave “trust
production function.” This modi…cation serves two purposes. First, for low send amounts
concavity permits stronger separation of plausible cheating notions than the more standard
12

Since the sender can send only integer amounts, the possible amounts a receiver could receive are:
f (1) = 8:05; f (2) = 11:30; f (3) = 13:85; f (4) = 16:05; f (5) = 17:90; f (6) = 19:60; f (7) = 21:20; f (8) =
22:65; f (9) = 24:05; f (10) = 25:30. This trust production function deviates slightly from f (S) = 8S 0:5 in
order to produce relatively simple values (multiples of 5 cents) while, at the same time, maintaining concavity
and surplus creation. Surplus creation is a central feature of the trust game and refers to the fact that each
additional dollar sent always produces more than one dollar in receiver earnings. Participants were presented
the trust production function in table format to facilitate comprehension.

7

linear production function, f (S) = 3S. For example, consider the …rst euro sent. This
euro produces 3 euro in receiver earnings in the standard trust game, while it produces 8.05
euros in our implementation. In the standard trust game, as in ours, a cheating notion
de…ned by a positive return on one’s “investment” requires that receivers return (at least)
1 euro. Another possible cheating notion is that the sender requires half of all the money
produced by the action of sending in order to not feel cheated. This latter notion requires
receivers to return 1.50 (4.025) euros using the standard (our) trust production function.
Consequently, these two notions would di¤er by only 0.50 euro using the standard trust
production, while, in contrast, our concave trust production function separates these two
cheating notions by about 3 euros (4.025 euros vs. 1 euro), making it less data-intensive to
distinguish the former notion from the latter.
The second purpose of a concave production function is to provide a relatively smooth
relationship between trust behavior and trust beliefs, aiding our examination of the “intensive margin” of trust (how much to send conditional on sending something). For instance,
if senders have standard risk-neutral preferences a linear trust production function often
implies corner solutions: send the entire endowment if the expected return from trusting is
positive, or nothing if the expected return is negative; if the expected return is zero, then
all send amounts are optimal. In contrast, our concave production function provides such
senders unique internal optimal send amounts that vary continuously with monetary return
beliefs for a wide range of beliefs.
Participants’ trust game strategies were collected using the strategy method. Before
discovering whether they would play the role of sender or receiver, participants submitted a
complete contingent strategy for each role: each participant speci…ed how much they would
send in the role of sender; for each possible amount they could receive in the role of receiver,
each participant speci…ed how much they would return. The order in which participants
submitted their strategies— whether …rst for sender, then for receiver or …rst for receiver
and then for sender— was randomized. Additionally, to bridge the gap between the strategy
method and the direct response method and to attempt to make each receiver’s decision
feel as real as possible, participants’ receiver strategies were elicited with a series of ten
separate screens. Each of these ten screens asked only one question: “if the sender sends S
euros and you therefore receive f (S) euros, how much will you return?”13
13

For each separate screen, S was replaced with exactly one of the 10 possible amounts a sender could send

8

To help our analysis of the intensive margin of trust and to separate it from the determinants of the decision to trust at all (the extensive margin of trust), in some sessions
we imposed a “sending fee” of 0:50 euro. In these sessions, senders who chose to send a
strictly positive amount incurred the fee whereas senders who chose to send nothing were
not charged the fee. We call sessions involving this sending fee “high fee”sessions. We label
the remaining sessions— where no sending fee was charged— “low fee”sessions. In both high
fee and low fee sessions, senders had the same set of feasible actions: S 2 f0; 1; : : : ; 10g.

3.2

The cheating notion questions

After participants submitted their complete contingent strategies, we asked them to specify
their personal de…nitions of cheating from the perspective of the sender. For each possible
strictly positive send amount, 1

S

10, participants were asked:14

“If you are assigned the role of A [sender] what is the minimum amount you
would need to receive back from player B [receiver] in order to not feel cheated?
. . . If you were to send S euros and B were to therefore receive f (S) euros, you
would need back how many euros?”
To respond, participants could either insert a number between 0 and f (S) or refrain
from specifying a cheating notion by selecting one of two options: “this has nothing to do
with cheating;” or “I don’t know.” Leaving the question blank was also possible, but not
explicitly mentioned as an option.
Initially, our design did not include these two explicit opt-out responses. Although
responding to the question was always completely voluntary, we realized that not providing
pre-programmed opt-out responses could make some participants feel obligated to supply a
cheating notion even if they did not truly have one. To address this concern, we inserted
the two opt-out responses. The majority of participants— 306 out of 428— took part in
sessions featuring the explicit opt-out responses. The remaining 122 participants took part
in sessions with no explicit opt-out opportunity. Unless otherwise speci…ed, our analyses
(S 2 f1; : : : ; 10g), and f (S) was replaced with the corresponding value from the trust production function
(f (S) 2 f8:05; : : : ; 25:30g). The order in which receivers faced their ten separate decisions was randomly
predetermined but the same for all participants. This maintains comparability across observations without
inducing undue consistency in receiver strategies that might arise from, e.g., facing a monotonically increasing
or decreasing sequence of send amounts. The order used was S = 7; 4; 8; 3; 9; 10; 2; 1; 6; 5.
14
In each question “S” and “f (S)” were replaced by the appropriate numbers. The words “sender” and
“receiver” did not appear on participants’screens.

9

utilize all 428 observations. In Appendix I we show that our results are robust to restricting
attention only to sessions with explicit opt-out.
One additional concern with our direct cheating notion question is priming. Some may
argue that by asking about cheating directly we may be priming participants to associate
behavior in the trust game with cheating. To address this concern we ran additional sessions
in which, rather than asking our direct cheating notion question above, we asked participants
to state how they would feel about various send/return combinations if they were to be
assigned the role of sender. The results support the idea that priming is not the driver
of reported cheating notions. Participants in fact single out negatively valenced adjectives
(“cheated" or “disappointed”) to describe their feelings even when there are other options
available. For further details of these sessions and results, see Appendix I, section A.2.

3.3

The beliefs elicitation phase

Following the cheating notions questions, participants discovered there would be a beliefs
elicitation portion of the experiment, and that they could earn additional money according
to the accuracy of their estimates. Beliefs were paid according to a randomized quadratic
scoring rule (Schlag and van der Weele, 2009) which is both incentive compatible and
theoretically robust to risk preferences. Participants were informed that one estimate from
this section would be chosen to count toward their potential earnings. An exactly correct
belief paid 5 euros in most sessions. In two sessions we strengthened belief elicitation
incentives— exactly correct beliefs paid 20 euros— in order to allow us to investigate the
importance of ex-post rationalization (Appendix I, section B).
In the beliefs elicitation section each participant was asked to estimate: i) how much
other senders would send on average; ii) how much other receivers would return on average;
iii) their beliefs about others’beliefs about how much receivers would return (second order
beliefs); iv) other participants’cheating notions; and v) the proportion of other participants
who would not cheat them, according to the respondent’s own subjective cheating notion
(see Appendix II for exact wording).15 For all belief elicitation questions, participants were
instructed to exclude their own actions from their estimates and were told that the accuracy
of their estimates would be calculated excluding their own strategies and cheating notions.
This was done to avoid mechanical correlations between reported beliefs and participants’
15

Items ii)-v) were asked for each possible send amount.

10

own strategies or cheating notions. Beliefs were elicited after participants submitted their
complete contingent strategies, but before knowing their assigned roles.

3.4

Payment phase

After all three phases of the experiment were completed, pairings were randomly determined
and within each pair roles were randomly assigned. Outcomes and potential earnings were
determined by combining, within each pair, the sender’s strategy with the receiver’s strategy.
Participants were informed at this point which randomly-chosen belief elicitation question
would count toward their potential earnings and how much their estimates earned them.
Finally, 10% of participant pairs were randomly chosen to be paid their potential earnings.
While 10 percent may seem low, the experiment was relatively short and convenient,
requiring on average about half an hour of participants’time. Furthermore, note that Italian
students’opportunity costs are relatively low. As an example, work-study positions at one
university in Rome we are familiar with typically pay students around 5 euros per hour.
Given both of these observations, we feel the expected earnings from the experiment are
commensurate with participants’ opportunity cost of time. Finally, note that behavior in
our in-lab sessions, where all participants were paid, was remarkably similar (see Appendix
I, section A.1), suggesting that the relatively weak incentives in our on-line study were
nevertheless adequate. The design of the experiment is summarized in Table 1.

3.5

Instilled values and risk attitudes

For each participant in our main study, we complement the experimental data with data
from a previously conducted, unrelated, survey. This survey contains basic demographic
information, a (self-reported) measure of the emphasis each participant’s parents placed on
various normative values during his or her upbringing as well as an incentive-compatible
measure of risk aversion (Holt and Laury, 2002).16
16

Brie‡y, this procedure asks participants to make a sequence of ten choices, each of which involves a
choice between a relatively risky lottery (38.50 euros with probability p, 1 euro with probability (1-p)) and
a safer lottery (20 euros with probability p, 16 euros with probability (1-p)). The probability of the high
payo¤, p, increases over the sequence from 0:1 to 1:0 in steps of 0:1. This construction implies that more risk
averse individuals will switch from preferring the safer lottery to the riskier lottery later in the sequence.
We use the choice number in the sequence where this switch occurs as our risk preferences measure which
ranges from 1 to 10 and is increasing in risk aversion. For ten percent of survey participants one decision
in this sequence was randomly chosen and these participants were paid according to the outcome in their
preferred lottery.

11

There was a considerable time lag between the survey and the start of our trust game
experiments (from 20 to 60 days) so that survey responses are unlikely to have a¤ected trust
game behavior directly. On the other hand, this temporal distance was small enough so
that traits, such as risk aversion or instilled values, likely did not change in the meantime.
This survey data allows us to control for risk aversion and altruism when examining sender
behavior, while instilled values will prove useful in examining what drives receiver behavior.

4

Results

We establish four main results: i) the vast majority of trust game participants have a
cheating notion; ii) beliefs about cheating are relevant in senders’ decisions to trust; and
iii) controlling for receivers’ expectations about senders’ cheating notions, receivers that
have higher standards— i.e., would feel cheated unless they were given back a lot when
playing as senders— are consistently less likely to cheat across all send amounts; moreover,
iv) intergenerationally transmitted values are important determinants of receivers’cheating
notions. Descriptive sample statistics are reported in Table 2.

4.1

Notions of Cheating

We start by remarking that the vast majority of senders— about 80%, depending on send
amount— have a notion of cheating even when they are given the possibility of not reporting one. Restricting attention to sessions involving explicit cheating notion opt-out, the
proportion of senders selecting the option “this has nothing to do with cheating” ranges
from a low of 13 percent when considering sending 10 euros, to a high of 20 percent when
considering sending one euro.17 These proportions are summarized in Table 3.
Next, we examine the cheating notions that senders report. Table 4 reveals that, conditional on reporting a cheating notion, most senders report one that is at least as demanding
as a positive return on investment rule. That is to say, most would feel cheated if their
co-player fails to return at least as much as is sent and many would feel cheated by an
even larger return amount. This is true for any amount a sender could possibly send, and
irrespective of whether a sender could opt out of reporting a cheating notion. Considering
all sessions pooled, the fraction of senders who would feel cheated by a negative return on
17

The proportion of senders who opt out of reporting a cheating notion for any reason— which includes
selecting “I don’t know” or just leaving the question blank, as well as selecting “this has nothing to do with
cheating”— in these same sessions is also low, ranging from 17 percent to 23 percent (Table 3).

12

their investment (conditional on specifying a cheating notion) ranges from 91 percent down
to 79 percent with higher fractions for smaller amounts sent.18;19
As a second step we plot kernel density estimates for individuals’own cheating de…nitions
and their estimates of others’cheating notions. We begin by considering cheating notions
conditional on sending 1 euro (Figure 1). Participants’ own cheating notions and their
estimates of others’cheating notions are similarly distributed and roughly cluster around 1
euro and 4:025 euros (indicated by the two vertical bars). The …rst value is consistent with
cheating being de…ned according to a positive return on investment rule, while the latter
value suggests cheating de…ned with respect to an equal split of the entire amount receivers
receive— about 8 euros in this case.20 While the latter cheating notion may seem extreme, it
…ts with a common interpretation of trust game receivers’situation: they are essentially in
the position of dividing a …xed-size pie and, in such situations, a common notion of fairness
dictates dividing the sum into equal shares (see, e.g., Camerer, 2003). However, notice
that since we use an unequal endowment design, equally splitting the receiver’s income
implements a very unequal outcome: about 13 euros for the sender and around 4 euros for
the receiver.
Figures 2A-2C present the analogous kernel density plots for the rest of the possible
send amounts, …rst for sessions without explicit opt-out opportunities (Figure 2A), then for
sessions featuring explicit opt-out choices (Figure 2B) and, …nally, for all sessions pooled
(Figure 2C). There are two points to notice. First, regardless of whether explicit opt-out
responses were available, own cheating de…nitions follow the same patterns as in Figure
1: own cheating notions are bi-modal and concentrated around an equal-split rule and a
positive return on investment rule. As these two de…nitions become closer to one another
(which happens at larger send amounts because of the concavity of our trust production
function) own cheating notions become more nearly unimodal. Secondly, also beliefs about
18

Di¤erences in proportions tests fail to reject equality of these percentages across explicit-opt-out and
no-explicit-opt-out sessions, for each send amount separately, at the 5 percent level.
19
In Table 4 the condition that de…nes cheating is amount returned - amount sent < 0. It ignores the 50
cent fee and in this it is consistent with the wording of the question that we asked to elicit cheating notions.
An alternative would be to de…ne cheating as amount returned - (amount sent+0:50) < 0 in sessions with a
strictly positive investment fee. Results when this alternative criteria is used are similar but all proportions
shown in Table 4 are slightly lower.
20
Using Hartigan’s test for unimodality, the null hypothesis that the empirical distribution of own cheating
notions when sending 1 euro is unimodal can be rejected (p < 0:01). This is true also if one restricts attention
to only those sessions where refraining from specifying a cheating notion was possible which is less obviously
bi-modal. Unimodality can also be rejected for the distributions of estimated others’cheating notions when
sending 1 euro (p < 0:01).

13

others’ cheating notions continue to roughly cluster around the two norms of equal-splits
and positive return on investment across all send amounts. All together these patterns
demonstrate that even in sessions where participants gravitate toward an equal-split notion
of cheating at the expense of a positive return on investment rule, they believe that others
will cluster around both of these notions of cheating.
In terms of reported beliefs, we …nd that …rst order beliefs about others’cheating notions
are highly correlated with receivers’ second order beliefs about what they believe senders
expect back from them, suggesting that receivers believe senders expect receivers will not
cheat them. The raw correlation between these two variables ranges from a high of 0:66
conditional on sending 1 euro to a low of 0:58 when considering a send amount of 8 euro.
In all cases the correlation is highly signi…cant (p < 0:001).
Our analysis of the kernel densities suggests that implied notions of cheating fall roughly
into two categories. While a positive return on investment rule serves well as a conservative
estimate of what most participants would consider cheating, using only this notion mischaracterizes a large proportion of participants. A sizable minority— roughly one third of
participants— demand half of the total money receivers receive in order to not feel cheated.
We label these latter participants “equal splitters.” As is evident in Table 5, the overall
proportion of equal splitters for each send amount is fairly constant and always around onethird.21 To see whether individuals are consistent with respect to their cheating notions,
we restrict attention to participants who are equal-splitters conditional on sending 1 euro
and plot the kernel density estimates of these individuals’ cheating notions across other
send amounts. As is evident in Figure 3A, equal splitters are consistent: those who de…ne
cheating in terms of an equal-split when sending 1 euro tend to use this cheating de…nition
for other possible send amounts. These same individuals also tend to believe others de…ne
cheating in the same way consistently across send amounts (Figure 3B).
To sum up, the vast majority of people playing the trust game have clear notions of
cheating even though receivers make no explicit promises. Having established this, the
obvious question to ask is whether expected cheating drives senders’ behavior. We now
21

Because experimental participants have a well-known proclivity to state integer values when possible,
we include in our de…nition of equal splitters any subject who stated a cheating notion between the largest
integer less than, and the smallest integer greater than, half of the total amount receivers receive in order
to not feel cheated. For example, for a send amount of 1 euro, receivers receive 8:05 euros, and half of
this amount is 4:025 euros. Consequently, our de…nition of an equal-splitter conditional on sending 1 euro
includes anybody who reported a cheating notion between 4 and 5 euros.

14

turn to addressing this question.

4.2

The E¤ects of Cheating Beliefs on Senders’Behavioral Trust

One of our main results is that participants’ trusting behavior depends crucially on how
likely they think it is that they will be cheated, where cheating is de…ned according to
trustors’ own personal notions of being cheated. To show this, for each participant we
construct a unidimensional measure of his or her beliefs about the proportion of non-cheaters
in the (experimental) population. We do this by averaging each participant’s answers to
the following set of 10 questions (S = 1; 2; : : : ; 10):
“If you send S euros and B therefore receives f (S) euros, what percent of B’s
will return enough money so that you do not feel cheated?”
The resulting measure of beliefs about population trustworthiness theoretically ranges
from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating the sender believes no receiver will cheat for any send amount
(all are trustworthy) and 0 indicating all receivers will cheat for every send amount (none
is trustworthy).
Before proceeding we must address one technical issue: how to construct this measure
for individuals who, for a particular amount sent, report no cheating notion. First of all, if
an individual responds that sending S euros “...has nothing to do with cheating,” then it
is reasonable to assume that this individual cannot feel cheated regardless of the receiver’s
decision. Therefore, we code such individuals’population trustworthiness belief conditional
on sending S euros as 1 before constructing the summary measure.22 On the other hand, if
an individual did not report a cheating notion conditional on sending S euros for any other
reason, then our elicitation mechanism is not incentive compatible since we cannot observe
whether such an individual will feel cheated. For these participants, we code as missing
their answer to the population trustworthiness question associated with sending S euros,
which also results in a missing observation with respect to our summary measure.
Given these caveats, we construct a unidimensional measure of population trustworthiness for 401 (out of 428) participants, which we interpret as their subjective probabilities
22
This could be problematic for our analysis if the subset of people who consistently report that sending
money has nothing to do with being cheated also sends more on average. However, this does not seem to
be the case. Only 39 individuals have a population trustworthiness measure equal to 1. The average send
amount for these 39 individuals is 4:28, which is not signi…cantly di¤erent from the average send amount for
the remaining 362 individuals (4:34).

15

of not being cheated. Figure 4 plots the kernel density of this probability separately for
opt-out and no-opt-out sessions. We document a modal value at around 0.5 (almost equal
to the fraction of non cheaters in the pool— see Table 2, bottom row) irrespective of opt-out
opportunities. In sessions with opt-out (the dashed line), a second mass of observations
centers around a value of 1, re‡ecting (mechanically) the small minority of participants
who report the trust game “has nothing to do with cheating” consistently.
In an analogous fashion, we construct for each participant a summary measure of his
or her beliefs about the proportion of the money they send that will be returned to them.
For each S; 1

S

10 we divide the participant’s estimated return amount conditional on

sending S euros by S to get their estimated (gross) return proportion conditional on sending
S. We then average their 10 return proportion estimates to get a unidimensional measure of
return proportion beliefs. The resulting averages range from a low of 0:00 to a high of 4:02
with a mean of 1:27 and a standard deviation of 0:64. We interpret this index as a measure
of senders’expected (gross) return proportion and note that, on average, expectations are
nearly identical to actual gross return proportions (Table 2).
Finally, using these two summary measures we estimate a model of how much senders
send as a function of the senders’ expected return proportion, their beliefs about being
cheated and an interaction between these two variables. We control for a host of demographic variables. To account for selection into sending a positive amount we estimate a
Heckman model and exploit variation in the investment fee across sessions to construct the
selection equation. Speci…cally, the exclusion restriction for the selection equation consists
of a dummy for “Low fee”sessions— i.e., sessions where the investment fee was zero. Importantly, because two common alternative explanations for senders’behavior in the trust game
are risk preferences and altruism, among our demographic controls we include an incentivecompatible measure of risk aversion collected from the survey described in Section 2.5 as
well as a proxy for altruism obtained from that same survey.23
Table 6 presents the estimates. Here and in all subsequent regressions we cluster standard errors by session. The estimates imply that the probability of being cheated plays a
signi…cant role in the intensive margin of trust: the positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient on
our measure of the expected probability of not being cheated indicates that when senders
23
We use as our measure of altruism the emphasis, on a scale from 0 to 10, participants’ parents placed
on the value of “helping others.”during their upbringing.

16

believe it is less likely that they will be cheated, they send more. The implied e¤ect of
non-cheating beliefs on behavioral trust is large: increasing this belief from 0:1 to 0:9 is
associated with an increase in the average amount sent equal to 51% of the sample mean.
The coe¢ cient on expected pecuniary returns is also positive and signi…cant, indicating
that standard pecuniary concerns also drive senders’ behavior. Finally, the negative and
(marginally) signi…cant coe¢ cient on the interaction between expected returns and noncheating beliefs suggests that as expected pecuniary returns increase, the negative impact
on trust of expected cheating subsides. In other words, the sting of expected betrayal can
be soothed by money.24

4.3

What Drives Receivers’Decision to Cheat?

If expected cheating drives trusting behavior, then the question of what drives cheating
becomes important for all the same reasons that trust itself is important. We therefore
study what drives receivers’ decisions to intentionally cheat. We can address this latter
question directly because we know when receivers cheat according to their own estimates
of others’cheating de…nitions.
We construct a dummy variable taking the value of 1 whenever receivers return less
than they themselves believe their co-players need back in order to not feel cheated and
0 otherwise, for each amount a sender could send. This dummy indicates when receivers
intentionally cheat. We then relate this variable to receivers’ demographic characteristics
as well as their own, and their estimates of others’, cheating notions.
With regard to own cheating notions, we run into the same technical problem as before:
how to handle participants who refrain from supplying a cheating notion. One potential
answer is to code the cheating threshold as 0 whenever a participant responds “this has
nothing to do with cheating,”and as missing if they fail to supply a cheating notion for any
other reason. This is what we do.25
Table 7 presents our estimates of receivers’propensities to intentionally cheat for each
possible send amount. Participants’demographics have few consistent e¤ects on cheating
24

The results are virtually the same if we estimate a Tobit model of send amounts, which intuitively
models selection as censoring.
25
An alternate strategy of coding the cheating notion as missing whenever participants fail to report a
cheating threshold for any reason roughly doubles the magnitude and increases the signi…cance of all own
cheating notion coe¢ cients in Table 7. The same happens simply including a dummy for those who report
that sending s euros has “nothing to do with cheating.” The results presented should therefore be seen as a
conservative estimate of the impact of own cheating notions.

17

across di¤erent send amounts: older participants generally cheat less for lower send amounts;
smarter participants— those who have higher math scores— are less likely to cheat for high
send amounts. Interestingly, gender plays no role. On the other hand, controlling for receivers’expectations about senders’cheating notions, receivers that have higher standards— i.e.,
would feel cheated unless they were given back a lot when playing as senders— are consistently less likely to cheat across all send amounts. We interpret this …nding as saying that
more demanding people tend to refrain from cheating others, behaving according to the
principle “do not do to others what you would not want others to do to you.” Notice,
however, that conforming to this principle is cheaper when amounts sent are low and the
temptation to deviate from it (and doing to others what you would not want them do to
you) is thus weaker. Consistent with this we …nd that the e¤ect of one’s own cheating
notion is stronger at low levels of amount sent and weaker at high levels: the reported
probit coe¢ cients imply that the marginal e¤ect of an increase in receivers’own notions of
cheating at send amount 10 is half that at send amount 1 (1.6 percentage points vs. 3.6
percentage points, respectively).

4.4

What Determines Cheating Notions?

Our …nding that higher standards in own cheating notions reduce cheating suggests that
cheating notions may be related to participants’ moral values. Since these values tend to
be culturally transmitted from parents to children (see e.g. Bisin and Verdier, 2010), we
test whether participants’ cheating notions are a¤ected by the values their parents emphasized during their upbringing— instilled values— while controlling for our standard set
of demographic variables.
We use data from a previously conducted unrelated survey (described in Section 2.5)
which included a section on parentally instilled values. The survey asked about a rich set
of normative values. For each normative value in this set, survey participants were asked
to state how much emphasis their parents placed on this value during their upbringing.
Valid responses ranged from 0, which indicates no emphasis, to 10 which indicated quite
a lot of emphasis.26 For our estimates, we select a relevant subset of these normative
values and organize them into two categories: “cooperative”and “competitive.”The former
category includes such values as helping others and honesty. The latter category includes, for
26

Participants could also respond “I don’t know,” which we code as missing.

18

example, the value of striving to be better than others.27 We construct an index of parents’
emphasis on “cooperative”and “competitive”values by taking the average emphasis over all
the values constituting each category. This yields a measure for each category theoretically
ranging from 0 and 10. We divide each of these measures by 10 obtaining an index on a 0
to 1 scale.
To get a summary measure of the impact of instilled values on cheating notions, we
pool over all send amounts and regress cheating notions on cooperative and competitive
values. Since pooling in this manner results in multiple observations for each participant we
incorporate individual-level random e¤ects in our model. We include a dummy variable for
sessions with no explicit cheating notion opt-out. To control for the idea that the investment
fee may directly a¤ect cheating thresholds we also include a dummy for sessions with no
investment fee. Finally, because our trust production function is approximately quadratic
in money sent, we allow cheating notions to be a quadratic function of money sent.
Interestingly, estimates reported in Table 8 reveal that values matter for individuals’
cheating notions but the two classes of values pull in opposite directions. Instilled cooperative values signi…cantly lower cheating notions: the more emphasis parents placed on
cooperative values, the fewer euros senders need back in order to not feel cheated. Competitive values, on the other hand, have the opposite e¤ect, raising cheating notions signi…cantly.
Controlling for instilled values, cheating notions tend to move one-for-one with the amount
sent, suggesting that a positive return on investment rule is the baseline cheating notion
and that values determine how far individuals deviate from this baseline. Finally, there is
little evidence that cheating notions vary by demographics, in particular gender, once we
control for values.

5

Discussion and interpretation

In this section we try to put our results in perspective and shed light on the type of preferences that could explain receivers’cheating decisions. We start by plotting (Figure 5) the
fraction of receivers who cheat at each send amount after partialling out the e¤ect of the
expected notion of cheating, thus purging the data from the mechanical e¤ect this has on
27
The full set of “cooperative” values is: i) behave as a model citizen; ii) help others; iii) group loyalty;
iv) always give others their fair share; v) always tell the truth; vi) always keep your word. “Competitive”
values are: i) always extract the maximum advantage from every situation; ii) seek to be better than others;
iii) act so as to induce good in others (e.g., scold somebody who litters).

19

the probability of cheating. The share is 38% at send amount 1 and decreases, roughly,
monotonically down to 1% at send amount 10.
This declining propensity to cheat as receivers receive larger sums from senders is inconsistent with both purely sel…sh preferences and …xed-cost of cheating models. With purely
sel…sh preferences receivers would always cheat. On the other hand, since potential pecuniary gains from cheating increase in the amount sent, …xed cost of cheating models would
predict a non-decreasing relationship between amount sent and cheating propensity.28
Patterns in our data also appear to be inconsistent with literal interpretations of many
in‡uential social preferences models. For example, consider inequality aversion (Fehr and
Schmidt, 1999) or social welfare preferences (Charness and Rabin, 2002). Inequality averse
individuals lose utility from unequal outcomes, while individuals with social welfare preferences place weight in their utility calculations on the outcome of the worst-o¤ individual
in their reference group as well as the total amount of money being distributed. In a twoplayer decision-making setting with no surplus creation opportunity such as that faced by
trust game receivers, both of these models predict that receivers should never willingly put
themselves behind in terms of …nal monetary payo¤s.29 However, a large fraction of receivers in our study do exactly that. For example, 82% of receivers willingly put themselves
further behind than necessary when sent 1 euro and 47% of the receivers put themselves
behind when sent 4 euros.30
The estimation results in Table 7 and the cheating pattern in Figure 5 could be justi…ed
in (at least) two ways. The standard justi…cation is positive or negative reciprocity: sending
more is a nicer action and/or sending less is a meaner action, so reciprocity demands
responding in kind with a nice action (not cheating) or a mean action (cheating). An
alternative explanation comes directly from the de…nition of trust: trust entails vulnerability.
28

Let B(S) denote the pecuniary bene…t to the receiver from cheating, which increases with S; and assume
the receiver j’s …xed cost of cheating, Kj , is randomly drawn from the distribution F (K). Then as S (and
B(S)) increases, there should be a (weakly) higher proportion of receivers for which B(S) exceeds Kj , and
who therefore cheat.
29
It is, of course, true that this strong prediction fails to hold if the receiver’s reference group is something
other than just himself or herself and his or her co-player. What the reference group is, or should be, is an
important open question outside of the scope of this paper. We follow most of the literature in assuming
participants view the trust game as a two-person interaction.
30
This ignores the extra 50 cents senders have in sessions with no investment fee. Taking into account this
extra 50 cents could obviously only increase these percentages. It should also be noted that receivers need
not put themselves behind, except when the amount sent is 1. But even there, the …gure of 82% includes
only those receivers returning a strictly positive amount, so these receivers are willingly putting themselves
further behind their counterpart than necessary.

20

At the same time, a widespread and intuitive moral standard is that, irrespective of what
constitutes cheating, it is more wrong to cheat the more vulnerable. For example, cheating
the elderly or the very young is commonly viewed as particularly reprehensible. This is
the point made by Gneezy (2005). In the context of the trust game, sending more makes
senders more vulnerable. Consequently, it is reasonable to assume that the moral costs of
cheating increase in amount sent.
Without additional information we can rule out neither reciprocity nor vulnerability as
the driving motive. To shed some light on why cheating declines in amount sent, in one
of our robustness treatments we asked participants to describe their rationale for how they
played the role of receiver in the trust game (Appendix I, section A.2.1). They could select
one response from among four pre-programmed options and one free description. Three of
the pre-programmed options were meant to capture positive reciprocity, negative reciprocity
and vulnerability motives, respectively, while the fourth was essentially a “decline to state.”
option. We found that the modal response— selected by 42 percent of participants (72
out of 170) was the vulnerability explanation. The second most common response was
positive reciprocity (about 30 percent of participants), while almost nobody chose negative
reciprocity (6 percent; 10 out of 170 participants).
In light of these patterns, a uni…ed way to model both senders’and receivers’preferences
that is consistent with our data is to augment standard pecuniary preferences with a moral
cost function. Individuals incur disutility from immoral actions, either when they are the
perpetrator or the victim of such actions. Receivers lose utility when they cheat. Senders
lose utility when receivers cheat them, which is consistent with our …nding that expected
cheating has a direct negative impact on the amount senders send. Beyond implying disutility from being cheated, our data do not say much about what senders’moral cost function
might look like. On the receiver side, however, our data provide a bit more bite. For the
rest of this section, therefore, we focus on receivers’preferences.
As a ‡exible speci…cation for receivers’ moral cost function, we assume it has three
arguments: the vulnerability of the sender as measured by the amount sent, s; a …xed
cost of cheating term; and a term measuring the degree with which the receiver cheats, as
de…ned by the distance between the receiver’s estimate of the sender’s cheating notion and
the amount the receiver returns, r.
In general, denote this moral cost function m(s; Kj ; dist(r; cj (s))). A receiver’s utility

21

is then given by:

Uj (r; s; cj ; Kj ) = u(f (s)

r))

I(r < cj (s))

m(s; Kj ; dist(r; cj (s)))

(1)

In (1), f (s) denotes how much the receiver receives when the sender sends s and I(r <
cj (s)) is an indicator function taking the value of 1 whenever the receiver intentionally cheats
by returning less than dictated by the receiver’s own estimate of the sender’s cheating notion,
cj (s). We assume that m is increasing in s; the vulnerability of the sender. We also assume
that the …xed cost of cheating, Kj

0, is a random draw from a common non-degenerate

distribution function, F (K). Finally, we assume that m is increasing and convex in its last
argument, dist(r; cj (s)), so that higher degrees of cheating are increasingly morally costly.
To be more concrete, a simple utility speci…cation satisfying these assumptions is given
by:

Uj (r; s; cj ; Kj ) = u(f (s)

r))

j I(r

In equation 2, we assume that u(f (s)

< cj (s))

fKj + v(s) +

j (cj (s)

r)2 g

(2)

r), the receiver’s standard pecuniary utility, is

increasing and concave. The rest of the utility function captures the moral cost of cheating.
The parameter

j

captures how much receiver j cares about morality. The parameter

j

captures how much the receiver cares about degrees of cheating. A sender’s vulnerability
or niceness is captured by v(s) which we assume is increasing.
There are three points to notice about this utility speci…cation. First of all, setting
j

= 0 reduces receivers’ utility to standard (amoral) preferences. Secondly, notice that

whenever

j

> 0, setting

j

= v(s)

0 implies receivers have simple …xed-cost-of-cheating

preferences. Finally, if we assume that receivers expect senders to expect not to be cheated,
then receivers’beliefs about senders’cheating notions— cj (s) in our model— may be closely
linked to receivers’(second order) beliefs about how much money senders’expect receivers
to return. In this case, our model can be thought of as an alternative way to capture guilt
aversion which does not require knowledge of second order beliefs. Supporting this view, as
already noted, in our data receivers’second-order beliefs are highly signi…cantly correlated
with their beliefs about others’cheating notions.
The speci…cation for receiver utility can explain: a) why the decision to cheat depends
on others’ expected cheating notions; b) why cheating depends on the intensity of moral
22

preferences as proxied for by receivers’ own cheating notions; and c) why the probability
of cheating decreases in amounts sent as shown in Figure 5. This latter feature would be
implied, for instance, whenever there are su¢ ciently many receivers with

j

> 0 and when

v(s) is su¢ ciently steep in s. Intuitively, as v(s) becomes steeper, cheating more vulnerable
senders requires a larger o¤setting pecuniary utility gain.
This simple preference speci…cation can also account for another feature of the data:
conditional on cheating, receivers on average do not go so far as to return nothing. Instead,
they send something back. In our model, the amount returned by cheaters should depend
positively on expected cheating notions, but— and this is the key prediction— it should not
move one-to-one with the expected notion of cheating. On the other hand, conditional on
not cheating, receivers should return the minimum amount consistent with satisfying the
sender’s notion. Non-cheaters’return amounts should therefore move one-to-one with the
expected cheating notion.31 Only the latter prediction is shared by both our model and the
…xed cost of cheating model.
Table 9 puts these predictions to a test. We split the sample between cheaters and
non-cheaters and estimate the amount receivers return as a function of their beliefs about
31

The receiver’s optimal choice can be found as follows. Suppose the receiver decides to cheat so that his
or her utility is
Uj (r; s; cj ; Kj ) = u(f (s)

r)

fKj + v(s) +

j

The amount the receiver sends back, r ; is given by:
u0 (f (s)

r )=2

j

j (cj (s)

j (cj (s)

r)2 g

(3)

(4)

r )

and is increasing in the estimated cheating notion cj (s) with a slope that is less than 1.
If the receiver decides not to cheat, the utility obtained is
u(f (s)
=

subject to : r

(5)

r)

(6)

cj (s)

and is maximized by setting r = cj (s) so that when the receiver does not cheat, the amount returned
varies one-to-one with the expected cheating notion.
Finally, the receiver decides whether or not to cheat by comparing utility under the two cases and thus
cheats if
u(f (s)

r (cj (s)))

u(f (s)

r (cj (s)))

or

j

fKj + v(s) +

u(f (s)

cj (s)) >

j (cj (s)

j

r (cj (s))2 g > u(f (s)

fKj + v(s) +

j (cj (s)

cj (s))

(7)

r (cj (s))2 g

(8)

where the left hand side is the net utility gain from cheating and the right hand side is the moral cost of
cheating. This expression makes it clear that as s increases, provided v(s) is su¢ ciently steep, cheating will
diminish.

23

senders’cheating notions. We control for our standard set of demographics and, moreover,
account for selection into cheating or not cheating by estimating a Heckman model. As the
exclusion restriction in the selection equation, we use participants’ own cheating notions.
Broadly speaking the results are consistent with our model’s predictions: the amount returned for both cheaters and non-cheaters depends on the expected notion of cheating, but
return amounts are much more sensitive to expected cheating notions for non-cheaters than
for cheaters. For non-cheaters, return amounts move essentially one-for-one with estimated
others’ cheating notions, while for cheaters this coe¢ cient is consistently around half as
large.

6

Concluding Remarks

Many real life exchanges require the “trustor” to decide whether and how much to trust a
“trustee” who makes no promise on how he will behave in response to the trust received.
This paper investigates whether individuals’personal, subjective notions of what constitutes
cheating can drive this type of decision. We do so in the context of a trust game, where we
elicit participants’de…nitions of being cheated as well as their beliefs about others’cheating
de…nitions. We show that: i) participants have cheating de…nitions when playing the trust
game, and that ii) these implicit notions a¤ect the behavior of both sides to the exchange of
whether to trust and by how much and whether to cheat and by how much; in addition, iii)
trustors’and trustees’beliefs about what constitutes proper behavior need not to coincide.
Our data reveal that the trust game gives rise to (at least) two cheating notions — a positive
return on investment rule and an equal split rule.
After showing the relevance of implicit cheating notion, we investigate directly the determinants of untrustworthiness. We …nd that beliefs about others’cheating notions drive
receiver behavior. We also …nd that, controlling for expectations about others’ cheating
notions, own cheating notions signi…cantly a¤ect cheating. We go further and provide novel
evidence that parentally instilled values are signi…cant determinants of cheating notions and
that, moreover, di¤erent families of values that we label “cooperative” and “competitive”
have opposite e¤ects on individuals’notions of what constitutes cheating.
Finally, we provide a simple analytical framework explaining our …ndings. We show that
the cheating behavior in our data can be rationalized by a model incorporating an intrinsic
moral cost of cheating function in which both the decision whether to cheat or not as well
24

as the degree of cheating have negative utility consequences. In the process we provide
evidence for, to our knowledge, a new explanation for the commonly-observed positive relationship between send amounts and trustworthiness: moral proscriptions against cheating
the vulnerable.
An interesting question which we cannot address with our current data is how knowing
that there are multiple notions of cheating a¤ects sender and receiver behavior, either in
the one-shot context here or when, more realistically, individuals interact repeatedly. One
may wonder whether individuals adapt their own cheating notions to be more in line with
the average population cheating notions causing an eventual convergence to one normative
cheating standard; or, rather, whether those with high cheating notions cease to interact
with the general population because they feel cheated more often in their interactions. We
leave these and related questions for future research.

25

References
[1] Akerlof, George A. and William T. Dickens (1982), ”The Economic Consequences of
Cognitive Dissonance,” The American Economic Review, 72, 307-319.
[2] Berg, J., Dickhaut, J. and K. McCabe (1995), ”Trust, Reciprocity and Social History,”
Games and Economic Behavior, 10, 122-142.
[3] Bohnet, Iris and Richard Zeckhauser (2004), “Trust, Risk and Betrayal.” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 55(4), pp. 467-484.
[4] Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2010), “The Economics of Cultural Transmission
and Socialization.” In Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin and Matthew O. Jackson editors:
Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. 1A, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 2011, pp.
339-416.
[5] Castillo, Marco, Ragan Petrie, Torero Ragan, Maximo A. Torero and Lise Vesterlund
(2012), “Gender Di¤erences in Bargaining Outcomes: A Field Experiment on Discrimination.” NBER Working Paper No. w18093
[6] Charness, Gary and Martin Dufwenberg (2006). “Promises and Partnership.” Econometrica, 74(6), pp. 1579-1601.
[7] Charness, Gary and Matthew Rabin (2002). “Understanding Social Preferences with
Simple Tests.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3), pp. 817-869.
[8] Chater, Nick, Ste¤en Huck and Roman Inderst (2010), "Consumer Decision-Making
in Retail Investment Services: A Behavioral Economics Perspective", Report to the
European Commission/SANCO.
[9] Cox, James C. (2004), “How to Identify Trust and Reciprocity,”Games and Economic
Behavior, 46, 260-281
[10] Dufwenberg, Martin and Gneezy, Uri (2000). “Measuring Beliefs in an Experimental
Lost Wallet Game,” Games and Economic Behavior, 30, pp. 163-182.
[11] Dufwenberg, Martin and Battigalli, Pierpaolo (2007). “Guilt in Games,” American
Economic Review, 97, pp. 170-176.
26

[12] Eagly, A.H. and M. Crowley (1986). “Gender and Helping Behavior: A Meta-Analytic
Review of the Social Psychological Literature," Psychological Bulletin, 100, pp. 283308.
[13] Eckel, Catherine C. and Philip J. Grossman (1998). “Are Women Less Sel…sh Than
Men?: Evidence from Dictator Experiments," Economic Journal, 108, pp. 726-35.
[14] Ermisch, John and Diego Gambetta (2006). “People’s trust: the design of a surveybased experiment," ISER Working Paper Series 2006-34, Institute for Social and Economic Research.
[15] Fehr, Ernst (2009), “On the Economics and Biology of Trust”, Journal of the European
Economic Association, 7, pp. 235-266.
[16] Fehr, Ernst and K.M. Schmidt (1999). “A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (3), pp. 817-868.
[17] Geanakoplos, John, David Pearce and Ennio Stacchetti (1989), “Psychological Games
and Sequential Rationality,” Games and Economic Behavior, 1, pp. 60-79.
[18] Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson, Jose A. Scheinkman and Christine L. Soutter (2000),
“Measuring Trust,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3), 811-846.
[19] Gneezy, Uri (2005), “Deception: The role of consequences,” American Economic Review, March 2005, 384-394.
[20] Hung, Angela A., Clancy Noreen, Je¤ Dominitiz, Eric Talley, Calude Berrebi and Farrukh Suvankulov (2008), "Investor and Industry Perspectives on Investment Advisers
and Broker-Dealers", Technical Report, Rand Institute for Civil Justice.
[21] Inderst, Roman and Marco Ottaviani (2012), "Financial Advice," Journal of Economic
Literature, 50(2): 494-512.
[22] Rabin, Matthew (1993), “Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics.”
American Economic Review, 83(5), pp. 1281-1302.
[23] Reiss, Michelle C., and Kaushik Mitra (1998). “The E¤ects of Individual Di¤erence
Factors on the Acceptability of Ethical and Unethical Workplace Behaviors, Journal
of Business Ethics, 17(14), pp. 1581-93.
27

[24] Ross, Lee, Greene, D., and House, P. (1977), “The False Consensus Phenomenon:
An Attributional Bias in Self-Perception and Social Perception Processes,” Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 13(3), 279-301.
[25] Rousseau, Denise and Sim B. Sitkin and Ronald S. Burt and Colin Camerer (1998),
“Introduction to Special Topic Forum: Not So Di¤erent After All: A Cross-Discipline
View of Trust,” The Academy of Management Review, 23(3), pp. 393-404.
[26] Sapienza, Paola, Anna Toldra and Luigi Zingales (2007), “Understanding Trust,”
NBER WP 13387

28

Table 1: Experimental design

Initial study

Number of
sessions
4

Explicit cheating notion
question opt-out
No

4

Yes

Additional
sessions

Investment fee
0.50 euro

Max belief
pay
5 euro

Obs

20 euro

306

0.50 euro (2 sessions)
0.00 euro (2 sessions)

Table 2: Descriptive statistics
Mean

Std Dev

Min

Max

N

Male

0.46

0.499

0

1

420

Age

23.73

4.171

18

58

420

Math score

7.66

1.251

3

10

402

Inc<30K

0.29

0.455

0

1

391

30≤Inc<45

0.24

0.426

0

1

391

45≤Inc<70

0.25

0.431

0

1

391

70≤Inc<120

0.16

0.366

0

1

391

Inc≥120K

0.07

0.249

0

1

391

Risk aversion

5.71

2.193

1

10

417

Send decision (binary)

0.81

0.392

0

1

428

Send amount

4.31

3.232

0

10

428

Average return proportion

1.28

0.697

0

4.02

427

Average expected return proportion

1.27

0.637

0

4.02

425

Competitive values emphasis

0.62

0.196

0

1

410

Good values emphasis

0.76

0.149

0.17

1

404

Expected probability of not being cheated

0.42

0.232

0

1

427

Average proportion of non-cheaters

0.49

0.376

0

1

428

Own cheating notion

29

122

Table 3: Proportion of participants in sessions who opt-out of reporting a cheating notion,
restricted to sessions with explicit opt-out opportunities “this has nothing to do with being cheated,”
by send amount

(1)
Mean
Std. Error

(2)

(3)

(4)

Send Amount
(5)
(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Proportion who selected “this has nothing to do with cheating”
0.20
0.18
0.17
0.15
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.14
(0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)

(10)

Obs

0.13
(0.02)

306

0.17
(0.02)

306

Proportion who did not report a cheating notion for any reason
Mean
Std. Error

0.23
(0.02)

0.21
(0.02)

0.21
(0.02)

0.17
(0.02)

0.15
(0.02)

0.15
(0.02)

0.15
(0.02)

0.16
(0.02)

0.17
(0.02)

Notes: [1] In sessions with an explicit “opt-out” possibility participants could refrain from specifying an explicit personal
cheating notion and instead respond either “I don’t know” or “this has nothing to do with cheating.” [2] The top row of Table 3
presents the proportion of participants who chose “this has nothing to do with cheating,” while the lower row presents the
proportion of participants who chose either of these two “opt-outs” or left the question entirely blank.

Table 4: Proportion of participants who feel cheated when receiving back less than sent

(1)
Feel cheated
if r<s
Std Err
Obs
Feel cheated
if r<s
StdErr
Observations

Send Amount
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Sessions with “opt-out” possibility, restricted to those who could feel cheated

0.90

0.84

0.89

(0.02)
237

(0.02)
243

(0.02)
243

0.93

0.89

0.92

(0.02)
122

0.89

0.87

0.82

0.82

(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02) (0.02)
253
259
260
261
Session without “opt-out” possibility
0.90

0.87

0.84

0.79

(10)

0.80

0.81

0.81

(0.03)
256

(0.02)
255

(0.02)
255

0.77

0.78

0.76

(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)
122
122
122
122
122
122
122
122
All sessions pooled, restricted to those who reported a cheating notion

(0.04)
122

Feel cheated
0.91
0.86
0.90
0.89
0.87
0.83
0.81
0.79
0.80
0.79
if r<s
StdErr
(0.02) (0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)
Observations
359
365
365
375
381
382
383
378
377
377
Notes: [1] “Feel cheated if r<s” is a dummy that takes the value of one if a participant’s threshold for feeling cheated conditional
on sending s was greater than s. That is to say, this variable is an indicator for whether an individual would feel cheated if the
return amount were strictly less than the send amount. [2] Robust standard errors, clustered by session, in parentheses. [3] The
term “opt-out” refers to whether the question eliciting cheating notions had an explicit option to refuse to answer. In sessions
with an opt-out, participants could choose either “I don’t know” or “this has nothing to do with cheating” instead of specifying a
personal cheating notion.

30

Table 5: Proportion of “equal-splitters.”
Send Amount
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Sessions with “opt-out” possibility, restricted to those who could feel cheated
Proportion
0.35
0.32
0.29
0.22
0.29
0.32
0.33
0.30
0.30
0.35
Std Err
(0.03) (0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03)
Obs
237
243
243
253
259
260
261
256
255
255
Sessions without “opt-out” possibility
Proportion
0.30
0.33
0.34
0.27
0.30
0.34
0.33
0.26
0.29
0.33
StdErr
(0.04) (0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)
Observations
122
122
122
122
122
122
122
122
122
122
All sessions pooled, restricted to those who reported a cheating notion
Proportion
0.33
0.32
0.30
0.24
0.29
0.32
0.33
0.29
0.30
0.34
StdErr
(0.02) (0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)
Observations
359
365
365
375
381
382
383
378
377
377
Notes: [1] “Equal-splitters” are participants who report they would feel cheated if they do not receive back at least half of the
entire amount allocated to the receiver. Because experimental participants have a well-known predilection to state whole-number
values, we label anyone whose definition of being cheated falls within the nearest whole-euro value of a precisely-equal split.
For example, if a sender sends €1, a receiver receives €8.05, so we define equal-splitters for €1 sent to be anyone whose
definition of being cheated falls within the interval [4, 5].

31

Table 6: Senders’ decisions, Heckman estimates

Expected probability of not being cheated
Expected return from trusting
(Probability of not being cheated)
x(Expected return from trusting)
Low fee (dummy)

Main equation
(1)
2.76**
(1.38)
1.34***
(0.45)
-1.57*

Selection equation
(2)
0.57
(0.65)
0.28**
(0.12)
-0.07

(0.85)
--

(0.46)
0.68***
(0.09)
0.00
(0.02)
0.35**
(0.14)
0.12***
(0.04)
0.04
(0.03)
0.04
(0.04)
0.13
(0.25)
-0.04
(0.23)
-0.08
(0.13)
0.74*
(0.40)
-1.62***
(0.61)

0.11***
(0.03)
0.36
(0.32)
-0.00
(0.09)
-0.14***
(0.05)
0.03
(0.12)
-0.29
(0.42)
-0.22
(0.59)
-0.62**
(0.29)
-0.63
(0.70)
1.45
(2.16)

Age
Male
Math score
Risk aversion
Altruism
30≤ Income <45
45≤ Income <70
70≤ Income <120
Income ≥120
Constant
Obs
Mills Ratio

350
-.86

350

(0.36)
Notes: [1] Robust standard errors, clustered by session, appear in parentheses. [2] *** = significant at 1%, ** = significant at 5%, * =
significant at 10%. [3] For the Heckman model (cols 1-2): the dependent variable in the selection equation takes the value of 1 if the
sender sends a positive amount and 0 otherwise; the dependent variable in the main equation is how much the sender sends. [4] The
exclusion restriction for the selection equation consists of a dummy for “Low fee” sessions, a dummy taking the value of one if the
observation came from a session where senders were charged nothing to send a positive amount, and 0 if the observation came from a
session where senders were charged € 0.50 to send a positive amount [5] “Expected probability of not being cheated” is our measure
of participants’ subjective beliefs about not being cheated, described in the text. [6] “Expected return from trusting” is the participant’s
estimate of the proportion of money sent that receivers will return, averaged over all 10 possible send amounts. [7] “Risk aversion” is
an index increasing in risk aversion obtained from an incentive compatible elicitation mechanism in a separate, unrelated, experiment.
This variable takes values from 1 (risk loving) to 10 (very risk averse). [8] Altruism is how much emphasis participants’ parents
placed on the value “help others” during their upbringing. [9] Income variables refer to (self-reported) annual family income from all
sources, in thousands of euros, net of taxes. The lowest category is excluded: "below 30 thousand euros".

32

Table 7: Intentional cheating by send amount

Own
cheating
notion

Est. others’
cheating
notion

Male
Age
Math score
Risk
aversion
30≤ Inc
45≤
70≤ Inc
Inc ≥120
Constant

Obs

Send Amount
(5)
(6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

-0.08**

-0.13***

-0.08*

-0.07***

-0.04

-0.04*

-0.04

-0.05**

-0.03*

-0.04*

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.02)

(0.03)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.02)

0.22***

0.21***

0.23***

0.22***

0.17***

0.15***

0.16***

0.17***

0.12***

0.14***

(0.04)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.02)

(0.04)

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.02)

0.07
(0.07)
-0.03
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.06)
-0.00

-0.02
(0.16)
-0.04***
(0.01)
-0.03
(0.05)
0.03

0.18
(0.12)
-0.03***
(0.01)
0.04
(0.04)
0.01

0.06
(0.14)
-0.02**
(0.01)
0.05
(0.05)
-0.00

0.03
(0.20)
-0.02**
(0.01)
-0.04
(0.05)
-0.02

-0.05
(0.15)
-0.03**
(0.01)
-0.03
(0.09)
-0.02

-0.16
(0.14)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.06***
(0.02)
0.00

-0.07
(0.13)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.06
(0.06)
-0.01

0.01
(0.13)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.08**
(0.04)
-0.02

-0.06
(0.18)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.03
(0.04)
-0.07***

(0.02)
-0.02
(0.19)
0.12
(0.16)
0.17
(0.33)
0.00
(0.35)
0.45
(0.76)

(0.02)
0.18
(0.16)
0.01
(0.08)
0.17
(0.18)
-0.21
(0.28)
0.85
(0.52)

(0.03)
0.24**
(0.12)
0.06
(0.13)
0.07
(0.21)
-0.07
(0.21)
-0.69
(0.52)

(0.03)
0.22
(0.21)
0.10
(0.17)
-0.05
(0.18)
0.01
(0.20)
-1.02*
(0.60)

(0.02)
0.09
(0.23)
0.29*
(0.17)
0.33*
(0.19)
-0.51
(0.32)
-0.07
(0.41)

(0.02)
0.25*
(0.15)
0.23***
(0.07)
0.41*
(0.22)
0.02
(0.28)
-0.10
(0.79)

(0.02)
0.50*
(0.26)
0.43
(0.28)
0.58**
(0.24)
-0.21
(0.40)
-0.76*
(0.41)

(0.02)
0.06
(0.19)
0.24**
(0.12)
0.70***
(0.16)
-0.44
(0.31)
-0.97
(0.81)

(0.04)
0.10
(0.12)
0.12
(0.14)
0.04
(0.20)
-0.04
(0.29)
-0.05
(0.70)

(0.02)
0.16
(0.21)
0.15
(0.20)
0.16
(0.33)
-0.56*
(0.33)
-0.42
(0.63)

369

366

366

369

371

370

371

369

366

366

Notes: [1] Each column presents estimates from a Probit model, with the (binary) dependent variable being "receiver intentionally cheats if
sent relevant amount." Intentional cheating is defined by sending back strictly less than the receiver estimated senders needed back in order to
not feel cheated. This threshold amount is also inserted as a control in each estimate by the variable “Est. others’ cheating notion.” [3] Robust
standard errors, clustered by session, in parentheses. *** = significant at 1%, ** = significant ay 5%, * = significant at 10%. [4] Math score is
individual's self-reported score on required math exams taken during the final year of high school in Italy. [5] Income variables refer to selfreported annual family income from all sources, in thousands of euros, net of taxes. The excluded category is "below 30 thousand euros
annually". [6] Observations vary over columns because not all participants reported a cheating notion for every send amount. This is
discussed in the text. Additionally, we do not have demographics for all participants.

33

Table 8: Determinants of cheating notions
Dependent variable = Own cheating notion
Math
€ sent
(€ sent)^2
Male
Age
score

Competitive
values

Competitive
values

-2.55**

1.63**

1.07***

-0.02***

-0.47

0.00

(1.09)

(0.64)

(0.07)

(0.01)

(0.43)

(0.03)

Risk
aversion

Cons

Obs

Individuals

-0.02

-0.11

3.55***

3496

354

(0.11)

(0.08)

(1.31)

Notes: [1] Estimates are from an individual-level random effects regression model. [2] Variables present in the regression, but omitted for
readability: full set of income dummies; dummy for sessions with no investment fee; dummy for sessions comprising the initial study. None
of these variables had significant coefficients. [3] Robust standard errors, clustered by session, appear in parentheses.

Table 9: Sensitivity of amounts returned to cheating notions by decision to cheat, Heckman models
Send Amount
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Conditional on not cheating ( euros returned >= estimated others' cheating notion)
Est. others' cheating notion
1.17***
1.02*** 0.97*** 1.19*** 1.07*** 0.95***
(0.17)
(0.13)
(0.14)
(0.25)
(0.15)
(0.11)
Constant
3.83**
4.98**
3.54**
4.68*
5.06** 4.88***
(1.95)
(2.25)
(1.73)
(2.78)
(2.39)
(1.85)
Demographics
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Obs
311
319
320
328
333
334

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.88***
(0.16)
5.96***
(2.10)
Y
335

0.89***
(0.13)
4.97**
(2.00)
Y
332

1.09***
(0.22)
8.15**
(4.06)
Y
329

1.02***
(0.13)
9.26***
(3.02)
Y
329

0.39

0.67

0.84

0.58***
(0.12)
0.09
(3.02)
Y
332

0.63***
(0.14)
-0.38
(3.36)
Y
329

0.53***
(0.12)
-0.01
(3.31)
Y
329

0.52

0.34

0.79

Wald test: est. others’ cheating notion coefficient = 1 (p-value)
0.32
0.86
0.84
0.43
0.63
0.66
0.43
Conditional on cheating (euros returned < estimated others' cheating notion)
Est. others' cheating notion
0.42***
0.37*** 0.57*** 0.38***
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.10)
(0.10)
Constant
-0.16
0.93
0.18
0.95
(0.92)
(1.02)
(1.51)
(1.92)
Demographics
Y
Y
Y
Y
Obs
311
319
320
328

0.44***
(0.10)
1.68
(1.91)
Y
333

0.43***
(0.09)
0.03
(2.01)
Y
334

0.49***
(0.13)
1.09
(2.87)
Y
335

Wald test: est. others’ cheating notion coefficient = 0.5 (p-value)
0.23
0.04
0.47
0.24
0.52
0.43
0.95

Notes: [1] Standard errors in parentheses. *** = significant at 1%, ** = significant at 5%, * = significant at 10%. [2] Each column presents
a Heckman model estimate using as its exclusion restriction participants’ own cheating notions. [3] The dependent variable in column i is the
amount a participant will send back if the sender sends i euros, i=1,…,10. [4] The reported independent variables in column i are: “Est others'
cheating notion” is each participant’s estimate of the minimum amount of money a sender would need back in order to not feel cheated when
the sender sends i euros, i=1,…,10. [5] Each estimate includes our standard set of demographic controls, omitted for readability from the
table. These controls are: gender, age, math score, family income and risk aversion.

34

Figure 1: Bimodal cheating definition distributions, for send amount 1 euro

Figure 2A: Bimodal cheating definition distributions (sessions with no “opt-out”)

35

Figure 2B: Bimodal cheating definition distributions (sessions with “opt-out.”)

Figure 2C: Bimodal cheating definition distributions, all sessions pooled

36

Figure 3A: Consistency of “equal splitters” defined for send amount 1, across other send amounts.
Sending 3 Euros

Sending 4 Euros

0

Density
.2 .4 .6

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5

Density
0 .2 .4 .6 .8

Sending 2 Euros

0

2

4
6
Euros

8

10

0

10

15

5

10
Euros

15

20

Density
.2 .4 .6
0

5

10
Euros

15

20

20

0

5

25

10
Euros

15

20

Sending 10 Euros
Density
0 .05 .1 .15 .2

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4

10 15
Euros

15

Sending 7 Euros

Sending 9 Euros

Density
0 .2 .4 .6 .8

5

10

Sending 6 Euros

0

Sending 8 Euros

0

5
Euros

Density
.2 .4 .6

0

0

Euros

0

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5

Sending 5 Euros

5

0

5

10 15
Euros

20

25

5

10

15
Euros

20

25

Notes: [1] The figure presents kernel density plots of cheating notions for send amounts 2-10 for those labeled as equal splitters
when considering sending 1 euro. [2] Dashed lines represent data from the additional sessions, where opt-out was possible, while
solid lines represent data from the initial study. [3] The vertical bars represent half of the total amount receivers if senders send
the associated amount.

Figure 3B: Consistency of “equal splitters” beliefs
Sending 3 Euros

Sending 4 Euros

Density
0 .2 .4 .6 .8

Density
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5

Sending 2 Euros

0

5
Euros

10

0

5

10

15

10
Euros

15

20

0

5

10
Euros

15

20

10 15
Euros

20

25

15

5

10
15
Euros

20

Sending 10 Euros

0

Density
.1 .2 .3

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4

5

0

Sending 9 Euros

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5

Sending 8 Euros

0

10
Euros

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4

0

5

5

Sending 7 Euros

Density
.1 .2 .3

Sending 6 Euros

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4

Sending 5 Euros

0

0

Euros

0

5

10 15
Euros

20

25

0

5

10 15
Euros

20

25

Notes: [1] The figure presents kernel density plots of beliefs about others’ cheating notions for send amounts 2-10 for those
whose own cheating notions classify them as equal splitters when considering sending 1 euro. [2] Dashed lines represent data
from the additional sessions, where opt-out was possible, while solid lines represent data from the initial study. [3] The vertical
bars represent half of the total amount receivers if senders send the associated amount.

37

0

.5

Density
1

1.5

2

Figure 4, Beliefs about the probability of not being cheated

0

.1

.2

.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
Beliefs about proportion of non−cheaters

Sessions without opt−out
All sessions pooled

.9

1

Sessions with opt−out

Notes: Observations in the sessions with opt-out (short-dash line) are restricted to individuals who have a cheating notion for
every possible amount a sender could send. This is to ensure our summary measure of beliefs about the probability of being
cheated is well-defined. Thus the density plot for the additional sessions is based on 207 (out of 306) observations.

Figure 5: Proportion of cheaters by send amount
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

proportion of cheaters
Notes: The figure reports the proportion of cheaters (y-axis), after partialling out the effect of expectations of others’ cheating
notions, for each possible send amount (x-axis).

38

Not for publication
Appendix I: Robustness Checks
A

Additional Robustness check treatments

In addition to our main experiment described in Appendix II, two further treatments were
conducted for robustness. First of all, to check whether there is something peculiar about the
on-line environment driving our results or whether paying only 10 percent of participants
provides incentives that are too weak, we ran two sessions in the laboratory where 100
percent of participants were paid. As a second robustness exercise, we conducted sessions
in which our direct cheating notion question was omitted and replaced with a series of
questions asking participants how they would feel about various possible outcomes in the
trust game from the point of view of the sender. The purpose of this latter treatment is to
address the concern that our direct cheating notion question might prime participants to
associate cheating with the trust game.

A.1

In-lab sessions

In total, 36 individuals took part in two sessions conducted in the experimental laboratory
at the Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance in Rome, Italy. Participants were
recruited from the same subject pool as were the on-line sessions. There was no overlap in
actual participants— i.e., no participant took part in both an on-line session and an in-lab
session. All in-lab participants were paid based on their choices in the experiment and the
accuracy of the their reported beliefs.
Apart from taking place in the laboratory, the design of this treatment and the materials
used were exactly the same as the on-line treatments. Participants simply completed the online experiment in the laboratory. All sessions of the in-lab experiment allowed participants
to opt out of specifying a cheating notion by selecting one of two responses: “I don’t know”
or “this has nothing to do with cheating.” Neither session featured a fee to send a positive
amount.
Participants’ return proportions, cheating notions and beliefs were remarkably similar
across the on-line and in-lab environment (Table A1). On the other hand, in-lab senders
were slightly more likely to send a positive amount than their on-line counterparts, raising
the average amount sent by in-lab senders. Conditional on sending a positive amount,
average send amounts were similar: 5.36 in on-line low fee sessions; 5.43 in the laboratory;
with standard errors 0.25 and 0.44, respectively.
Next, consider how send amounts vary with cheating and monetary return beliefs (Table
A2). Because we have few observations and lack the exogenous variation in senders’incentives which we exploited in the analysis of our on-line data, we account for selection into
sending a positive amount here by estimating a Tobit model rather than a Heckman model.
The results paint a picture qualitatively similar to the on-line data: amounts sent vary
positively and signi…cantly with both expected (lack of) cheating and expected return.
In terms of cheating notions, the picture is also quite similar in the lab and on-line
experiments: the vast majority of participants have a cheating notion for all possible send
39

amounts (Table A3); the vast majority have a cheating notion demanding at least a positive
return on investment (Table A4); roughly one-third of participants are “equal-splitters”
(Table A5). Furthermore, as in the on-line data, own cheating notions are negatively related
to intentional cheating while expectations about others’ cheating notions are positively
related to intentional cheating (Table A6).

A.2

Treatments without cheating notion question

We also conducted (on-line) sessions of a treatment in which we dropped our direct cheating
notion question and replaced it with a section where participants were asked to indicate
how they would feel, as a sender, about various send/return amount scenarios. In total, 170
participants took part in this treatment. As with the main study, ten percent of participants
were randomly chosen to be paid their experimental earnings.
To keep the number of individual questions reasonable, we selected three common send
amounts— S = 1; 5 and 10— and, for each of these, asked participants how they would
“feel” if the receiver returned four speci…c amounts: 0, S2 , S and f (S)
2 . These send/return
scenarios were chosen to line up with the cheating notions common in the data from our
main study. In terms of feelings, for each send/return amount scenario participants were
asked to select exactly two options from a list of several options that best described how
they would feel if the scenario were realized. The list of options included positive evaluations
(“[the receiver] was generous,”“[the receiver] treated me fairly”), neutral evaluations (“[the
receiver] was intelligent,” “I have no particular opinion of [the receiver’s] behavior”) and
negative evaluations (“[the receiver] cheated me,” “[the receiver] disappointed me”). A
free-form response option was also available.
To compare the qualitative data we have in this treatment with data from our main
sessions, for each send/return scenario investigated in this treatment we calculate the proportion of participants in our main treatment who would feel cheated according to their
own reported cheating notions. We compare this proportion to the proportion of respondents in the “feelings”treatment reporting feeling “disappointed”or “cheated.”To maximize
comparability, from our main treatment data we use only sessions where participants were
allowed to opt out of specifying a cheating notion. We …nd a strong positive relationship
between the proportion of participants expressing negative feelings in particular scenarios
and the implied proportion of participants feeling cheated in those scenarios in the data
from the main treatment (Figure A1). We interpret this as support for the view that trust
game participants have well-de…ned cheating notions and evidence against the view that
the cheating notions they report can be mainly attributed to priming.
A.2.1

Evidence on receivers’motivations

In sessions without a direct cheating notion question, at the end of the experiment we added
a section in which participants were asked to descibe the rationale they used, if any, for
deciding how much to return in the role of receiver. Participants were asked:
Describe, in general, how you arrived at your decisions concerning how much to
return when you played role B [receiver] for each amount A could have sent you

40

Participants could select among four pre-programmed options, or, if none on the list
suited them they could select “other”and specify their own rationale. Three of the four preprogrammed responses were meant to capture positive reciprocity, (“the more A [the sender]
sent, the more I returned in order to reward nice behavior”); negative reciprocity (“the less
A [the sender] sent, the less I returned, in order to punish bad behavior”); vulnerability
(“the more A [the sender] sent, the more I returned in order to compensate A [the sender]
for being at the mercy of my actions”). The fourth pre-programmed option was essentially
a decline to state option (“I did not have any particular rationale in mind.").
Table A7 presents the results. Overall, 83 percent of participants selected one of the
four pre-programmed option. The modal response, selected by 42 percent of participants,
was that receivers return more when senders send more to compensate senders for their
vulnerability. The second most common response re‡ected positive reciprocity. Almost
nobody (6 percent) selected negative reciprocity as their primary rationale, while a similarly
low percentage selected the pre-programmed decline to state option (6 percent).

B

Robustness checks on beliefs

A common concern whenever beliefs are elicited is the extent to which the elicitation mechanism itself colors reported beliefs. Monetary incentives meant to ensure that participants
report beliefs truthfully may give rise to other potential confounds, such as hedging motives:
by shading reported beliefs toward bad outcomes, individuals may reduce the variance of
their experimental earnings. On the other hand, monetary incentives that are too weak can
allow reported beliefs to be non-truthful for various reasons. In particular, one may worry
that the signi…cant correlation between estimates of others’cheating notions and own return
amounts arises because of a tendency for participants to ex-post rationalize their receiver
strategies: by reporting believing that whatever they return is enough to not cheat others,
participants can maintain a positive moral self-image.
First we consider ex-post rationalization. If ex-post rationalization is driving beliefs
about others’ cheating notions, then quadrupling the incentives for belief accuracy in the
additional sessions should make this motive less relevant. Therefore, evidence of ex-post
rationalization in initial sessions would be a consistently smaller correlation between return
amounts and beliefs about others’cheating notions in the “high belief pay”sessions. Table
A8 (panel A) presents panel regressions of beliefs about others’cheating notions as a function
of return amounts incorporating a dummy for high belief pay and an interaction with
return amounts. The coe¢ cient of interest is on the interaction between high belief pay
and return amount: if ex-post rationalization is important when belief pay is low, and
diminished for high belief pay, we would expect this coe¢ cient to be consistently negative
and signi…cant. Instead, the estimated coe¢ cient on the interaction term is positive and
(marginally) signi…cant providing evidence against ex-post rationalization. Adding our
standard set of demographics does not change the results. Moreover, restricting to the
subset of observation where the receiver does not cheat— where the ex-post rationalization
argument has the most bite— changes nothing qualitatively.1
1

We omit these last two robustness checks to save space, but they are available on request. It should also
be noted that variation in belief pay could not have direcly a¤ected receivers’actions, since participants did

41

Next, consider hedging motives. As a concrete example, consider a sender who has
chosen to send 10 euros. If the sender believes the receiver is trustworthy and reports this
belief, then in the good state of the world where the receiver is trustworthy, the sender earns
a lot— both beliefs and actions pay o¤. However, in the bad state of the world where the
receiver returns nothing, the sender loses quite a lot— neither actions nor beliefs pay o¤.
By shading reported beliefs downward— towards a higher likelihood of an untrustworthy
sender— the sender can shift some earnings out of the good state of the world into the bad
state of the world, reducing earnings variance, i.e., risk.
To test for hedging motives in beliefs, we estimate participants’ stated beliefs about
the amount of money receivers will return for each possible send amount. We present
panel regressions, where we control for whether a sender actually chose to send a particular
amount, risk aversion, an interaction between these two variables. Since hedging motives
can only (literally) apply to the send amount a sender actually chose to send, one measure
of the hedging motive is the coe¢ cient on the dummy for actually chosen send amounts.
A secondary prediction is that more risk averse individuals care about hedging more, so
the interaction term should be negative. Table A8 (panel B) presents our estimates, which
provide no support for the importance of hedging. In fact, contrary to hedging motives,
reported beliefs about return amounts are (marginally) signi…cantly higher for the amount
a sender actually chose to send as evidenced by the coe¢ cient on “Chosen send amount.”
Risk aversion plays no signi…cant role. Controlling for demographics and/or the level of
belief pay does not change anything qualitatively.

not know there would be a belief elicitation section until after they had submitted their strategies.

42

Table A1: Comparison of behavior in the lab and on-line, summary statistics
Send > 0

Obs

Send
amount

0.97
(0.03)
36

5.28
(0.45)
36

0.90
(0.03)

4.83
(0.26)

150

150

Obs

Return
proportion

Return
proportion
(belief)

In-lab sessions
1.25
1.36
(0.10)
(0.10)
36
36
On-line low fee sessions
1.28
1.22
(0.06)
(0.06)
149

Proportion of
non-cheaters

Proportion of
non-cheaters
(belief)

0.43
(0.06)
36

0.56
(0.03)
36

0.53
(0.03)

0.53
(0.02)

150

135

148

Table A2: Send amount (Tobit), in-lab sessions
Dependent variable = send amount
(1)
(2)
(3)
Expected probability of not being cheated
Expected return from trusting

4.29*
(2.19)
1.54*
(0.81)

4.94**
(2.25)
1.57**
(0.75)
1.53*
(0.81)
-0.16*
(0.09)
-0.34
(0.42)

0.86
(1.52)
36

5.85
(4.60)
34

Male
Age
Math score
Risk aversion
Altruism
30≤ Income <45
45≤ Income <70
45≤ Income <70
Income ≥120
Constant
Obs

6.97***
(1.90)
1.41*
(0.77)
0.93
(0.75)
-0.30**
(0.11)
0.07
(0.37)
-0.47**
(0.17)
0.04
(0.21)
-1.48
(0.98)
0.03
(1.10)
1.76
(1.47)
-2.99**
(1.26)
8.66*
(5.01)
32

Notes: [1] Robust standard errors in parentheses. [2] *** = significant at 1%, ** = significant at 5%, * = significant at 10%. [3]
Each column presents a Tobit model estimate where the dependent variable is how much the sender sends and censoring below 0
is taken into account. [5] “Expected probability of not being cheated” is our measure of participants’ subjective beliefs about not

43

being cheated, described in the text. [6] “Expected return from trusting” is the participant’s estimate of the proportion of money
sent that receivers will return, averaged over all 10 possible send amounts. [7] “Risk aversion” is an index increasing in risk
aversion obtained from an incentive compatible elicitation mechanism in a separate, unrelated, experiment. This variable takes
values from 1 (risk loving) to 10 (very risk averse). [8] Altruism is how much emphasis participants’ parents placed on the value
“help others” during their upbringing. [9] Income variables refer to (self-reported) annual family income from all sources, in
thousands of euros, net of taxes. The lowest category is excluded: "below 30 thousand euros".

Table A3: Proportion of participants with a cheating notion, in-lab sessions

Proportion w/
cheating notion

Obs

Send amount
(5)
(6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.72
(0.08)

0.86
(0.06)

0.83
(0.06)

0.92
(0.05)

0.94
(0.04)

36

36

36

36

36

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.94
(0.04)

0.97
(0.03)

0.97
(0.03)

0.97
(0.03)

0.97
(0.03)

36

36

36

36

36

Notes: [1] Raw proportions reported. [2] Standard errors appear in parentheses

Table A4: Proportion of participants who would feel cheated by (return amount)<(send
amount), in-lab sessions

Proportion w/
(cheating notion) ≥
(send amt)

Obs

Send Amount
(5)
(6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.88
(0.06)

0.84
(0.07)

0.97
(0.03)

0.94
(0.04)

0.94
(0.04)

26

31

30

33

34

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.97
(0.03)

0.89
(0.05)

0.83
(0.06)

0.83
(0.06)

0.86
(0.06)

34

35

35

35

35

Notes: [1] Reported proportions are conditional on specifying a cheating notion. [2] Standard errors appear in parentheses

44

Table A5: Proportion of participants with an “equal-split” cheating notion, in-lab sessions

Proportion of
“equal splitters”

Obs

Send Amount
(5)
(6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.35
(0.10)

0.23
(0.08)

0.20
(0.07)

0.18
(0.07)

0.32
(0.08)

26

31

30

33

34

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.32
(0.08)

0.34
(0.08)

0.23
(0.07)

0.23
(0.07)

0.37
(0.08)

34

35

35

35

35

Notes: [1] Reported proportions are conditional on specifying a cheating notion. [2] “Equal splitters” are defined by having a
cheating notion, c, such that floor(f(s)/2) ≤ c ≤ ceiling(f(s)/2), where floor(x) is the least integer less than x and ceiling(x) is the
least integer greater than x. This takes into account the well-known predilection of experimental participants for integer values.
For example, since floor(4.025) = 4 and ceiling(4.025) = 5, a participant is labeled an “equal splitter” for send amount 1 if his or
her cheating notion, c, satisfies 4 ≤ c ≤ 5. [3] None of the reported proportions are significantly different from 0.30 at the 10
percent significance level using two-tailed difference in proportions tests.

Table A6: Intentional cheating (reduced form), in-lab sessions

Own cheating notion
Estimate of others'
cheating notions
Constant

Obs

Sent Amount
(5)
(6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

-0.78*
(0.43)

-0.35**
(0.17)

-0.08
(0.12)

-0.05
(0.11)

0.02
(0.07)

-0.08
(0.09)

-0.05
(0.11)

-0.02
(0.11)

-0.25**
(0.12)

-0.13*
(0.07)

1.08**
(0.50)
-0.68
(0.64)

0.32
(0.20)
0.27
(0.62)

0.15
(0.17)
-0.36
(0.74)

0.16
(0.14)
-0.73
(0.87)

0.18
(0.13)
-1.13
(0.94)

0.05
(0.13)
0.30
(0.85)

0.25**
(0.11)
-1.49
(1.09)

0.11
(0.13)
-0.41
(1.06)

0.28*
(0.16)
-0.11
(1.01)

0.34***
(0.11)
-1.98*
(1.11)

26

31

30

33

34

34

35

35

35

35

Notes: [1] Each column presents estimates from a Probit model, with the (binary) dependent variable being "receiver
intentionally cheats if sent relevant amount." Intentional cheating is defined by sending back strictly less than the receiver
estimated senders needed back in order to not feel cheated. This threshold amount is also inserted as a control in each estimate by
the variable “Estimate of others’ cheating notion.” [3] Robust standard errors, clustered by session, in parentheses. *** =
significant at 1%, ** = significant ay 5%, * = significant at 10%.

45

Table A7: Proportion of receivers specifying a particular rationale
Sender vulnerability
Positive reciprocity
Negative reciprocity
No motive

Obs

Overall
0.42
(0.04)
0.29
(0.04)
0.06
(0.02)
0.06
(0.02)
170

High fee sessions
0.40
(0.05)
0.31
(0.05)
0.06
(0.03)
0.05
(0.02)
93

Low fee sessions
0.45
(0.06)
0.27
(0.05)
0.05
(0.03)
0.08
(0.03)
77

Notes: [1] Raw proportions reported; [2] Standard errors in parentheses; [3] Proportions in
each column sum to less than one, with the unaccounted for observations being participants
who elected to supply their own rationale rather than one of the four pre-programmed
rationale; these self-supplied rationale varied widely and are not easily classifiable.

Table A8: Robustness checks, main study data

Return
amount
0.11***
(0.02)

Amount
sent
0.82***
(0.02)

Panel A: checking for ex-post rationalization
Dependent variable = Expected others' cheating notion
Amount sent
High belief pay
(High belief pay)
Cons
Obs
X (Return amt)
0.85***
0.12
0.05*
1.58*** 4254
(0.03)
(0.24)
(0.03)
(0.20)

Chosen send
amount
0.29*
(0.17)

Panel B: checking for hedging motives in beliefs
Dependent variable = Expected return amount
(Chosen send amt)
Risk aversion
Cons
X (Risk aversion)
-0.00
-0.02
1.61***
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.23)

Individuals

R^2

428

0.5

Obs

Individuals

R^2

4146

417

0.34

Notes: [1] Both the top and bottom panel report individual random effects regressions pooling observations across all send
amounts. [2] Robust standard errors, clustered by session, appear in parentheses. [3] “High belief pay” is a dummy taking the
value of one if the session involved a 20 euro maximum belief pay, and 0 if the maximum possible belief pay was 5 euros;
“Chosen send amount” is a dummy variable indicating the amount a participant actually chose to send in the role of sender; “Risk
aversion” is an incentive-compatible index of risk aversion obtained from a previous experiment. [4] We drop observations for
which we have no measure of risk aversion.

46

Figure A1: Comparison of proportion feeling cheated by elicitation method

47

Appendix II: Experiment Instructions
In this experiment, you will be randomly paired with another participant and assigned
randomly one of two roles: A or B. This pairing will be anonymous. Neither the person in
the role of A nor the person in the role of B wil know with whom they have been paired.
The role of A
The player in the role of A is given 10.50 euros and must decide whether to send some
all or none of this money to the player in the role of B, the person with whom A has been
paired. [If A decides to send some of the this money, A will be charged a fee of 0.50 euros.]
For every euro that A sends, B will receive more than 1 euro according to the table below.
If A sends e
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
B receives e 8:05 11:3 13:85 16:05 17:9 19:6 21:2 22:65 24:05 25:3
The role of B
After A makes his or her decision about how much to send to B, B decides how much
of the money he or she receives— the amounts in the table above (8.05 euros, 11.30 euros,
etc.)— to return to A. The player in the role of B will specify an amount to return for each
possible amount they could receive. For example, if A sends 4 euros and B therefore receives
16.05 euros, B must decide how much of this 16.05 euros to return to A; and a decision
must be made for every amount A could send (1,2,3,. . . ,10 euros).
Your earnings
For every pair of participants, one in the role of A and one in the role of B, the decisions
that both A and B make determine the pairs earnings. Both A and B will be informed of
the outcome determined by their choice.
In general:
If A sends a positive amount to B:
1. A’s earnings will be: e 10.50 – (euros sent to B) + (euros returned by B) – (e
0.50 fee)
2. B’s earnings will be: (euros received by B according to the table above) –(euros
returned to A)
If A sends nothing to B:
1. A’s earnings will be e 10.50
2. B’s earnings will be e 0.
Speci…cally, for every pair of players the result of this situation will be determined as
follows:
48

i Every participant speci…es their decision for each possible role (A and B).
ii The computer will randomly assign a role to each participant and randomly and anonymously pair each participant assigned the role of A with a participant assigned the role
of B.
iii Within each pair, A’s decisions will be combined with B’s decision to determine the
outcome for both A and B.

A

Experiment Screens

A.1

Sender decision screen 1

If you are assigned the role of A, do you want to send money to B? If you send money, you
will be charged a e 0.50 fee.
Choose “send” or “don’t send” on this screen. If you choose “send”, you will specify
the amount to send on the next screen.
__ Send money
__Don’t send money

A.2

Sender decision screen 2

How much money do you want to send if you are assigned the role of A?
__ e 1
__ e 2
...
__ e 10

A.3

Receiver decision screens

[There are 10 separate screens. A representative question is below.]
Imagine that you have been assigned the role of B . . .
How much will you send back to A if A sends e 7 and you therefore receive e 21.20?

A.4

Cheating de…nition screen

If you are assigned the role of A, what is the minimum amount you would need to receive
back from B in order to not feel cheated?
If you send e1 and therefore B receives e8.05, you would need back : ____
Insert a number above, or select one of the two following options:
__ This has nothing to do with cheating
49

__ I do not know
...
If you send e10 and therefore B receives e25.30, you would need back : ____

Insert a number above, or select one of the two following options:
__ This has nothing to do with cheating
__ I do not know

A.5

Belief elicitation

A.5.1

Instructions, screen 1

Now, we begin a new section. In this section as in the previous section, each question can
contribute to your potential earnings.
Speci…cally, in this section you will be asked to estimate the choices other participants
made in the previous section. Every question is about the choices of other participants, so
please exclude your own actions from your estimations. The accuracy of your estimates will
be calculated excluding your own actions as well.
Your earnings from this section will be determined by choosing one of your estimations
at random and paying you according to the accuracy of this randomly chosen estimation.
Every estimate has the same chance of being chosen by the computer. Your potential
earnings from this experiment will be the sum of your earnings in this section and in the
previous section.
The formula used to calculate your earnings from the randomly-chosen estimate is detailed on the next page.

A.5.2

Belief compensation formula screen

The method used to calculate your earnings from your estimates is detailed below. The most
important thing to notice is that more accurate estimates have higher chances of earning
money.
Your estimate, R, is inserted into the following formula where “r”stands for the true
value of the thing being estimated and “rmax ” is the maximum value this true value
can attain.
1

R r
rmax

This produces a number between 0 and 1. Call this number “z”.
The computer chooses a number between 0 and 1 with each number in between 0 and
1 being equally likely. Call this number “y”.
50

If y

z, you will earn e5.00 [e20.00] for your estimate.

If y > z, you will earn e0.00 for your estimate.
An example
Suppose you are asked to estimate the average amount participants in the role of A
send in the previous section of this experiment. And, imagine that this average turns out
to actually be e4.00. The maximum value this average could have taken is e10. Therefore
“rmax ” in the equation above is 10 and r is 4. The equation therefore becomes:
R 4
1
10
Notice that the closer your estimate, R, is to the actual value of 4 in our hypothetical
example, the larger is z and therefore the larger is the probability of earning e5 [e20.00]
for your estimate rather than e0.
If your estimate is exactly correct, then (R-4)/10 = 0 and therefore z=1. Because the
number chosen by the computer is at most one, an exactly correct estimate always
pays e5 [e20.00].
On the other hand, the probability with which your estimate earns you e5 [e20.00]
diminishes the farther away from the true value your estimate is: z becomes smaller
and so does the chances that y < z.

Click continue to begin start the estimation section
A.5.3

Beliefs elicitation screen 1

How much, on average, will players in the role of A send to B’s? Insert a number between
0.00 and 10.00 : ___
A.5.4

Beliefs elicitation screen 2

How much, on average, will B’s return to A’s?
If A sends e1 and B therefore receives e8.05, B’s will return on average: ___
...
If A sends e10 and B therefore receives e25.30, B’s will return on average: ___

A.5.5

Beliefs elicitation screen 3

What is the minimum amount (on average) that A’s will need back from B’s in order to
not feel cheated?
If A sends e1 and B therefore receives e8.05, to not feel cheated A will need back from
B at least: ___
51

...
If A sends e10 and B therefore receives e25.30, to not feel cheated A will need back
from B at least: ___
A.5.6

Beliefs elicitation screen 4

What percent of participants in the role of B will return enough money to you (if you are
assigned the role of A) so that you don’t feel cheated?
If you send e1 and B therefore receives e8.05, what percent of B’s will return enough
so that you don’t feel cheated?: ___
...
If you send e10 and B therefore receives e25.30, what percent of B’s will return enough
so that you don’t feel cheated?: ___
A.5.7

Beliefs elicitation screen 5

How much money (on average) do other participants in the role of A believe will be returned
to them by B’s?
If A sends e1 and B therefore receives e8.05, how much money does A believe B will
return? ____
...
If A sends e10 and B therefore receives e25.30, how much money does A believe B will
return? ____

52

