                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      UNDERSTANDING THE LONG-RUN DECLINE IN INTERSTATE MIGRATION

                                            Greg Kaplan
                                        Sam Schulhofer-Wohl

                                        Working Paper 18507
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18507


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




We thank Diego Amador and Chloe Booth for excellent research assistance and Joan Gieseke for editorial
assistance. We also thank Esteban Rossi-Hansberg and numerous seminar and conference participants
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Greg Kaplan and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate Migration
Greg Kaplan and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl
NBER Working Paper No. 18507
November 2012
JEL No. D83,J11,J24,J61,R12,R23

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze the secular decline in interstate migration in the United States between 1991 and 2011.
Gross flows of people across states are about 10 times larger than net flows, yet have declined by around
50 percent over the past 20 years. We argue that the fall in migration is due to a decline in the geographic
speci˝city of returns to occupations, together with an increase in workers' ability to learn about other
locations before moving there, through information technology and inexpensive travel. These explanations
find support in micro data on the distribution of earnings and occupations across space and on rates
of repeat migration. Other explanations, including compositional changes, regional changes, and the
rise in real incomes, do not fit the data. We develop a model to formalize the geographic-specificity
and information mechanisms and show that a calibrated version is consistent with cross-sectional and
time-series patterns of migration, occupations, and incomes. Our mechanisms can explain at least one-third
and possibly all of the decline in gross migration since 1991.


Greg Kaplan
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
gkaplan@princeton.edu

Sam Schulhofer-Wohl
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Ave.
Minneapolis MN 55480-0291
wohls@minneapolisfed.org
1. Introduction
       In the early 1990s, about 3 percent of Americans moved between states each year.
Today, that rate has fallen by half. We show that micro data rule out many popular explana-
tions for this change, such as aging of the population or changes in the number of two-earner
households. But the data do support two novel theories. The first theory is that labor mar-
kets around the country have become more similar in the returns they offer to particular
skills, so workers need not move to a particular place to maximize the return on their id-
iosyncratic abilities. The second theory is that better information — due to both information
technology and falling travel costs — has made locations less of an experience good, reducing
the need for young people to experiment with living in different places. We build a model
that makes these ideas precise and show that a plausibly calibrated version is consistent with
cross-sectional and time-series patterns.
       Many policymakers have worried that the decline in migration heralds a less-flexible
economy where workers cannot move to places with good jobs. In such an economy, the labor
market might adjust more slowly to shocks, potentially prolonging recessions and reducing
growth. Low migration has thus been proposed as an explanation for the slow recovery
from the 2007–’08 financial crisis (see, for example, Batini et al., 2010). But the causes of
decreased migration that we identify suggest that the economy may not be less flexible after
all. Rather, low migration means that workers either do not need to move to obtain good
jobs or have better information about their opportunities. In either case, the appropriate
policy response may differ from the appropriate response to a decrease in workers’ ability to
move. Thus, understanding the causes of the decline in gross migration is an important goal
for economists.
       Figure 1 shows gross and net interstate migration rates over the past half-century.
The gross rate — the fraction of U.S. residents at least 1 year old who lived in a different
state one year ago — comes from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current
Population Survey, commonly known as the March CPS. The net rate comes from the Census
Bureau’s annual state population estimates (U.S. Census Bureau, 1999, 2009a). Several key
patterns are immediately apparent. First, net flows are an order of magnitude smaller than
gross flows. Second, while the gross flows exhibit some cyclical fluctuations, these fluctuations
                       0.04



                       0.03



                       0.02



                       0.01
                                  CPS gross migration rate
                                  Working−age adults
                                  Net migration rate
                       0.00
                                   1970       1980        1990       2000        2010

                           Figure 1: Gross and net interstate migration.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data and Census Bureau popu-
lation estimates. The numerator of the net migration rate is one-half of the sum of absolute values of inflows
minus outflows in each state. (This number is the minimum number of moves that would have to be prevented
to set net migration to zero in every state.) The denominator of the rate between years t and t + 1 is the
U.S. population at t minus deaths between t and t + 1.


are much smaller than the overall decline over the past 20 years. Third, the trend in gross
flows is virtually identical when we restrict the analysis to a sample of working-age adults in
civilian households. These patterns suggest that to understand the decline in migration, we
must look for factors that affect gross flows rather than net flows; that vary over long time
horizons rather than at business cycle frequencies; and that affect working-age people, rather
than only people making life cycle–related transitions such as retiring or moving for college.
        Two additional patterns guide our focus on information and on workers. Figure 2(a)
shows that even among recent immigrants to the United States, the fraction who move
between states after arriving has fallen over time. This decline is broadly consistent with
both theories we propose. Improved information may make immigrants better able to choose
a good initial destination. Alternatively, if immigrants choose their initial destinations based
on family or ethnic ties (e.g., MacDonald and MacDonald, 1964), then later move to places
where their idiosyncratic job matches are better, a decline in interstate migration by new
immigrants is consistent with the hypothesis that locations have become more similar in the
jobs they offer, so that there is less reason for immigrants to change their initial locations.

                                                      2
 0.07                                                         0.015

 0.06

 0.05
                                                              0.010
 0.04

 0.03
                                                              0.005
 0.02

 0.01                                                                   Job−related reasons
            Immigrated to U.S. in last 1−4 years
                                                                        Family reasons
            Immigrated to U.S. in last 1−3 years                        All other reasons
 0.00                                                         0.000
   1990         1995          2000         2005    2010          1995           2000          2005    2010
        (a) Migration rates for recent immigrants                            (b) Reasons for moving

                                   Figure 2: Key patterns in migration rates.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data. Sample restricted to
working-age adults. Estimates shown for all years when variables are available. In figure 2(a), sample is
further restricted to individuals with non-imputed data on number of years in the United States, estimates
are standardized to the mean age distribution for new immigrants over the years shown, and thin lines show
1-standard-error confidence band around point estimates.


          Figure 2(b) examines the dimensions of information that may matter by showing the
fraction of Americans who say they moved between states for various reasons. Job-related
reasons — primarily moves for new jobs or job transfers — have declined sharply, while other
types of moves have declined more slowly. Of course, the reasons people give in a survey may
not be their true reasons for moving. However, when a survey respondent says she moved for
a new job, we think it is highly likely that she changed jobs around the time of the move —
even if other factors, such as local amenities, motivated the desire to search for a job in a new
location. Thus, to understand why migration is falling, we need to understand why people
have become less likely to make moves that happen around the same time as job changes.
          The decline in job-related moves suggests that the potential improvements in job
opportunities from moving are smaller than in the past. However, any decline in the impact
of moving on job opportunities cannot come simply from convergence of mean incomes across
states: Such a change would reduce net migration, not gross migration. Rather, there must
be a change in the importance of the match between a particular worker and a particular
location. In our model, workers choose between two locations and two occupations. Each



                                                          3
worker has different skills in the two occupations, and each occupation is more productive
in one location. Changes in this occupation-location premium, which we call the geographic
specificity of occupations, have no effect on net flows but do change gross flows by reducing
workers’ need to sort into the places where their particular skills are most productive.
       A decrease in the geographic specificity of occupations cannot be the whole story,
however. If locations offer more similar jobs, workers will be less likely to move for work but
more likely to move for amenity-related reasons, because a smaller difference in amenities is
now required to overcome the difference in earnings. But as figure 2(b) shows, amenity-related
moves have not risen. Thus, some other factor must also be at play.
       In our model, this other factor is information. The two locations in our model differ
in both the job opportunities and the local amenities they offer. Based on evidence that
most workers who move for job-related reasons do so with a new job in hand, we assume
that workers can search remotely for a job and know the distribution of job opportunities in
remote locations. However, we assume that amenities are an experience good: Workers do
not know how much they will like the sun in California until they live there. If workers in
one location are sufficiently uncertain about amenities in the other location, they may move
simply to acquire information. We call this a move for experimentation purposes. If the new
location proves to be good, an experimenting worker will stay there; if not, she may return
to her original location. We model an increase in information as an increase in the precision
of workers’ priors about the amenities in each location. Tighter priors have two opposing
effects on migration. First is a “news” effect: Some workers discover that they would prefer
a different location and decide to move. Second is an experimentation effect: Some workers
who would have made experimental moves no longer do so because the tighter prior reduces
their need to acquire information. Because people who move for experimentation purposes
often dislike the new location and return to the origin, the reduction in experimental moves is
larger than the increase in news-driven moves, and more information leads to lower migration
overall.
       We provide direct empirical evidence for both of our theories. To support the hy-
pothesis that migration has fallen because job opportunities have become more similar across
locations, we show that occupations have become more evenly spread across the country. Fur-


                                              4
ther, this change appears to result from a decrease in the dispersion of productivity rather
than a change in the supply of workers willing to take jobs in particular places, because
we also find that the variance across states of the average income for a given occupation
has fallen. (If, instead, workers increasingly desired jobs in unproductive places — due for
example to an exogenous decrease in mobility — the dispersion of incomes would rise.) In
addition, we show that migration responds to the geographic specificity of occupations: On
average, workers move to states where their particular occupations are better paid.
        Recent advances in information technology and decreases in travel costs clearly make
it easier for workers to learn about faraway places.1 The hypothesis that increases in in-
formation have reduced the need to migrate also has a testable prediction: Rates of repeat
migration should have declined because migrants will be more likely to be satisfied with their
destinations. We turn to panel data to test this prediction and find that repeat migration
indeed has declined, although the estimates are imprecise.
        We use a calibrated model to demonstrate that our theories not only are consistent
with the data but also can explain a substantial portion of the decline in gross migration. The
decrease in geographic specificity of occupations explains one-third of the fall in migration
since 1991. An increase in information can explain as much as all of the remaining decrease.
        Our work is related to a substantial literature. Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak (2011)
survey research on internal migration in the United States and describe important patterns
in the decline in interstate migration, finding, as we do, that compositional changes cannot
explain much of the decline. Our analysis of compositional changes extends theirs by consid-
ering more fine-grained measures of some variables and by formally calculating counterfactual
migration rates that hold composition fixed.2

   1
      In principle, lower travel costs might raise migration by making it easier to move. However, much of the
cost of moving is a time cost — the migrant must find a new home, pack and unpack belongings, and find
local services such as doctors and schools — that lower airfares cannot offset. Moreover, if lower travel costs
should have increased migration, the observed decline is simply a larger puzzle; our mechanisms then explain
less of the decrease relative to the appropriate counterfactual, leaving more room for other explanations.
    2
      One factor that has received much attention but that we do not consider here is fluctuations in the housing
market. The trend we document is a secular decline in migration over at least 20 years, during which house
prices and homeownership rose and then fell. If house prices and homeownership are important determinants
of gross migration, it is difficult to explain why the decline in migration was monotonic while the housing
market fluctuated sharply. In addition, Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak (2011) show that the decline in house
prices since the mid-2000s plays at most a small role in the drop in migration over that period.


                                                       5
       Theories of migration, such as the classic models by Harris and Todaro (1970) and
Roback (1982), generally focus on net flows. In related empirical work, Ganong and Shoag
(2012) analyze the relationship between income convergence, net flows, and housing regula-
tion, while Partridge et al. (2012) study the response of net migration to demand shocks.
       Kennan and Walker (2011) structurally estimate a model in which workers choose
locations to maximize their expected lifetime income. Differences in expected income across
locations imply that the model features both gross and net flows. The price of studying net
flows is that Kennan and Walker (2011) must allow workers to choose among many locations,
which means the model has many state variables and must be highly simplified along many
dimensions to remain tractable. By studying only gross flows, we can reduce our model to two
locations and add realism along other important dimensions, such as utility from amenities,
learning, and geographic specificity of skills. Bayer and Juessen (2012) similarly study gross
flows in a two-location model but focus on how the autocorrelation of income affects selection
into migration; their model does not include amenities or learning, and they investigate cross-
sectional patterns rather than the change in migration over time. Coen-Pirani (2010) builds
a model to explain gross and net flows but does not analyze the decline in gross flows.
       Our analysis is also connected to the literatures on agglomeration effects, city growth
rates, and the concentration of industries in particular regions. To our knowledge, the de-
crease in the geographic specificity of occupations has not been described previously in the
economic literature; it is distinct, for example, from the shift of aggregate employment to-
ward less-dense areas described as “deconcentration” by Carlino and Chatterjee (2002). Our
finding that workers move to states where their occupations are better paid is similar to
Borjas, Bronars, and Trejo’s (1992) conclusion that high-skill workers tend to move to places
with higher returns to skill, although they focus on one-dimensional measures of skill such
as education or aptitude test scores rather than on a multitude of occupations. The New
Economic Geography literature, starting with Krugman (1991), studies how transportation
costs and local economies of scale lead workers and firms to concentrate in one location. In
the typical model, these effects largely result in net flows: workers move toward the more
populated region. Empirically, Crozet (2004) tests the ability of a New Economic Geography
model to explain labor migration. More broadly, changes in agglomeration effects could help


                                              6
explain the changes in the geographic dispersion of wages that we take as exogenous; Du-
ranton and Puga (2004) review a variety of mechanisms that generate agglomeration effects
and, hence, might affect the geographic dispersion of wages. The literatures on city popula-
tion growth, industry concentration, and concentration of skilled workers in particular cities
also essentially analyze net rather than gross flows. Again, though, the theoretical mecha-
nisms proposed in these literatures, such as learning through interaction with other workers
(Glaeser, 1999), linkages between human capital and entrepreneurship (Berry and Glaeser,
2005; Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Tobio, forthcoming), or technological diffusion and knowledge
spillovers (Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg, 2009), could help explain changes in the geographic
dispersion of wages.
         The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we describe the CPS data and compare
migration rates in the CPS and other datasets. In section 3, we review a litany of demographic
and economic theories of falling migration and show that they are incompatible with the data.
Section 4 presents direct evidence for the key mechanisms in our model: We show that the
returns to working in particular occupations have become less geographically dispersed and
that repeat migration rates have declined, and we review evidence for falling costs of learning
about distant locations. Section 5 lays out our model of information and migration. Section
6 calibrates the model, examines its success in fitting the data, and quantifies how much of
the decline in migration our mechanisms can explain. Section 7 concludes.

2. Data
         We focus our analysis on working-age adults in civilian households in the March CPS
from 1991 to 2011.3 (We start the analysis in 1991 because, as shown in figure 1, the CPS
migration rate spikes in 1990, but the cause of this spike is unclear and we do not want it to
unduly influence our results.) We define a civilian household as one where no household mem-
ber is in the military; excluding military households is important because military households
move frequently and the military has become smaller (Pingle, 2007). We define a working-age
adult as one who is no more than 55 years old and either (a) has a bachelor’s degree and is
at least 23 years old, or (b) does not have a bachelor’s degree, is not currently enrolled in

  3
      Our data omit 1995 because the CPS did not measure one-year migration that year.


                                                    7
school, and is at least 19 years old.4 Thus, we concentrate on people who have completed
their education but are not yet approaching retirement. From 1996 onward, we follow Kaplan
and Schulhofer-Wohl (2012) and exclude observations with imputed migration data so that
changes in CPS imputation procedures do not produce spurious fluctuations in the migration
rate. (The imputation rate before 1996 is negligible.) We obtain most of the data from the
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (King et al., 2010) but identify imputed observations
with the imputation flags on the original public-use files from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
       The CPS measures migration with retrospective questions: Did the respondent live
in the same home one year ago, and if not, where did he or she live? We drop respondents
who did not live in the United States one year ago so that fluctuations in immigration do not
affect our results. Since we are interested in how internal migration affects the labor market,
we ideally would measure migration between distinct labor markets, such as the commuting
zones defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Tolbert and Sizer, 1996). However, we cannot
identify migrants’ origin and destination commuting zones because commuting zones are
groups of counties and origin counties are not available in the CPS public-use files. Instead,
we examine migration between states. In most parts of the country, states are large enough
that labor markets do not cross state borders. Of course, by looking at interstate migration,
we miss some migration between distinct labor markets within a state and include some
migration that does not entail changing labor markets, such as when a worker in Manhattan
moves to a New Jersey suburb. We show below that our results are robust to controlling
for the latter bias by excluding two sets of states where the problem is particularly severe
— New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut, as well as Maryland, Virginia, and Washington,
D.C. — from the data.
       It is unlikely that the long-run decline we describe is a mechanical result of under-
sampling people who move to newly built homes. First, the CPS sample frame is designed
to capture new construction (U.S. Census Bureau, 2006, chap. 3).5 In addition, if a bias

   4
     The CPS measures current school enrollment only for people ages 16 to 24. We treat all people over age
24 as not currently enrolled in school.
   5
     The CPS technical documentation (U.S. Census Bureau, 2006, chaps. 3, 15) does report that the sample
may miss some newly built group quarters. However, excluding group quarters residents from the sample
does not change the gross interstate migration rate by more than 0.01 percentage point in any year.



                                                    8
                       0.04



                       0.03



                       0.02



                       0.01
                                  CPS
                                  IRS
                                  ACS
                       0.00
                         1990           1995        2000         2005         2010

                Figure 3: Gross migration measured from different data sources.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) and American Community Survey
(ACS) micro data and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) state-to-state migration tabulations.


associated with new construction were the main driver of changes in the CPS migration rate,
the rate would have fallen sharply during the housing boom of the mid-2000s and risen during
the housing bust; it did not.
        We use the CPS data because they cover many years and contain a myriad of covariates
that allow us to test hypotheses about the decline in migration. However, the decline in
measured annual interstate migration rates appears in other data as well.6 Figure 3 compares
migration rates in the CPS, in micro data from the Census Bureau’s American Community
Survey (ACS) (Ruggles et al., 2010), and in Internal Revenue Service (IRS) data. The ACS
migration rate parallels the CPS rate from 2005 to 2011 but is about one-half of a percentage
point higher in each year, likely because the ACS pursues nonrespondents more intensively
(Koerber, 2007). We do not examine earlier ACS data because, before 2005, the ACS was a
pilot project and occasional changes in survey procedures may have affected the estimated

   6
     It is also possible to measure migration over horizons longer than a year, for example by asking whether
individuals lived in a different state five years ago or were born in a different state than the one where they
live now. Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak (2011) show that these long-term migration rates have fallen much less
than annual migration rates. However, long-term migration rates respond to fundamentally different factors
than annual rates because they ignore some return migration (someone who moves away and returns within
a two-year period will not count as a migrant in the five-year measure) and integrate individuals’ behavior
over many years.


                                                      9
migration rate.7 The IRS data cover more years; they, too, show a decline, albeit smaller
than in the CPS. However, the IRS data are not a perfect measure of migration: They cover
only people with incomes high enough to file taxes, track mailing addresses rather than home
addresses, and can be distorted by changes in household formation and in the time of year
when people file their returns (Internal Revenue Service, 2008).8
        Because the CPS is a very large sample — more than 200,000 individuals in 2011 —
the standard errors of our estimates are typically minuscule, on the order of one-tenth of
a percentage point, and we omit them from most of the graphs in the next section in the
interest of legibility. However, we show standard errors when their magnitude is meaningful.9

   7
      The ACS initially mails a survey form to sample housing units, then tries to telephone those who do
not return the mailed form, and finally sends field representatives to personally interview a subsample of
those who are not reached by mail or phone (U.S. Census Bureau, 2009b, chap. 7). Estimated migration
rates are lower for mail and telephone respondents than for in-person respondents, probably because the
mail and telephone surveys are less likely to reach recent movers (Koerber, 2007). (Koerber, 2007, finds that
migration rates vary little by response mode in the CPS because the CPS does not use mail surveys and is
more likely than the ACS to have up-to-date phone numbers for respondents.) Thus, any variation in the
percentage of respondents interviewed in person could translate into variation in the estimated migration
rate. From 2000, when the ACS became a large national demonstration project, through 2005, the first year
of full implementation, survey procedures changed at least four times in ways that could have affected the
rate of in-person interviews and hence the migration rate. First, in 2002, budget constraints caused the ACS
to conduct no surveys in July and to skip telephone and in-person follow-ups in June (Garrett and Williams,
2006). Second, in mid-2002, the rate of telephone interviews increased because the ACS obtained more
telephone numbers from the decennial census and was able to contact more housing units by phone (Garrett
and Williams, 2006). Third, in 2004, budget constraints caused the ACS to skip telephone and in-person
follow-ups in January (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012). Fourth, through 2004, all housing units that were not
reached by telephone or mail had a one-in-three chance of inclusion in the personal-interview subsample (U.S.
Census Bureau, 2004), but since 2005, the probability of a personal interview has varied by census tract and
by whether the housing unit has an address where mail can be delivered (U.S. Census Bureau, 2005, 2009b).
The pre-2005 public-use data do not indicate the response mode, and the data since 2005 do not distinguish
between telephone and in-person interviews, so we cannot adjust the data to account for these effects.
    8
      Based on IRS news releases reporting the number of returns filed each week during the filing season from
1996 to 2010, the median filing date of individual income tax returns appears to be shifting earlier by about
one day every two years. However, the news release data are too imprecise to allow us to measure the second
derivative of the median filing date, which is what determines the timing bias, if any, in the IRS data.
    9
      From 2005 onward, we calculate standard errors using the person-level replicate weights provided by
the Census Bureau that account for the design of the CPS sample. Before 2005, replicate weights are not
available, so we calculate standard errors by assuming that the survey weights are inversely proportional to
the probability of sampling and that the sample is clustered by households. Clustering on households and
replicate weights give virtually identical standard errors for the interstate migration rate in 2005 and later
years. We do not follow Davern et al.’s (2006) method of clustering on geographic areas because it gives larger
standard errors than the replicate weights, likely because clustering on geography is too conservative when
analyzing a variable such as interstate migration that is not highly correlated across neighboring households.
When we combine estimates for multiple years, we calculate separate point estimates for each year, take the
unweighted average across years, and calculate the standard error assuming the estimates in different years
are independent. (Because the CPS is a rotating panel of addresses, this assumption is not strictly correct,
but the available sampling information in the public-use files does not allow us to easily relax it.)


                                                      10
 0.16                                                      0.16
                                          1991−1997                                                      1991−1997
 0.14                                     1998−2004        0.14                                          1998−2004
                                          2005−2011                                                      2005−2011
 0.12                                                      0.12

 0.10                                                      0.10

 0.08                                                      0.08

 0.06                                                      0.06

 0.04                                                      0.04

 0.02                                                      0.02

 0.00                                                      0.00
        20   25   30    35    40     45     50    55              20   25      30    35    40       45     50    55
              (a) No bachelor’s degree                                      (b) Bachelor’s degree

                          Figure 4: Age profile of interstate migration.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data. Sample restricted to
working-age adults. Thin lines show 1-standard-error confidence bands around point estimates.


        One limitation of the CPS is that it does not follow migrants over time and thus does
not let us see how earnings and other outcomes change when a particular person moves, or
even to see how likely a migrant is to migrate again. When we examine repeat migration, we
turn to panel data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation. However, for most
purposes, panel data are not ideal for measuring migration because results will depend on the
survey’s success rate in tracking respondents who move, and this success rate could change
over time independent of any changes in actual behavior. Thus, we focus most of our analysis
on the CPS, which is not subject to attrition bias precisely because it is cross-sectional.

3. Patterns of Migration: Theories and Data
        This section describes demographic and economic patterns in migration over the past
two decades. We use these patterns both to learn what dimensions are important to model
and to show that various common beliefs about the fall in migration do not match the data.

A. Life cycle patterns and composition effects
        Figure 4 shows the age profile of migration rates separately for college graduates and
nongraduates in our sample of working-age adults. Migration rates decline sharply with age,
but this decline is steeper for college graduates, who migrate much more than nongraduates


                                                      11
up to about age 40. Since 1991, the migration rate has fallen at all ages. Thus, although
the population is aging and older people migrate less, the aggregate decline in migration
cannot be due solely to population aging; the aggregate rate would have fallen even if the age
distribution had remained the same. Importantly, however, the decline in migration is larger
for the young — a fact we will ask our calibrated model to reproduce.
       Figure 5(a) quantifies the importance of population aging by calculating what the
interstate migration rate would have been in each year if the age distribution had not changed
after 1991. The effect is tiny: Holding the age distribution fixed, the migration rate would
have been 0.1 percentage point higher in 2011. We find similar results when we adjust for
changes in the distribution of education, marital status, or number of labor force participants
in the household: Figures 5(b), 5(c), and 5(d) show that migration rates have fallen at all
education levels, for people of all marital statuses, and for both single-earner and multiple-
earner households. Further, figure 5(a) shows almost unnoticeable effects on gross migration
of holding the population distributions of these variables fixed at the 1991 distribution. Thus,
although the demographics of the U.S. population have changed in many ways since 1991,
these changes have no power for explaining the decline in interstate migration. In particular,
the findings on marital status and number of earners demonstrate that the fall in migration
is not due to changes in the number of “tied stayers” (Gemici, 2011; Guler, Guvenen, and
Violante, 2012; Mincer, 1978) who cannot move because their partners cannot move.

B. Occupation and industry effects
       Over the past several decades, the service sector has expanded while manufacturing
has declined. If workers’ mobility rates differed across industries, this sectoral shift could
produce a decline in migration. However, figure 6(a) shows that service-industry workers
have approximately the same mobility as workers in other industries and that mobility has
declined in parallel for workers in all industries. Further, figure 5(a) shows that when we hold
the industry distribution fixed at the 1991 distribution, the migration trend does not change.
Thus, the rise of the service sector seems unlikely to explain the decline in migration.
       Another hypothesis is that new communications technologies reduce migration by
allowing some workers to do their jobs from anywhere in the country, instead of having to


                                              12
 0.06                                                             0.06
                            Observed migration rate                                           No bachelor’s degree
                            Adjusted for age                                                  Bachelor’s degree
 0.05                       Adjusted for education                0.05
                            Adjusted for marital status
                            Adjusted for number of earners
 0.04                       Adjusted for income                   0.04
                            Adjusted for occupation
                            Adjusted for industry
 0.03                                                             0.03

 0.02                                                             0.02

 0.01                                                             0.01

 0.00                                                             0.00
   1990        1995      2000        2005         2010              1990   1995     2000      2005         2010
        (a) Composition-adjusted migration rates                              (b) By education
 0.08                                                             0.06
                         Married, spouse present                                           ≤ 1 earner in household
 0.07                    Cohabiting                                                        ≥ 2 earners in household
                         Divorced/separated/spouse absent         0.05
                         Single
 0.06
                                                                  0.04
 0.05

 0.04                                                             0.03

 0.03
                                                                  0.02
 0.02
                                                                  0.01
 0.01

 0.00                                                             0.00
   1990        1995      2000        2005         2010              1990   1995     2000      2005         2010
               (c) By household structure                     (d) By number of household members in labor force

              Figure 5: Time series of interstate migration by population subgroups.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data. Sample restricted to
working-age adults. Composition-adjusted rates hold the following variables constant at their 1991 distri-
bution: respondent’s age (single years), respondent’s education (single years), respondent’s marital status
(four categories shown in figure 5(c)), number of labor force participants in respondent’s household (two
categories shown in figure 5(d)), and real income per capita of respondent’s household (20 equal-population
bins in 1991). Thin lines in figures 5(b), 5(c), and 5(d) show 1-standard-error confidence bands around point
estimates.




                                                             13
 0.05                                                              0.04
                                         Services/FIRE                                      Professional/managerial
                                         Other industry                                     Other occupation
                                         Not in labor force                                 Not in labor force
 0.04
                                                                   0.03

 0.03
                                                                   0.02
 0.02

                                                                   0.01
 0.01


 0.00                                                              0.00
   1990       1995        2000         2005        2010              1990   1995     2000      2005         2010
                     (a) By industry                                           (b) By occupation

                        Figure 6: Migration rate by industry and occupation.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data. Sample restricted to
working-age adults. Thin lines show 1-standard-error confidence bands around point estimates. Pro-
fessional/managerial occupations include all managerial and professional specialty occupations, and ser-
vice/FIRE industries include all service industries and finance, insurance, and real estate as coded by King
et al. (2010).


live in the city where their employer has its operations. These changes affect some occupations
much more than others. But figure 6(b) shows that the migration rate for professional and
managerial workers — who may have the most opportunities to work remotely — has declined
only slightly more than the migration rate for workers in other occupations. Thus, we must
seek an explanation for decreased migration that applies to all workers, not just those who
can do their jobs over the Internet.

C. Income effects
          The recent recession notwithstanding, the United States has grown wealthier since
1991. If living in one place for a long time is a normal good, the rise in incomes could cause a
fall in migration. Figure 7 tests this hypothesis by estimating the migration rate as a function
of real household income per capita, controlling for age.10 Controlling for age is important

  10
     We obtain the graph by estimating a partially linear model in which migration depends linearly on a full
set of age indicator variables and nonparametrically on income: migration = xβ + f (income) + , where x
represents the age indicators. We estimate the linear part using the method of Yatchew (1997) with tenth-
order differencing, then estimate the nonparametric part with local linear regression. We normalize the age
effects to have mean zero.



                                                              14
 0.08                                                       0.08
                                           1991−1997                                                  1991−1997
 0.07                                      1998−2004        0.07                                      1998−2004
                                           2005−2011                                                  2005−2011
 0.06                                                       0.06

 0.05                                                       0.05

 0.04                                                       0.04

 0.03                                                       0.03

 0.02                                                       0.02

 0.01                                                       0.01

 0.00                                                       0.00
     7        8       9       10     11       12     13         7        8       9       10     11       12     13
         ln(real household income per capita, $2009)                ln(real household income per capita, $2009)
               (a) No bachelor’s degree                                    (b) Bachelor’s degree

             Figure 7: Migration rate by real household income, controlling for age.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data. Sample restricted to
working-age adults. Lines are local linear regression estimates of the migration rate as a function of income,
controlling for age indicator variables in a partially linear model using the method of Yatchew (1997). Esti-
mates use bandwidth 0.15 and Epanechnikov kernel. The graph is truncated at the 1st and 99th percentiles
of the income distribution, conditional on education, in each period.


because young people tend to have lower incomes and migrate more. Even after we control for
age, migration is indeed higher at the low end of the income distribution. However, migration
also ticks up at the high end of the distribution, so if income gains were concentrated among
the already well off, the overall rise in incomes would not necessarily reduce migration. In
addition, the figure shows that migration rates fell uniformly across the income distribution,
and figure 5(a) shows that holding the real income distribution constant would not change
the overall migration rate. Thus, rising real incomes do not explain the fall in migration.

D. Regional effects
         Throughout U.S. history, high migration rates have been associated with large flows
from one part of the country to another, most prominently in the Great Migration of African
Americans out of the South. Is the recent decline in migration merely the result of a change
in flows into or out of one part of the country? The net migration rate shown in figure 1
suggests not: Even if all net interstate migration were eliminated, gross flows would barely
change. Figure 8 examines this question another way by disaggregating the gross migration



                                                       15
 0.05                                                         0.05
                                             Northeast                                                 Northeast
                                             Midwest                                                   Midwest
                                             South                                                     South
 0.04                                        West             0.04                                     West


 0.03                                                         0.03


 0.02                                                         0.02


 0.01                                                         0.01


 0.00                                                         0.00
   1990       1995      2000       2005        2010             1990        1995      2000   2005        2010
             (a) Gross inflows by region                                (b) Gross outflows by region
                            0.04



                            0.03



                            0.02



                            0.01
                                     Entire U.S.
                                     Excluding NY/NJ/CT
                                     Excluding DC/MD/VA
                            0.00
                              1990         1995          2000        2005      2010
                            (c) Effect of excluding New York, New Jersey, and
                            Connecticut or Maryland, Virginia, and Washing-
                            ton, D.C.

                               Figure 8: Regional patterns in migration.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data. Sample restricted to
working-age adults. Thin lines in figures 8(a) and 8(b) show 1-standard-error confidence bands around point
estimates.




                                                         16
rate by region. Figure 8(a) shows each region’s gross inflow rate: the fraction of people
in the region who lived in a different state (whether in the region or outside it) one year
ago. Similarly, figure 8(b) shows each region’s gross outflow rate: the fraction of people who
lived in the region one year ago and have since moved to a different state (whether in the
region or outside it). The graphs show that both inmigration and outmigration have fallen
substantially in all regions. Thus, the driving force in the decline in migration cannot be a
simple change in Americans’ desire or ability to move to or from one particular part of the
country.
        Another possibility is that in some parts of the country, interstate migration is a poor
proxy for migration between labor markets. If migration from cities to suburbs has fallen over
time, and if interstate migration captures some urban-suburban moves, we could mistakenly
conclude that moves between labor markets have fallen when in fact they have not. We
conjecture that this problem is likely to be most severe in the New York metropolitan area,
which extends to large parts of New Jersey and Connecticut, and the Washington, D.C.,
metropolitan area, which extends into Maryland and Virginia. However, figure 8(c) shows
that the decline in migration is actually larger when we exclude all respondents who live in
New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut in the survey year, and is virtually identical when
we exclude respondents in Maryland, Virginia, and Washington, D.C.11

E. Job search
        Improvements in information technology and reductions in travel costs potentially
change workers’ information about both job opportunities and local amenities. One possibility
is that increased information about faraway jobs reduces the number of workers who move
to a distant location simply in order to search for a job there. However, the data on workers’
reasons for moving suggest that this mechanism is not at work. Figure 9 disaggregates the
reasons for moving that we showed earlier in figure 2(b). The decline in job-related moves
comes mainly from a decline in people who move for a new job or job transfer; there has been
little change in the fraction of people who move because they lost a job or to look for work.

  11
    We exclude the entirety of the states because the boundaries of the metropolitan areas have changed over
time.



                                                    17
                          0.02
                                   Family reasons
                                   New job or job transfer
                                   Lost job or to look for work
                                   Other job−related reasons
                                   Housing reasons
                                   All other reasons


                          0.01




                          0.00
                            1995            2000              2005   2010

                            Figure 9: Detailed reasons for moving.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data. Sample restricted to
working-age adults. Estimates shown for all years when variables are available.


Although self-reported reasons for choices must be interpreted with caution, these findings
are the opposite of what we would expect if better information had made it easier for workers
to search remotely without moving first: In that case, we would see an increase in moves for
new jobs and a decrease in the number of people who move to look for work. Nonetheless,
because moves for a new job or job transfer are much more common than moves to look for
work, the ability to search for jobs in remote locations appears to be an important component
of migration decisions.

4. Direct Evidence for Our Mechanisms
       Our theory relies on two mechanisms to generate a decrease in migration: an increase
in the similarity of job opportunities in different parts of the country and a decrease in the
cost of learning about amenities in faraway locations. This section presents direct evidence
for each mechanism.

A. Increases in the similarity of job opportunities
       We test whether job opportunities around the country have become more similar and
whether geographic differences in job opportunities are related to migration by examining
both prices and quantities. First, we show that the dispersion of incomes across states and
metropolitan areas within occupations has fallen. In other words, the earnings of workers


                                                      18
in a given occupation have become more similar across space. This convergence in the price
of workers in various occupations might result from a change in either demand (e.g., an
increase in the productivity of certain occupations in places where those occupations used
to be unproductive) or supply (e.g., workers moving from places with low productivity to
places with high productivity until marginal productivity is equated across space). A change
in demand would reduce migration in the model we present later in the paper; a change
in supply is merely a consequence of migration and would not itself cause migration to
fall. To distinguish between demand and supply effects, we examine the distribution of the
number of workers in each occupation around the country. If productivity in particular
occupations becomes less geographically specific, occupations will become less geographically
segregated — that is, the distribution of occupations in each state will become more similar
to the national average. By contrast, if workers move to places where their occupations are
more productive, each location will become more specialized and occupations will become
more geographically segregated. We find that occupations and industries have become less
geographically segregated across states and metropolitan areas, supporting the view that
occupations’ productivity levels have become less geographically specific. The change in
productivity dispersion, as measured by the change in income dispersion, will be a key input
to our model below. We then connect productivity dispersion to migration by showing that,
on average, a migrant’s occupation brings higher pay in the destination state than in the
origin state. Thus, migrants tend to move toward states where their occupations earn higher
pay, a key mechanism in our model.

The dispersion of incomes within occupations
       We study the geographic specificity of occupations’ income levels by estimating a sta-
tistical model in which incomes depend on a state-occupation interaction and characterizing
the variance of the state-occupation interaction. Our model is


                            ln yiost = ast + bot + x0iost β t + ξost + iost ,                 (1)


where yiost is the wage, salary, and self-employment income of worker i in occupation o, state
s, and year t; ast is a state-year fixed effect; bot is an occupation-year fixed effect; xiost is a

                                                   19
vector of controls, including sex, dummy variables for single year of education, and a quartic
polynomial in potential experience; and ξost is the state-occupation interaction of interest.
                                                                                2
We model ξost as a normally distributed random effect with mean 0 and variance σξ,t and
                       2
estimate the variance σξ,t for each year.12 When σξ,t
                                                  2
                                                      is smaller, the variance of incomes across
states within an occupation is smaller, after controlling for individual demographics xiost and
factors bst that affect all occupations in a state. Thus, if occupations’ productivity becomes
                               2
less geographically specific, σξ,t will fall.
        We use single-digit occupations as listed in appendix A1 (except for military, unem-
ployed, and not in the labor force) to keep the number of parameters manageable.13 Although
detailed occupation coding in Census Bureau datasets has changed over time, these changes
should have had little impact on how workers are classified at the one-digit level, so we think
it is unlikely that our results are driven by changes in occupation coding.
        We estimate the model year by year in data from the CPS, the decennial census, and
the ACS.14 Figure 10(a) shows moments of the posterior distribution of σξ,t
                                                                        2
                                                                            for each year.
A clear decline from 1970 to 2000 can be seen in the decennial census data. The downward
trend also appears in the CPS, although the CPS estimates are volatile from year to year.
In the ACS, the posterior mean has a slight upward trend, but the posterior density is too
dispersed to demonstrate whether the true trend is upward or downward.

  12
      Treating ξost as a fixed effect and then calculating the variance of the estimated fixed effects would
                                        2
produce upward-biased estimates of σξ,t     because some of the variance in the estimated fixed effects would
come from sampling error. This bias would depend on the sample size, and the size of the sample changes
over time, so estimates based on fixed effects would not be comparable over time and could not be used to
                           2
determine the trend in σξ,t  .
   13
      Nonetheless, the large samples and large number of parameters make maximum likelihood estimators
converge very slowly, so we estimate the posterior distribution of the parameters by Markov chain Monte
Carlo using algorithm 16 of Chib (2001). For these estimates only, we do not use survey weights because we
cannot derive the weighted likelihood without detailed information on sampling and weighting procedures (see,
e.g., Gelman, 2007). The demographic controls xiost should absorb most of the subpopulation heterogeneity
that survey weights are intended to account for. We use standard uninformative priors for the fixed effects
ast and bot and the coefficients β t and standard weakly informative priors for the variances of ξost and iost .
                                                                                                    2
The prior has a larger effect on the posterior when the sample is smaller. We choose a prior for σξ,t  centered
on 0.001, which is smaller than any of the posterior means. Thus, the prior could produce a downward trend
                                 2
in the posterior estimates of σξ,t  only if the samples were getting smaller over time; in reality, the sample
sizes increase over time, which means that our results are, if anything, an underestimate of the decrease in
income dispersion.
   14
      We use the 1 percent form 1 and form 2 state samples from the 1970 census, the 5 percent samples from
the 1980 and 1990 censuses, the 5 percent and 1 percent samples from the 2000 census, and annual samples
from the ACS. We obtain all census and ACS data from Ruggles et al. (2010).


                                                       20
0.015                                                       0.015
                                              Census                                                  Census
                                              CPS                                                     CPS
                                              ACS                                                     ACS


0.010                                                       0.010




0.005                                                       0.005




0.000                                                       0.000
   1970        1980       1990        2000      2010           1970    1980       1990        2000       2010
                  (a) Across states                                       (b) Across MSAs

                Figure 10: Variance of location-occupation interaction in income.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data, 1977–2011; American
Community Survey (ACS) micro data, 2005–2011; and decennial census micro data (1970, 1980, 1990, and
2000). Thick lines are posterior means; thin lines show 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of posterior distribution.
Sample restricted to employed civilians ages 16 and over.


        Figure 10(b) shows that we also find a decline in σξ2, t when we define geographic
locations by metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) rather than states, but the decline is now
steeper in the CPS and less steep in the decennial census. Using MSAs instead of states poses
challenges because some people do not live in MSAs, not all MSAs are identified in public-use
datasets, and MSA boundaries change over time. Also, MSAs can be identified in the CPS
only starting in 1986. In the figure, we limit the sample for each dataset (Census, CPS, or
ACS) to respondents who live in MSAs that are identified in every year for that dataset. We
do not adjust for changes in the counties that each MSA includes because the public-use data
do not always show the respondent’s county and because expansions of MSAs often reflect
expansions of the geographic area that forms a single labor market.15
        We interpret the downward trend in geographic dispersion of incomes as reflecting
convergence across states in productivity within occupations. In this view, a worker with
given skills faces more similar wages across states now than he did several decades ago.
However, another possible interpretation is that unobserved differences across states in worker

  15
    The MSA analysis use the 1 percent form 1 and form 2 metro samples instead of the state samples from
the 1970 census and drop the 1 percent sample from the 2000 census because it identifies relatively few MSAs.



                                                       21
quality may have gotten smaller, which would mean that a worker with given skills does not
necessarily face more similar wages across states now than in the past. Econometrically
distinguishing differences across states in unobservable worker quality from differences across
states in skill returns is a complicated task, and we do not attempt it here.16 But we believe
our implicit assumption that workers with identical education, living in the same state but
educated in different states, face identical wages is a reasonable one. This assumption is
common in the literature (see, e.g., Dahl, 2002), and even papers that study the effect of
local school quality on wages, such as Card and Krueger (1992), acknowledge large differences
across space in the returns to education for workers with identical quality.

The dispersion of quantities of workers
        In figure 11, we compute the Theil information-theory index of segregation (Theil
and Finizza, 1971) for various categories of occupations and industries. The Theil index is
commonly used to measure racial segregation, and Reardon and Firebaugh (2002) show that it
has many desirable properties that other indices lack, especially when measuring segregation
of more than two groups. The Theil index compares the distribution of occupations or
industries in each location to the distribution for the nation as a whole. The index ranges from
0 to 1, with higher values indicating more segregation; the index is 1 when each occupation
or industry is found in only one location, and 0 when each location has the same distribution
of occupations or industries as the nation as a whole.17 As with our analysis of income

  16
     For example, re-estimating (1) with state-specific returns to education would not allow us to rule out
differences in worker quality because state-specific returns to education could reflect either differences in the
wages for identical workers or differences in the quality of education.
  17
     The formula for the index is
                                                     S
                                                 1 X Ns
                                           H=              (E − Es ),
                                                 E s=1 N
where s indexes states, Ns is the number of workers in state s, N is the national number of workers, and E
and Es are the national and state entropy indices. The entropy indices are defined by
                                         J
                                         X                            J
                                                                      X
                                  E=−          πj ln πj ,    Es = −         πjs ln πjs ,
                                         j=1                          j=1

where j indexes groups (occupations or industries), πj is the fraction of U.S. workers who are in group j, and
πjs is the fraction of state s’s workers who are in group j. We compute standard errors for the index by the
delta method, treating the number of workers in each state as nonstochastic and assuming that when zero
workers are observed in a state-group cell, that cell contains zero workers in the population.



                                                            22
 0.04                                                             0.02
                              Census/ACS broad industry                                     Census/ACS broad occupation
                              Census/ACS detailed industry                                  Census/ACS detailed occupation
                              CPS broad industry                                            CPS broad occupation
 0.03



 0.02                                                             0.01



 0.01



 0.00                                                             0.00
   1970       1980          1990         2000        2010           1970       1980         1990            2000     2010
            (a) Across states, by industry                                 (b) Across states, by occupation
 0.06                                                             0.03
                                                                           Census/ACS broad occupation
                                                                           Census/ACS detailed occupation
 0.05                                                                      CPS broad occupation


 0.04                                                             0.02

 0.03

 0.02                                                             0.01

 0.01     Census/ACS broad industry
          Census/ACS detailed industry
          CPS broad industry
 0.00                                                             0.00
   1970       1980          1990         2000        2010           1970       1980         1990            2000     2010
            (c) Across MSAs, by industry                                   (d) Across MSAs, by occupation

             Figure 11: Theil indices of segregation of industries and occupations.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) micro data, 1981–2011; American
Community Survey (ACS) micro data, combined 2006–2010 sample; and decennial census micro data (1970,
1980, 1990, and 2000). Detailed industry and occupation categories are three-digit codes for the IND1990 and
OCC1990 variables in Ruggles et al. (2010). Broad industry and occupation categories are one-digit codes
listed in appendix A1. Sample restricted to employed civilians ages 16 and over. Weighted by number of
workers. Figures 11(c) and 11(d) include only MSAs that can be identified in every year for a given dataset.
Thin lines show 1-standard-error confidence bands around CPS point estimates. Standard errors of census
and ACS estimates are too small to be visible.




                                                             23
dispersion, we focus on states as locations but check that our results are robust to using
MSAs instead.
         Figure 11 shows that, over time, states’ and metropolitan areas’ distributions of work-
ers across industries and occupations have become more similar. This pattern holds whether
we look at single-digit industries and occupations or more detailed categories. (To examine
more detailed categories, we must go to decennial census and multiyear ACS data,18 because
the CPS contains too few observations to reliably estimate, say, the number of workers in
hardware stores in Vermont in 2010.) In results not shown here, we found that the decline is
not solely due to the shift from manufacturing to services; an index of segregation of detailed
industries within manufacturing also falls over the past four decades.

Migration and the geographic specificity of occupations
         We examine whether migrants move to states where their occupations bring higher
pay by testing whether the state-occupation interaction ξost in equation (1) is larger in the
migrant’s destination state than in the migrant’s origin state. For each year, we regress log
income on state fixed effects, occupation fixed effects, and the demographic controls, then
estimate ξost by the average of the residuals from this regression in occupation o, state s, and
year t. We use the estimates of ξost to calculate the difference in earnings between migrants’
origin and destination states, conditional on the migrants’ occupations. Specifically, for a
migrant i who moved from state s to state s0 and is currently working in occupation o, we
define
                                           ∆it = ξˆo,s0 ,t − ξˆost ,                                    (2)

where ξˆost is our estimate of the state-occupation interaction ξost . The quantity ∆it is the
difference between i’s predicted income from equation (1) at the destination state and i’s
predicted income at the origin state, holding constant i’s occupation and demographics and
controlling for differences in incomes that affect all occupations in a given state. That is,

  18
    We use the same census samples as for the income dispersion analysis. For the ACS, we use the 2006–2010
combined dataset, which is equivalent to a 5 percent sample. Despite the large size of these samples, some
occupations and industries are not observed in all years. We combine industries or occupations that are not
observed in all years into an “all other” category so that the groups over which the index is calculated are
constant over time.



                                                     24
                             0.02
                                                                   CPS
                                                                   CPS linear trend
                                                                   ACS
                             0.01



                             0.00



                            −0.01



                            −0.02
                               1980   1985    1990   1995   2000    2005     2010

                 Figure 12: Mean within-occupation income gains from moving.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Current Population Survey (CPS) and American Community Survey
(ACS) micro data. Samples restricted to interstate migrants who are working-age adults in civilian households
and report an occupation. CPS sample restricted to those with non-imputed migration data. ACS sample
restricted to those not living in group quarters. Estimates shown for all years when variables are available.
Thin lines show 1-standard-error confidence bands around point estimates.


∆it represents i’s within-occupation income gains from moving, net of any difference in the
average income across all occupations between the origin and destination states. If migrants
move toward states where their occupations are better paid, we expect ∆it to have a positive
mean.
        Figure 12 shows the mean of ∆it in each year in the CPS and ACS. The CPS estimates
begin in 1986 because that is the earliest year when we can identify working-age adults. We
define occupations by one-digit codes, we estimate ξost using data on all workers, not just
migrants, and we estimate the mean of ∆it using data on all interstate migrants, even if they
are not currently employed. The results show that, on average, ∆it is positive: Migrants move
toward states where their occupations are higher paid. In the CPS, the estimates are volatile
and imprecisely estimated but appear to trend downward, consistent with the hypothesis
that the gaps in occupations pay between states have gotten smaller. From 1991 to 1997, the
mean of ∆it in the CPS is 0.0013, which means that the average migrant’s occupation pays
0.13 percent more in the destination state than in the origin state. By the 2005–’11 period,
that average falls to zero. The ACS estimates are more precise owing to the larger sample
size; the average gap in the ACS from 2005 to 2011 is 0.10 percent, and we can reject at the



                                                     25
5 percent significance level the null hypothesis that the average in the ACS is zero.

B. Decreases in the cost of information
       If people have better information about distant locations, they will be less likely to
move somewhere only to find it unsatisfactory and move again soon afterward. Thus, a
decrease in the cost of information about faraway places should reduce the rate of repeat
and return migration. We cannot measure repeat and return migration in the cross-sectional
CPS, so we turn to panel data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP) as well as data on place of birth and residence five years ago from the
decennial census. Each of these data sources has drawbacks, but given the need for repeated
measures of migration, the SIPP and the decennial census are the best available datasets for
our purpose.
       As we discuss in section 2, panel survey data are not ideal for measuring migration
because results can depend on the survey’s procedure for finding migrants at their new loca-
tions, and any changes in measured migration might result from changes in survey procedures.
However, the SIPP makes significant efforts to locate respondents who move (see U.S. Census
Bureau, 2009c, chap. 2) and starts with a large sample, about 50,000 households in recent
years, so that the population at risk of repeat migration is large enough to obtain reasonably
precise estimates. (Overall interstate migration rates in the SIPP are similar in magnitude
to those in the CPS, although the downward trend is less pronounced.) The SIPP consists
of a series of independent panels that started in various years and were followed for several
years each. Respondents are interviewed every four months. For each panel, we calculate
repeat and return annual interstate migration rates in the first two years that the panel was
followed. Specifically, for a panel first interviewed in year t, the repeat migration rate is
the probability of living in a different state at the seventh interview (year t + 2, 24 months
after the first interview) than at the fourth interview (year t + 1, 12 months after the first
interview), conditional on making an interstate move between the first and fourth interviews
(years t and t + 1). The return migration rate is the probability of returning to the year-t
state at t+2, conditional on making an interstate move between t and t+1. These definitions
ignore moves that happen within a single year — even though the SIPP measures such moves


                                             26
— so that we are measuring annual rates that can be compared with the annual rates in the
CPS. In some panels, the SIPP public-use data files combine certain small states to protect
respondents’ anonymity. We use these combinations of states in all panels to ensure that our
results are not driven by changes in the state coding.
        Because the census is collected cross-sectionally, it is not affected by panel attrition.
Long-form census questionnaires ask respondents where they were born and where they lived
five years ago. We calculate the repeat migration rate as the probability of living in a different
state at the time of the census than five years earlier, conditional on making an interstate move
between birth and five years ago. The return migration rate is the probability of currently
living in the birth state, conditional on not living in the birth state five years ago. These rates
are not directly comparable to the one-year migration rates among workers that are the focus
of our paper, because they include some moves by children and some moves in the distant
past, and ignore some moves at frequencies higher than five years.19 Nonetheless, these rates
are useful indicators because decreases in high-frequency return migration by workers should
lead, all else equal, to decreases in the return migration rate that we measure in the census.
        To make the SIPP and census data as comparable as possible to our results from the
CPS, we limit the SIPP and census samples to people who are working-age adults in civilian
households. Additional details on sample selection and the calculation of confidence intervals
are in appendix A2.
        Figure 13 shows the results. Repeat and return migration rates are high: The SIPP
data show that someone who leaves a state in one year has roughly a 7 percent chance of
returning the next year and a similar chance of moving to a third state the next year. But
these rates have fallen over time. In particular, the annual repeat migration rate in the SIPP
appears to have fallen by about 5 percentage points in the past two decades. The census
data also show high but declining repeat and return migration.
        Several important caveats apply to these findings. First, the estimates from the SIPP
are very imprecise. The reason is that respondents are part of the sample used to estimate

  19
    For example, a person who is born in Minnesota, moves to Wisconsin at age 1, returns to Minnesota at
age 29, and is a census respondent at age 30 will count as a return migrant; a person who lives in Minnesota
up to age 27, moves to Wisconsin at age 28, returns to Minnesota at age 29, and is a census respondent at
age 30 will not count as a return migrant.


                                                    27
 0.25                                                         0.25
                                                                                                   Return migration rate
                                                                                                   Linear trend

 0.20                                                         0.20


 0.15                                                         0.15


 0.10                                                         0.10


 0.05                                                         0.05
          Repeat migration rate
          Linear trend
 0.00                                                         0.00
        1985     1990       1995     2000       2005                 1985       1990       1995     2000       2005
                          SIPP panel                                                     SIPP panel
          (a) Repeat migration in the SIPP                              (b) Return migration in the SIPP
                                  0.25
                                                                     Return migration rate
                                                                     Repeat migration rate

                                  0.20


                                  0.15


                                  0.10


                                  0.05


                                  0.00
                                    1970          1980          1990                    2000
                                                      Census year
                                    (c) Repeat and return migration in the census

                       Figure 13: Repeat and return interstate migration rates.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and decennial census
micro data. Working-age adults in civilian households; additional sample selection details in appendix A2.
Dashed lines in figures 13(a) and 13(c) are predicted values from a linear regression of the repeat or return
migration rate on the initial year of the SIPP panel. Vertical bars in 13(a) and 13(c) show 95 percent
confidence intervals for point estimates. Confidence intervals for census estimates are too small to be visible.




                                                         28
repeat or return migration only if they migrate in the initial year; because interstate migration
is rare to begin with, this sample is small even though the overall SIPP sample is large.
The downward trends in the SIPP repeat and return migration rates are not statistically
significant at conventional significance levels. Second, the changes we observe in the SIPP
could theoretically be due to changes in procedures for following respondents who move,
although we are not aware of any such changes. Third, in the census, the timing of the
changes in moving behavior is unclear because the estimated rates are a function of migration
over the entire life cycle, and the observed changes could result from changes in moving rates
among families with children rather than from changes in moving rates among workers.
       In addition, a decline in repeat and return migration is not the strongest possible
evidence for our hypothesis about migration, because other changes that reduce migration in
general could mechanically reduce repeat and return migration as well. A stronger prediction
of our theory is that the fraction of moves in a year that are repeat or return moves should
have declined. Unfortunately, we cannot estimate this fraction with any precision because the
estimated migration rates in the SIPP are noisy and the census does not give us the annual
migration rates we would need.
       Still, there are reasons beyond the decline in repeat and return migration to believe
that people have more information about distant locations than in the past. The past several
decades have seen dramatic changes in several technologies and markets that help people to
gather this information. Most obvious, of course, is the development of the Internet, which
allows people to inexpensively and rapidly learn about life in other cities. But other changes
have also sharply reduced the cost of information. Following the breakup of AT&T in 1984,
competition in the market for long-distance telephone calls rose, prices fell by 50 percent in
seven years, and demand for long-distance services doubled (Taylor and Taylor, 1993). Thus,
even before the Internet, the cost of learning about distant places by picking up the telephone
was decreasing.
       Travel costs are also an important influence on the cost of gathering information. A
person who wants to learn whether she will like the weather in California can best do so by
going to California on vacation. After the United States deregulated the airline industry in
1978, airfares fell significantly (though the exact size of the decrease is difficult to calculate)


                                                29
and airlines offered more flights to more destinations (Borenstein and Rose, 2008). A de-
crease in the cost of air travel reduces the cost of gathering information both by reducing
actual outlays on travel and, for workers who substitute to air travel from other modes of
transportation, by reducing the time required to reach the destination.

C. Summary
       The data show that numerous hypotheses about the decline in migration do not match
the facts. Migration has not fallen because of any of the following:

   • Changes in the distribution of age, education, marital status, number of labor force
       participants per household, or real household incomes.
   • Changes affecting only people of particular ages, people at particular education levels,
       people in particular kinds of households, people at particular income levels, or people
       in particular occupations or industries.
   • Changes affecting only one region of the country.
   • Changes affecting the relative desirability of some regions compared with other regions
       in the same way for all people.

       In contrast, the data do support two other mechanisms: a decrease in the geographic
specificity of occupations and a decrease in the cost of information.

5. A Model of Information, Specialization, and Gross Migration
       Guided by our empirical findings, we construct a model in which broad-based changes
in information technology and the structure of labor markets impel all workers to migrate
less. Our model contains five features that make it suitable for our purposes.
       First, our model features only two symmetric locations, which can be thought of as
“here” and “there.” By formulating a model with only two locations, each of which contains
half of the population, rather than multiple locations with different populations, we limit our
ability to make inferences about net population movements to or from particular locations.
However, since it is gross migration rates and not net migration rates that have changed,
this modeling choice does not come at any cost. Instead, it imparts some important benefits.
Unlike existing models (e.g., Davis, Fisher, and Veracierto, 2010; Kennan and Walker, 2011)


                                              30
that have multiple locations, our model is simple enough to allow for the inclusion of richer
environmental features that are at the heart of theories of the decline in migration.
       Second, agents in our model can be employed in one of two distinct occupations or be
nonemployed. Each occupation commands a higher wage in one of the two locations. One
could think, for example, of banking in New York and acting in Los Angeles. Individuals in our
model have occupation-specific skills that evolve stochastically, so that there is heterogeneity
across households in their comparative advantage at working in an occupation, and thus their
labor market incentives for living in each location.
       Third, locations in our model are an experience good. This means that individuals
have imperfect information about the non–labor market (amenity) values that they derive
from living in each location. Only by living in a location do individuals learn about their
preferences for living there.
       Fourth, the labor market in our model is frictional, in the sense that individuals must
search for employment opportunities. Moreover, living in one location does not preclude an
individual from searching for a job in the other location. The possibility of remote search
is important because it allows us to capture the notion that even if the fundamental reason
for a move is a change in amenity-related preferences, the move may not take place until the
individual finds a job opportunity in the desired location.
       Finally, our model has a life cycle element, since we showed in section 3A that the
likelihood of migration varies greatly with age.

A. Environment
Demographics and preferences Individuals (which we will also refer to as households
or agents) live for T periods, t = 1, . . . , T . In each period, they live in one of two locations,
j ∈ {a, b}, and either work in one of two occupations, k ∈ {A, B}, or are nonemployed,
k = u. They choose locations, occupations, and job search strategies to maximize expected
discounted utility:
                                           T
                                           X
                                       E         β t−1 (yt + ut ),
                                           t=1

where yt is income and ut is utility derived from non–labor market features of the location
where the individual lives at age t. We let njt ∈ [0, t] denote the number of periods that the

                                                    31
individual has lived in location j, up to and including period t. Note that nat = t − nbt , since
in any period an individual who is not in location a must be in location b, and vice versa.

                                                                                0
Information and amenities Agents’ preferences for local amenities, v = v a , v b , are
fixed over time. However, individuals do not know these preferences and must learn them
over time, through living in the two locations. Each period, an individual who lives in location
jt receives non–labor market utility ut = v jt + t , that is, the sum of his underlying unknown
preference for the location and an i.i.d. random preference shock. The individual observes
only ut and must use this information to update his belief about v jt . We denote the initial
prior mean and precision of beliefs by mj0 and τ0 . We assume that the  shocks and the v
values are normally distributed with precisions τ and τv , respectively:
                                                         
                                      1             j     1
                              ∼ N 0, 2 ,        v ∼ N 0, 2 .
                                     τ                  τv

We assume that v a and v b are independent so that a strong preference for living in either
location imparts no information about the absolute preference for living in the other location.


Labor markets Labor markets are arranged according to an island structure in each lo-
cation, in the spirit of Lucas and Prescott (1974). There are two islands, one on which
production takes place and one populated by nonemployed households who receive a nonem-
ployment benefit. To find the production island, nonemployed households are required to
search. On the production island, there is a competitive labor market for each occupation.
Technology is constant returns to scale in skills, and labor is the only input for production.
Thus, the wage rate per unit of skill equals the marginal product of skills in each occupation;
we take this marginal product as exogenous.
     An individual at age t is characterized by his skills in each of the two occupations,
           B 0
             
st = sA
      t , st   , which evolve according to an exogenous Markov process normalized so that
E [est ] = 1 ∀t. These skills are revealed to the individual at the beginning of period t. (That
is, while our model features learning about amenity preferences, there is perfect information
about skills. We abstract from learning about skills because observed occupational mobility
is much higher than long-distance geographic mobility — implying that people will learn

                                               32
faster about their skills than about their geographic preferences — and because explaining
occupational mobility within geographic locations is not our goal.) We also assume that skills
have a deterministic life cycle component ψt to capture the evolution of average wages over
the life cycle.
        We denote the price of skills for occupation k in location j by pjk and assume that


                                                paB = pbA < paA = pbB .


This specification encodes two assumptions. First, islands and occupations are symmetric.
Second, there is a geography-occupation interaction in the price of skills: An occupation
commands a higher price per unit of skill when it is performed in the location where it has a
comparative advantage. We normalize paB = pbA = 1 and define θ = paA = pB
                                                                        B . Thus, θ > 1 is

the wage premium for working in a matched location and occupation.
        Incomes depend on skills st , the life cycle component ψt , and a time cost of moving.
Specifically, income is
                                         
                                         (1 − κ1migrate )ψt eskt pj
                                         
                                                                          employed agent
                                                                   k
                  yt (jt , kt , st ) =
                                         (1 − κ1migrate )q
                                         
                                                                          nonemployed agent,

where κ is the time cost of moving, q is the nonemployment benefit, and a worker who
migrates between periods t and t + 1 loses a fraction κ of his work time during period t.
        Both nonemployed and employed workers can choose to search for the production
island in either location (but not both), regardless of where they are currently located. Search
is costless and equally efficient for employed and nonemployed agents. Searches succeed with
probability λ.20 In addition, employed workers randomly lose their jobs and are forced to
move to the nonemployment island with probability δ.


Timing An individual enters period t with the following relevant information: the location
where he resides (jt ); his current island, that is, production or nonemployment (it ); his skills in

  20
    Although we could introduce search costs and differences in search efficiency, we do not need to do so to
explain the decrease in migration.


                                                          33
the two occupations at the end of the previous period (st−1 ); his beliefs about his preferences
for living in the two locations, conditional on information at the end of period t − 1 (mt−1 );
and the number of periods he has lived in location a (nat−1 ). Recall that nbt−1 = t − 1 − nat−1 .
       Within each period, the timing of events is as follows:

  1. The individual’s skills in each of the two occupations, st , are realized.
  2. The individual receives his non–labor market utility, ut = v jt + t .
  3. The individual updates the number of periods he has lived in location a, nat , and his
      beliefs about his utility from living in location jt , mjt t . He does not update his beliefs
      about utility from living in the other location because he has no new information about
      that parameter. A formal description of the learning problem and formulas for updating
      beliefs can be found in appendix A3.
  4. If the individual is on the production island (it = 1), he chooses his occupation for the
      current period kt . He may also choose to quit to the nonemployment island.
  5. The individual works (if employed) and receives his earnings or nonemployment benefit.
  6. After working, an employed worker may randomly lose his job with probability δ.
  7. The individual decides whether to search for the production island in either location,
      and the results of search are realized.
  8. Conditional on the outcome of search, the individual makes his migration decision, that
      is, he chooses his location for t + 1. This consists of the choice of a location-island pair
      (jt+1 , it+1 ). Migrants pay a moving cost κ, proportional to income. There is no cost for
      switching occupations.

       Given this timing, we can express the worker’s maximization problem recursively. The
associated Bellman equations are given in appendix A4.

B. Incentives to migrate
       Why might an individual in this model decide to migrate? First, consider a shock
to skills in one or both occupations. When θ > 1, so that each location has a comparative
advantage in one of the two occupations, a shock to an individual’s relative abilities in the two
occupations changes his relative earnings potential in the two locations. If θ is large enough
that the effect on earnings dominates any difference in the locations’ perceived amenity values,

                                                34
this shock to the worker’s skills will lead him to migrate. Second, consider a low realization
of non–labor market utility ut . Such a realization causes an individual to revise downward his
beliefs about his underlying preference for the current location, and hence to revise upward
his belief about his relative preference for living in the other location. If this change in beliefs
is big enough to overcome any difference in potential earnings across the two locations, then
the individual will choose to migrate. The likelihood of such a move depends on both the
tightness of individuals’ prior beliefs about their preferences for each location τ0 and the
information content of the signals that they obtain through living in a location, τ .
       The two reasons for migration just described can be considered the fundamental rea-
sons for moving in the model, since it is the exogenous shocks to either skills or beliefs that
change individuals’ relative desire to live in the two locations. However, because of the fric-
tional labor market, the proximate cause of migration may differ from the fundamental cause.
Consider an individual who desires to migrate because he has received a series of bad draws
for his amenity-related utility in the current location. Knowing that he desires to live in the
other location, this individual may search for a job there, yet may move only once he finds
a job. The proximate reason for this individual’s migration is the outcome of search — a
job offer in the remote location. Hence, if asked in a survey about his reason for migrating,
he may well answer that it was to take a new job. However, the fundamental reason for
migrating was actually the shock to his beliefs about his non–labor market preferences.
       Finally, the model generates one additional type of migration, which we refer to as
experimentation. Consider a worker in location a who believes that he prefers the amenities in
a (i.e., mat > mbt ) but is quite uncertain about his beliefs regarding location b (i.e., has a small
precision τtb ). This worker may migrate to location b, even though in expectation the amenities
there are worse, simply because the information gained from the move is valuable. However,
a move made for reasons of experimentation may lead to return migration if, once the worker
learns more about b, he becomes relatively certain that he prefers location a. Increases in
initial information will reduce both the initial experimental moves and the subsequent return
migration.




                                                 35
6. Quantifying our proposed mechanisms’ effect on migration
        Above, we showed qualitatively that our proposed explanations for the secular decline
of gross interstate migration fit the facts, while many other theories do not. This section
shows that our explanations succeed quantitatively: Given the size of the observed fall in the
geographic specificity of returns to skills, and for plausible improvements in information, the
decline in migration that our model predicts is consistent with what has been observed in the
data.
        Our quantitative exercise compares steady states of the model under different param-
eter values. We start by fitting the model to cross-sectional data from the period 1991–’97.21
Our parameterized model for this period closely fits the salient features of the migration and
labor market data. We then reduce the geographic concentration of returns to skills and
increase the available amount of information, compute the model’s new steady state, and
compare it with data from 2005–’11.
        We emphasize that the purpose of the quantitative analysis is not to attempt a full
structural estimation of a life cycle model of migration, occupation choice, and labor market
flows, as in, for example, Kennan and Walker (2011). Rather, our goal is to provide some
confidence that the two mechanisms we propose as the source of the decline in migration not
only are qualitatively consistent with the evidence, but also generate the right quantitative
drop in migration rates.
        A key element in our quantitative exercise is the size of the change in our two proposed
mechanisms that we feed into the model. For the decline in the geographic specificity of skill
prices, we can measure the change directly because there is a one-to-one mapping between
the wage premium for working in a matched location-occupation in the model, θt , and the
                                                                2 22
measured state-occupation interaction in earnings regressions, σξ,t . We measure θ in the
same years as the other data; thus, our comparison of steady states assumes that the economy
will quickly converge to a new steady state after a change in θ. Section 6C below analyzes
transition dynamics in our model. We find that under reasonable assumptions, convergence

  21
     We choose 1991–’97, rather than just 1991, as our initial condition because pooling several years of data
gives us sharper estimates of the empirical moments that we want our model to match.
  22
     If we ran the earnings regressions from section 4A in simulated data from the model and included skills
                                           2
as one of the controls, we would obtain σξ,t = (θt − 1)2 /4. Thus, θt = 1 + 2σξ,t .


                                                     36
is indeed rapid. In addition, our results are not particularly sensitive to this assumption
because, if convergence were slow, the solution would be to calibrate the model to lagged
changes in θ, such as the change from 1970 to 1990, that are similar in magnitude to the
contemporaneous changes.
       For the increase in information, there is no direct analogue in the data. The increase
in information that our mechanism emphasizes is an increase in the precision of initial beliefs
about local amenities, τ0 , because this precision reflects what individuals know about a place
without living there. It is difficult to say exactly how much the technological changes we de-
scribe above have increased this precision. However, we think it is unlikely that technologies
such as the Internet and low-cost travel could give people more information than what they
could learn by actually living in a location. Therefore, it is natural to measure the improve-
ment in information as a fraction of the precision of the annual signals, τ . We experiment
with improvements in initial information that are equivalent to a range of fractions of τ . If
we had a precise estimate of the change over time in the return or repeat migration rate, we
could use this estimate to discipline the increase in information. However, as figure 13 shows,
we cannot estimate this rate precisely even in the largest available suitable dataset. Although
we do not directly target the change in return or repeat migration, we do show below that our
model generates a decline in repeat migration that is consistent with the empirical evidence.
       Our quantitative analysis features an important asymmetry: We change the geographic
dispersion of returns to skills but not the geographic dispersion of the value of amenities. We
make this choice because a decrease in the geographic dispersion of amenity values would not
fit the data. In particular, the model predicts that job-related moves will rise when amenity
values become more similar, but in the data, job-related moves fell.
       In section 3, we showed that the age profile of migration is very different for college-
educated and non-college-educated workers. We therefore perform all of the quantitative
analysis separately for these two education groups. We do not have a theory of how well
people are matched with their initial locations, so we drop from our simulations the first
model period — when many agents move because of initial conditions — and match the age
profile starting with migration between the second and third model periods.



                                              37
                                    Table 1: Calibrated parameters
           Parameter                      Description                       Non-college      College
               q        value of nonemployment∗                                      2.10        0.42
               δ        separation rate                                             0.084       0.127
               ρ        skills process: autoregressive coefficient                  0.931       0.862
               σ02      skills process: initial variance                            0.304       0.036
               ση2      skills process: innovation variance                         0.138       0.161
               κ        moving cost                                                  0.52        0.24
               τ0       amenities: precision of initial prior beliefs                10.8         8.4
               τ       amenities: precision of preference shocks                     7.9        21.0
       ∗
           As multiple of average earnings conditional on working in the first model period.


A. Initial steady state: 1991–1997
Parameterization
           The model period is annual. We fix the annual discount factor, β, at 0.96 and the
arrival probability of a job offer, λ, at 0.5. Given our available data, these parameters are
difficult to separately identify from the remaining model parameters and have little impact
                                                                                                             1
on our ultimate findings.23 Also, we set the dispersion in amenity values across locations,                 τv
                                                                                                               ,
equal to 1. This choice is essentially a normalization. Migration decisions are determined by
beliefs about amenity values, not by the true values, so the dispersion of true values influences
decisions only by influencing the dispersion of beliefs.
           The wage premium for working in a matched location-occupation, θ, is set to 1.15,
consistent with the average measured state-occupation interaction in earnings in the CPS
from 1991 to 1997. This value implies that an identical worker earns 15 percent higher wages
in the matched location-occupation than the unmatched one.
           Ten parameters remain: the cost of moving, κ; the parameters describing the learning
process for amenity values (τ0 , τ ); the value of nonemployment, q; the separation rate, δ; and
the parameters describing the stochastic process for skills (a quadratic in t for the determinis-
tic component ψt , and an AR(1) process with initial variance σ02 , innovation variance ση2 , and

  23
    In particular, the arrival probability of a job offer is difficult to separately identify from the value of
nonemployment and the separation rate without data on flows in and out of employment. Since our focus is
on understanding migration, not labor market flows, we fix λ exogenously.


                                                      38
autoregressive parameter ρ for the stochastic component st ). We choose these parameters to
match the age profiles of migration, employment, mean log earnings, and the variance of log
earnings, as well as two scalar moments: the autocorrelation of log earnings and the average
log earnings difference between migrants and non-migrants.24 Although we cannot formally
prove that these moments identify the parameters, below we provide an intuitive argument
for why the parameters are identified, alongside our discussion of the model fit. Table 1 shows
the calibrated parameter values.

Model fit
        Figure 14 shows how the model fits the age profiles of labor market moments. The
graphs in the left column of figure 14 refer to the non-college sample, while those in the
right column refer to the college sample. Figures 14(a) and 14(b) show the fit for mean
log earnings conditional on working. Conditional on migration and occupation decisions,
which affect mean earnings through the geographic specificity parameter, θ, the age profile
of mean log earnings pins down the quadratic age profile for ψt . Earnings grow over the life
cycle both because of this deterministic age component and because workers move toward
locations that match their occupations as they age. (The fraction of workers in a matched
location-occupation rises from 62 percent to a maximum of 70 percent for the non-college
group and from 60 percent to 68 percent for the college group.)
        Figures 14(c) and 14(d) show the model fit for the variance of log earnings. Together
with the autocorrelation of log earnings, this profile pins down the parameters that govern the
stochastic process for skills (ρ, σ02 , σ2 ). The variance among the young determines the initial
variance σ02 . Conditional on ρ, the variance among the old determines the innovation variance
σ2 , because with ρ < 1 the variance among the old will be that of the stationary distribution

  24
     The earnings variable for the age profiles and the migrant–non-migrant earnings difference is usual weekly
earnings. The CPS measures this variable at the time of the survey — that is, after any migration — in
contrast to other income variables that are for the previous year and may include income before or after
migration. We calculate the migrant–non-migrant earnings difference as the coefficient on a migration indi-
cator in a regression of log earnings on the migration indicator and age indicators. For the autocorrelation
of log earnings, we cannot use cross-sectional CPS data, so we turn to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
and calculate the autocorrelation of residuals from a regression of log labor income on experience, experience
squared, and year indicators. (We make the PSID samples comparable to our CPS samples by including only
people ages 23 to 55. We use PSID data for 1968 to 1997.) When we ask the model to match the earnings
difference and autocorrelation, we run the same regressions in the model as in the data.


                                                      39
2.5                                                              2.5



 2                                                                2



1.5                                                              1.5



 1                                                                1



0.5                                                              0.5

                        Mean log wage: data                                               Mean log wage: data
                        Mean log wage: model                                              Mean log wage: model
 0                                                                0
       20    25    30       35      40      45    50   55              20      25    30       35      40      45    50   55
                             Age                                                               Age

        (a) Mean log wage, non-college sample                                (b) Mean log wage, college sample

 1                                                                1
                    Variance of log wage: data                                        Variance of log wage: data
0.9                 Variance of log wage: model                  0.9                  Variance of log wage: model

0.8                                                              0.8

0.7                                                              0.7

0.6                                                              0.6

0.5                                                              0.5

0.4                                                              0.4

0.3                                                              0.3

0.2                                                              0.2

0.1                                                              0.1

 0                                                                0
       20    25    30       35      40      45    50   55              20      25    30       35      40      45    50   55
                             Age                                                               Age

      (c) Variance of log wage, non-college sample                     (d) Variance of log wage, college sample

 1                                                                1

0.9                                                              0.9

0.8                                                              0.8

0.7                                                              0.7

0.6                                                              0.6

0.5                                                              0.5

0.4                                                              0.4

0.3                                                              0.3

0.2                                                              0.2

0.1                     Employment rate: data                    0.1                      Employment rate: data
                        Mean log wage: model                                              Mean log wage: model
 0                                                                0
       20    25    30       35      40      45    50   55              20      25    30       35      40      45    50   55
                             Age                                                               Age

       (e) Employment rate, non-college sample                              (f) Employment rate, college sample

                               Figure 14: Model fit, labor market moments.
                                                            40
                                   Table 2: Scalar targeted moments
                                                                    Non-college               College
                            Moment                                Data       Model       Data       Model
       Autocorrelation of log earnings                  0.767  0.822  0.780  0.811
       Migrant vs. non-migrant log earnings difference −0.094 −0.070 −0.001 −0.022



of the stochastic process. Finally, the curvature of the age profile and the autocorrelation
of earnings shown in table 2 determine the autoregressive parameter, ρ. Of course, these
parameters are determined jointly with all the other parameters of the model since, for
example, more migration and high levels of θ also serve to increase the variance of log earnings.
         Figures 14(e) and 14(f) show the fit for the employment rate. The average level of
employment over the life cycle pins down the separation rate, δ, because this parameter de-
termines the outflow from employment and hence the steady-state employment rate. The
slope and curvature of this age profile pin down the value of nonemployment, q, given migra-
tion choices as well as the stochastic process for skills and the mean wage profile ψt . This is
because the employment rate at a given age depends on where q falls in the distribution of
potential earnings, which in turn depends on age through ψt .25
         Figure 15 shows the age profile of migration in the model. The model closely captures
the overall level of migration as well as the way that migration varies with age for the two
groups. Our calibrated model yields an average migration rate for the non-college sample of
2.56 percent, compared with 2.69 percent in the 1991–’97 data; and an average migration rate
for the college sample of 4.40 percent, compared with 4.16 percent in the 1991–’97 data.26
The age profile of migration can be thought of as encompassing three moments: the level of
migration for the old, the level of migration for the young, and the curvature of migration
between young and old ages. The stochastic process for skills and the location-occupation
match premium θ together pin down the level of migration for the old, because old agents

  25
     Our model cannot match the decrease in employment with age for the college sample because the model
does not include any of the mechanisms that could produce such a decline, such as marriage and child-
rearing, differential taxation of secondary earners, and disability. We think it is unlikely that including these
mechanisms would significantly change the model’s implications for migration.
  26
     We compute these averages weighting all ages equally.


                                                       41
                                      Migration rate: data                                                 Migration rate: data
                                      Migration rate: model                                                Migration rate: model




  0.1                                                                0.1




 0.05                                                               0.05




   0                                                                  0
        20    25    30    35     40      45       50      55               20     25     30    35     40      45       50      55
                           Age                                                                  Age

         (a) Migration rate, non-college sample                                 (b) Migration rate, college sample

                                      Figure 15: Model fit, migration.

migrate primarily for labor-market-related reasons. (Old agents have largely completed the
learning process and have little uncertainty about amenities. In addition, they have higher
wages and thus respond more to the location-occupation premium.) Meanwhile, migration
rates among the young depend primarily on τ0 , which describes the tightness of individuals’
initial priors about the amenity value of each location. A tighter prior leads to lower migration
for experimentation reasons in the first half of the working life. Finally, the speed with
which individuals learn about their preferences, and thus the rate at which migration for
experimentation reasons slows with age — the curvature of the age profile — is determined
by the precision of the signals, τ .
         It may seem natural to conjecture that the age profile of migration should also pin
down the cost of moving, κ. But while κ affects migration rates, other parameters can adjust
to offset changes in κ. Instead, the moving cost in our model is primarily pinned down by
the mean difference in log earnings between migrants and non-migrants, which we report
in table 2. Two components determine the size and sign of this difference. First, there is
the average increase in earnings that an individual receives by moving, compared with the
counterfactual earnings that individual would have if he did not move. Such wage gains arise
primarily when individuals move to a matched location-occupation; thus, this component is
determined by θ. In the model, this component is strongly positive and yields an earnings


                                                               42
difference that is larger than in the data. Second, and offsetting these wage gains, the model
generates negative selection into migration because the cost of moving is a time penalty;
higher-wage workers pay higher moving costs when measured in units of income. Because
the cost of migration rises with income, lower-income workers are more likely to move. This
negative selection reduces the cross-sectional average earnings of migrants and increases the
average earnings of non-migrants. The larger is κ, the more negative selection occurs. Hence,
the moving cost is pinned down by the difference between the wage gains from moving that
θ alone would imply and the observed earnings gap between migrants and non-migrants.
      In the calibrated model, the annual occupational switching rate conditional on being
employed is approximately 6.3 percent for the non-college sample and 13.3 percent for the
college sample. Although Kambourov and Manovskii (2008) empirically document a similar
overall level for annual mobility between one-digit occupations, they report that workers with
more education have lower occupational mobility, contrary to the results in our simulations.
A likely explanation for the discrepancy is that our model does not feature occupation-
specific human capital, which Kambourov and Manovskii (2008) argue reduces migration
among highly educated workers. We think it is unlikely that introducing a complication such
as occupation-specific human capital would have a meaningful impact on migration rates in
our model. In both the data and the model, occupation switches tend to take place early
in the life cycle, but migration among the young in the model is mostly driven by amenity
preferences and experimentation, not by occupational switches.

B. Change in gross migration
Decline in geographic specificity of returns to skills
      We measure the effect on migration of the fall in geographic specificity of skills by
changing θ from 1.15 to 1.10 — consistent with the average measured state-occupation inter-
action in earnings in 2005 to 2011 — but leaving all other parameters the same and simulating
the model’s new steady state. Figures 16(a) and 16(b) show the results for the non-college
and college samples, respectively. The solid red line in each figure shows the age profile of
migration in the baseline model. The dashed blue line shows the age profile of migration
in the model with a lower geographic specificity of returns to skills. On average over all


                                             43
                      Migration rate: baseline model                                         Migration rate: baseline model
                      Migration rate: less geographic specificity                            Migration rate: less geographic specificity




  0.1                                                                      0.1




 0.05                                                                     0.05




   0                                                                        0
        20   25      30      35       40      45       50       55               20   25    30      35       40      45       50       55
                              Age                                                                    Age

                  (a) Non-college sample                                                   (b) College sample

                  Figure 16: Effects of reduced geographic specificity on migration.

ages, the decline in the geographic specificity of skills reduces the migration rate from 2.56
percent to 2.14 percent for the non-college sample and from 4.40 percent to 3.64 percent
for the college sample. These changes are equivalent to 42 percent of the observed drop in
migration for the non-college group and 52 percent of the observed drop for the college group
from the 1991–’97 baseline to the 2005–’11 period. Thus, the increased similarity of returns
to occupational skills across space can account for about half of the total observed decline in
migration between 1991–’97 and 2005–’11.
         It is not surprising that the decline in the wage premium for working in a matched
location-occupation has a larger effect for the college sample and that the resulting declines
in migration are concentrated among older workers. (In fact, for the college sample, this
mechanism has essentially no impact on migration in the first five years in the labor market.)
Higher-wage (i.e., older and college-educated) workers respond more to changes in θ because
these workers have more to gain in absolute terms from a wage premium that generates a
multiplicative increase in wages for being in a matched location-occupation. In addition,
older workers have more incentive to move locations to be better matched to their particular
skills because they are less likely to want to switch occupations before their careers end.
         In the quantitative exercise, we feed into the model an exogenous change in skill prices
and allow agents’ occupation and location decisions to respond endogenously. We can check


                                                                     44
whether our model features a quantitatively realistic endogenous response to the change in
skill prices by comparing the implied change in the distribution of workers across space with
the change observed in the data. In the baseline model, the Theil index of occupational
segregation is 0.092 for the non-college group and 0.083 for the college group. These indices
fall to 0.060 in both groups in the experiment with lower geographic specificity θ.27 The level
of the Theil index of occupational segregation depends on the number of occupations and
hence is quite different in the simulated model (with two occupations) than in the data (where
we consider many more occupations). To adjust for this difference in levels, we compare the
percent change in the Theil index in the model and the data. In the model, the change in
geographic specificity θ reduces the Theil index by 35 percent for the non-college sample and
by 28 percent for the college sample. By comparison, figure 11(b) shows that in the data,
from 1990 to 2010, the Theil index for broad occupations fell by 30 percent and the index for
detailed occupations fell by 23 percent. Since our calibration strategy did not target changes
in the Theil index, this close mapping between data and model should be taken as evidence
that our relatively simple model of migration and occupation decisions does a relatively good
job of capturing workers’ endogenous responses to changes in the geographic specificity of
skills.

Increase in information
          Figure 17 shows the decline in migration that the model generates when we give
individuals more information about their preferences for living in different locations. The
solid red line in each figure is the age profile of migration in the baseline model. The other
four lines show the age profile of migration when individuals are better informed about their
preferences. As discussed above, we model the information change as an increase in the initial
precision of beliefs about preferences for amenities, τ0 , and we set as an upper bound for this
increase the improvement in precision that would be obtained by living in a location for one
year, τ . The figures also report the corresponding reductions in migration if we increase
the amount of available information by smaller amounts: one-quarter, one-half, and three-
quarters of a year’s worth of signals. Overall, these relatively modest increases in information

  27
   Results are similar in the experiment below with more information as well as lower geographic specificity.
Adding information alone slightly reduces the index.

                                                     45
                     Migration rate: baseline model                                        Migration rate: baseline model
                     Migration rate: more information (1 year)                             Migration rate: more information (1 year)
                     Migration rate: more information (9 months)                           Migration rate: more information (9 months)
                     Migration rate: more information (6 months)                           Migration rate: more information (6 months)
                     Migration rate: more information (3 months)                           Migration rate: more information (3 months)
  0.1                                                                     0.1




 0.05                                                                    0.05




   0                                                                       0
        20   25      30      35       40      45       50      55               20   25    30      35       40      45       50      55
                              Age                                                                   Age

                  (a) Non-college sample                                                  (b) College sample

                       Figure 17: Effects of increased information on migration.

generate large declines in migration. For the non-college sample, the overall decline ranges
from a 7 percent reduction for three months’ worth of information to a 24 percent reduction
for one year’s worth of information. For the college sample, the overall decline ranges from
an 8 percent reduction for three months’ worth of information to a 25 percent reduction for
one year’s worth of information. Expressed as a fraction of the observed decline in migration,
this mechanism generates between 19% and 60% of the decline in the data for the non-college
sample, and between 25% and 74% for the college sample.
         Increased availability of information mainly affects young workers. Figure 17 reveals
that as retirement approaches, this mechanism has almost no impact on migration rates.
This finding is intuitive: By the time individuals reach the second half of their working lives,
most of the initial uncertainty about their preferences has been resolved, so changes in the
precision of initial beliefs have little effect on migration rates at older ages.
         We can check whether the informational changes we feed into the model are reasonable
by examining their effect on the repeat migration rate. (In the model, repeat and return
migration are identical because there are only two locations, so we compare repeat migration
in the model with repeat migration in the data.) In the baseline model, the one-year repeat
migration rate is 1.0 percent for the non-college group and 5.4 percent for the college group.
These rates fall to 0.8 percent and 4.4 percent, respectively, in the experiment with six


                                                                    46
                       Migration rate: baseline model                                         Migration rate: baseline model
                       Migration rate: less geographic specificity                            Migration rate: less geographic specificity
                       + more information (6 months)                                          + more information (6 months)


  0.1                                                                       0.1




 0.05                                                                      0.05




   0                                                                         0
         20   25      30      35       40       45       50      55               20   25    30      35       40       45       50      55
                               Age                                                                    Age

                   (a) Non-college sample                                                   (b) College sample

        Figure 18: Combined effects of geographic specificity and information on migration.

additional months of information.28 The levels of repeat migration in the model are much
lower than in the data, most likely because the model does not include heterogeneity in moving
costs κ and thus cannot reproduce a phenomenon that we think is likely to be important in
the real world: Migrants are those with lower moving costs and thus are disproportionately
likely to migrate again. However, adding six months of information reduces repeat migration
by a factor of about one-fourth to one-fifth in the model, a change that is broadly consistent
with the observed decline in figure 13.

Combined effect of the two mechanisms
          The previous two experiments showed that a reduction in the geographic specificity of
returns to skills is quantitatively consistent with the observed decline in migration at older
ages, while an increase in the availability of information is quantitatively consistent with
the observed decline in migration at younger ages. Since the data show that migration has
declined at all ages, it is natural to conjecture that the combined effect of our two proposed
mechanisms can quantitatively account for the overall observed reduction in migration. Figure
18 shows the results of an experiment in which we increase information by the equivalent of

  28
    The changes are proportionately larger or smaller when we add more or less information. Changing θ
alone has almost no effect on the repeat migration rate.



                                                                      47
                Table 3: Average migration rates in the data and the model.
                                                          Non-college     College
                    Data, 1991–’97                             2.69%       4.16%
                    Model, baseline                            2.56%       4.40%
                    Model, less geographic specificity∗        2.14%       3.64%
                    Model, +6 months’ information†             2.21%       3.76%
                    Model, both mechanisms∗,†                  1.76%       3.02%
                    Data, 2005–’11                             1.69%       2.69%
                ∗
                    Reduce θ from 1.15 to 1.10. † Increase τ0 by τ /2.


six months’ worth of signals and reduce the wage premium for being in a matched location-
occupation by the amount observed in the data. As shown in table 3, the model generates
an overall reduction in migration of 0.8 percentage point for the non-college sample, which
is equivalent to 80 percent of the corresponding decline in the data; and a reduction of 1.38
percentage points for the college sample, which is equivalent to 93 percent of the corresponding
decline in the data. Additional information would further reduce the migration rate. Since we
are somewhat agnostic on the actual size of the increase in information that took place over
the period from 1991 to 2011, and since the change in θ is somewhat imprecisely estimated,
we conclude that our combined mechanisms can account for at least one-third and possibly
all of the observed reduction in gross interstate migration in the United States.

C. Transition dynamics
       We claimed above that it was appropriate to measure θ in the same years as the
migration rate and to compare steady states with different parameters because convergence
to the steady state is rapid in our model. Here, we explore the model’s transition dynamics
to provide evidence for this claim.
       Figure 19 shows how the average migration rate in the model evolves after we change
the geographic specificity of occupations and the amount of information agents have. In the
experiment, agents begin in the steady state corresponding to our baseline calibration. Then
we impose two one-time, unexpected, permanent parameter changes: a decrease in θ from
1.15 to 1.10 and an increase in the precision of every agent’s beliefs corresponding to six

                                                 48
 0.05                                                                  0.05
                       Migration rate in baseline steady state
                       Transition path
                       Migration rate in new steady state
 0.04                                                                  0.04



 0.03                                                                  0.03



 0.02                                                                  0.02



 0.01                                                                  0.01
                                                                                           Migration rate in baseline steady state
                                                                                           Transition path
                                                                                           Migration rate in new steady state
 0.00                                                                  0.00
     0    5    10     15      20      25     30      35      40            0   5   10     15      20      25     30      35      40
               Years after change in parameters                                    Years after change in parameters

               (a) Non-college sample                                                (b) College sample

Figure 19: Transition dynamics of the average migration rate after a change in geographic
specificity and information.

months of information.
         As the figure shows, the migration rate reaches the level of the new steady state
within a few years. This rapid convergence occurs because the only potentially slow-moving
endogenous state variable in our model is the precision of agents’ beliefs, but our experiment
directly shocks this precision.
         Convergence in our model would be slower if we assumed that the new parameters
applied only to cohorts newly reaching working age and not to agents who were of working
age before the parameter change. Such an assumption would be quite strong, however. For
example, it would mean assuming that workers who were 20 years old when the geographic
specificity of occupations changed would ignore that change for the rest of their lives.
         In any event, our model’s overall ability to explain a large fraction of the decline
in migration is not sensitive to what we assume about whether parameter changes affect
new cohorts or all cohorts. This timing assumption has little effect on transition dynamics
related to information, because changes in information mainly affect young agents, and after
a few years, all young agents are from cohorts that reached working age after the parameter
change. Thus, the timing assumption mainly has an impact on transition dynamics related to
a change in θ, the geographic specificity of occupations. In additional experiments, we found


                                                                  49
that the migration rate reaches the new steady-state value after 20 to 30 years when the new
parameters apply only to newborn cohorts. Therefore, if we assume new parameters affect
only new cohorts, we should measure the change in θ over a period 20 to 30 years earlier than
the period when we measure a decline in migration. Figure 10(a) shows that the decline in
the geographic specificity of occupations across states from 1970 to 1990 was as large as the
decline from 1991 to 2011.29 As a result, our comparison of steady states based on 1991 and
2011 parameters gives quantitatively similar results to what we would obtain if we calibrated
the model to the change in θ between 1970 and 1990, simulated transitions assuming that the
new parameters affect only newborn cohorts, and compared the simulated migration rates in
1991 and 2011.

7. Conclusion
       We argue that interstate migration is falling in the United States because of a combi-
nation of two factors: a reduction in the geographic specificity of returns to different types
of skills and an increase in workers’ information about how much they will enjoy living in
alternative locations. Micro data reject numerous alternative explanations but do support
our two hypotheses. We build a model of migration that makes these hypotheses precise. In
the model, workers choose locations on the basis of both income and local amenities, search
for jobs both locally and remotely, and gradually learn about the amenities in different loca-
tions. The calibrated model provides a good fit to the data and shows that our mechanisms
can account for at least one-third and possibly all of the decline in interstate migration over
the past two decades.
       Our empirical analysis reveals a novel fact about U.S. labor markets: Returns to oc-
cupations have become less geographically specific over time. While our analysis takes this
change as exogenous and studies its implications for migration, looking into the causes of
the decrease in geographic specificity would be a valuable subject for future research. Un-
derstanding these causes is important for determining what policies, if any, are appropriate

  29
     In addition, improvements in information have continued over many decades, and it seems reasonable to
assume that the changes from 1970 to 1990 (related to airline and telephone deregulation) were similar in
magnitude to those between 1991 and 2011. But such an assumption is not necessary because, as noted, the
model converges rapidly after a change in information even if that change affects only new cohorts.



                                                   50
in response to the decline in migration. It would also be valuable to know whether similar
changes in the geography of work have happened in other parts of the world, and if so, what
the effect on migration has been. (Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak, 2011, show that Canada and
most European countries have not experienced a secular decline in migration, although a vari-
ety of factors such as European economic integration may cause the international experience
to differ from the U.S. one.)
       The decline in interstate migration is not the only recent change in gross worker flows
in the United States: Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2012) show that job creation and
destruction rates have also fallen in the past two decades, while Kambourov and Manovskii
(2008) show that occupational and industry mobility increased between 1968 and 1997. Be-
cause job-to-job flows and occupational and industry changes are much more common than
long-distance migration, we did not ask our model to explain these phenomena. However,
future research could examine whether there is a connection between changes in interstate
migration and changes in other gross flows, and if so, whether that connection helps explain
the fraction of the migration decrease that our mechanisms leave unexplained.




                                             51
                                           Appendix

A1. One-digit industry and occupation categories
         We use the following one-digit industry categories in figures 5(a), 11(a), and 11(c):

  1. Unknown
  2. Agriculture/forestry/fishing
  3. Mining/construction
  4. Durable manufacturing
  5. Nondurable manufacturing
  6. Transportation/utilities
  7. Trade
  8. Finance/insurance/real estate
  9. Services
 10. Government
 11. Not in labor force

         We use the following one-digit occupation categories in figures 5(a), 10, 11(b), and
11(d):

  1. Executive, administrative, and managerial
  2. Professional specialty
  3. Technicians and related support
  4. Sales
  5. Administrative support
  6. Service
  7. Farming, forestry, and fishing
  8. Precision production, craft, and repair
  9. Operators, fabricators, and laborers
 10. Military
 11. Unemployed not classified
 12. Not in labor force


                                                52
A2. Details on SIPP and census data on repeat and return migration
SIPP. We use data from the 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 2001,
2004, and 2008 SIPP panels. We omit the 1984 panel because it uses different groupings
of small states that would cause us to lose information and the 1989 panel because it was
followed for less than two full years.
       The SIPP interviews respondents every four months. Thus, the wave 1 interview tells
us the respondent’s location at baseline, the wave 4 interview tells us the location in year
t + 1, and the wave 7 interview tells us the location in year t + 2. We restrict the sample to
respondents who (a) had data collected in all of waves 1, 4, and 7 and (b) as of wave 4 were
working-age adults (defined as in our CPS sample) and lived in households where no one was
a member of the military. Restriction (a) implies that we exclude anyone who moves and is
not followed by the SIPP. Restriction (b) makes our sample as comparable as possible to the
working-age adults sample from the CPS (for which we measure migration between t − 1 and
t among people who are working-age adults in non-military households at t).
       We construct a combined state code for respondents in Maine and Vermont, and a
second combined state code for respondents in Alaska, Idaho, Iowa, Montana, North Dakota,
South Dakota, and Wyoming, because states within these groups cannot be distinguished in
some years in the public-use data files.
       We weight the data by the SIPP panel weights. For panels where the Census Bureau
constructed several panel weights, we use the panel weight that corresponds to the first
two years of the survey. For pre-2001 panels, we use the half-sample and stratum codes
provided with the public-use files to account for the survey sampling design when we estimate
confidence intervals. Starting with the 2001 panel, we use the panel replicate weights to
estimate confidence intervals.


Census. We use the 1 percent form 1 and form 2 state samples from the 1970 census, the
5 percent samples from the 1980 and 1990 censuses, and the 5 percent and 1 percent samples
from the 2000 census, all obtained from Ruggles et al. (2010). We restrict the sample to
respondents who were born in the United States, lived in the United States five years earlier,
do not have imputed birth states or locations five years earlier, and are working-age adults


                                             53
in non-military households at the time of the census. We use the stratum and cluster codes
provided by Ruggles et al. (2010) to account for the census public-use sample design when
we estimate confidence intervals.

A3. Updating formulas for beliefs
       This appendix derives the updating formulas for beliefs about amenities. Because the
prior and the signal are both normally distributed, the posterior after any number of signals
will also be a normal distribution and can be completely described by its mean and variance.
                 1
Let mt,n and     2
                τt,n
                       be the mean and variance of the posterior at date t after n signals. Using
Bayes’ theorem and the definitions of normal densities, we have the following relationship
between the kernels of the posterior, signal, and prior after one signal:
                                                                           
               1 2                               1 2               1 2
          exp − τt,1 (v − mt,1 )          ∝ exp − τ (ut − v) exp − τ0 (v − m0 ) ,
               2                                 2                 2

which implies
                                 2                            τ02 m0 + τ2 ut
                                τt,1 = τ02 + τ2 ,   mt,1 =                   .
                                                                  τ02 + τ2
                                                                         2
Repeating the same analysis given priors with mean mt,n−1 and precision τt,n−1 , we arrive at
the following general updating formulas for the moments of the belief distribution:

                                 2      2
                                τt,n = τt−1,n−1 + τ2 = τ02 + nτ2 ,
                                        [τ02 + (n − 1)τ2 ]mt−1,n−1 + τ2 ut
                               mt,n =                                        .
                                                    τ02 + nτ2

       Because there are only two locations, we only need to keep track of nat , the number
of periods lived in location a up to time t. The number of periods lived in location b is then
given by t−nat , and the precision of beliefs can be expressed as a function of nat . The updating
formulas conditional on the location jt where the agent lives in period t are thus:




                                                     54
                          jt = a                                           jt = b

            nat   = nat−1 + 1                             nat   = nat−1
                    (τ02 +nat−1 τ2 )mat−1 +τ2 ut
            mat   =          τ 2 +na τ 2
                                                          mat   = mat−1
                                 0    t 
                                                                  [τ02 +(t−1−nat−1 )τ2 ]mbt−1 +τ2 ut
            mbt   = mbt−1                                 mbt   =           τ 2 +(t−na )τ 2
                                                                                0       t   


The conditional distribution of the time t + 1 signal, ut+1 , given information available at the
end of period t, is normal with mean and variance given by

                             h                        i
                               jt+1         jt+1 jt+1        j
                           E ut+1 |jt+1 , nt , mt       = mt t+1 ,
                             h
                               jt+1         jt+1 jt+1
                                                      i           1         1
                          Var ut+1 |jt+1 , nt , mt      = 2        jt+1 2 + 2 ,
                                                          τ 0 + nt τ      τ

where we have used the fact that the time t + 1 location decision is known at the end of
period t.

A4. Bellman equations
       This appendix describes the Bellman equations associated with the decision problem
in the model of section 5. We consider the expected present value of an individual in period
t just before making his location and island choice for t + 1, (jt+1 , it+1 ). The state variables
at this point are xt = (jt , st , mt , nt , ot ), where jt is the current location, st is the vector
of skills in the two occupations, mt is the vector of beliefs about preferences over the two
                                                                              0
locations, nt is the number of periods lived in location a, and ot = oat , obt are indicator
variables denoting whether the individual has an offer to work in each location. Because
employed workers are free to choose either occupation, the current occupation is not relevant
when deciding the future location once we condition on ot ; hence, kt is not a state variable.
Furthermore, because individuals are always free to quit to unemployment, an individual will
never choose a pair (j, 0) over (j, 1) if he has an offer at location j. Nonetheless, even if jt+1
is the only choice at a given state, it is convenient to define the value functions in terms
of location-island pairs. We will denote this choice as yt ≡ (jt+1 , it+1 ). Consequently, let
Jt (xt , yt ) be the expected present value of an individual in period t who has state variables
xt and chooses the location-island pair yt .
       Agents make two other decisions in each period: occupation and search choices. It is

                                                     55
useful to define a beginning-of-period value function. Let Vt (jt , it , st , mt , nat ) ≡ Vt (Ωt ) be the
expected present value of an individual who begins period t on island it at location jt with
state variables (st , mt , nat ), and who makes optimal occupation, search, and migration choices
from then onward.
         The choice-specific value functions are then given by

                          XZ
     Jt (xt , yt ) =                [ut+1 + βVt+1 (Ωt+1 )] dF (ut+1 |mt , jt+1 ) Pr (st+1 |st ) − κt (xt , yt )
                          st+1u
                              t+1
                          XZ
                      =            [u0 + βV 0 (Ω0 )] dF (u0 |m, n, j 0 ) Pr (s0 |s) − κ (x, y) ,
                           s0 u0



where in the second line we have used primes to denote t + 1 variables. The migration cost
κt (xt , yt ) for individuals who migrate is κpjk ψt est for those who worked in period t and κq for
those who were unemployed, where paA = pB          b    a
                                        B = θ and pA = pB = 1.

         Using the conditional distribution of ut+1 derived above, we then have

                                            XZ
                                     j0
                J (x, y) = m + β                     V 0 (Ω0 ) dF (u0 |m, n, j 0 ) Pr (s0 |s) − κ (x, y) ,
                                             s0 u0



where u0 shows up inside the integral in the m0 component of Ω0 . This holds because m0 =
E [u0 |j 0 , n, m].
         We now derive the value function V . Define


                                              Lt (xt ) = max Jt (xt , yt ) .
                                                            yt



The available choices yt are determined by the offers ot . Expanding yt = (jt+1 , it+1 ) and
making use of the fact that J(x, (j, 1)) ≥ J(x, (j, 0)) always, we have


                                   Lt (xt ) = max Jt (xt , a, oat ) , Jt xt , b, obt .
                                                                                   



For ease of notation, we suppress the rest of the state space xt and the time subscript because
these choices are made within one time period, and we denote this value function as L(oa , ob ).
         Consider now the search decision. Let ζ denote the search decision, with ζ = 0 being

                                                            56
no search, ζ = 1 being search in the opposite location, and ζ = 2 being search in the current
location (which is relevant only for unemployed households). Let He (ζ) and Hu (ζ) be the
expected present values of employed and unemployed agents who choose search strategy ζ.
For an agent at location a, these search-specific value functions are


                            He (0) = L(1, 0)

                            He (1) = λe L(1, 1) + (1 − λe )He (0) − ce

                           Hu (0) = L(0, 0)

                           Hu (1) = λu,1 L(0, 1) + (1 − λu,1 )Hu (0) − cu,1

                           Hu (2) = λu,2 L(1, 0) + (1 − λu,2 )Hu (0) − cu,2 ,


where again we have suppressed the dependence on the state variables (j, s, m, n). These
functions are analogously defined for agents in location b.
       Finally, let K(j, k) be the expected present value of an agent in location j who works
in occupation k. These occupation-specific value functions are
                
                pj ψesj + (1 − δ) maxq≤1 He (q) + δ maxq Hu (q) if employed (k ∈ {A, B}
                
                  k
    K(j, k) =
                q + maxq Hu (q)
                
                                                                                      if unemployed (k = u).

The beginning-of-period value function V can thus be written as
                                                   
                                                   maxk K (k, jt , it , st , mt , nat )
                                                   
                                                                                           if it = 1
                 Vt (jt , it , st , mt , nat ) =
                                                   K (u, jt , it , st , mt , na )
                                                   
                                                                                           if it = 0,
                                                                               t



where the second line reflects the fact that if it = 0, the individual is unemployed and so
kt = u.

References
Bayer, Christian, and Falko Juessen, 2012, “On the Dynamics of Interstate Migration: Mi-
  gration Costs and Self-Selection.” Review of Economic Dynamics 15(3), 377–401.



                                                              57
Batini, Nicoletta, Oya Celasun, Thomas Dowling, Marcello Estevão, Geoffrey Keim, Martin
  Sommer, and Evridiki Tsounta, 2010, “United States: Selected Issues Paper.” Interna-
  tional Monetary Fund Country Report No. 10/248. Available at http://www.imf.org/
  external/pubs/ft/scr/2010/cr10248.pdf.

Berry, Christopher R., and Edward L. Glaeser, 2005, “The Divergence of Human Capital
  Levels Across Cities.” Papers in Regional Science 84(3), 407–444.

Borenstein, Severin, and Nancy L. Rose, 2008, “How Airline Markets Work . . . Or Do They?
  Regulatory Reform in the Airline Industry.” Forthcoming in Economic Regulation and Its
  Reform: What Have We Learned? Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Available at
  http://www.nber.org/chapters/c12570.pdf.

Borjas, George J., Stephen G. Bronars, and Stephen J. Trejo, 1992, “Self-Selection and
  Internal Migration in the United States.” Journal of Urban Economics 32(2), 159–185.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger, 1992, “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Educa-
  tion and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States.” Journal of Political
  Economy 100(1), 1–40.

Carlino, Gerald, and Satyajit Chatterjee, 2002, “Employment Deconcentration: A New Per-
  spective on America’s Postwar Urban Evolution.” Journal of Regional Science 42(3), 445–
  475.

Chib, Siddhartha, 2001, “Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods: Computation and Inference.”
  In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 5, ed. James J. Heckman and Edward Leamer, 3569–
  3649. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Coen-Pirani, Daniele, 2010, “Understanding Gross Worker Flows Across U.S. States.” Journal
  of Monetary Economics 57(7), 769–784.

Crozet, Matthieu, 2004, “Do Migrants Follow Market Potentials? An Estimation of a New
  Economic Geography Model.” Journal of Economic Geography 4(4), 439–458.




                                            58
Dahl, Gordon B., 2002, “Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with
  Multiple Markets.” Econometrica 70(6), 2367–2420.

Davern, Michael, Arthur Jones Jr., James Lepkowski, Gestur Davidson, and Lynn A. Blewett,
  2006, “Unstable Inferences? An Examination of Complex Survey Sample Design Adjust-
  ments Using the Current Population Survey for Health Services Research.” Inquiry 43(3),
  283–297.

Davis, Morris, Jonas Fisher, and Marcelo Veracierto, 2010,“The Role of Housing in Labor
  Reallocation.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper 2010-18.

Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger, 2012, “Labor Market Flows in
  the Cross Section and Over Time.” Journal of Monetary Economics 59(1), 1–18.

Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, 2009, “Spatial Growth and Industry Age.”
  Journal of Economic Theory 144(6), 2477–2502.

Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga, 2004, “Micro-foundations of Urban Agglomeration
  Economies.” In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4, ed. J.V. Henderson
  and J.-F. Thisse, 2063–2117. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Ganong, Peter, and Daniel Shoag, 2012, “Why Has Regional Convergence in the U.S.
  Stopped?” Harvard Kennedy School Research Working Paper 12-028.

Garrett, B. Dale, and Andre L. Williams, 2006, “Meeting 21st Century Demographic
  Data Needs — Implementing the American Community Survey: Report 6: The 2001–
  2002 Operational Feasibility Report of the American Community Survey.” Available at
  http://www.census.gov/acs/www/Downloads/library/2004/2004_Garrett_01.pdf.

Gelman, Andrew, 2007, “Struggles with Survey Weighting and Regression Modeling.” Sta-
  tistical Science 22(2), 153–164.

Gemici, Ahu, 2011, “Family Migration and Labor Market Outcomes.” Manuscript, New York
  University.

Glaeser, Edward L., 1999, “Learning in Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics 46(2), 254–277.

                                           59
Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto, and Kristina Tobio, forthcoming, “Cities, Skills,
  and Regional Change.” Regional Studies.

Guler, Bulent, Fatih Guvenen, and Giovanni L. Violante, 2012, “Joint-Search Theory: New
  Opportunities and New Frictions.” Journal of Monetary Economics 59(4), 352–369.

Harris, John R., and Michael P. Todaro, 1970, “Migration, Unemployment and Development:
  A Two-Sector Analysis.” American Economic Review 60(1), 126–142.

Internal Revenue Service, 2008, “Supplemental Documentation for Migration Data Products.”
  Available at http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/countmiguser0708.doc.

Kambourov, Gueorgui, and Iourii Manovskii, 2008, “Rising Occupational and Industry Mo-
  bility in the United States: 1968–97.” International Economic Review 49(1), 41–79.

Kaplan, Greg, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, 2012, “Interstate Migration Has Fallen Less Than
  You Think: Consequences of Hot Deck Imputation in the Current Population Survey.”
  Demography 49(3), 1061–1074.

Kennan, John, and James R. Walker, 2011, “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual
  Migration Decisions.” Econometrica 79(1), 211–251.

King, Miriam, Steven Ruggles, J. Trent Alexander, Sarah Flood, Katie Genadek, Matthew
  B. Schroeder, Brandon Trampe, and Rebecca Vick, 2010, Integrated Public Use Microdata
  Series, Current Population Survey: Version 3.0. [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis:
  University of Minnesota.

Koerber, Kin, 2007, “Comparison of ACS and ASEC Data on Geographic Mobility:
  2004.” Manuscript, U.S. Census Bureau. Available at http://www.census.gov/acs/www/
  library/by_year/2007/.

Krugman, Paul, 1991, “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography.” Journal of Political
  Economy 99(3), 483–499.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Edward C. Prescott, 1974, “Equilibrium Search and Unemploy-
  ment.” Journal of Economic Theory 7(2), 188–209.

                                            60
MacDonald, John S., and Leatrice D. MacDonald, 1964, “Chain Migration, Ethnic Neighbor-
  hood Formation, and Social Networks.” Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly 42(1), 82–97.

Mincer, Jacob, 1978, “Family Migration Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy 86(5),
  749–773.

Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak, 2011, “Internal Migration in the
  United States.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3), 173–196.

Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 2012, Public use dataset produced and distributed by the
  Institute for Social Research, Survey Research Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
  Mich.

Partridge, Mark D., Dan S. Rickman, M. Rose Olfert, and Kamar Ali, 2012, “Dwindling U.S.
  Internal Migration: Evidence of Spatial Equilibrium or Structural Shifts in Local Labor
  Markets?” Regional Science and Urban Economics 42(1–2), 375–388.

Pingle, Jonathan F., 2007, “A Note on Measuring Internal Migration in the United States.”
  Economics Letters 94(1), 38–42.

Reardon, Sean F., and Glenn Firebaugh, 2002, “Measures of Multigroup Segregation.” Soci-
  ological Methodology 32(1), 33–67.

Roback, Jennifer, 1982, “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy
  90(6), 1257–1278.

Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder,
  and Matthew Sobek, 2010, Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-
  readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

Taylor, William E., and Lester D. Taylor, 1993, “Postdivestiture Long-Distance Competition
  in the United States.” American Economic Review 83(2) (Papers and Proceedings), 185–
  190.




                                             61
Theil, Henri, and Anthony J. Finizza, 1971, “A Note on the Measurement of Racial Integra-
  tion of Schools by Means of Informational Concepts.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology
  1(2), 187–193.

Tolbert, Charles M., and Molly Sizer, 1996, “U.S. Commuting Zones and Labor Market Areas:
  A 1990 Update.” U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service Staff Paper
  No. AGES-9614.

U.S. Census Bureau, 1999, “State Population Estimates and Demographic Components of
  Population Change: Annual Time Series, April 1, 1990 to July 1, 1999.” Available at
  http://www.census.gov/popest/data/state/totals/1990s/tables/ST-99-07.txt.

U.S. Census Bureau, 2004, “Accuracy of the Data (2004).” Available at http://www.census.
  gov/acs/www/Downloads/data_documentation/Accuracy/accuracy2004.pdf.

U.S. Census Bureau, 2005, “Accuracy of the Data (2005).” Available at http://www.census.
  gov/acs/www/Downloads/data_documentation/Accuracy/accuracy2005.pdf.

U.S. Census Bureau, 2006, “Design and Methodology: Current Population Survey.” Technical
  Paper 66. Available at http://www.census.gov/prod/2006pubs/tp-66.pdf.

U.S. Census Bureau, 2009a, “Annual Population Estimates, Estimated Components of
  Resident Population Change, and Rates of the Components of Resident Population
  Change for the United States, States, and Puerto Rico:         April 1, 2000 to July
  1, 2009.” Available at http://www.census.gov/popest/data/national/totals/2009/
  files/NST_EST2009_ALLDATA.csv.

U.S. Census Bureau, 2009b, “Design and Methodology: American Community Survey.”
  Available at http://www.census.gov/acs/www/Downloads/survey_methodology/acs_
  design_methodology.pdf.

U.S. Census Bureau, 2009c, “Survey of Income and Program Participation Users’ Guide,”
  third edition (initially published 2001, revised 2009). Available at http://www.census.
  gov/sipp/usrguide.html.


                                           62
U.S. Census Bureau, 2012, American Community Survey, “Response Rates — Data,” De-
  cember 17, accessed Jan. 17, 2013. Available at https://www.census.gov/acs/www/
  methodology/response_rates_data/.

Yatchew, A., 1997, “An Elementary Estimator of the Partially Linear Model.” Economics
  Letters 57, 135–143.




                                         63
