                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DID THE NEW DEAL SOLIDIFY THE 1932 DEMOCRATIC REALIGNMENT?

                                          Shawn Kantor
                                         Price V. Fishback
                                        John Joseph Wallis

                                       Working Paper 18500
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18500


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




Fishback's and Kantor's work on the New Deal has been supported by National Science Foundation
Grants SBR-9708098, SES-0080324, SES-0214395, SES-0617942, SES-0617972, and SES- 0921732.
We are solely responsible for the views expressed in the article. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Shawn Kantor, Price V. Fishback, and John Joseph Wallis. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Did the New Deal Solidify the 1932 Democratic Realignment?
Shawn Kantor, Price V. Fishback, and John Joseph Wallis
NBER Working Paper No. 18500
November 2012
JEL No. H5,N42

                                              ABSTRACT

The critical election of 1932 represented a turning point in the future electoral successes of the Democrats
and Republicans for over three decades. This paper seeks to measure the importance of the New Deal
in facilitating the Democrats’ control of the federal government well into the 1960s. We test whether
long-differences in the county-level electoral support for Democratic presidential candidates after
the 1930s can be attributed to New Deal interventions into local economies. We also investigate more
narrowly whether voters rewarded Roosevelt from 1932 to 1936 and from 1936 to 1940 for his efforts
to stimulate depressed local economies. Our instrumental variables estimates indicate that increasing
a county’s per capita New Deal relief and public works spending from nothing to the sample mean
($277) would have increased the long-run support for the Democratic party by 10 percentage points.
 We further find that the long-run shift toward the Democratic party after 1928 was not a function
of the Roosevelt landslide victory in 1932. Roosevelt’s ability to win over voters during the 1936
and 1940 elections, however, did matter for the long-term.


Shawn Kantor                                         John Joseph Wallis
School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Arts       Department of Economics
University of California, Merced                     University of Maryland
5200 N. Lake Road                                    College Park, MD 20742
Merced, CA 95343                                     and NBER
and NBER                                             wallis@econ.umd.edu
skantor@ucmerced.edu

Price V. Fishback
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu
                                                                                                    1




          Did the New Deal Solidify the 1932 Democratic Realignment?



                                   Shawn Kantor, University of California, Merced and NBER
                                         Price V. Fishback, University of Arizona and NBER
                                      John Joseph Wallis, University of Maryland and NBER


        When I took office, the first thing we had to do was mount an aggressive response to the
        worst economic crisis we’d seen since the Great Depression, because we didn’t want a
        second Great Depression . . . And by the way, one of those steps was called the
        Recovery Act. And I want everybody to understand here’s what it did . . . Now,
        sometimes you’ve got people who were critics of what we did, but they’ll show up at the
        ribbon cutting. So I just want to make clear here what we did, because people try to
        score political points by attacking the Recovery Act, that’s what they’re attacking . . .
        relief for laid-off workers, investment in your community – 2.5 million Americans went
        to work today who otherwise wouldn’t have gone to work.

        – President Barack Obama, “Remarks by the President at Ottumwa, Iowa Town Hall,”
        April 27, 2010 (http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-
        ottumwa-iowa-town-hall)


I.     Introduction

       The election of 1932 was a turning point in the fortunes of the Democrats and

Republicans. Democrats had won just three of the previous ten presidential elections and had

held a majority in both the House and the Senate in only four of the previous 20 sessions of

Congress. After the “critical election” of 1932, Democrats won seven of the ten presidential

elections from 1932 to 1968 and majorities in both the House and the Senate in all but two of the

19 Congressional elections. The New Deal, of course, was not foreshadowed in Roosevelt’s

1932 campaign, and could not be the cause of the 1932 election results. Hoover and the

Republicans lost that election more than the Democrats won it. But there was nothing inevitable

about the Democrats’ becoming the majority party for the next fifty years, they could have

squandered the opportunity handed to them by the nation’s deepest depression, but they did not.
                                                                                                   2


       This paper seeks to measure the importance of the New Deal in facilitating the

Democrats’ control of the federal government well into the 1960s. From July 1933 to June 1941

(from fiscal year 1934 to fiscal year 1941), the federal government spent over $27 billion on

programs cooperatively administered by state and local governments aimed at relieving the

unemployed, building the nation’s infrastructure, and supporting farmers’ incomes, among other

programs. Total federal government expenditures in fiscal year 1929 amounted to only $3.2

billion, so the New Deal spent more each year on programs administered in conjunction with

state and local governments than the federal government spent in total prior to the onset of the

Depression. Our aim is to estimate the impact of that spending on electoral outcomes over the

course of the 1930s and on long-run changes in electoral support into the 1960s. This analysis

will not tell us why the Democrats became the majority party in the middle of the 20th century,

but it will help us to understand the role that an expanding federal government may have played

in securing that majority.

       The Roosevelt administration funded a variety of different programs in an attempt to

revive economic activity. The Public Works Administration (PWA) handed out grants to build

civil infrastructure, while the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA), the Civil

Works Administration (CWA), and the Works Progress Administration (WPA) granted state and

local governments funds to provide work relief and direct relief and to build and maintain

infrastructure. The New Deal launched the farm programs that paid farmers to alter their land

usage. New Deal agencies loaned funds to state and local governments, banks, homeowners,

farmers, and to industry in order to provide needed liquidity. Through the Federal Housing

Administration (FHA) the federal government sought to prop up the housing sector by insuring

home improvement and mortgage loans.
                                                                                                       3


       Not all states or counties fared equally in terms of federal support. There was substantial

geographic variation in how New Deal grants were distributed and there were great differences

in the recoveries of local economies during the course of the New Deal. We have constructed

measures of annual federal spending in over 3,000 counties from 1933 to 1939. We focus on

two sets of grants programs that potentially directly impacted local citizens’ economic well-

being: relief and public works spending and Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA)

spending. Relief and public works spending was used to provide employment by hiring people

to build public works projects or to perform public maintenance activities. In contrast, the AAA

grant payments were specifically designed to pay farmers to take land out of production in an

attempt to curtail supply so that prices, and consequently farmers’ incomes, would rise. The

AAA potentially had perverse economic and political effects because when farmers were

encouraged to reduce acreage, the demand for labor fell, and farm workers were disadvantaged.

Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005 and 2006) have shown that greater AAA spending in a

county caused retail sales to decline and encouraged greater out-migration.

       We test whether long-differences in the county-level electoral support for Democratic

presidential candidates after the 1930s can be attributed to these New Deal interventions into

local economies. We also investigate more narrowly whether voters rewarded Roosevelt from

1932 to 1936 and from 1936 to 1940 for his efforts to stimulate depressed local economies. Our

working hypothesis, based on fundamental principles in both the political economy and political

science literatures, is that local voters should have rewarded the president’s efforts to help their

economies emerge from the Great Depression, all else constant. The predicted impact of AAA

spending is more uncertain, however, and remains an empirical question, as the economic

benefits of AAA spending were unequally distributed across various segments of the farm
                                                                                                    4


population. In the process of estimating the contemporaneous electoral impact of local New

Deal spending, we must be cognizant of the potential for endogeneity that would tend to bias an

OLS estimate downward.1 First, if Democrats allocated New Deal funds strategically towards

places where support for the President or the Democrats was marginal or tenuous, then New Deal

spending might appear to lower Democratic support. Second, if we are unable to fully measure

economic shocks at the county level, we might omit a variable, such as a negative economic

event, that triggered greater New Deal spending but also placed blame on the Democrats. In

both of these cases, an OLS coefficient would be biased downward and we would underestimate

the true effect of New Deal spending on Roosevelt’s local electoral support. Therefore, we adopt

an instrumental variables approach to isolate the causal role of New Deal spending on

Roosevelt’s electoral outcomes.

       One seeming benefit of examining the long-term effect of New Deal spending is that the

allocation decisions in the 1930s might be considered exogenous to voting decisions decades

later. Because voting behavior is serially correlated, however, the worry about endogeneity bias

is still relevant even when thinking about voting outcomes over a long time horizon. In fact,

controlling for this bias is critical to understanding the causal effect of the New Deal on the

electoral success of the Democratic party. To preview the results, our instrumental variables

estimates indicate that increasing a county’s per capita New Deal relief and public works

spending from nothing to the sample mean ($277) would have increased the long-run support for

the Democratic party by 10 percentage points. This effect holds even when we control for

marginal changes in Roosevelt’s electoral support over the course of the New Deal period. We

further find that the long-run shift toward the Democratic party after 1928 was not a function of

1
  See Levitt and Snyder (1997) for a discussion of the endogeneity bias in early studies to
identify the political impact of government spending.
                                                                                                        5


the Roosevelt landslide victory in 1932. That is, the change in the Democratic share of the vote

between 1928 and 1932 does not explain much of the overall long-run shift toward the

Democrats from the period prior to the 1932 critical election into the 1950s. On the other hand,

Roosevelt’s ability to win over voters during the 1936 and 1940 elections did matter for the long-

term. The shift in the Democratic share of the presidential vote between 1932 and 1936 and

between 1936 and 1940 is statistically significantly related to the long-run success of the

Democrats. While the voters the Democrats gained in the 1932 election reflected Hoover’s

failure and indeed could have been ephemeral, the votes gained in the 1936 and 1940 elections

reflected the political benefits of the New Deal and those effects persisted well into the 1960s.

Our detailed empirical analysis of the 1936 and 1940 elections shows the importance of New

Deal spending on relief and public works to Roosevelt’s electoral successes, especially in 1936.


II.    Geographic Variation in the Great Depression and the New Deal Response

       The 1930s was a decade of lost output for the U.S. economy. By 1933 both real per

capita GDP and per capita retail sales had fallen to approximately two-thirds of their 1929 peaks.

In per capita terms, real retail sales returned to its pre-Depression level by 1939, while real GDP

did not return to its 1929 level until 1940.2

       Gauging economic performance at the local level during the 1930s is complicated

because modern indices of local economic activity, such as unemployment rates and personal

income, were unavailable. As an alternative, retail sales, which were reported for every county

in the U.S. in 1929, 1933, 1935, and 1939, is a credible measure of local economic activity. The

ratio of 1939 retail sales to 1929 retail sales at the state level ranged from a low of 77 percent in

Mississippi to a high of nearly 125 percent in South Carolina. The New England states appear to
2
 See series T81 deflated by series E135 and series F4 in U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975, pp.
210-11, 224, and 843). See also Romer (1992).
                                                                                                        6


have had the most success in recovering to their pre-Depression levels as every state had higher

real retail sales in 1939 than in 1929. Within many states there was substantially more variation

than there was across the states. Texas counties experienced some of the greatest variation as the

discovery of new oil fields led to an explosion of economic activity in some counties, while the

Dust Bowl and its aftermath contributed to a continuation of the Depression in some agricultural

counties.3

        The crisis of the Great Depression led the Roosevelt administration to distribute

unprecedented amounts of federal money in the form of nonrepayable grants. The federal

government distributed $16.5 billion in grants from 1933 to 1939. The grants represented a new

role for the federal government during peacetime, as the New Deal increased the federal

government’s outlays as a share of GDP from about four to eight percent. Furthermore, the

federal government began spending large amounts of money where it had spent very little before,

setting the stage for a long-term structural shift in the financial responsibilities of the national,

state, and local governments.4 As a share of government expenditures at all levels, the New Deal

raised the proportion of federal spending from 30 percent in 1932 to 46 percent by 1940 (Wallis

1984, pp. 141-42).
3
  See Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005, Table 1) for a detailed statistical description of the
distribution of retail sales performance at the state and county level.
4
  Our measure of New Deal spending does not encompass all federal spending, so our analysis
does not address the impact of all forms of federal expenditures. It should be noted, however,
that much of the New Deal represented an entirely new role for the federal government. For
example, agricultural spending, relief spending, many forms of lending to state and local
governments, and insurance of mortgage loans broke new ground for the federal government. In
addition, there were major increases in federal spending from the early 1930s on roads, public
buildings, public works, and conservation. The New Deal programs caused federal
intergovernmental and direct outlays on education to rise from 26 million in 1932 to 235 million
in 1934, on highways from 217 million to 599 million, on public welfare and employment
security from 2 million to 585 million, on housing and urban renewal from 0 in 1932 to 3 million
in 1934 to 71 in 1936. Spending on the primary tasks of the federal government prior to the
1930s generally did not display the same marked jumps. See Wallis (1985) and U.S. Bureau of
Census (1975, pp. 1124-26).
                                                                                                      7


       In 1940 the U.S. Office of Government Reports (OGR) produced county-level statistics

on federal spending on over 30 New Deal programs for the period March 3, 1933, through July

30, 1939. We divide the New Deal grants into two distinct categories that potentially had quite

different impacts on local economies: public works and relief grants; and Agricultural

Adjustment Administration benefits paid to farmers.5 We group public works and relief grants

together because the programs had broadly similar goals of hiring workers to build various

public works projects and to provide other public services. Relief grants were primarily

distributed under the aegis of the Works Progress Administration (WPA), the Federal Emergency

Relief Administration (FERA), the Civil Works Administration (CWA), the Social Security

Administration’s Aid to the Blind, Aid to Dependent Children, and Old-Age Assistance, and the

Farm Security Administration’s “rural rehabilitation” programs. The principal goal of these

programs was to provide immediate relief to the unemployed and low-income people, as 85

percent of the grants were used to hire the unemployed on work relief jobs. These relief jobs

ranged from make-work activities to maintenance activities to the building of sidewalks, post

offices, schools, local roads, and other additions to local infrastructure. The public works grants

included expenditures by the Public Works Administration (PWA), Public Buildings

Administration (PBA), and the Public Roads Administration (PRA). These grants were also

5
  The U. S. Office of Government Reports, “County Reports,” also provided information on
$10.4 billion in repayable loans under a variety of programs as well as data on the Federal
Housing Administration’s insurance of $2.7 billion in mortgage loans. We do not focus attention
on these programs for several reasons. First, the nature of the loans and insurance were
substantially different from the nonrepayable grants and it is hard to determine the true dollar
size of the benefits that the counties received. Second, in the analysis we seek to reduce
problems of endogeneity by using instrumental variables. We face difficulties in finding enough
effective instruments that will allow us to simultaneously identify more than two or three New
Deal variables in a system of equations. Third, by omitting the loans and FHA insurance we
reduce measurement error at the risk of increasing omitted variables bias in our estimates of the
impact of New Deal grants. We do not believe that the bias will be large from omitting the loans
and FHA insured loans because these variables are largely orthogonal to the grants variables.
                                                                                                   8


used largely to employ workers, but the programs were administered differently as they focused

less on hiring people from the relief rolls and, thus, were able to employ a broader class of

skilled workers. The public works programs also focused more on building large-scale projects

like dams, roads, schools, sanitation facilities, and other forms of civil infrastructure.6

       The federal New Deal expenditures that provided the primary aid to the farm sector came

through the AAA’s payments to farmers to remove land from production. The impact of the

AAA grants on local economic outcomes was likely smaller than the impact of the relief grants

and potentially even negative. On the one hand, farm owners might have received higher net

incomes from the AAA program. Payments typically exceeded the income farmers would have

earned on the land that they took out of production because the least productive land was

removed first. If the AAA succeeded in raising farm prices, the farmers also would have earned

more on the crops they produced. In addition, the higher prices and the limits on land usage

would have encouraged farmers to raise yields on the land they kept under cultivation. On the

other hand, the AAA had an adverse effect on the incomes of farm laborers, tenants, and

sharecroppers. There is evidence that sharecroppers and tenants did not receive their full share

of the AAA payments on the lands that they had cultivated and that some were demoted to wage

laborers.7 Further, the AAA payments required that the farmer remove land from production.

Consequently, the demand for farm labor likely fell, leading to declines in laborers’ incomes.8

Previous research has shown that the net effect of the AAA was in fact negative as greater AAA

spending in a county led to diminished retail sales and out-migration.9



6
  See Clarke (1996, pp. 62-68) and Schlesinger (1958, pp. 263-96).
7
  See Depew, Fishback, and Rhode (2012), Biles (1994, pp. 39-43), Whatley (1983), and
Saloutos (1974).
8
  See Alston (1981).
9
  See Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005, 2006).
                                                                                                          9


       As was the case with the recovery in retail sales, there was substantial variation in the

extent of per capita New Deal spending across the country. The patterns of New Deal spending

across states and within states differed for the two broad categories. Spending on relief and

public works was over $125 per person in the heavily urbanized states in the Northeast and

Midwest and was well over $200 per person in many western states. Meanwhile, relief and

public works expenditures were below $80 per person in many southern states. AAA

expenditures were highest in agricultural regions, particularly the West North Central region and

the Mountain West. The South received substantially higher amounts per capita than did the

Northeast, but much less than the amounts spent in the West and the West North Central.



III.   Estimating the Impact of the New Deal of Electoral Outcomes

       Our first goal is to measure whether changes in Democratic voting during the New Deal

and New Deal spending had long-term consequences for the success of the Democratic Party at

the county level after the “critical election” of 1932. To test this idea, we regress the long-

difference between the share of votes for Democratic presidential candidates averaged over

1952, 1956, and 1960 (𝑉i,1952-1960) and the average share of votes for Democratic candidates

between 1896 and 1928 (𝑉i,1896-1928), on a vector of New Deal grant spending in the 1930s

(NDPRi and NDAi), changes in Roosevelt’s support during the New Deal (ΔVi, t-(t-4)), a vector of

structural socioeconomic variables (Xi,1930), and state fixed effects (S). The analysis is conducted

at the county level (subscript i). Specifically, we estimate the following equation:

       𝑉i,1952-1960 – 𝑉i,1896-1928 = β1 ΔVi, t-(t-4) + β2 NDPRi + β3 NDAi + β4 Xi,1930 + β5 S + εi (1),

where εi is the error term.
                                                                                                     10


       Even in the context of a long-difference estimation, because voting patterns are serially

correlated, endogeneity of the New Deal variables may be a concern. That is, to the extent that

Roosevelt targeted New Deal funds to places where Democratic support was tenuous, then an

OLS estimate of the New Deal’s effect on voting would be biased downward. Therefore, we

also estimate a 2SLS model in which the first-stage equations are:

       NDPRi = θ1 INSTi + θ2 ΔVi, t-(t-4) + θ3 Xi,1930 + θ4 S + νi                            (2);

       NDAi = γ1 INSTi + γ2 ΔVi, t-(t-4) + γ3 Xi,1930 + γ 4 S + ξi                            (3),

where INSTi is a vector of instrumental variables that were selected because they are correlated

with the New Deal grants, but uncorrelated with the error term, εi, of the vote equation. The error

terms in the equations, εi, νi, and ξi, are assumed to be independent and identically distributed

and uncorrelated with each other.

       We chose 1960 as the terminal year because political scientists debate whether 1964 or

1968 were critical elections themselves. ΔVi, t-(t-4) is a vector of three variables measuring the

change in Roosevelt’s share of the popular vote in county i in election year t (1932, 1936, and

1940) relative to the Democratic vote share in the prior election. We include these variables to

determine whether and when Roosevelt was instrumental in the short-term in shifting long-term

voter sentiment toward the Democratic Party. The shift in the vote between 1928 and 1932

reflected Hoover’s failure rather than Roosevelt’s policies, while the shifts in votes between

1932 and 1936, and 1936 and 1940, reflect two different regimes under Roosevelt. If

Roosevelt’s policies, even beyond New Deal spending that we measure directly, really mattered

for long-run Democratic success, we would expect to see the 1936 and 1940 vote shifts play an

important role.
                                                                                                         11


        We include state dummy variables to capture unmeasured factors that were common to

the counties in the states but varied across states. The state dummy variables might capture state

policies and changes in state policies over time, differences in the cost of living across states,

policies related to state taxation and spending, or differences in state political organization,

strategy, or effort. One example of a major policy change during the 1930s for which the state

dummies would control is the introduction of income taxes and sales taxes in certain states. We

also cluster the standard errors at the state level to account for the fact that presidential politics

centers on winning majorities within a specific state, not county, so political strategy across

counties within a state were likely correlated.

        NDPRi is real per capita New Deal public works and relief spending in county i from

March 1933 to December 1939, and NDAi is real per capita New Deal AAA grants over the same

period. New Deal funds were not distributed randomly. In fact, there is evidence that they were

distributed at least in part in response to economic crises across the country. As a result, there is

the possibility that OLS New Deal coefficients will be biased if such crises were correlated with

voters’ decisions to vote for Roosevelt, especially if we cannot fully control for those

differences. Moreover, Democrats may have targeted spending in certain areas where the party

faced greater political challenges, which would also impart a negative bias to an OLS coefficient

of New Deal spending. New Deal administrators stated that their objectives in distributing relief

funds and, to some extent, the public works funds were to provide jobs for the unemployed, to

offset economic distress, and to promote economic recovery. The explicit goal of the AAA

program was to raise farmers’ incomes, although landowners in particular tended to be the

disproportionate beneficiaries. The empirical literature on the geographic distribution of

programmatic New Deal spending at the county level suggests that relief spending was
                                                                                                       12


distributed to areas where there was relatively more economic distress, while the public works

programs responded to higher unemployment.10

          The instrumental variables procedure requires that we find variables that were correlated

with New Deal spending but uncorrelated with the error term of vote equation (1). We use four

criteria in choosing appropriate instruments. First, the instrumental variables have to be

important determinants of New Deal spending and not themselves influenced by the New Deal.

The instruments we choose are from a time period prior to the New Deal or are geographic

characteristics of the county so the New Deal could not have influenced the variables, nor could

voting in the 1930s or after have affected the instruments. Second, the instruments had to

provide statistical explanatory power to at least one of the first-stage New Deal regressions. The

statistical relevance of a variable was determined using a t-test of its coefficient, and F-tests to

determine the joint statistical significance of the group of variables. Third, the instrument’s

coefficient had to have the expected sign in at least one of the first-stage regressions. We expect

the instruments to make economic sense in the first-stage regression so that the second-stage

results do not rely on spurious relationships from the first-stage estimation. Fourth, there should

be no reason to expect that the instruments themselves should be included as a correlate in the

second-stage voting equation.

          A number of scholars have used natural resource endowments or physical characteristics

as instruments in cross-sectional analyses in part because these factors were established long

before the decisions under consideration in the research were made (see, e.g., Frankel and Romer

1999; Hoxby 2000). The presence of a major river in a county, for example, likely influenced

public works and relief spending because the potential for flooding and the requirements for

10
     See Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis (2003).
                                                                                                  13


dredging and docks and other public services along the river provided local officials with ready-

made projects that they could propose to federal New Deal administrators.11 More major rivers

in a county meant more public works opportunities. In the case of agriculture, rivers were likely

to influence the types of crops chosen and, hence, the pattern of AAA spending.

       To create a useful instrument, we looked beyond the mere presence of a river because

every county in the United States has at least one river, and often many more, within its

boundaries. Therefore, we sought to create an instrument that describes each county’s access to

“major” rivers because the size of dredging and port projects was likely to increase as the rivers

increase in size. In prior research, we have experimented with three definitions of “major”

rivers. Our first definition of a major river is one that passes through 50 or more counties, which

includes only the Ohio, Mississippi, and Missouri Rivers. For this category, the variable records

the number of these three major rivers that passed through the county. The second variable

measures the number of rivers in the county that pass through 21 to 50 total counties and the

third variable measures the number of rivers in the county that pass through 11 to 20 total

counties. The three groupings captured nearly all of the major rivers in the U.S.12 While these

variables have proven effective in prior research, the parameterization that proved most powerful

in this context was a single variable measuring access to rivers that ran through 21 or more

11
   As one example, Hoxby (2000) used the number of streams in an area as an instrument for the
number of school districts on the grounds that they were natural boundaries that would have
influenced the location of school district boundaries. As seen in the text, we use major rivers for
different reasons.
12
   In 1,763 counties the value for each major river variable was zero. The maximum number of
major rivers within a county was two for the rivers passing through 11 to 20 total counties, three
for the rivers passing through 21 to 50 total counties, and 2 for the largest rivers. Summing the
total major rivers across all three categories, the maximum in any one county was 4. We control
for the possibility that bigger counties would have had more rivers by including county land area
in the analysis. We also experimented with a variable measuring the number of rivers in a
county passing through 5 to 10 total counties, but the coefficients in the first-stage regressions
were always small and statistically insignificant.
                                                                                                  14


counties. Adding the separate variables did not change the second-stage results appreciably, but

reduced the power of the first-stage instruments, so we have chosen to use only the 21-or-more-

county measure.13

       Could the rivers, however, have influenced voting decisions? Certainly, rivers influence

the location of cities, farming decisions, and economic activity, which, in turn, may have

influenced how people voted. However, many of the avenues by which the presence of rivers

would have influenced such voting – economic activity, urbanization, farm structure, state fixed

effects, homeownership – are controlled in the second-stage vote equation. Thus, for the river

variable to be an unsuitable instrument, it would have to have an additional influence on the

voting equation error term above and beyond these other control factors.

       In their analysis of the determinants of 18 New Deal programs, Fishback, Kantor, and

Wallis (2003) found that the elasticity of per capita AAA spending with respect to average farm

size in 1929 was larger than nearly every other elasticity among all the programs. Voting in the

1930s and after obviously could not have influenced average farm size in 1929, but we need to

consider whether average farm size belongs in the voting equation or whether it might be

correlated with unobservables in the equation. At first blush it would seem that farm scale could

have influenced the course of agricultural development during the 1930s and, thus, could have

influenced how people voted later. However, the likely mechanism through which farm size

would have influenced voting is through income opportunities. But income opportunities have

largely been controlled in the regression with the inclusion of retail sales per capita, farm
13
  We have experimented with other geography variables, in addition to access to major rivers,
but they proved not to have much explanatory power in the first stage in this setting. We tried
such instruments as the range in elevation within the county, the maximum elevation, access to
coastlines along the Atlantic Ocean, Pacific Ocean, Gulf Coast, and the Great Lakes, the
presence of bays, lakes, swamps, and beaches, and various measures of soil quality. In all of
these experiments river access and average farm size in 1929 (discussed below) provided the
most power in the first-stage estimation.
                                                                                                        15


ownership, the share of the county’s land devoted to agriculture, and a dummy variable

measuring whether the county experienced the Dust Bowl during the 1930s (see Hanson and

Libecap 2004).

       The results from the first-stage equations indicate the strength of the identifying

instruments for the public works and relief regression and the AAA regression. The specific t-

tests for individual instruments (not shown) in the first-stage public works and relief regression

show that the presence of large rivers led to statistically significantly higher New Deal spending,

as expected, while average farm size had no impact on relief and public works spending.

Similarly, the t-tests for the individual instruments (not shown) in the first-stage AAA regression

show that average farm size was strongly positively associated with more AAA spending in a

county, while access to larger rivers had little effect. The F-tests shown in the tables below

strongly reject the hypothesis that the coefficients of the two instruments were simultaneously

equal to zero in the two first-stage regressions at the 1 percent level. While the F-statistics often

are greater than 10, a standard benchmark for determining the risk of bias from weak

instruments, there are occasions when the statistic fall below. Generally, the instruments perform

less well as we add more correlates to the equations.

       The second idea we examine is whether the New Deal had a short-term impact on

Roosevelt’s electoral outcomes at the county level in both 1936 and 1940. As noted above, the

analysis is complicated by the fact that the endogeneity of New Deal grant spending will likely

bias an OLS estimate downward. Therefore, we seek to reduce the endogeneity bias of the New

Deal variables’ impacts by estimating the following set of equations:

       Vi t = φ1 NDPRi t-4 to t + φ2 NDAi t-4 to t + φ3 Vi,1932 + φ4 Ei t-4 to t + φ5 Xi,1930 + φ6 S + ηi

       (4);
                                                                                                           16


        NDPRi t-4 to t = λ1 INSTi + λ2 Vi,1932 + λ3 Xi,1930 + λ4 S + κi                             (5);

        NDAi t-4 to t = τ1 INSTi + τ2 Vi,1932 + τ3 Xi,1930 + τ 4 S + µi                             (6),

where Vi t is the percent of the vote for Roosevelt in each county i in year t (either 1936 or 1940),

NDPRi t-4 to t is real per capita New Deal public works and relief grants during the four year

period leading up to the election (specifically, March 1933 through December 1936 and January

1937 to December 1939) and NDAi t-4 to t is real per capita New Deal AAA grants over the same

periods.14 Vi is a measure of prior voting behavior in county i, specifically Roosevelt’s vote

share in 1932, before the New Deal activity began. Including the 1932 vote effectively makes

our estimation equation a quasi-first difference estimation. Ei t-4 to t is a vector of variables

measuring economic factors at the time of the election or that occurred since the last election that

might have influenced voters’ decisions in county i, such as changes in retail spending (a proxy

for changes in income), unusual bouts of wetness, drought, temperature, or whether the county

experienced Dust Bowl conditions. Xi,1930 is a vector of structural correlates, measured in 1930,

that might have determined how various interest groups aligned politically; S is a vector of state

dummy variables; and INSTi is the vector of instrumental variables discussed above. The error

terms of the equations are all assumed to be independent and identically distributed and

uncorrelated with each other.




14
   The Office of Government Reports (1939) reported county information for the period March
1933 to June 1939. The Office also reported state level information for each fiscal year for the
public works, relief, and agricultural grants. We split the county-level spending into annual
fiscal year estimates by using that fiscal year’s share of the state totals for the period March 1933
to June 1939. We then created calendar year estimates by taking the average of the fiscal years.
For example, the calendar year estimate from January 1 to December 31, 1936 is one half of the
estimate for the fiscal year from July 1, 1935, to June 30, 1936, plus one half of the estimate for
the fiscal year from July 1, 1936, to June 30, 1937. For the calendar year 1939 the estimate is
equivalent to the fiscal year estimate from July 1, 1938, to June 30, 1939.
                                                                                                    17


IV.     Long-Term Results

        In order to estimate the effect of the New Deal on the long-term electoral support for the

Democrats from the pre- to post-New Deal era, we calculated the difference in the Democratic

share of the presidential vote from 1952 to 1960 and subtracted the Democratic share of the vote

from the elections of 1896 to 1928. The regression results estimating equations (1)-(3) are

presented in Table 1. The OLS regression specification in Column (1) includes only the New

Deal variables and state fixed effects; specification (2) is a 2SLS estimation with the same

variables; column (3) only includes the marginal vote changes during the 1930s and state fixed

effects; specifications (4) and (5) include both sets of variables in an OLS and 2SLS setting,

respectively; and, finally, specifications (6) and (7) add structural socioeconomic variables

describing counties in 1930 to the OLS and 2SLS equations.

        The OLS results suggest that New Deal spending on public works and relief or on the

AAA played a trivial direct role in solidifying voters’ support for the Democratic party over the

long term. But our worry that an OLS estimate would be biased downward is clearly borne out

as we move to a 2SLS setting (column 2). The OLS coefficient of the AAA variable has a

negative sign, suggesting that the AAA spending harmed future Democratic election prospects,

but the coefficient is statistically significant at only the 10 percent level and very small in

magnitude. The OLS coefficient of public works and relief spending is positive but very small

and statistically insignificant.

        The use of instrumental variables, however, leads to a much stronger effect of New Deal

public works and relief spending while changing the impact of the AAA very little. The public

works and relief 2SLS coefficient of 0.0315 in column (2) of Table 1 is statistically significant

and economically meaningful. The 2SLS public works and relief coefficient increases in size
                                                                                                   18


and remains statistically significant when all of the additional correlates are added to the analysis

in column (7) of Table 1. The coefficient of 0.0362 suggests that increasing a county’s per

capita relief and public works spending from $0 to the sample mean level of $277 would have

caused the Democrats to have increased their support in that county by 10 percentage points over

the long-term.

       Column (3) presents OLS results when just the election-over-election marginal vote

changes and state fixed effects are included as explanatory variables. The short-term shifts in

Democratic voting between 1932 and 1936 and between 1936 and 1940 were related strongly to

the long-term shift in Democratic voting. Moreover, as shown in columns (4) through (7), the

marginal effects of the election-over-election vote shifts had effects on long-term voting that

were independent of the one related to New Deal spending. When both sets of variables are

included in the 2SLS estimation (column 7), the statistically significant effects of New Deal

relief spending and the marginal vote changes remain.

       The results in column (7) show that a 1 percentage point shift in the share voting for

Roosevelt between 1932 and 1936 statistically significantly translated into a 0.34 percentage

point increase in Democratic support over the long-term. Similarly, a 1 percentage point shift in

the Democratic vote share from 1936 to 1940 contributed a statistically significantly 0.39

percentage point increase in long-term Democratic voting.

       In contrast, the results show very weak long-run effects of the vote swing toward

Roosevelt between the 1928 and 1932 elections. This finding suggests that Roosevelt’s landslide

victory in 1932 was driven more by voters casting ballots against Hoover, possibly punishing

him for the weak economy, than they were voting for Roosevelt. Instead, it was Roosevelt’s
                                                                                                     19


ability to win or maintain electoral support between 1932 and 1936 and between 1936 and 1940

that had the strongest persistent effect.

       Finally, there were clear structural voting changes that took place after the 1932 election.

The results in columns (6) and (7) in Table 1 show that many socioeconomic shifts favored the

Democrats. Manufacturing workers, the foreign born, and counties with a greater share of tenant

farmers all shifted statistically significantly toward Democrats after the 1932 critical election.

Meanwhile, counties that were better off in 1930 tended to shift Republican. Specifically,

counties with a greater share of tax returns filed, greater homeownership, and greater radio

ownership in 1930 shifted away from Democrats. The statistically strong negative coefficient of

the black population variable seems counter to conventional wisdom that black voters supported

Democratic presidential candidates. The key to understanding this result is that counties with

large black populations in 1930 were in the South, which voted overwhelmingly Democratic in

the early 1930s. As white southern conservative voters began moving out of the Democratic and

into the Republican party, a shift that was not consummated until the 1980s, the Democratic

share of the southern vote fell. Black voters enfranchised by the Voting and Civil Rights Acts

would not appear until elections later in the 1960s.



V. Effects of New Deal Spending on Voting in 1936 and 1940

       There are a number of reasons why New Deal spending might not have been directly

correlated with Democratic voting in the 1930s. First, the South was solidly Democratic and had

been since the late 19th century. There was little that Roosevelt and the New Dealers could gain

from making large grants to the South and trying to incrementally increase the Democratic

voting share; they were going to win those states in any case. In addition, southern Democrats
                                                                                                     20


often opposed increasing spending for relief and public works projects in the South that might

have made black citizens more independent of white political patronage (Alston and Ferrie

1999). As a result, per capita New Deal spending in the South was lower than any other region

of the country despite the fact that the Democratic share of the vote was higher than in any

region of the country (see, e.g., Arrington 1970, Reading 1973, Wright 1974).

       Democrats had a strategic reason to channel spending toward states where a small shift in

voters’ decisions could shift a county, state, or region from the Republican to Democratic

column. This strategic spending dovetailed, in part, with New Deal efforts to relieve the

unemployed who were concentrated in urban industrial areas. The states in the belt running west

from New York to Illinois (what would become the “rust belt” in the 1970s) were heavily

industrialized and had been the states where Democrats and Republicans closely contested

elections in the late 19th century and early 20th century.

       As one might expect, the impact of New Deal spending on electoral outcomes in the

1930s is much stronger when the IV analysis is performed. Table 2 shows the results from OLS

and 2SLS estimations including and excluding various economic and socioeconomic controls.

All of the equations are run as quasi-first differences in the sense that Roosevelt’s 1932 vote

share is included as a control variable so the coefficients represent the marginal impact of the

New Deal variables on the 1936 vote relative to the 1932 outcome in each respective county. All

of the equations include state fixed effects and standard errors are clustered at the state level.

       In Table 2 the coefficients of the New Deal spending variables are always positive. In

each comparison of 2SLS coefficients and OLS coefficients with the same set of correlates, the

2SLS coefficients are always larger than the OLS coefficients, for both the AAA and the public

works and relief variables. The OLS and 2SLS coefficients on AAA spending are not much
                                                                                                    21


different, but the coefficients on the relief and public works spending are 30 to 40 times bigger in

the IV than in the OLS. In discussing the magnitudes of the coefficients, we focus on the 2SLS

estimates with all correlates in specification (6) of Table 2 to minimize the impact of omitted

variable bias. Increasing the relief and public works spending in a county from zero to an

amount equal to the sample mean of $145 would have increased Roosevelt’s share of the vote by

5.4 percentage points relative to his 1932 landslide performance against Herbert Hoover. An

increase in AAA spending from zero to the sample mean ($101) would have increased the

Roosevelt vote share by a more modest 0.8 percentage point. The smaller AAA effect is

consistent with the contrasting positive effects of the AAA for farm owners versus the negative

effects for farm workers, sharecroppers, and tenants who were forced to move down or off the

agricultural tenure ladder. The net effect is likely positive because the farm owners and those

who kept their positions on the tenure ladder were likely to be voters, while the losers from the

AAA were more likely to be disenfranchised.

       It also appears that the long-run effects of New Deal spending on presidential voting were

concentrated in the years from 1933 to 1936. Table 3 presents the results for the 1940 election

and the columns report both OLS and 2SLS results, using New Deal spending measured for

different time periods, and the results using various sets of control variables. The first two

columns present OLS and 2SLS estimates of Roosevelt’s vote share in 1940 using New Deal

spending from 1937 to 1939 (the last year for which we have county-level data). The only other

controls are Roosevelt’s vote share in 1932 and state fixed effects. We control for the 1932

election returns because, as we showed above, the New Deal had an impact on the 1936 election

results so including 1936 would potentially dampen the true effect of the New Deal. Columns (3)
                                                                                                      22


and (4) add structural socioeconomic variables to the equation using the 1937 to 1939 spending

data, and columns (5) and (6) add contemporaneous economic variables to them.

       The central difference between New Deal spending before and after 1936 is the degree to

which state governments determined the level of New Deal grant allocations to counties within

the states. Before 1936, most relief funds were allocated by the Federal Emergency Relief

Administration (FERA). FERA funds legally became the property of the states when they were

granted and the federal relief administration had difficulty controlling the administration and

allocation of relief funds within the states. In 1936 and after, the largest relief program was the

Works Progress Administration (WPA). The federal government had much more direct control

over the allocation of WPA funds than FERA funds. As Wallis, Fishback, and Kantor (2006)

show, the allocation of WPA funds was significantly more responsive to economic factors like

unemployment and lower incomes than FERA allocations, and significantly less likely to be

influenced by political factors. In light of the difference in pre- and post- 1936 methods of

allocating funds, it is not surprising that the effect of New Deal spending on voting behavior was

different in the two periods.

       As was the case in the 1936 voting model, the 2SLS coefficient of the relief and public

works variable is larger than the OLS estimate. Not surprisingly, the coefficient on the 1937 to

1939 spending on the 1940 vote is smaller than in the 1936 analysis and is not statistically

significant in 2SLS specifications (4) and (6) when additional correlates are added. If a county

were to receive an average amount of New Deal relief and public works spending in the 1937 to

1939 period ($132 per capita), then Roosevelt’s vote share in 1940 would have increased by 2.6

percentage points (132 x 0.0196) relative to 1932. The AAA coefficients for the 1940 voting in

Table 3 are even smaller than the modest effects found for the 1936 votes in Table 2. Thus, the
                                                                                                  23


main effect of the New Deal had become manifest by 1936 and New Deal spending after 1936

seems to have had only marginal effect on Roosevelt’s electoral support after 1936.15 When

paired with our long-term results in Table 1, it appears that it was early New Deal relief and

public works spending that had an electoral impact that had lasting consequences.

       New Deal public works and relief grants influenced long-term Democratic voting both

directly and indirectly. The direct effect operates through the coefficient of public works and

relief in specification (7) of Table 1, where we showed that a rise from no spending to the mean

of $277 over the span of the New Deal raised the share voting Democrat in the 1952-1960

elections, relative to pre-New Deal elections, by 10 percentage points. The indirect effect of

New Deal spending operated through the share voting for Roosevelt between 1932 and 1936,

since that change in vote share contributed to greater support of Democrats over the long-term.

Based on the coefficient from specification (6) in Table 2, increasing the relief and public works

spending in a county from zero to an amount equal to the sample mean of $145 would have

increased Roosevelt’s share of the vote by 5.4 percentage points in 1936 relative to his 1932

landslide performance against Herbert Hoover. After multiplying this change by the coefficient

of 0.3445 for the change in the vote from 1932 to 1936 from Table 1 specification (7), the

indirect effect adds another 1.9 percent to the long-term support for Democratic presidential
15
  This statement is supported further by regressions in which we estimated the impact of New
Deal spending after 1936 on voting in 1940, while holding constant Roosevelt’s vote share in
1936. Those regressions, which are available from the authors, show very small effects of the
New Deal spending.
        Moreover, we experimented with including New Deal spending variables that covered the
entire period from 1933 to 1939 rather than the period since the 1936 election. In results
available from the authors, the AAA coefficient is effectively zero. Meanwhile, the 2SLS
coefficient of public works and relief grant from 1933 to 1939 is positive and statistically
insignificant. An increase in per capita relief and public works spending from zero to the mean
of $277 over the entire span of the New Deal would have translated into a 2.4 percentage point
boost in Roosevelt’s 1940 vote share (277 x 0.0088). Thus, the main effect of the New Deal had
become manifest by 1936 and New Deal spending, broadly speaking, had only marginal effects
on Roosevelt’s electoral support after 1936.
                                                                                                     24


candidates. A similar procedure using the coefficients from Tables 1 and 3 suggests that the

public works and relief spending had an indirect effect through the change in the vote for

Roosevelt from 1936 to 1940 would have added an additional 0.6 percentage points in support

for Democrat. As a result the combined direct and indirect effects may have been as large as 12

to 12.5 percent.

       Finally, Table 4 reports the estimated coefficients of the structural and contemporaneous

economic variables from specifications (5) and (6) for the 1936 regressions in Table 2 and the

1940 regressions in Table 3. The results of the contemporaneous economic variables do not

indicate that Roosevelt particularly benefited or suffered as a result of economic fluctuations at

the local level. One strong effect, though, is that counties with greater per capita retail sales

growth in the inter-election period were more likely to side with Roosevelt in the 1936 election,

holding support in 1932 constant. Generally speaking, however, we find little evidence that

negative climate shocks in the form of the droughts, extreme wetness, or the horrors of the Dust

Bowl were tied to Roosevelt.

       The variables measuring the structural socioeconomic characteristics of the counties

showed that Roosevelt picked up support in 1936 and 1940, relative to 1932, from counties with

larger black populations, more urban residents, more manufacturing workers, and a larger share

of foreign-born residents (in 1936). Support was lower in counties with greater religious

participation (in 1940), greater homeownership, and in counties with a larger fraction of their

land in farms.
                                                                                                  25


VI.    Conclusions

       The New Deal programs that most directly affected the lives of unemployed Americans

during the Great Depression were the emergency spending and public works programs, such as

the FERA, CWA, WPA, PRA, PWA, and the farm programs. The New Deal distributed large

sums of money to state and local governments to provide employment and relief and to build a

wide array of public works. The New Deal paid farmers to change their production patterns in

an attempt to raise commodity prices. Nearly all of these grants represented a substantial and

novel change in the federal government’s role in the economy, especially local economies.

Recent studies have shown that the public works and relief programs had salutary effects in

raising personal incomes and retail purchases, and contributed to a reduction in crime and several

types of death rates. The AAA farm programs aided farm owners, but reduced economic

opportunities for share tenants, sharecroppers, and unskilled farm workers.16

       Was Roosevelt rewarded for his efforts to improve economic conditions? Yes. Drawing

together the implications of our long- and short-term analyses of voter support for Democratic

presidential candidates paints the following picture. The election of 1932 reflected an adverse

judgment on Herbert Hoover rather than a permanent shift in voting patterns towards the

Democrats. In contrast, the shift in or retention of Democratic votes between the 1932 and 1936

and the 1936 and 1940 elections helped to secure a permanent change in the electorate that lasted

into the 1960s. New Deal policies could not have affected the 1932 vote, but our results show

that the change in voter behavior between 1932 and 1936 was a direct response to the New Deal.

Our results suggest that an average increase in New Deal relief and public works spending

resulted in a 5.4 percentage point increase in the 1936 Democratic voting share, and a smaller
16
  See Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005, 2006), Fishback, Haines, and Kantor (2007),
Fishback, Johnson, and Kantor (2010), Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2011), Barreca, Fishback
and Kantor (2012), and Depew, Fishback, and Rhode (2012).
                                                                                                  26


amount in 1940. Given that an average amount of New Deal relief spending would have

increased long-term Democratic support by 10 percentage points, it appears that Roosevelt’s

early, decisive actions created long-lasting positive benefits for the Democratic party. However,

the effects of AAA spending were minimal because support from the farmers who benefitted was

partially offset by opposition from those who saw their opportunities decline. Finally, on net,

between 1936 and 1940 additional spending on public works and relief and the AAA added little

to the support Roosevelt had already gained by 1936.

       Why didn’t New Deal activity after 1936 sway voters much? Roosevelt was elected in

1932 with the hope and promise of providing “relief, recovery, and reform” to an ailing

economy. People were out of work, losing homes, struggling to subsist, Roosevelt brought

solutions and his administration’s performance in its first 100 days was legendary. The economy

was clearly improving from 1933 through 1937, although a double-dip recession in 1938 set the

economy back and no doubt caused concern for citizens expecting an end to their economic

frustration. Table 5 shows the unemployment figures throughout the 1930s. While

unemployment had fallen to 9.1 percent by 1937 (counting emergency federal workers as

employed), by 1938 it had jumped to 12.5 percent and only dropped significantly once the nation

was set on a wartime buildup. Farmers also had reason to be concerned as prices that they

received for their products languished in the latter part of the 1930s (see Table 5), something that

the AAA was expected to reverse. Therefore, the New Deal offers cautionary lessons for

politicians who offer high-profile policies, for which they expect admiration (see opening Obama

quotation), designed to target specific economic problems. Voters are willing to reward

policymakers when their efforts bear fruit, but when economic distress lingers, these same

programs serve as a glaring reminder to voters that the incumbent has failed to bring the
                                                                                                  27


solutions promised. Yet, as the Democrats’ electoral success in the post-1932 Realignment

period shows, voters have the capacity to eagerly look beyond arguably unproductive policy

interventions. In the end, it seems it was the New Deal effort that seemed to matter in voters’

minds, not the end result.
                                                                                                28


                                        REFERENCES

Alston, L. J., 1981. Tenure choice in southern agriculture. Explorations in Economic History 18
        (3), 211-32.
Alston, L. J., Ferrie, J., 1999. Southern Paternalism and the American Welfare State. Cambridge
        University Press, New York.
Arrington, L. J., 1970. Western agriculture and the New Deal. Agricultural History 49 (4), 337-
        53.
Barreca, A. I., Fishback, P.V., Kantor, S. (2012), Agricultural policy, migration, and malaria in
        the United States in the 1930s. Explorations in Economic History 49 (4), 381-98.
Biles, R., 1994. The South and the New Deal. University of Kentucky Press, Lexington, KY.
Clarke, J. N., 1996. Roosevelt’s Warrior: Harold L. Ickes and the New Deal. Johns Hopkins
        University Press, Baltimore.
Depew, B., Fishback, P. and Rhode, P., 2012. New Deal or No Deal in the Cotton South: The
        Effect of the AAA on the Labor Structure in Agriculture. Working paper, University of
        Arizona.
Fishback, P.V., Haines. M.R., and Kantor, S., 2007. Births, deaths, and New Deal relief during
        the Great Depression. Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (1), 1-14.
Fishback, P.V., Horrace, W. C., Kantor, S., 2005. Did New Deal grant programs stimulate local
        economies? A study of federal grants and retail sales during the Great Depression. The
        Journal of Economic History 65 (1), 36-71.
________, 2006. The impact of New Deal expenditures on mobility during the Great Depression.
        Explorations in Economic History 43 (2), 179-222.
Fishback, P. V., Johnson, R. S., Kantor, S., 2010. Striking at the roots of crime: The impact of
        social welfare spending on crime during the Great Depression. Journal of Law and
        Economics 53 (4), 715-40.
Fishback, P. V., Kachanovskaya, V., 2011. In search of the multiplier for federal spending in the
        states during the Great Depression. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper No. 16561.
Fishback, P. V., Kantor, S., Wallis, J. J., 2003. Can the New Deal’s three R’s be rehabilitated? A
        program-by-program, county-by-county analysis. Explorations in Economic History 40
        (3), 278-307.
Frankel, J.A., Romer, D., 1999. Does trade cause growth? American Economic Review 89 (3),
        379–99.
Hansen, Z. K., Libecap, G. D., 2004. Small farms, externalities, and the Dust Bowl of the 1930s.
        Journal of Political Economy 112 (3), 665-94.
Hoxby, C.M., 2000. Does competition among public schools benefit students and taxpayers?
        American Economic Review 90 (5), 1209–38.
Levitt, S. D., Snyder, J. M., Jr., 1997. The impact of federal spending on House election
        outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 105 (1), 30-53.
Reading, D. C., 1973. New Deal activity and the states, 1933 to 1939. Journal of Economic
        History 33 (4), 792-810.
Romer, C. D., 1992. What ended the Great Depression? The Journal of Economic History 52 (4),
        757– 84.
Saloutos, T., 1982. The American Farmer and the New Deal. Iowa State University Press, Ames,
        IA.
                                                                                                  29


Schlesinger, A., Jr., 1958. The Age of Roosevelt: The Coming of the New Deal. Houghton-
        Mifflin, Boston.
U.S. Census Bureau, 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States: From Colonial Times to
        1970. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Wallis, J. J., 1984. The birth of the old federalism: Financing the New Deal, 1932-1940. Journal
        of Economic History 44 (1), 139-59.
_____, 1985. Why 1933? The origins and timing of national government growth, 1933-1940.
        Research in Economic History 4, 1-51.
Wallis, J.J., Fishback, P.V., Kantor, S., 2006. Politics, relief, and reform: Roosevelt’s efforts to
        control corruption and manipulation during the New Deal. In: E. Glaeser, C. Goldin,
        Corruption and Reform. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Whatley, W. C., 1983. Labor for the picking: The New Deal in the South. Journal of Economic
        History 43 (4), 905-29.
Wright, G., 1974. The political economy of New Deal spending: An econometric analysis.
        Review of Economics and Statistics 56 (1), 30-38.
                                                                                                                                30


Table 1
OLS and 2SLS Estimates of Long-Difference Change in Democratic Support, 1896-1960

Variables                               Mean       (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
                                        (std.     OLS        2SLS       OLS         OLS        2SLS       OLS        2SLS
                                        dev.)
Dependent variable:                      -5.234
Long-difference in Democratic vote1     (18.56)
Independent variables:
Constant                                           -5.554     -2.089    -3.086       -3.569     -3.250      9.019     -8.763
                                                   (-11.0)    (-0.50)   (-1.88)      (-2.27)    (-0.80)     (2.00)    (-0.77)
Per capita AAA spending. 1933-            155.7   -0.0026    -0.0047                -0.0015    -0.0038     0.0003    -0.0018
1939                                    (249.9)    (-1.64)    (-1.77)                (-0.68)    (-1.18)     (0.18)    (-0.73)
Per capita public works and relief        277.1    0.0026     0.0315                 0.0018     0.0292     0.0012     0.0362
spending, 1933-1939                     (259.6)     (1.60)     (2.09)                 (1.60)     (1.97)     (1.56)     (2.48)
ΔDemocratic vote share 1932–1928          23.93                         0.0425       0.0466     0.0389     0.0843     0.0817
                                        (11.59)                          (0.48)       (0.57)     (0.52)     (1.28)     (1.14)
ΔDemocratic vote share 1936–1932         -1.665                         0.3517       0.3493     0.2937     0.3875     0.3445
                                        (7.647)                          (3.44)       (3.52)     (3.01)     (6.07)     (5.19)
ΔDemocratic vote share 1940–1936         -6.117                         0.4217       0.4064     0.3498     0.3815     0.3884
                                        (6.505)                          (2.95)       (2.60)     (2.37)     (3.08)     (3.10)
Pct. of population black, 1930            11.19                                                           -0.2714    -0.2491
                                        (18.44)                                                            (-3.41)    (-2.89)
Pct. of population living in urban        20.46                                                            0.0204     0.0041
area, 1930                              (24.42)                                                             (1.58)     (0.18)
Pct. of population manufacturing          4.582                                                            0.1329     0.1892
workers, 1929                           (5.034)                                                             (1.42)     (1.89)
Pct. of population foreign born, 1930     4.663                                                            0.8676     0.8134
                                        (5.804)                                                             (7.43)     (6.27)
Pct. of population illiterate, 1930       5.197                                                            0.0651     0.1962
                                        (5.520)                                                             (0.50)     (1.17)
Pct. of population belonging to           45.68                                                            0.0272     0.0519
religious organizations, 1926           (18.19)                                                             (1.12)     (1.53)
Pct. of county’s land in farms, 1929      64.38                                                           -0.0153     0.0528
                                        (26.95)                                                            (-0.91)     (1.37)
                                                                                                                                                 31


 Percentage of farm operated by              31.25                                                                       0.1608       0.2055
 tenants, 1929                             (15.35)                                                                        (3.20)        (3.45)
 Percentage of households owning             50.84                                                                      -0.0915      -0.0735
 homes, 1930                               (12.22)                                                                       (-1.44)       (-1.07)
 Percentage of households owning             51.93                                                                      -0.2952      -0.2492
 radios, 1930                              (18.38)                                                                       (-3.58)       (-2.83)
 Tax returns filed per capita               0.0171                                                                       -78.01        -69.77
                                          (0.0166)                                                                       (-2.88)       (-1.86)
 State fixed effects                                       Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
 F-statistic: Excluded instruments in                                   16.1                                  15.9                        13.3
 AAA equation (p-value)                                              (0.000)                               (0.000)                    (0.000)
 F-statistic: Excluded instruments in                                   10.5                                  9.88                        7.63
 relief & public works equation (p-                                  (0.000)                               (0.000)                    (0.001)
 value)
 R2                                                        0.74         0.63        0.76         0.76                      0.81
 Adjusted R2                                               0.74                     0.76         0.76         0.66         0.80         0.65
 N                                         2,901          2,901        2,901       2,901        2,901        2,901        2,901        2,901

Notes & sources: 1 The dependent variable is the long-difference between the average vote for the Democratic presidential candidate in 1952,
1956, and 1960, and the average vote for the Democratic presidential candidates from 1896 to 1928, inclusive. Standard errors are clustered at the
state level. See data appendix in Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005) for sources. Presidential voting in 1952, 1956, and 1960 was collected
from ICPSR file number 8611.
                                                                                                                                                        32


Table 2
OLS and 2SLS Estimates of Roosevelt’s Percentage of the Vote, 1936

                                                         Mean           (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                          (std.
 Variables                                               dev.)        OLS          2SLS        OLS        2SLS          OLS         2SLS
 Dependent variable:
 Roosevelt vote share, 1936                               66.22
                                                        (18.12)
 Independent variables:
 Constant                                                            7.082         4.414      13.42       3.236       -9.719         -63.7
                                                                     (2.51)        (0.94)     (3.39)      (0.67)      (-0.37)      (-1.45)
 Per capita AAA spending, 1933-1936                       100.9     0.0016        0.0040     0.0061      0.0072       0.0062       0.0076
                                                        (171.7)      (1.06)        (1.41)     (6.98)      (4.41)       (6.40)       (2.98)
 Per capita public works and relief spending,             145.1     0.0015        0.0661     0.0010      0.0282       0.0010       0.0369
 1933-1936                                              (169.4)      (1.02)        (2.41)     (0.93)      (2.06)       (0.74)       (2.16)
 Roosevelt’s share of the vote in 1932                    67.89     0.8656        0.8530     0.8177      0.7939       0.8160       0.7874
                                                        (18.21)      (20.8)        (17.9)     (22.1)      (20.0)       (22.3)       (18.4)

 Contemporaneous Economic Variables:                                   No            No         No          No           Yes           Yes
 Structural Socioeconomic Variables:                                   No            No         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 State Fixed Effects                                                   Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 F-statistic: Excluded instruments in AAA                                           18.8                   14.2                       25.2
 equation (p-value)                                                              (0.000)                (0.000)                    (0.000)
 F-statistic: Excluded instruments in relief &                                      6.92                   6.74                       5.69
 public works equation (p-value)                                                 (0.002)                (0.003)                    (0.006)
 R2                                                                   0.89          0.62        0.92       0.88         0.93          0.85
 Adjusted R2                                                          0.89                      0.92                    0.93
 N                                                                   2,901         2,901       2,901      2,901        2,899        2,899


Notes & sources: The instrumental variables that are used are the number of rivers in county flowing through 21 or more counties and average
farm size in 1929. State fixed effects are included in all models. t-statistics are in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. See
Table 4 for the coefficients to the Contemporary and Structural Socioeconomic variables from columns (5) and (6). See Table 1 for sources.
                                                                                                                                                        33


Table 3
OLS and 2SLS Estimates of Roosevelt’s Percentage of the Vote, 1940

                                               Mean          (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
                                          (std. dev.)       OLS        2SLS         OLS         2SLS         OLS        2SLS
  Dependent variable:
  Roosevelt vote share, 1940                   60.09
                                             (20.46)
  Constant                                                    4.273        8.226     12.89       10.45      -46.26      -55.92
                                                              (1.20)       (1.51)    (2.26)      (1.59)     (-1.35)     (-1.73)
  Per capita AAA spending, 1937-               54.82        -0.0048     -0.0014     0.0022      0.0005      0.0040      0.0016
  1939                                       (89.12)         (-1.06)     (-0.327     (1.42)      (0.13)      (2.44)      (0.24)
  Per capita public works and relief           132.0         0.0079      0.0446     0.0048      0.0144      0.0056      0.0196
  spending, 1937-1939                        (105.6)          (2.14)       (1.40)    (2.08)      (0.78)      (2.67)      (0.92)

  Roosevelt’s share of the vote in             67.89         0.8106      0.8109     0.7901      0.7868      0.7896      0.7848
  1932                                       (18.21)          (15.2)      (15.2)     (15.8)      (14.5)      (15.7)      (15.3)
  Contemporaneous Economic
  Variables                                                      No          No         No          No         Yes         Yes
  Structural Socioeconomic
  Variables                                                     No          No          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
  State Fixed Effects                                           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
  F-statistic: Excluded instruments                                        7.08                    8.22                   6.07
  in AAA equation (p-value)                                             (0.002)                 (0.001)                (0.005)
  F-statistic: Excluded instruments
  in relief & public works equation                                        12.6                    6.98                   6.61
  (p-value)                                                             (0.000)                 (0.002)                (0.003)
  R2                                                           0.88        0.85        0.90        0.90       0.90        0.90
  Adjusted R2                                                  0.88                    0.90                   0.90
  N                                                           2,901       2,901       2,901       2,901      2,899       2,899

Notes & sources: The instrumental variables that are used are the number of rivers in county flowing through 21 or more counties and average
farm size in 1929. State fixed effects are included in all models. t-statistics are in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. See
Table 4 for the coefficients to the Contemporary and Structural Socioeconomic variables from columns (6) and (6). See Table 1 for sources.
                                                                                                                              34


Table 4
Coefficients of Contemporaneous Economic and Structural Socioeconomic Variables from 1936 and 1940 OLS and 2SLS Regressions

                                                      Table 2 (1936)                     Table 3 (1940)
                                                 Mean                               Mean
                                                  (std.                              (std.
                                                 dev.)         (5)         (6)      dev.)         (5)         (6)
 Contemporaneous Economic Variables
 Percentage change in real per capita retail     0.2477     2.533        2.202      0.2044     1.156        1.080
 sales 1933-1935 or 1935-1939                  (0.1804)     (3.26)       (2.32)   (0.1812)     (1.01)       (0.97)
 Real per capita retail sales, 1935 or 1939       435.1    0.0044       0.0045       530.7   -0.0007      -0.0004
                                                (228.7)     (3.36)       (1.25)    (273.0)    (-0.36)      (-0.18)
 Months of excess or severe drought, 1933-        11.87   -0.0171      -0.0487       6.979   -0.0643      -0.0654
 1936 or 1937-1940                              (10.33)    (-0.58)      (-1.34)    (10.56)    (-0.94)      (-0.95)
 Months of excess or severe wetness, 1933-        1.194    0.0225      -0.2810       1.353   -0.1190      -0.1828
 1936 or 1937-1940                              (2.508)     (0.41)      (-1.10)    (2.583)    (-1.30)      (-1.38)
 Average monthly temperature, 1933-1936           1.014     20.61        62.40       1.008     59.21        66.99
 or 1937-1940 relative to 1920s average        (0.0168)     (0.81)       (1.46)   (0.0140)     (1.71)       (1.94)
 “Dustbowl” County                               0.0203   -0.7844       -3.683      0.0203    -2.200       -1.681
                                               (0.1348)    (-0.82)      (-1.66)   (0.1348)    (-2.28)      (-0.70)
 Structural Socioeconomic Variables:
 Pct. of population black, 1930                   11.20    0.1209      0.1249        11.20    0.0820       0.0876
                                                (18.44)     (4.83)      (4.72)     (18.44)     (3.52)       (3.47)
 Pct. of population living in urban area,         20.47    0.0482      0.0633        20.47    0.0538       0.0435
 1930                                           (24.42)     (5.97)      (3.32)     (24.42)     (3.49)       (2.72)
 Pct. of population manufacturing workers,        3.336    0.3353      0.3795        3.336    0.2104       0.2182
 1929                                           (3.389)     (6.48)      (5.21)     (3.389)     (4.39)       (3.89)
 Pct. of population foreign born, 1930            4.664    0.3349      0.3202        4.664    0.1560       0.1428
                                                (5.805)     (3.18)      (2.73)     (5.805)     (0.92)       (0.93)
 Pct. of population illiterate, 1930              5.190   -0.0301      0.0623        5.190   -0.0356      -0.0048
                                                (5.504)    (-0.51)      (0.76)     (5.504)    (-0.51)      (-0.06)
 Pct. of population belonging to religious        45.70   -0.0174      0.0082        45.70   -0.0374      -0.0353
 organizations, 1926                            (18.17)    (-1.04)      (0.30)     (18.17)    (-1.67)      (-1.63)
 Pct. of county’s land in farms, 1929             64.39   -0.0346      0.0040        64.39   -0.0615      -0.0504
                                                (26.93)    (-3.02)      (0.71)     (26.93)    (-4.19)      (-2.29)
                                                                                                                                                35


  Percentage of farm operated by tenants,          31.73    -0.0136     0.0113       31.73   -0.0337    -0.0243
  1929                                           (15.94)     (-0.77)     (0.56)    (15.94)    (-1.47)    (-0.91)
  Percentage of households owning homes,           51.86    -0.0961    -0.0804       51.86   -0.1380    -0.1374
  1930                                           (12.99)     (-3.23)    (-2.15)    (12.99)    (-2.98)    (-2.80)
  Percentage of households owning radios,          34.50     0.0144     0.0066       34.50    0.0518     0.0642
  1930                                           (17.65)      (0.42)     (0.17)    (17.65)     (1.06)     (1.25)
  Tax returns filed per capita                    0.0118     -33.88     -77.45      0.0118     25.66      28.80
                                                (0.0130)     (-1.56)    (-1.40)   (0.0130)     (0.94)     (1.03)

Notes & sources: The coefficients were drawn from the full regression of voting returns in the respective years and included the variables reported
here and in Table 2 and 3.
                                                                                                    36


Table 5
Unemployment and Agricultural Prices

Year         Unemployment      Prices received
                               by farmers
                               (191-1914=100)
1930         8.7               125
1931         15.3              87
1932         22.5              65
1933         20.6              70
1934         16.0              90
1935         14.2              109
1936         9.9               114
1937         9.1               123
1938         12.5              97
1939         11.3              95
1940         9.5               100

Sources: Unemployment is from Darby (1976, 8) and reports his corrected BLS series. This figure
includes emergency federal relief works as employed. Prices received by farmers are from the U.S.
Census (1975), series Da1337.
