                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN GREEN GROWTH

                                               David Popp

                                         Working Paper 18506
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18506


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2012




This paper was produced for the Green Growth Knowledge Platform (www.greengrowthknowledge.org),
a joint initiative of the Global Green Growth Institute, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, United Nations Environment Programme, and the World Bank, and also appears as
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper #6239. I thank Michael Toman, Marianne Fay, and
Stephane Hallegatte for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. In addition, the discussion
in this paper has also been informed by my work with various colleagues on other projects related
to technological change and the environment, including Richard Newell, Adam Jaffe, Nick Johnstone
and Jung Eun Kim. Their implicit contributions to this work are duly noted. Any remaining errors
are solely my responsibility. Views and errors remain mine alone, and should not be attributed to
the World Bank Group or its member countries. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Technological Change in Green Growth
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 18506
November 2012
JEL No. Q55,Q56

                                              ABSTRACT

By reducing the costs of environmental protection, technological change is important for promoting
green growth. This entails both the creation of new technologies and more widespread deployment
of existing green technologies. This paper reviews the literature on environmentally friendly technological
change, with a focus on lessons relevant to developing countries. I begin with a discussion of data
available for measuring the various steps of technological change. I continue with a discussion of
sources of environmental innovation. Given that most innovation is concentrated in a few rich countries,
this leads to a discussion of the remaining role for lower-income countries, followed by a discussion
of technology transfer. Because of the importance of market failures, I then discuss the role of both
technology policy and environmental policy for promoting environmentally friendly technological
change. The review concludes with a discussion of what environmental economists can learn from
other fields.


David Popp
Department of Public Administration
 and International Affairs
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
I. Introduction

        Recent rapid economic growth of countries such as China and India brings the promise of

a better life to much of the world’s population. As developing countries grow, attention often

turns to the environment.          For instance, a recent World Bank report shows that levels of

particulate matter (PM) in urban areas are over twice as high in low and lower-middle income

countries than in upper-middle and high income countries. As a result, these low and low-

middle income countries lose an average of 0.7% of gross national income from PM-related

damages, compared to just 0.3% for high income countries (World Bank, 2009). Similarly,

Dasgupta et al. (2008) provide estimates from a series of World Bank studies in the Middle East

and North Africa on the costs of environmental degradation from indoor and outdoor air

pollution, inadequate water and sanitation services, land degradation, coastal zone degradation,

and solid waste disposal. These costs range from 2% of GDP in Tunisia to 7% of GDP in Iran.1

        Such costs from pollution suggest that promoting a cleaner environment need not conflict

with efforts to promote economic growth. Green growth seeks to encourage economic growth

and development in a way that balances concerns about environmental harm with the need for

long-term economic growth. Reducing environmental harm can come from end-of-the-pipe

solutions that remove pollutants from the waste stream before they enter the environment, or

from behavioral changes that reduce the use of resources in production or consumption.

Reducing resource usage reduces the pollution that comes from these resources (e.g. reducing

fossil fuel consumption reduces greenhouse gas emissions) and reduces stress on the

environment from the extraction of natural resources.



1
  These studies consider the costs from indoor and outdoor air pollution, inadequate water and sanitation services,
land degradation, coastal zone degradation, and solid waste disposal. Thus, not all of these costs would be measured
using conventional definitions of national income.
         Technological innovation plays an important role in reducing the costs of both types of

environmental protection, and thus promoting green growth. One reason that upper-middle and

high income countries have been able to achieve better environmental quality for some pollutants

such as local air quality is through their use of advanced pollution abatement techniques.2 While

the use of these technologies often entails initial costs, which can engender debate over near-

term gains relative to reduced disposable income, the benefits they provide, which may come in

the form of improved health and quality of life as opposed to increased disposable income, are

often substantial.3      Similarly, the development of more efficient appliances, vehicles, and

industrial equipment allows for greater energy efficiency and lower cost of resource use. Many

of the fixed costs of technology development have already been paid by developed countries.

Thus, in many cases, it is the transfer of these technologies to developing countries that is

important.

         Moreover, the concern is not just for the local environment in developing countries.

Global environmental problems are also an issue. While emissions in high-income countries

begin to stabilize, the share of emissions coming from developing countries is growing. In 2010,

75% of the growth in CO2 emissions came from non-OECD countries.4 CO2 emissions from

non-OECD countries are projected to be nearly double of those from OECD countries by 2035

(Energy Information Administration, 2010). Due to the growth in emissions from developing

countries, designing policy that encourages the transfer of clean technologies to developing

countries has been a major discussion point in climate negotiations.

         This paper reviews the growing literature examining the links between technological

change, environmental policy, and economic performance.                       Technological change proceeds in

2
  See, for example, Dasgupta et al. (2002).
3
  For a recent review of such studies in a U.S. context, see Graham (2007).
4
  http://www.iea.org/index_info.asp?id=1959, accessed August 5, 2011.

                                                         2
three stages. At each stage, incentives, in the form of prices or regulations, affect the

development and adoption of new technologies:

       Invention: an idea must be born.

       Innovation: new ideas are then developed into commercially viable products. Often, these

           two stages of technological change are lumped together under the rubric of research

           and development (R&D).

       Diffusion: to have an effect on the economy, individuals must choose to make use of the

           innovation.

       I use this review to identify gaps in the literature at each of these three stages that merit

further study to advance the promotion of green growth. I begin with a discussion of data

available for measuring the various steps of technological change. I continue with a discussion

of where environmental innovation comes from. Given that most innovation is concentrated in a

few rich countries, this leads to a discussion of the remaining role for lower-income countries. I

note a growing role for emerging economies, and identify three key questions pertaining to green

R&D in developing countries. These questions all focus on the links between innovation and

demand: (1) promoting the development of technologies with limited markets in high-income

countries, (2) the role of adaptive R&D, and (3) the potential for emerging economies to meet the

green technology needs of high-income countries.

       Since much R&D occurs in high-income countries, I continue with a discussion of

technology transfer. Beginning with diffusion across countries, differences among countries

raise important questions, such as (1) understanding how the technological distance between

countries affect the transfer of green technologies, (2) whether lessons learned from the recent

successes of India and China are generalizable to smaller countries. Similarly, within countries,



                                                3
diffusion of green technologies can be affected by characteristics that are unique to developing

countries. For instance, limited access to credit markets may make financing green technology

difficult. Research on alternative financing mechanisms should aim to address concerns over

access to financing.

       Because of the importance of market failures, I then discuss the role of both technology

policy and environmental policy for promoting environmentally friendly technological change.

Three key questions emerge. First, while there is consensus in the literature that both policies

play a role, most of the exiting research focuses on high-income countries that emphasize the

creation of new green technologies. Thus, an important knowledge gap is understanding the

balance of policies needed in developing countries, where adaptive R&D and technology transfer

will play a larger role. Second, to build stronger support for green innovations even without

policy interventions in developing countries, additional research should better quantify the

potential of secondary benefits from green technologies. Third, given that the effectiveness of

policy depends on good governance, the links between governance and green growth also

deserve further study.

       The review concludes with a discussion of more general technology issues, such as what

environmental economists can learn from other fields. While not exclusive, much of the focus in

the paper is on energy use and climate change. This is consistent with general trends in the

literature, given recent interest in the climate problem.   While not emphasized here, other

technologies will also be important for low-income countries, particularly pertaining to resource

use (such as water) and agricultural productivity. As noted in the concluding section, future

work should also explore the differences that emerge among various technological fields.




                                               4
II. Data on Technological Change

       To begin our review, it is important to know how technology is measured.              The

knowledge that makes any technology a valuable improvement is an abstract concept. We do not

observe knowledge directly. Rather, we observe inputs that create knowledge or outputs that

contain knowledge.    Similarly, knowledge is rarely given directly to developing countries.

Rather, it comes embodied in products bought and sold through international trade, or can be

tacit knowledge provided by the education of a worker. It is these indirect inputs and outputs of

the knowledge-generation process that are used to measure technological change, both as it

pertains to green growth and more generally.

       Research and development (R&D) data offer a straightforward measure of innovative

activity. R&D is an input into the innovation process. Variations in environmentally-friendly

R&D spending tell us the relative importance placed on such innovation. However, as R&D is

an input, measures of R&D effort do not reveal information about outcomes of the innovation

process. Moreover, detailed information on specific types of R&D is often unavailable. For

instance, in a survey of energy R&D activity, Gallagher et al. (2011) note that while government

spending on energy R&D is widely available for International Energy Agency (IEA) member

nations, data on energy R&D efforts from private firms are scarce. As an example of such public

R&D data, Table 1 presents public energy R&D budgets for various IEA member countries for

selected years. In general, public support for energy R&D has grown in recent years, with the

most notable increase coming from energy efficiency and renewable energy research. Moreover,

even publicly available R&D data are noisy. Data collection may vary by country. For instance,

one country may include basic R&D on semiconductors as investment in photovoltaic research

while another may not (Gallagher et al. 2011).



                                                 5
        Patents offer an alternative measure of inventive activity. Patents provide a detailed

record of each invention. From the bibliographic data on a patent, the researcher can learn the

identity and home country of the inventor, read a description of the invention, and see references

to earlier patents. Using patent data, it is possible for researchers to collect data in highly

disaggregated forms. Whereas R&D data are typically available only for specific industries or

general applications,5 patent classifications can be used to distinguish between different types of

R&D at great detail, such as air pollution control devices designed to reduce NOX emissions

versus devices designed to control SO2 emissions.6 In addition, economists have found that

patents, sorted by their date of application, provide a good indicator of R&D activity, as patent

applications are usually filed early in the research process (see, for example, Griliches 1990). As

a result, patent counts not only serve as a measure of innovative output, but are indicative of the

level of innovative activity itself. A recent OECD data collection effort makes data on 37

different types of environmental technologies readily available to researchers.7

        However, patent data also have drawbacks. While patent counts should be expected to

increase as R&D activity increases, the correlation need not be exact. Variations in patent law,

both across countries and across time, must be controlled for to properly interpret patent data.

Furthermore, the existence of a patent does not mean that the technology has been adopted.

Indeed, studies of the economic value of patents find that most patents have little commercial

value, suggesting that adoption of most patented inventions is not widespread (see, for example,

Lanjouw et al. 1998). Moreover, firms are more likely to use patents to protect new products



5
  For example, in the US, private R&D is available from 1972-1994 for air pollution control, but it is not broken
down by pollutant.
6
  For example, US patent classes 423/235-423/239 pertain to control of “nitrogen or (a) nitrogenous component”,
and patent classes 423/242 – 423/244 and 423/569 – 423/570 pertain to control of sulfur compounds. Using patent
databases, it is possible to download all patents in these classes.
7
  Accessible at http://stats.oecd.org/index.aspx, accessed September 21, 2011.

                                                        6
than new processes (Levin et al. 1987). As such, patent data may understate changes in the

nature of innovation as countries shift their environmental policy focus from end-of-the-pipe to

integrated solutions leading to modified production process.8 Despite these caveats, patent data

offer several advantages when studying technological change and its effect on the environment,

and have been widely used in studies of eco-innovation.9 For instance, Johnstone et al. (2010)

show that patenting activity for renewable energy technologies, measured by applications for

renewable energy patents submitted to the European Patent Office (EPO), has increased

dramatically in recent years, as both national policies and international efforts to combat climate

change begin to provide incentives for innovation. Figure 1 illustrates these trends for five

technologies: wind, solar, geothermal, ocean power, and electricity from biomass and waste.

With the exception of biomass and waste, each technology experiences an increase in innovation

after signing of the Kyoto Protocol in December 1997.

        Whereas patents represent an innovation that is ready to be commercialized, scientific

publications can be used to measure research at earlier stages of technology development. In

particular, data on scientific publications can be useful for research carried out by public sector

or non-profit organizations that place less emphasis on obtaining patents.                      As there is no

equivalent to a patent classification system for publications, keyword searches of titles and

abstracts are often used to identify relevant publications. This search strategy may introduce a

biased towards research from English-speaking countries that should be considered when

comparing publication trends across countries.




8
  In some cases, process changes may be captured by patent data, particularly when third-party suppliers provide
relevant equipment or materials. For an example, see Popp et al. (forthcoming), which discusses process changes in
pulp and paper production.
9
  Popp (2005) provides an introduction to the use of patent data for studying environmental innovation.

                                                        7
        A vast literature in the field of bibliometrics uses data on scientific publications and

citations.10 While peer review has traditionally been the main form of evaluating academic

research, quantitative methods have become more important in the past 20 years (Hicks et al.

2004). Within the field of economics, until recently most empirical studies of innovation used

patent data, rather than publication data, as the measure of research output. While the use of

publication data within the economic research community has recently increased, the focus has

primarily been on using publication data to measure knowledge flows across institutions, rather

than evaluating the effectiveness of research inputs.11

        Other options for measuring knowledge creation are also available to researchers. Some

studies focus on the effects of innovation. For instance, Newell et al. (1999) demonstrate a

correlation between energy prices and the energy efficiency of home appliances available for

sale between 1958 and 1993. Surveys are also used, such as in Lanoie et al. (2007). In a survey

of firms in seven OECD countries, they find that greater regulatory stringency induces a firm to

perform more environmental R&D. Surveys are particularly useful in the case of process

innovations, which are more difficult for the researcher to observe with secondary data.

        The above data focus primarily on innovative activity. Focusing on the diffusion of

technology is more difficult. In some cases, data are available at the macro-level for cross-

country comparisons. For instance, studies such as Popp et al. (2011) and Brunnschweiler

(2010) compare investments in renewable energy capacities across countries. However, for more

micro-level studies, detailed data on the adoption of specific technologies is required, such as in

Kemp (1997), Blackman and Bannister (1998), or Gallagher and Meuhlegger (2011). Data


10
  Moed, Glänzel, and Schmoch (2004) provide a good introduction and overview of this literature.
11
  Examples of the former include Adams, Clemmons, and Stephan ( 2004, 2006), Adams and Clemmons (2008),
Jones et al. (2008), Wuchty et al. (2007), and Zucker et al. (2007). Doranova et al. (2009) provide an example
pertaining to green technologies.

                                                        8
collection for such studies can be costly.   World Bank support in collecting product-level

diffusion data in developing countries would be very useful to the study of green technology

diffusion in low-income countries.

       Other sources of technology diffusion data include international trade data, which are

available at the product level. For example, Sawhney and Kahn (2011) use the harmonized

commodity description and coding system of the World Customs Organization to assemble data

on U.S. imports of wind and solar energy technology. They find a growing role for emerging

economies such as China and India, which they interpret as evidence of increased technology

adoption in those countries.   Similarly, World Bank (2008a) uses trade data to show that

removing trade barriers on alternative energy technologies would increase trade volumes, and

hence technology transfer.



III. Green R&D in Developing Countries

       As shown in Figure 2, most of the world’s R&D occurs in a few high income countries.

In 2007, global R&D expenditures were an estimated $1.107 trillion, with OECD nations

accounting for 80 percent, and the United States and Japan together accounting for 46 percent.

Among non-OECD countries, China performs 9 percent of global R&D. Estimates of R&D from

India and Brazil also place them among the top 15 R&D performers worldwide (National

Science Board, 2010).

       The dominance of high-income countries among the top R&D performers holds true for

environmental innovation as well. Using patent data from the US, Japan, Germany, and 14 low-

and middle-income countries, Lanjouw and Mody (1996) study technological change for a

variety of environmentally-friendly technologies. They find that such innovation increases as



                                              9
pollution abatement expenditures in the country increase. For the US, Japan, and Germany,

patents on these innovations are typically domestic patents. In contrast, for developing countries,

the majority of these patents come from other countries. This is especially true of air pollution

control technologies, which tend to be complex. Water pollution control technologies, on the

other hand, are more frequently local innovations, as local conditions shape the requirements of

these technologies, and are less likely to be patented elsewhere.

        Dechezleprêtre et al. (2011) examine climate-friendly innovation using patent data from

1978-2005 for 76 countries and covering a broad range of technologies, including renewable

energy technologies, carbon capture and storage, and energy efficiency technologies for

buildings, lighting, and cement manufacture. Like Lanjouw and Mody (1996), they find that

most climate-friendly innovation occurs in developed countries. In fact, the US, Japan, and

Germany together account for two-thirds of the innovations in their sample. Reflecting the role

and impact of policy, innovation increases after the Kyoto Protocol in all Annex I countries

except the US, which had not ratified Kyoto.12

        Dechezleprêtre et al. (2011) do find some evidence of innovation in emerging economies,

as measured by patents. In particular, China, South Korea, Russia and Brazil together accounted

for 18.5% of climate-friendly innovations from 2000-2005. However, innovation in emerging

economies is often of a different nature. For example, the most prevalent innovations in China,

South Korea, Russia, and Brazil include technologies designed primarily for local markets, such

as geothermal and cement manufacture. As a result, the share of high-value patents (defined as

patent applications filed in multiple countries) from these four countries is just 7.2%. Consistent

with Lanjouw and Mody (1996), Dechezleprêtre et al. (2011) find that technologies of wider use

12
   Annex I countries include all Annex B countries plus Belarus and Turkey. These are the developed and
transitioning economies required to reduce emissions under the Kyoto Protocol. A list of Annex B countries can be
found at http://unfccc.int/kyoto_protocol/items/3145.php

                                                       10
globally, measured by the percentage of patents that have corresponding applications in other

countries, are nearly all from developed economies.13

         Most patents are financed via private R&D investments. Data on government-sponsored

R&D show that the emerging economies are beginning to ramp up efforts pertaining to energy

R&D. Gallagher et al. (2011) provide rough estimates of government spending on energy R&D

by industrialized economies and six emerging economies: Brazil, Russia, India, Mexico, China,

and South Africa (BRIMCS). Industrialized economy governments spent $12 billion on energy

R&D in 2008, compared to $13.8 billion by the BRIMCS.14 In the BRIMCS, government

energy R&D spending is a recent phenomenon. However, as in the industrialized world, much

of this spending is on traditional energy sources, such as fossil fuels and nuclear. For example,

India tripled its nuclear energy R&D budget between 2003 and 2007. Whether such investments

can be considered green (e.g. does research on fossil fuels make them cleaner) is unclear.



A. Knowledge Gaps on Green R&D

         Because so much green innovation occurs in high income countries, their environmental

policies usually shape the development of environmentally-friendly technologies worldwide.

This is partially because these countries are typically the first to enact environmental regulations.

Because most environmental innovations help to reduce externalities, there is little market for

such innovations without policy incentives.                 By increasing the relative price of pollution,

environmental polices provide incentive for green innovation. Drawing on the notion of induced

innovation (Hicks 1932, Binswanger and Ruttan 1978, Acemoglu 2002), which recognizes that

13
   Because patents are only valid in the country granting the patent, an inventor must file a patent application in each
country for which protection is desired. These related applications are called patent families. Economists use these
patent families to indicate the importance of an invention (e.g. Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004).
14
   Both figures are in 2008 US dollars using purchasing power parity. Of the $13.8 billion, $11.8 billion comes from
China.

                                                          11
R&D is a profit-motivated investment activity and that the direction of innovation likely

responds positively in the direction of increased relative prices, there is a broad literature

demonstrating the links between environmental policy and innovation in developed countries

(see Popp et al. 2010 for a review of this literature).

       In contrast, there is less work exploring the potential for additional R&D from developing

countries. The technologies needed in developing country markets may differ from those created

in high-income countries.        Developing countries, particularly emerging economies with

demonstrated existing R&D capacity, such as the BRICS, may be able to play a role filling this

gap. This suggests three questions for future research.



       1. What can be done to encouraging development of technologies with limited markets in

       high-income countries?

       Given that the technologies needed in developing country markets may differ, research is

needed on how to encourage innovation on technologies with limited markets in high-income

countries. For example, technologies for use off of the main electric grid, such as improved

cooking stoves, typically have limited markets in developed countries. However, nearly three

billion people in developing nations use indoor stoves burning crop waste, wood, coal, or dung.

Indoor air pollution from the burning of these fuels kills 1.9 million people per year (Broder,

2010). Moreover, recent research highlights the potential for improved cookstoves to not only

reduce indoor air pollution, but also mitigate climate emissions. Smoke from these stoves

produces black carbon, which recent reports list as the second most important pollutant

contributing to climate change, responsible for 18 percent of global warming (compared to

carbon dioxide’s (CO2) 40%).        Ramanathan and Carmichael (2008) first noted the climate



                                                  12
change potential of black carbon. They note in particular that China and India alone account for

25-35% of global black carbon emissions. Providing energy efficient and smoke-free cookers,

along with reducing soot emissions from coal combustion in small industries, could reduce

warming from black carbon in East Asia by 70-80%.

         To illustrate the role of developing countries for such off-grid technologies, Table 2

presents total patent counts based on inventor country for four types of cooking stoves whose

primary applications are in developing country markets.15 In all four cases, China is the leading

source of patents, ranging from 46% to 89% of the total for each technology. Among developing

countries, we also include data for India and South Africa, as these countries are important

sources of scientific publications, to be discussed below. However, neither is an important

source of patenting. This may be because these countries are doing less commercial work on

these technologies, or because intellectual property rights are not seen as valuable in India and

South Africa.

         Because developed country research on indoor cooking stoves may be led by non-

commercial entities such as universities or non-profit foundations, which are less likely to patent

successful research outcomes, Table 2 also includes counts of scientific publications. Even here,

a developing country is the leading source of articles for three of the four stove technologies.




15
  These patents were identified using a combination of keyword and patent classification searches using the
Delphion on-line patent database. Countries are identified using the first inventor listed on the patent. If no inventor
country is limited, the first priority country (e.g. the country where the application was first filed) is taken as the
source of the invention. Scientific publication data are collected using a keyword search of abstracts and titles in the
Web of Knowledge database. Here, the source country comes from author affiliations. For multiple authored
papers, affiliations are counted for each country, so that the total number of affiliations may exceed the total number
of articles. Appendix A lists the search terms used for each stove type. Note that the use of keyword searches may
bias downward counts from countries whose patent abstracts may appear in other languages, such as France and
Germany. However, that Chinese patent counts are larger than even the U.S. and Japan, who do the bulk of global
R&D, is still notable.

                                                          13
However, in this case, it is India, rather than China, that is the leading source.16 In both cases,

the evidence above suggests that R&D from emerging economies can play a role providing

technologies of need throughout the developing world.                       Their potential needs to be better

understood.



         2. What adaptive R&D will be needed? What are the potential impacts of adaptive R&D?

         Because policies in developed countries have encouraged innovation of emissions-

reducing technologies, in many cases technologies are readily available for developing markets.

In some cases, the availability of cleaner technologies may even offer developing countries the

opportunity to “leapfrog” over developed countries by adopting cleaner technologies before

serious harm occurs (see, for example, Dasgupta et al. 2002). For example, when China imposed

its first fuel economy regulations on passenger vehicles in 2004, they were more stringent than

the standards in the United States (Bradsher, 2004).

         However, even technology transfer may require some investment in R&D.                                   When

adjustments are necessary to fit new technologies to local market conditions, it is the recipient

countries that will be best-positioned to do this research.                     Popp (2006) finds evidence of

innovation even in countries that are late to adopt regulations, suggesting that these countries do

not simply take advantage of “off the shelf” technologies that have been developed elsewhere.

Rather, late adopters often undertake adaptive R&D to fit the technology to local markets, as

evidence by the increased likelihood of these later patents to cite earlier foreign rather than

earlier domestic inventions. Lanjouw and Mody (1996) find similar evidence that the

environmentally-friendly innovations that occur in developing countries are smaller inventive

16
   While illustrative of differences in research trends across income levels (particularly given India’s lead over the
U.S. in most categories), English language bias is definitely an issue when using publication data, as seen by the
large advantage of US publications over countries such as Japan or Germany.

                                                           14
steps, typically done to modify existing technologies to local conditions. Both studies suggest

that foreign knowledge serves as a blueprint for further improvements, rather than as a direct

source of technology. This suggests that when policymakers consider the potential for

technological change to reduce environmental impacts in developing countries, they must make

allowances for adaptive R&D to fit technologies to local conditions, or else be prepared for less

successful results. As an example of such concerns, Wang (2010) finds that when evaluating

potential CDM projects, the Chinese government does not encourage the use of technologies that

are new to Chinese conditions because of concern that technologies from abroad may not adapt

well to local conditions. The risk of poor adaptation to local conditions would increase the risk

to credits generated from the CDM project, thus lowering their value. Similarly, as prevailing

wind speeds are lower in India than in Europe, wind turbines need to be adapted to generate

electricity at these lower wind speeds to be effective (Kristinsson and Rao 2007).

       While these examples provide illustrations of adaptive R&D, more research is needed to

fully understand both the magnitude of adaptive R&D needed and the potential impacts of

adaptive R&D. For example, the spread of cell phones has had major impacts in developing

countries, as they are often used to improve provision of services needed in developing country

markets, such as financial services.     Developing alternative uses for existing technologies

requires fewer resources than traditional R&D, making it within the reach of even lower income

countries. Given this, research designed to develop a better understanding of the potential for

environmentally friendly alternative uses for traditional technologies would be beneficial.

Adapting production processes to fit local conditions is also important. For example, de la Tour

et al. (2011) note that Chinese photovoltaic manufacturers adapt production processes by

replacing capital with labor, which is less expensive in China. Such innovations should require



                                               15
fewer resources than developing processes from scratch. However, process innovations are often

more difficult to study, as data are harder to come by. For example, firms are less likely to

patent process innovations, as they are easier to keep secret (Levin et al. 1987). Thus, studying

adaptive process innovation will require a mix of qualitative and quantitative approaches to

collect the necessary data.



       3. Can emerging economies innovate to meet demands of high-income countries?

       A third question of particular importance for emerging economies is whether such

adaptive innovation can help them meet the demands of high-income countries. That is, can they

be suppliers of advanced green technologies for global markets? A few recent studies provide

such evidence for emerging economies.         For instance, Medhi (2009) finds that Korean

automotive manufacturers first incorporated advanced emission controls into their vehicles to

satisfy regulatory requirements in the U.S. and Japanese markets. Only later did the Korean

government pass domestic regulations requiring advanced emission controls. While emissions

control technologies were produced by foreign suppliers, adaptive R&D was necessary to

incorporate them into Korean vehicles. Similarly, Sawhney and Kahn (2011) find that imports of

wind and solar equipment from poorer countries have grown faster than those from rich

countries, and that emerging economies such as China and India have become important sources

of wind and solar equipment, helping to reduce the costs of such equipment. de la Tour et al.

(2011) note that the Chinese photovoltaic industry produced 35 percent of worldwide capacity in

2008, of which 98 percent was exported.

       The potential influence of high-income demand raises several questions. First, will the

development of such industries via adaptive innovation eventually provide spillover benefits to



                                               16
the environment in countries?                For example, will domestic production of solar and wind

equipment hasten the deployment of these technologies in China and India? The Korean

automobile case provides a positive example. Can such spillovers to the domestic environment

be achieved elsewhere? Second, while nearly the entire current production of solar PV cells

from China is exported, and thus has limited impact on emissions in China, these imports also

lower the cost of PV electricity in the global market.                       These price decreases may reduce

emissions elsewhere. Quantifying such general equilibrium effects would be beneficial.



IV. Technology Transfer and the Environment

           As the last section suggests, promoting green growth within developing countries will

often be about the diffusion and adaptation of technology, rather than the creation of new

technologies. Having discussed adaptation, we now turn to diffusion. Here two issues are

relevant. First is the flow of technology across borders, which is important for getting green

technologies to developing countries. Second, even when technologies are introduced in an

economy, their spread within the country may be uneven. Moreover, uneven diffusion is often

more of an issue in a developing country context. This section discusses both issues in turn.



A. International Technology Transfer and the Environment

           While international technology transfer has received much attention in the broader

economic literature, research focused specifically on environmental technologies has primarily

been recent in nature.17 Nonetheless, diffusion of environmental technologies, particularly to

developing countries, is currently one of the most pressing environmental concerns. Technology

transfer may include the exchange of products, equipment, experience and knowledge. The
17
     For a general review of the literature on international technology transfer, see Keller (2004).

                                                             17
benefits of the transfer to the recipient developing country, and thus the potential for technology

transfer to improve well-being in the recipient country, depend on the type of transfer.

       Embodied technology transfer comes through the importation of equipment into a

country (e.g., flows of equipment). In such cases, the technology is embodied in the imported

equipment.

       Disembodied technology transfer involves the flow of know-how or experience.

Examples include demonstration projects, training local staff, and local firms hiring away staff

from multinational firms operating in a developing country. Disembodied transfers provide

additional benefits to recipients, as they enable the recipient to develop skills that can be used in

later projects initiated by the recipient country. At the same time, disembodied technology

transfers are a concern for private firms, as such benefits may come in the form of knowledge

spillovers for which technology suppliers are not fully compensated.

       Knowledge spillovers provide benefit to the public as a whole, but not to the innovator.

As a result, private firms do not have incentives to provide the socially optimal level of

technology transfer. The transfers of disembodied knowledge will typically include knowledge

spillovers, as it is nearly impossible for the firm transferring a technology to be fully

compensated for the enhanced productivity the recipient will enjoy when employing the newly-

received skills in future projects. Indeed, encouraging knowledge spillovers is often a goal of

developing country policy. For example, China recently ruled that the Chevrolet Volt electric

vehicle would not be eligible for the same tax subsidies available to other hybrid and electric

vehicles in China unless General Motors transfers the knowledge necessary for building the Volt

to a joint venture with a Chinese partner (Bradsher, 2011).




                                                 18
        Technology transfer may come from public or private sources. Public funding includes

aid from governments or non-governmental organizations (NGO), typically in the form of

official developmental assistance (ODA). Compared to private investment, ODA flows are low,

but are important in areas of the world that receive little foreign investment (Gupta et al. 2007).

Technology transfer from private sources may come via international trade, foreign direct

investment, or licensing. Spillovers are possible through private transfers, but depend both on

the nature of technology flow (e.g. spillovers are often less likely via FDI, which allows

multinational firms to maintain control over their technology) and the absorptive capacity of the

country.     Absorptive capacity describes a country’s ability to do research to understand,

implement, and adapt technologies arriving in the country. Absorptive capacity influences the

speed at which a newly arriving technology diffuses through a developing country. It depends

on the technological literacy and skills of the workforce, and is influenced by education, the

strength of governing institutions, and financial markets.18

        FDI is important for environmental technology transfer, as multinationals are usually the

first to bring new environmental technologies to a country (see, for example, Dasgupta et al.

2002). In many cases, it is easier for a multinational firm to use the same equipment and

processes that it uses at home, rather than develop a dirtier process for use in developing

countries. Transfer via FDI is likely to be particularly important for integrated process solutions

to reduce pollution. Although currently unexplored, this notion is a fruitful topic for future

research.




18
  World Bank (2008b) provides a discussion of the role of absorptive capacity in technology transfer. They use
data on education, governance and macroeconomic stability to construct an index of absorptive capacity. In addition
to the importance of an educated workforce, they provide evidence that a stable economy and strong business
environment improve adaptive capacity.

                                                        19
        i. Literature on environmental technology transfer

        In the broadest sense, environmental technological change is addressed in literature on

trade and the environment. There, economists decompose the effect of international trade on

environmental quality in developing countries into three components. First, scale effects account

for increased pollution levels due to the greater wealth and increased economic activity that

follows international trade. Second, composition effects refer to reductions in pollution resulting

from a preference for cleaner goods that develops as countries become richer. Third, technique

effects refer to emission reductions that occur because trade expands access to cleaner

technologies (Esty 2001, Copeland and Taylor 2003). Attempts to identify this technique effect

can be seen as examples of technology transfer.

        Fisher-Vanden and Ho (2010) consider the interaction of scale and technique effects in a

simulation of increased science and technology (S&T) capabilities and energy use in China.

They note that improving S&T capabilities has two offsetting effects. While technological

development can lead to the use of cleaner technologies (the technique effect), increases in S&T

also lead to larger energy intensive industries (the scale effect). Their paper simulates the effect

of S&T growth in China, with R&D intensity reaching 2.5% by 2020, as stated in China’s long-

term policy goals. They note that China’s R&D intensity has already increased from 0.6% in

1996 to 1.3% in 2003.       Calibrating their model based on econometric results from 1500

industrial enterprises, they find that the S&T takeoff should have an energy-saving bias, resulting

in lower energy prices. However, this leads to more economic growth and greater energy

consumption by households, so that the net effect of the S&T takeoff is greater energy use and

more carbon emissions. Fisher-Vanden and Sue Wing (2008) develop an analytical model that

finds similar results.



                                                20
           Khanna and Zilberman (2001) illustrate the importance of trade to diffusion in a study of

the adoption of energy efficient technologies at electric power plants in India. As is typical in

adoption models, variations in the adoption of these technologies occur due to differences across

heterogeneous plants.         Emissions could be reduced by the adoption of high quality coal.

However, such coal would need to be imported. In an effort to protect the domestic coal

industry, such imports were virtually banned by the Indian government. Khanna and Zilberman

find that while an emissions tax is necessary to achieve optimal levels of abatement, simply

removing domestic and trade policy distortions would increase adoption of energy efficient

technology and potentially decrease carbon emissions.                 Thus, policies designed to protect

specific sectors may have unintended consequences that increase environmental harm, raising

political challenges to achieving green growth.

           Dechezleprêtre et al. (2011) provide a detailed look at technology transfer coming from

the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).                      The CDM allows polluters in industrialized

countries with emission constraints to receive credit for financing projects that reduce emissions

in developing countries, which do not face emission constraints under the Kyoto Protocol.19

Dechezleprêtre et al. reviewed 644 CDM projects registered by the Executive Board of the

UNFCCC to determine how many projects transfer “hardware”, such as equipment or machinery,

as opposed to “software”, which they define as knowledge, skills, or know-how. Spillovers of

software exemplify disembodied technology transfer. Thus, their research helps to identify the

settings under which such transfers are likely.

           Dechezleprêtre et al. (2011) find that 279 projects, or 43%, involve technology transfer.

However, these projects are among the most significant CDM projects, accounting for 84% of

the expected emissions reductions from registered CDM projects. Of these projects, 57 transfer
19
     Lecocq and Ambrosi (2007) provide a description of the Clean Development Mechanism.

                                                       21
equipment, 101 transfer knowledge, and 121 transfer both equipment and knowledge.

Dechezleprêtre et al. find that a project is more likely to include technology transfer if it is

larger, if the project developer is a subsidiary of a company in a developed country, and if the

project includes one or more carbon credit buyers. Before credits for a project can be sold, the

emissions reductions must be certified. Because they have an interest in obtaining emissions

credits, credit buyers help to facilitate this process. Dechezleprêtre et al. (2011) find that

technology transfer is more likely if the country is more open to trade. They also find that

technology transfer is less likely if there are other similar projects in the country. For instance,

countries with greater technological capacity are better able to develop their own innovations in

agriculture, reducing the need for technology transfer from abroad for agricultural projects.

       Several recent studies explore the role of technology transfer, both through joint ventures

with multinational firms and supported by policy, in the development of renewable energy

industries in developing countries. Lewis (2007) explores the development of the wind energy in

India and China. Both India and China went from having no wind turbine manufacturing

capacity to almost complete local production of turbines in less than 10 years’ time. In both

cases, a combination of local energy policy that created demand for wind energy and efforts of

the leading local firms to gain new skills were important. For example, Suzlon, the leading

Indian wind turbine manufacturer, established R&D facilities in the Netherlands and Germany to

take advantage of the expertise from these countries. In contrast, Goldwind, the leading Chinese

wind turbine manufacturer, sends employees abroad for training, but has no overseas facilities.

Both firms used licensing agreements with European manufacturers to gain initial access to

turbine technology, which they then built upon through their own R&D efforts. In both cases,

domestic policies encouraged licensing. India used customs and excise taxes to favor importing



                                                22
wind turbine components over complete turbines, thus providing a market for domestic firms to

assemble turbines. China requires that 70% of the content of a wind turbine used in China be

produced domestically.

       Lewis (2007) also provides examples of the potential constraints faced by developing

countries when the promote technology transfer.       For example, while foreign-owned wind

turbine companies operating in China use China-based manufacturing facilities, they have

typically chosen not to transfer intellectual property through licensing agreements. Moreover, in

both India and China, the licensing agreements that have been reached have been with smaller

companies that had little international presence. In contrast, larger companies avoided licensing

agreements so as to avoid helping the development of international competitors.

       de la Tour et al. (2011) provide a similar analysis of the development of the Chinese

photovoltaic (PV) industry. This industry primarily serves international demand, as 98 percent

of output is exported. However, these firms are not involved with all facets of PV production.

Rather, Chinese production capacity is strongest in downstream segments such as cell

production, rather than upstream segments such as silicon purification. These downstream

processes require little previous experience, so that Chinese manufacturers are able to take

advantage of the low cost of energy to provide PV cells for a global market. As in Lewis (2007),

international mobility of workers was a more important source of information than FDI or

licensing. Of the top 9 PV producers, only three receive FDI, and all three are late entrants into

the market. Chinese firms do exchange knowledge with equipment suppliers. Training sessions

of engineers and technicians also allow Chinese firms to adapt the manufacturing process to local

conditions, such as substituting cheap labor for equipment. Indeed, to the extent that Chinese PV




                                               23
firms innovate, their innovations appear adaptive. For example, only 1% of Chinese PV patents

are also filed abroad, suggesting they primarily target the specific features of the Chinese market.

        Extending beyond the BRICs nations, Pueyo et al. (2011) examine the role of technology

transfer in the development of the wind industry in Chile. The case examines Fibrovent Wind, a

start-up company that produces wind turbine blades. The firm was created as a partnership with

a Spanish turbine manufacturer.       Interestingly, in this case, South-South transfer proved

essential, as the firm hired a Brazilian wind turbine expert who helped set up the company.

Indeed, the authors conclude that successful technology transfer in this case consisted not only of

acquisition of foreign equipment and knowledge, but also to knowledge about management,

which helped the firm to assimilate foreign technologies. Moreover, Fibrovent was able to

transfer knowledge about composite materials used in the Chilean mining industry to blade

production. Both examples further illustrate the importance of absorptive capacity in technology

transfer.



        ii. Knowledge gaps on environmental technology transfer

        Particularly in emerging economies, technology transfer has been a motivating factor in

the development of green energy industries. Potential spillovers from technology transfer can

enhance the domestic capabilities of recipient countries, thus promoting growth. Technology

transfer can also influence innovation, as knowledge spillovers may enhance the recipient

country’s ability to develop future innovations. Each of the cases discussed above provides

examples of successful technology transfer. However, questions remain when considering the

connections between technology transfer and green growth.




                                                24
       1. How will the technological distance between countries affect green technologies?

       The potential for successful technology transfer depends on a good match between the

needs of the recipient and the technologies available from source countries. Using patent citation

data to assess the flow of knowledge across borders, Verdonlini and Galeotti (2011) test whether

knowledge spillovers from foreign innovations influence domestic energy R&D. They use these

data to construct knowledge stocks and show that increases in foreign knowledge have a larger

impact on domestic R&D than increases in domestic knowledge. This result suggests that

knowledge spillovers across countries are an important driver of innovation. While primarily

focused on developed countries, Verdonlini and Galeotti include data from emerging economies

such as Brazil and China in their initial analysis of the patent citation data. Importantly for

developing countries, they find that greater technological distance, an index measuring the

similarity of the patent portfolios of two countries, reduces the flow of knowledge across

borders, and that technological distance is more important than geographic distance. Given that

technological distance will be greatest between countries of disparate income levels, this further

emphasizes the need to focus on technology transfer and adaptation of existing technologies,

rather than innovation, for developing countries.

       Concerns over technological distance also suggest a potential role for technology transfer

among developing countries. For instance, one might expect emerging economies to be better

positioned to provide technologies specific to developing country needs, as the technological

distances will be smaller. The evidence on patents and publications pertaining to cooking stoves

presented in section III is an example. However, research must focus not only on the potential of




                                                25
emerging economies to create such technologies, but also on the potential for these economies to

supply needed technologies to lower income countries.

           Two papers consider flows of technology transfer among developing countries. Brewer

(2008) suggests that policy should consider the possibility of South-South or even South-North

technology transfers. He gives examples where developing countries play roles as technology

leaders, such as biofuels in Brazil and subsidiaries of General Electric developing wind turbines

in China. Doranova et al. (2009) provide further evidence in a study of 497 CDM projects.

They ask whether existing knowledge in the host country shapes technology sourcing patterns,

focusing on projects using local technologies. Of the 497 projects studied, 56% use technologies

of local origin. Moreover, some technology transfer is South-South. China, Malaysia, Taiwan

and South Africa all provided technologies in other developing countries.      They use data on

patents and publications related to climate friendly technologies to measure the knowledge base

of a country. Countries with more publications more likely to use local technologies, but more

those with more patents are more likely to use foreign technologies, either alone or combined

with local technologies. Countries with more experience with a technology are more likely to

use local or combined technologies. While these studies suggest that emerging countries can

play a role meeting the research needs of developing country markets for environmental

technologies, further research on the potential of emerging economies to close the technology

distance gap cited by Verdonlini and Galeotti, would be beneficial. What incentives need to be

in place to encourage transfer of needed technologies among developing countries? Similarly, as

adaptation to climate change becomes a concern, what lessons can tropical and semi-arid

countries provide for warming industrialized nations.20



20
     I thank Stephane Hallegatte for this insight.

                                                     26
       2. Are the lessons from India and China generalizable?

       Much of the literature focuses on successful examples from China and India. Broader

comparative studies, particularly of a quantitative nature, could provide additional insights. For

instance, Lewis notes the very different strategies used by India and China. Additional work to

better understand which strategies are likely to be most successful are needed. Moreover,

understanding where these strategies work is important. China offers multinational investors the

opportunity to access a market of one billion people. Thus, firms may be willing to accept

restrictions on technology transfer to enter the Chinese market that they would not accept to

enter smaller markets. Smaller countries may face additional hurdles when attracting technology

transfer. Should such countries focus their attention elsewhere? Could a group of smaller

countries form partnerships to increase their bargaining power with multinational firms?

Moreover, the earlier concerns about technological distance suggest that further study should

address whether policy needs may be different for countries at different stages of development.

Whereas countries such as India and China may have the absorptive capacity to benefit from the

spillovers provided via technology transfer, countries with a greater technological distance may

find using technology transfer and adaptive R&D less valuable, either because they lack the

skills necessary to adapt the technology or because even an adapted technology wouldn’t be

appropriate for their market. More comparative studies would thus be of great value to policy

makers interested in promoting green technology transfer.



B. Diffusion Within Countries

       The above studies focus on the flow of knowledge across countries. Also important is the

flow of knowledge within countries. The diffusion of a new technology is a gradual, dynamic



                                               27
process. New technologies are not adopted en masse. Rather, adoption usually begins with a

few early adopters, followed by a more rapid period of adoption, with the rate of adoption

leveling off once most potential users have adopted the technology. This process generates the

well-known S-shaped diffusion curve: the rate of adoption rises slowly at first, speeds up, and

then levels off as market saturation approaches.

       The role of information is important for diffusion in both developed and developing

country settings. In one recent developing country example, Rebane and Barham (2011) survey

households in Nicaragua about their knowledge and adoption of solar home systems for

electricity. These systems are at an early stage of market penetration and are rarely seen in some

poorer areas of the country. Rebane and Barham estimate a biprobit model where they first

estimate determinants of knowledge about solar home systems and then estimate determinants of

adoption of such systems.     Not surprisingly, awareness of the technology is important for

adoption. Among non-adopters, half were unaware of solar home systems. Of those aware of

the systems, most learned about them from a family, friend, or neighbor. The importance of

learning from others exemplifies how adoption provides a positive externality to others by

increasing awareness of the technology. Rebane and Barham suggest that demonstration projects

(e.g. on public buildings) or subsidies for early adopters can thus help spread technology within a

market. Moreover, early adopters may also benefit future users by reducing uncertainty about

the quality of new technologies.

       Recent work also suggests that important differences can be found between adoption

rates in developed and developing countries. World Bank (2008b) notes that in industrialized

countries, once technologies reach the country, they almost always achieve mass-market scale.

In contrast, there is more disparity in developing countries. Of 67 technologies studied by World



                                                28
Bank (2008b) that reached 5% penetration in developing countries, only 6 reached a 50% market

share. Similarly, Winkler et al. (2011) note that simply providing access to grid electricity is not

sufficient to ensure its use in low-income countries. Affordability is an important constraint.

Even after on-grid infrastructure is in place, poor households may be unable to afford appliances

that use electricity. Thus, income disparities within countries will lead to uneven diffusion of

new technologies.

       Two studies by Allan Blackman illustrate differences in adoption of green technologies

between developing and developed countries.          Blackman and Kildegaard (2003) study the

adoption of three clean leather tanning technologies in Mexico. They use original survey data on

a cluster of small- and medium-scale leather tanneries in León, Guanajuato, noting that small and

medium scale enterprises often dominate pollution intensive industries in developing countries.

To explain the adoption of each tanning technique, they estimate a system of multivariate probit

models. They find that a firm’s human capital and stock of technical information influence

adoption. They also find that private-sector trade associations and input suppliers are important

sources of technical information about clean technologies. In contrast to results typically found

in developed countries, neither firm size nor regulatory pressure is correlated with adoption. In

addition to economic incentives, direct regulation, and information provision, some research has

emphasized the role that “informal regulation” or community pressure can play in encouraging

the adoption of environmentally clean technologies. For example, in an analysis of fuel adoption

decisions for traditional brick kilns in Mexico, Blackman and Bannister (1998) suggest that

community pressure applied by competing firms and local non-governmental organizations was

associated with increased adoption of cleaner fuels, even when those fuels had relatively high

variable costs.



                                                29
       Dasgupta et al. (2010) study the benefits from integrated pest management (IPM) for

Bangladesh farmers. IPM uses natural parasites and predators, rather than chemical pesticides to

control agricultural pests. As chemicals are expensive, IPM can potentially increase profits as

well as benefit the environment. Dasgupta et al. present survey data showing that IPM rice

farming is as productive as traditional farming and has lower costs.          However, because a

neighbor’s use of traditional chemical pesticides can kill natural parasites and predators needed

for IPM, individual adoption is not rational. Thus, institutional support for collective adoption is

needed.

       Several recent case studies note the importance of maintenance and access to finance for

successful technology adoption in developing countries. Barry et al. (2011) study the adoption

of efficient stoves, small biogas plants, and efficient tobacco barns for commercial farmers in

Rwanda, Tanzania and Malawi. They conclude that maintenance must be planned for (including

funding) at the outset of the project, and must be kept simple, so that it does not require much

additional training. If not, users will abandon a technology as soon as something goes wrong.

Because information is spread by word of mouth, having a local champion for a technology is

also important. Because of high start-up costs, financing was cited as the main stumbling block

for all projects. Thus, providing aid for financing is also important. Reviewing the success of

China’s Renewable Energy Development Project, D’Agostino et al. (2011) also cite access to

financial credit and quality of after-sales service as important barriers to the adoption of solar

home systems in China.       Finally, Romijn and Caniëls (2011) find that inadequate on-site

technical support holds back adoption of small-scale biomass gasification in India.

       Exploring the role of financing further, Brunnschweiler (2010) explores the importance

of financial sector development in the adoption of renewable energy. Investment in renewable



                                                30
capacity often requires long-term loans. In low-income countries, access to such credit is

limited, particularly for small and medium sized companies. Brunnschweiler finds that a one-

standard deviation increase in her measure of financial intermediation leads to a 0.3 standard

deviation increase in non-hydro renewable energy generation per capita. As such, improving the

financial infrastructure of a nation may not only lead to macroeconomic benefits, but also

encourage green growth by providing easier funding for green infrastructure.



        i. Knowledge gaps on within country diffusion of environmental technology

        Many of the questions needing to be addressed regarding within country diffusion of

environmental technologies are issues for both developing and developed countries. Even in

high income countries, what drives adoption of green technologies is not completely

understood.21        One example is the finding that seemingly cost-effective energy-efficient

technologies diffuse slowly, suggesting what has become to be known as an “energy efficiency

paradox.” Much of the discussion on the energy paradox focuses on whether or not there are

market failures that slow adoption or whether people are making seemingly irrational decisions.

Incorporating methodology from behavioral economics would contribute to our understanding of

why adoption of energy efficiency technologies is slow, and would better inform policy makers’

attempts to increase adoption of energy efficient technologies.                     Given the importance of

information for diffusion, such studies could also provide guidance as to what ways information

can be provided to best encourage diffusion of green technologies.

        Turning specifically to developing countries, the importance of financing suggests that

more research is needed to design mechanisms for financing green technology investments. This


21
  Popp, Newell, and Jaffe (2010) provide a detailed review of the literature on diffusion of environmental
technologies in developed countries.

                                                        31
is particularly important for efficiency-enhancing technologies. Such technologies require up-

front investments, but can provide cost savings that allow the investment to pay for itself over

the life of the technology. However, since investors cannot typically borrow on the promise of

future cost savings, other forms of financing need to be available to facilitate these investments.



V. The Role of Policy

       Public policy plays an important role encouraging both the development and diffusion of

green technologies. Market forces provide insufficient incentives for investment in either the

development or diffusion of environmentally-friendly technologies. Economists point to two

market failures as the explanations for underinvestment in environmental R&D. These market

failures provide the motivation for government policy designed to increase such research. In

addition, other market failures, such as imperfect credit markets or incomplete information, may

slow the diffusion of technology.

       One market failure affecting environmental innovation is the traditional problem of

environmental externalities. Because pollution is not priced by the market, firms and consumers

have no incentive to reduce emissions without policy intervention. Thus, without appropriate

policy interventions, the market for technologies that reduce emissions will be limited, reducing

incentives to develop such technologies.       Similarly, once green technologies are available,

diffusion will be slow if market incentives do not properly reflect the environmental benefits

offered by such technologies. It is true that there will likely be some incentives to develop clean

technologies even without policy interventions, as private benefits may exist. For example,

improving energy efficiency in industrial processes not only reduces emissions, but also lowers

the costs of production. The market failure problem simply means that individuals do not



                                                 32
consider the social benefits of using technologies that reduce emissions, so that not all socially

beneficial opportunities for technological change are pursued.

         The second market failure pertaining to technological change is the public goods nature

of knowledge (see, for example, Geroski 1995). In most cases, new technologies must be made

available to the public for the inventor to reap the rewards of invention. However, by making

new inventions available, some (if not all) of the knowledge embodied in the invention becomes

public knowledge. This public knowledge may lead to additional innovations, or even to copies

of the current innovations.22 As noted earlier, such knowledge spillovers provide benefit to the

public as a whole, but not to the innovator. As a result, private firms do not have incentives to

provide the socially optimal level of research activity.                  Because inventors cannot be fully

compensated for knowledge spillovers, environmentally friendly R&D will be underprovided by

market forces even if environmental policies to correct the environmental externalities of

pollution are in place. Similarly, when transferring technologies, multinational firms will attempt

to do so in ways that minimize the spillovers that may occur.

         As with R&D investments, market failures may affect the diffusion of technology.

Externalities are still a concern. For instance, without appropriate accounting for the external

benefits from reducing pollution, individual decisions to adopt environmental technologies will

be sub-optimal. Thus, environmental regulation is needed to encourage adoption of end-of-pipe

solutions to pollution (e.g. Kemp 1998, Kerr and Newell 2003, Snyder et al. 2003, and Popp

2010). For efficiency-enhancing investments, such as energy efficiency improvements, there are

private incentives to adopt, but even then, adopters will undervalue the social benefits, such as

reduced pollution, that come from improving efficiency.

22
   Intellectual property rights, such as patents, are designed to protect inventors from such copies. However, their
effectiveness varies depending on the ease in which inventors may “invent around” the patent by making minor
modifications to an invention. See, for example, Levin et al. (1987).

                                                          33
       Uncertainty is another factor that may limit the adoption of new technology (Geroski

2000). Potential adopters may be uncertain both about the quality of a technology and about

future market conditions. For example, investing in energy saving technology is less valuable if

energy prices fall in the future. As suggested in the previous section, facilitating the provision of

information can help to alleviate some concerns about uncertainty.

       Because of these market failures, both technology policy and environmental policy will

play a role promoting technology transfer of green technologies. Technology policy helps to

reward innovators for the public benefits that result from knowledge spillovers. Environmental

policy makes polluters accountable for the damages they cause, thus increasing demand for green

technologies. This section discusses the role of each of these policy options and suggests

questions for future research.



A. Technology Policy

       Policy plays a role throughout the innovation process. R&D subsidies and tax credits

help promote the development of new technologies. Intellectual property rights protection helps

to reward inventors by providing temporary monopoly protection for their invention. However,

for developing countries, the goal of technology policy will typically be to attract technology

transfer or to encourage adaptive R&D on existing technologies, rather than to promote the

development of new technologies. As noted in our literature review, knowledge spillovers from

international technology transfer are important for recipient countries. However, these same

spillovers may discourage innovators who wish to avoid developing competitors for their own

products. For technology transfer, policy must manage a careful balancing act, so as promote

knowledge spillovers from technology transfer to the extent possible without discouraging



                                                 34
investors from coming into the country at all. Indeed, the literature on technology transfer

suggests that a one-size fits all policy is not desirable. As a country’s own innovative capacity

grows, so should the strength of its intellectual property protection (e.g. Masksu 2002).

           Developing country policies can help to promote spillovers. First, policies that improve

the absorptive capacity of a country increase the potential of benefiting from knowledge

spillovers. Using patent applications as a measure of technology transfer, Hascic and Johnstone

(2011) find that absorptive capacity increases wind energy patent applications filed in developing

countries by developed country inventors. Indeed, in their study, absorptive capacity proves to

be more important than traditional technology transfer policies such as CDM.23

           By providing access to technology, trade policy can also help to promote spillovers from

technology transfer. World Bank (2008a) includes a study of the effect of tariff and non-tariff

trade barriers on trade flows of four clean energy technologies: clean coal, wind energy, solar

photovoltaic systems, and energy-efficient lighting. Examining imports to the top 18 developing

countries ranked by greenhouse gas emissions, they find that eliminating tariff and non-tariff

barriers would increase trade volumes by 4.6 percent for clean coal to 63.6 percent for energy-

efficient lighting.

           Enhancing absorptive capacity or improving access to trade promote spillovers in a way

that offer little cost to innovators deciding whether or not to transfer a technology. In contrast,

efforts to require technology transfer require a careful balancing act, so as to not discourage

multinationals from choosing to participate at all. Wang (2010) illustrates this balancing act in a

study on China’s policy towards CDM projects. While the Chinese government often acts as a

broker to bring parties together when technology transfer is desired, its policies often hamper

technology transfer from CDM. Most importantly, China has local content requirements. For
23
     World Bank (2008b) provides a more general discussion of the role of absorptive capacity in technology transfer.

                                                           35
example, by 2004, new wind farms had to have 70% local content. Moreover, regulations on

CDM project ownership restrict potential of technology transfer through CDM. Only Chinese

companies or Chinese holding companies (requires at least 51% Chinese ownership) are eligible

for CDM projects in China.            While such restrictions encourage the development of local

industry, they limit the ability of local industry to benefit from spillovers from technology

transfer partnerships. Certified Emission Reductions (CERs) are viewed as a national asset from

which private foreign companies should not profit. Thus, while foreign companies may end up

as buyers of CERs, they have limited incentives to finance CDM projects, since they cannot

profit from the sale of emission credits. This limits the success of projects where the only

benefits are emissions reductions (e.g. reducing landfill gases), as these projects are more likely

to need foreign financial support to be viable.

        Intellectual property rights provide another example of balancing the need to promote

innovation with the need to promote beneficial spillovers. There is rising interest in broader

sharing of intellectual property pertaining to environmental technologies. In 2008, the World

Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) created the Eco-Patent Commons to

allow free access to patents with environmental benefits. In a 2009 interview, Steven Chu, the

U.S. Secretary of Energy, encouraged the sharing of intellectual property, stating that “any area

like that (energy efficient buildings), I think, is where we should work very hard in a very

collaborative way — by very collaborative I mean share all intellectual property as much as

possible.”24

        Intellectual property rights (IPR) provide a tradeoff to both inventors and to society as a

whole. The goal of IPR is to reward inventors for the fixed costs of innovation.                             For


24
   http://dotearth.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/03/26/energy-chief-seeks-global-flow-of-ideas/#more-1775, accessed July
2, 2009.

                                                       36
environmental technologies, patents are the relevant form of IPR. Successful patent applicants

are provided a temporary monopoly, lasting twenty years from the initial application date, in

return for disclosing information on the innovation in the patent document, which is part of the

public record. By granting this market power, IPR helps to mitigate potential losses from

knowledge spillovers and encourage innovation. Thus, while it is certainly true that, conditional

on an innovation having taken place, one would expect technology transfer to be slower when

IPR is in place. However, one cannot assume that the level of innovation would be the same if

IPR were not available.

       While there is still room for more research on the question of IPR and eco-innovation, the

role of demand for clean technologies cannot be overstated, and is consistent with results found

elsewhere. In an oft-cited study on the role of intellectual property on pharmaceuticals, Attaran

and Gillespie-White (2001) ask whether patents constrain access to AIDS treatments in Africa.

They find that, even in African countries where patent protection is possible, few AIDS drugs are

patented as the markets for such drugs are too small to be of interest to multinational

pharmaceutical companies. Rather than patents, they conclude that a lack of income, national

regulatory requirements, and insufficient international aid are the main barriers to the spread of

AIDS treatments in Africa. Similarly, with green technologies, one would expect demand (or the

lack thereof) for clean technologies to be a primary constraint on international technology

transfer. The spread of environmental regulation across developing countries is an important

pre-condition to the diffusion of eco-innovations. Calls to weaken IPR for eco-innovations will

have little impact unless they are packaged in international agreements leading to stronger

environmental regulation within the developing world.




                                               37
B. Environmental Policy

       Without environmental policy, polluters do not have incentives to adopt costly

technologies that reduce emissions but provide no additional cost savings to the polluter. In fact,

in some cases, reducing emissions requires polluters to take costly actions that provide no direct

benefits to the polluter itself. For instance, since regulations limiting particulate matter were

enacted several years before regulations covering sulfur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxides

(NOX), most power plants in China have controls for particulate matter, while only the newest

plants control NOX and SO2 (Lovely and Popp 2011). Similarly, in a study of joint ventures

between US and Chinese automobile firms, Gallagher (2006) finds that the emission control

technologies transferred to China are not advanced, and, in most cases, the emissions control

technologies used on autos in China would not meet standards in developed countries. She notes

that “(t)he main reason cleaner and more energy-efficient technologies were not transferred is

that there simply were no compelling policy incentives for the US firms to do so, and the foreign

firms did not voluntarily transfer better technologies” (Gallagher, 2006, p. 387).

       This is important not only for diffusion, but also for innovation, as inventors will not

develop technologies for which there is little demand. There is a broad literature, reviewed in

Popp et al. (2010), linking environmental policy to innovation in the developed world. Because

high income countries are typically the first to enact strict environmental regulations, they also

take the lead in developing green technologies.         Thus, when focusing on links between

environmental policy and technological change in developing countries, much of the focus is on

the links between policy and diffusion of technology.

       Using the Clean Development Mechanism as a policy example, two papers take a

qualitative approach to evaluate the potential of CDM for enhancing technology transfer. For



                                                38
example, Schneider et al. (2008) suggest four barriers to transfer of environmentally sustainable

technology: (1) lack of commercial availability, (2) lack of information, (3), lack of access to

capital, and (4) lack of institutional framework (e.g. rule of law, IPR). Using existing empirical

studies and expert interviews, they conclude that CDM addresses the first two barriers by

creating a market for clean technologies in developing countries and by encouraging sharing of

knowledge, such as through the project design process. However, improved access to capital

varies depending on how a CDM project is financed. Many unilateral projects must find funds to

start a project, with the hope of recouping these costs once CERs are sold. Finally, CDM does

nothing to change institutional settings within host countries.

       Doukas et al. (2009) provide an exploratory analysis of the current developed country

status and developing country prospects for five renewable energy technologies: hydropower,

wind, solar, geothermal, and ocean energy. Regarding solar energy, they find that it is only

economically competitive where grid connection or fuel transport is difficult, costly or

impossible, such as remote rural locations. Echoing Schneider et al.’s (2008) emphasis on

institutional framework, they find that “the nonexistence of the required regulatory framework in

most of the developing countries and the very high capital costs usually strangles the interest for

(solar energy) projects in developing countries.”

       Not only do environmental regulations encourage both innovation and adoption of

environmental technologies, but the availability of technology itself may help shape regulation.

This is important, because since most pollution control technologies are first developed in

industrialized countries, and because environmental regulations are needed to provide incentives

to adopt these technologies, the decision to enact environmental regulation in developing

countries is a key first step in the diffusion of environmental technologies. While the adoption of



                                                 39
pollution control technologies within a country responds quickly to environmental regulation, the

initial adoption of environmental regulations across countries follows the typical S-shaped

pattern noted in studies of technology diffusion, in which a few early adopters, typically

technology leaders, are followed by a period of more rapid adoption. A period of slower

adoption by the remaining stragglers follows (Lovely and Popp 2011, Jänicke and Jacob 2004).

       As a result of these diffusion patterns, over time, countries adopt environmental

regulation at lower levels of per capita income. Lovely and Popp (2011) study the adoption of

regulations limiting emissions of SO2 and NOX at coal-fired power plants in 39 developed and

developing countries. They identify access to technology as an important factor influencing the

adoption of regulations and find that as pollution control technologies improve, the costs of

abatement, and thus the costs of adopting environmental regulation, fall. This enables countries

that adopt environmental regulations at later dates to adopt them at lower levels of per capita

income than early adopters who enacted similar regulations first. Lovely and Popp suggest that

this trend shows that the availability of technologies (produced by those countries that chose to

adopt SO2 regulations first) lowered adoption costs to the point where more countries were able

to afford to reduce SO2 emissions. Moreover, they find that countries that are more open to

international trade gain access to new abatement technologies sooner, and thus are able to

regulate SO2 emissions sooner.



C. Knowledge Gaps on the Role of Policy for Green Growth

       1. What balance of policies is needed?

       Both technology and environmental policies play a role promoting green technologies.

Environmental policies create demand for green technologies. However, without technology



                                                40
policy in place, insufficient incentives exist for creating and diffusing new technologies. While

there is a large literature demonstrating the need for both policies in developed country settings

(see Popp, 2010 for a review), the appropriate balance of environmental and technology policies

within developing countries has not received similar attention. However, within developing

countries, the focus will be on technology transfer and adaptive R&D, rather than on the creation

of new green technologies. Thus, the relative importance of environmental and technology

policies may differ in a developing country setting. Moreover, even within developed countries,

there is still debate whether it is sufficient to use broad technology policies that correct market

failures for all innovations, or whether targeted policies, such as product-specific R&D subsidies

or tax credits, are needed.

       The appropriate role for intellectual property rights for green innovations provides one

example where additional research is needed. While IPR will encourage innovation, it also

slows diffusion once innovations exist. For developing countries whose interests are diffusion,

rather than the creation, of technology, weaker patent rights may appear to be a panacea.

However, empirical evidence to support recent calls for weaker IPR for green technologies is

lacking. To date, there has been little work directly studying the effect of intellectual property

rights on technology transfer of eco-innovations. A Copenhagen Economics (2009) study on

climate change concludes that IPR are not a barrier to the transfer of carbon emission-reducing

technologies, and that the high costs of these technologies are due more to the immaturity of the

technologies, rather than IPR. Hall and Helmers (2010) provide an extensive review of the

literature on patent protection.     While they find evidence that stronger IPR encourages

innovation in general, this effect is strongest in chemical-related sectors such as pharmaceuticals.

Regarding technology transfer, they cite the work by Copenhagen Economics (2009), as well as



                                                41
by Barton (2007), that suggests developing country policies such as tariffs on renewable energy

technology and subsidies for fossil fuels do more to limit technology transfer of clean

technologies than do IPR. IPR does seem to encourage technology transfer to middle income

countries with the appropriate absorptive capacity. They caution that Copenhagen Economics’

finding of few climate-related patents in developing countries need not imply that IPR are not a

barrier to technology transfer. Rather, it may simply mean that those countries are not yet

viewed as favorable markets for climate-related technologies. Moreover, they note that because

climate protection is a global public good, wide diffusion of climate-friendly innovations is

desirable.   Thus, they conclude that additional research is needed to assess the specific

implications of IPR for green technologies.



       2. What is the role of secondary benefits from green innovation? To what extent can

       these promote green growth without policy intervention?

       Environmental policy encourages the development and deployment of green technologies

by making consumers and producers consider the external effects of their actions. However,

some green technologies provide benefits that are not externalities.         For example, while

technologies that increase energy efficiency reduce pollution, thus benefiting the public as a

whole, they also provide cost savings to the user. Quantifying and understanding the value of

these secondary benefits is important to understanding the extent to which green technologies

can be established without the aid of environmental policy. Moreover, clean technologies that

provide secondary benefits for the local economy provide an additional boost for green growth.

       Such secondary benefits will be particularly important for efforts to foster the adoption of

technologies that reduce global pollutants. A willingness to “leapfrog” over dirty technologies to



                                               42
a clean energy system depends not only on the availability of technology, but also on the

political will to enact policies supporting more costly forms of energy (Perkins, 2003). For many

lower-income countries, such support seems unlikely and undesirable. Documenting potential

for both local benefits along with global emissions reductions can help win support for such

efforts. For instance, electrification reduces the need to burn wood or waste for heating or

cooking, reducing indoor air pollution. It also increases opportunities for economic development

(Sathaye et al. 2007). Improved cooking stoves could reduce indoor air pollution by as much as

95% (Smith et al. 2000, cited in Sathaye et al. 2007). Improved energy efficiency brings local

economic benefits through lower costs (Sathaye et al. 2007). Photovoltaic cells are more costly

than traditional electricity sources, but of great value to remote developing regions that are not

connected to the electric grid. While the costs of PV energy are typically higher than other forms

of electricity, solar PV can be economically competitive where grid connection or fuel transport

is difficult, costly or impossible, such as remote rural locations (Doukas et al. 2009). As the

primary focus of the environmental innovation literature has been on pollution control, these

secondary benefits have received less attention.        However, they will be important for

encouraging expansion of green growth technologies to low-income markets and are deserving

of more research.

       The links between resource usage and technological change provide another example of

secondary benefits worth further study. The focus of the papers cited here, and of much of the

research in environmental economics, is on pollution control. However, concerns about access

to energy and promoting secure and stable energy supplies often take priority among

policymakers. Whether the goal of promoting energy security complements or competes with

the goal of providing clean energy depends on the resources available to a country. Lovely and



                                               43
Popp (2011) find that countries producing larger amounts of coal per capita are less likely to

adopt regulations on sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions at coal-fired power plants.

Cragg and Kahn (2009) show that members of the U.S. Congress representing districts with

greater carbon emissions are less likely to support legislation reducing emissions. Relating such

findings to innovation, Kim (2011) examines the effect of fossil fuel endowment on the patterns

of technology innovation in automobile sector. She finds that countries with larger fossil fuel

endowments are less likely to develop alternative fueled vehicle technologies such as electric

vehicles or fuel cells.   As emerging economies such as China and India increase energy

consumption while they grow, more focus on the links between resource endowments and

incentives for technological change in such economies is needed. Policies to promote green

growth are likely to be most successful when they complement the resource endowments of a

country.

       A focus on pollution control also ignores the important role of coping with a changing

environment.    For developing countries, innovation will be particularly important when

considering adaptation to climate change. Whereas mitigation of greenhouse gases is a global

public good, the benefits of adaptation are local public goods. In some cases, these local public

goods may be provided publicly, such as flood control or irrigation projects. In other cases,

private actors will undertake adaptive behavior (such as farmers switching to drought-resistant

crops). However, while investments in adaptive infrastructure may only have local benefits,

knowledge developed research and development that improves adaptive technologies will also

have the spillover benefits that result from knowledge being a public good. Given that the types

of technologies needed to adapt to climate change are likely to vary depending on local




                                               44
conditions, this suggests a role for developing countries and/or international aid to support R&D

designed to improve adaptation options for developing countries.



3. How does governance affect green growth?

       Since environmental policy is necessary to create a market for clean technologies, issues

of governance are also important. In a developed country framework, recent work by Gennaioli

and Tavoni (2011) suggests that rent seeking and corruption may be an issue for clean

technologies. Using a difference-in-difference regression strategy across Italian provinces,

Gennaioli and Tavoni find evidence of greater criminal activity in provinces with high wind

energy potential after the passage of policies favorable to the wind energy sector. They also find

evidence that greater corruption leads to faster expansion of wind energy. They conclude that

when socio-political institutions are weaker, market-based policies to promote clean technologies

may lead to adverse outcomes. While these results are still preliminary and have not been

validated in other settings, they raise an important warning signal for countries where institutions

may be weak, and suggest that policy options to promote clean technologies must be tailored to

fit the broader political context of each country. Extending this work to explore links between

governance and environmental policy effectiveness in a developing country setting would be of

great value.


VI. Conclusions

       This literature review on environmental technological change suggests several lessons for

promoting green growth in developing countries. I highlight five of the most important here.

First, the fact that high-income countries dominate R&D activities, both for green technologies

and more generally, suggests that technology transfer is important.           In many cases, the

                                                45
technologies needed to promote green growth will already be available. Second, even when

technologies are available, adaptive R&D can improve the fit of new technologies to local

market conditions. For example, production processes can be adapted to take advantage of cost

savings in local markets. Third, technology transfer will be most likely to promote green growth

when it promotes knowledge spillovers. Fourth, financial constraints and ease of use play

important roles determining diffusion of green technologies within developing countries. Fifth,

policy incentives are important for creating markets for green technologies, as market forces

typically do not reward pollution prevention completely.

           While not exclusive, much of the focus in the paper is on energy use and climate change.

This is consistent with general trends in the literature, given recent interest in the climate

problem. Developing countries now play a key role in post-Kyoto negotiations. At the same

time, secondary benefits from energy policies (e.g. lower costs from improved energy efficiency,

reduced local air pollution) are important for low-income countries. While not emphasized here,

other technologies will also be important for low-income countries, particularly pertaining to

resource use (such as water) and agricultural productivity. Future work should also explore the

differences that emerge among various technological fields.

           For instance, advances in agriculture, such as drought resistant crops and more efficient

irrigation, are of particular importance to developing countries. In health care, neglected tropical

diseases are a prominent issue.25 These diseases, primarily of an infectious or parasitic nature,

occur almost exclusively in developing countries, so that for-profit pharmaceutical companies

have had little incentive to invest in new medicines to combat these diseases (Ridley et al. 2006).

Thus, the same problems of creating demand for innovations needed in developing countries that

green technologies face occurs in other fields as well, such as agricultural economics and health
25
     See, for example, http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/en/, accessed March 17, 2011.

                                                         46
economics.26 Advance purchase commitments for medicines (Barder et al. 2006) provide an

example of how researchers in the health care community propose creating demand for

innovation on medicines for neglected diseases. Moving forward, environmental economists can

learn from existing work in these fields to gain new insights on creating demand for green

technology. At the same time, the additional market failure of environmental externalities

suggests that simply applying the lessons from other sectors will not be sufficient.

           Finally, a focus on pollution control also ignores the important role of coping with a

changing environment. For developing countries, innovation will be particularly important when

considering adaptation to climate change. Whereas mitigation of greenhouse gases is a global

public good, the benefits of adaptation are local public goods. In some cases, these local public

goods may be provided publicly, such as flood control or irrigation projects. In other cases,

private actors will undertake adaptive behavior (such as farmers switching to drought-resistant

crops). However, while investments in adaptive infrastructure may only have local benefits,

knowledge developed research and development that improves adaptive technologies will also

have the spillover benefits that result from knowledge being a public good. Given that the types

of technologies needed to adapt to climate change are likely to vary depending on local

conditions, this suggests a role for developing countries and/or international aid to support R&D

designed to improve adaptation options for developing countries.                     A focus on green growth

should not only include research designed to improve environmental quality, but also on coping

with environmental changes that will inevitably come.




26
     For an example pertaining to pharmaceutical markets in developing countries, see Kremer (2002).

                                                          47
                                          References
Acemoglu, D. (2002), “Directed technical change”, Review of Economic Studies 69:781-809.
Adams, James D., J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan. (2004), “Standing on Academic
   Shoulders: Measuring Scientific Influence in Universities,” NBER Working Paper #10875.
Adams, James D., Clemmons, J. Roger, and Stephan, Paula E. (2006), “How rapidly does
   Science leak out?” NBER Working Paper #11997.
Attaran, Amir and Lee Gillespie-White (2001), “Do Patents for Antiretroviral Drugs Constrain
    Access to AIDS Treatment in Africa?” Journal of the American Medical Association,
    286(15),1886-1892.
Barder, Owen, Michael Kremer, and Heidi Williams (2006), “Advance Market Commitments: A
    Policy to Stimulate Investment in Vaccines for Neglected Diseases,” The Economists' Voice,
    3(1), Article 1. doi: 10.2202/1553-3832.1144. Available at: http://www.bepress.com/ev/
    vol3/iss3/art1.
Barry, Marie-Louise, Herman Steyn, and Alan Brent (2011), “Selection of renewable energy
    technologies for Africa: Eight case studies in Rwanda, Tanzania and Malawi,” Renewable
    Energy, 36, 2845-2852.
Barton, J.H. (2007), “Intellectual Property and Access to Clean Energy Technologies in
    Developing Countries,” ICTSD Issue Paper #2.
Binswanger, H., and V. Ruttan (1978), Induced Innovation: Technology Institutions and
    Development. (Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD).
Blackman, A. Bannister, G.J. (1998). “Community pressure and clean technology in the informal
    sector: An econometric analysis of the adoption of propane by traditional Mexican
    brickmakers”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 35(1), 1-21.
Blackman, A. Kildegaard, A. (2003). “Clean technological change in developing-country
    industrial clusters: Mexican leather tanning”. Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 03-
    12.
Bradsher, Keith. 2011. Hybrid in a trade squeeze. The New York Times, September 6, 2011, p.
    B1.
Bradsher, Keith. 2004. China sets its first fuel-economy rules. The New York Times, September
    23, 2004, p. W1.
Brewer, T. L. (2008), “Climate change technology transfer: a new paradigm and policy agenda,”
    Climate Policy, 8, 516-526.
Broder, John M. (2010), “Developing Nations to Get Clean-Burning Cookstoves,” The New York
    Times, September 21, 2010, A8.
Brunnschweiler, Christa N. (2010), “Finance for renewable energy: an empirical analysis of
    developing and transition economies,” Environment and Development Economics, 15, 241-
    274.
Copeland, Brian .R. and M. Scott Taylor (2003), Trade and the Environment: Theory and
      Evidence (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).


                                               48
Copenhagen Economics (2009), “Are IPR a Barrier to the Transfer of Climate Change
   Technology,” report prepared by Copenhagen Economics and the IPR Company.
Cragg, M.I., Kahn, M.E., (2009), “Carbon geography: the political economy of congressional
    support for legislation intended to mitigate greenhouse gas production,” NBER Working
    Paper 14963, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
D’Agostino, Anthony L., Benjamin K. Sovacool, and Malavika Jain Bambawale (2011), “And
   then what happened? A retrospective appraisal of China’s Renewable Energy Development
   Project (REDP), Renewable Energy, 36, 3154-3165.
Dasgupta, Susmita, Kïrk Hamiltion, Stefano Pagiola, and David Wheeler (2008),
    “Environmental Economics at the World Bank,” Review of Environmental Economics and
    Policy, 2(1), 4-25.
Dasgupta, Susmita, Benoit Laplante, Hua Wang, and David Wheeler. 2002. Confronting the
    Environmental Kuznets Curve. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 16:147-168
Dasguupta, Susmita, Craig Meisner, and David Wheeler (2010), “Is environmentally friendly
     agriculture less profitable for farmers? Evidence on integrated pest management in
     Bangladesh,” Review of Agricultural Economics, 29(1), 103-118.
de la Tour, Arnaud, Matthieu Glachant and Yann Ménière (2011), “Innovation and international
      technology transfer: The case of the Chinese photovoltaic industry,” Energy Policy, 39,
      761-770.
Dechezleprêtre, Antoine, Matthieu Glachant, Ivan Hascic, Nick Johnstone, and Yann Ménière,
     (2011), “Invention and transfer of climate change mitigation technologies on a global
     scale: A study drawing on patent data,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,
     5(1), 109-130.
Doranova, A., Costa, I., and G. Duysters (2009), “Knowledge base determinants of technology
     sourcing in the Clean Development Mechanism projects,” UNU-MERIT Working Paper
     #2009-015.
Doukas, H., C. Karakosta, and J. Psarras (2009), “RES technology transfer within the new
   climate regime: a ‘helicopter’ view under the CDM,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy
   Reviews, 13, 1138-1143.
Energy Information Administration (2010), International Energy Outlook 2010, Washington,
    DC: U.S. Department of Energy.
Esty, Daniel C. (2001), “Bridging the trade-environment divide”, Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, 15(3):113-130.
Fisher-Vanden, K. and M.S. Ho (2010), “Technology, Development, and the Environment.”
    Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 59(1), 94-108.
Fisher-Vanden, K. and I. Sue Wing (2008), “Accounting for quality: Issues with modeling the
       impact of R&D on economic growth and carbon emissions in developing countries”,
       Energy Economics, 2771-2784.
Gallagher, Kelly Sims. 2006. Limits to leapfrogging in energy technologies? Evidence from the
     Chinese automobile industry. Energy Policy. 34:383-394.

                                              49
Gallager, Kelly Sims, Laura Diaz Anadon, Ruud Kempener and Charlie Wilson (2011), “Trends
     in investments in global energy research, development, and demonstration,” Wiley
     Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 2(3), 373-396.

Gallagher, Kelly Sims and Erich Muehlegger (2011), “Giving green to get green? Incentives and
     consumer adoption of hybrid vehicle technology,” Journal of Environmental Economics
     and Management, 61(1), 1-15.

Gennaiolli, Caterin and Massimo Tavoni (2011), “Clean or ‘Dirty’ Energy: Evidence on a
    Renewable Energy Resource Curse,” FEEM Working Paper #63.

Geroski, Paul (2000), “Models of technology diffusion,” Research Policy 29, 603-626.

Geroski, Paul (1995), “Markets for Technology: Knowledge, Innovation, and Appropriability,”
     ch. 4. in Paul Stoneman, ed. Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological
     Change, pp. 90-131.

Graham, John D. (2007), “The Evolving Regulatory Role of the U.S. Office of Management and
     Budget,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 1(2), 171-191.

Griliches, Zvi (1990), “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of
      Economic Literature, 28(4), pp 1661-1707.

Gupta, S., D. A. Tirpak, N. Burger, J. Gupta, N. Höhne, A. I. Boncheva, G. M. Kanoan, C.
     Kolstad, J. A. Kruger, A. Michaelowa, S. Murase, J. Pershing, T. Saijo, A. Sari (2007),.
     Policies, Instruments and Co-operative Arrangements. In Climate Change 2007:
     Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. B. Metz, O.R. Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R.
     Dave, L.A. Meyer. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Hall, Bronwyn H. and Christian Helmers (2010),”The Role of Patent Protection in (Clean/Green)
      Technology Transfer,” NBER Working Paper #16323.

Hascic, Ivan and Nick Johnstone (2011), “The Clean Development Mechanism and International
     Technology Transfer: Empirical Evidence on Wind Power,” forthcoming in Climate
     Policy.
Hicks, Diana, Hiroyuki Tomizawa, Yoshiko Saitoh, and Shinichi Kobayashi (2004),
    “Bibliometric techniques in the evaluation of federally funded research in the United
    States,” Research Evaluation, 13(2), 78-86.
Hicks, J. (1932), The Theory of Wages, Macmillan, London.
Jänicke, Martin and Klaus Jacob. 2004. Lead markets for environmental innovations: A new role
      for the nation state. Global Environmental Politics. 4:29-46.
Johnstone N, Hascic I, Popp D. 2010. Renewable energy policies and technological innovation:
       evidence based on patent counts. Environ. Resour. Econ. 45(1): 133-155.



                                               50
Jones, Benjamin F., Stefan Wuchty, and Brian Uzzi (2008), “Multi-university research teams:
       Shifting impact, geography, and stratification in science,” Science, 322, 1259-1262.
Keller, Wolfgang (2004), “International technology diffusion”, Journal of Economic Literature,
        42, 752-782.
Kemp, René (1997), Environmental Policy and Technical Change (Cheltenham, UK: Edward
      Elgar).
Kerr S, Newell RG. 2003. Policy-induced technology adoption: Evidence from the U.S. lead
       phasedown. J. Ind. Econ. 51 (3), 317-343.
Khanna, M. and D. Zilberman (2001), “Adoption of energy efficient technologies and carbon
      abatement: the electricity generating sector in India”, Energy Economics, 23, 637-658.
Kim Jung Eun (2011), “Energy security or Climate change: does resource-scarcity promote
      alternative energy?,” working paper, Syracuse University.
Kremer, Michael (2002), “Pharmaceuticals and the Developing World,” Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, 16(4), pp. 67-90.
Kristinsson, Kari and Rekha Rao (2007), “Learning to Grow: A Comparative Analysis of the
        Wind Energy Sector in Denmark and India,” DRUID Working Paper 07-18, Danish
        Research Unit for Industrial Dynamics.
Lanjouw, J.O. and A. Mody (1996), "Innovation and the international diffusion of
      environmentally responsive technology", Research Policy 25:549-571.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Shankerman (2004), “The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation
      with Multiple Indicators,” Economic Journal, 114(495), 441-465.
Lanjouw, J.O., Pakes A., and Putnam, J., 1998. How to count patents and value intellectual
      property: uses of patent renewal and application data. The Journal of Industrial
      Economics, 46:405-433.
Lanoie, P., Laurent-Lucchetti, J., Johnstone, N., Ambec, S. (2007). “Environmental policy,
       innovation and performance: New insights,” GAEL Working Paper 2007-07.
Lecocq, F. and P. Ambrosi (2007), “The clean development mechanism: History, status, and
      prospects”, Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 1(1):134-151.
Levin, R.C., Klevorick, A.K., Nelson, R.R. and Winter, S.G., 1987. Appropriating the returns
       from industrial research and development. , 3:783-820.
Lewis, Joanna I. (2007), “Technology Acquisition and Innovation in the Developing World:
       Wind Turbine Development in China and India,” Studies in Comparative International
       Development, 42(3-4), 208-232.
Lovely, Mary and David Popp. 2011. Trade, technology and the environment: Does access to
       technology promote environmental regulation? Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management, 61(1), 16-35.
Maskus, Keith E. (2002), “Lessons From Studying the International Economics of Intellectual
      Property Rights,” Vanderbilt Law Review, 53(6), 2219-2239.



                                              51
Medhi, Neelakshi (2009), Adoption of environmental regulations and diffusion of
       environmentally sound technologies in developing countries, Ph.D. diss., Syracuse
       University.
Moed, Henk F., Wolfgang Glänzel, and Ulrich Schmoch, eds. (2004), Handbook of Quantitative
      Science and Technology Research: The Use of Publication and Patent Statistics in
      Studies of S&T Systems, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands.
National Science Board (2010), Science and Engineering Indicators 2010. Chapter 4, “Research
       and Development: Funds and Technology Linkages,” National Science Foundation,
       Arlington, VA.
Newell, Richard, Jaffe, Adam, Stavins, Robert (1999). “The induced innovation hypothesis and
      energy-saving technological change,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3), 941-
      975.
Perkins, Richard (2003), “Environmental leapfrogging in developing countries: A critical
       assessment and reconstruction,” Natural Resources Forum, 27, 177-188.
Popp, David (2010), “Innovation and Climate Policy,” Annual Review of Resource Economics,
       vol. 2., Gordon C. Rausser, V. Kerry Smith and David Zilberman eds., Annual Reviews,
       Palo Alto, CA, 275-298.
Popp David (2010), “Exploring the links between innovation and diffusion: Adoption of NOX
      control technologies at U.S. coal-fired power plants,” Environmental and Resource
      Economics, 45(3), 319-352.
Popp, David (2006), “International innovation and diffusion of air pollution control technologies:
       The effects of NOX and SO2 regulation in the U.S., Japan, and Germany,” Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management. 51(1), 46-71.
Popp, David (2005), “Lessons from Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in
       Environmental Models,” Ecological Economics, 54(2-3), 209-226.
Popp, David, Ivan Hascic and Neelakshi Medhi (2011), “Technology and the Diffusion of
       Renewable Energy,” Energy Economics, 33(4), 648-662.
Popp, David, Richard G. Newell and Adam B. Jaffe, (2010), “Energy, the Environment, and
       Technological Change,” Handbook of the Economics of Innovation: vol. 2, Bronwyn Hall
       and Nathan Rosenberg, eds., Academic Press/Elsevier, 2010, 873-937.
Popp, David, Tamara Hafner and Nick Johnstone (forthcoming), “Policy vs. Consumer Pressure:
       Innovation and Diffusion of Alternative Bleaching Technologies in the Pulp Industry,”
       forthcoming in Research Policy.
Pueyo, Ana, Rodrigo García, María Mendiluce and Darío Morales, “The role of technology
       transfer for the development of a local wind component industry in Chile,” Energy
       Policy, 39, 4274-4283.
Ramanathan V. and G. Carmichael (2008), “Global and regional climate changes due to black
   carbon,” Nature Geoscience, 1, 221-227.
Rebane, Kaja and Bradford L. Barham (2011), “Knowledge and adoption of solar home systems
    in rural Nicaragua,” Energy Policy, 39, 3064-3075.

                                               52
Ridley, David B., Henry G. Grabowski and Jeffrey L. Moe (2006), “Developing Drugs For
    Developing Countries,” Health Affairs, 25(2), 313-324.
Romjin, Henry A. and Marjolein C.J. Caniëls (2011), “Pathways of Technological Change in
   Developing Countries: Review and New Agenda,” Development Policy Review, 29(3), 359-
   380.
Sawhney, Aparna and Matthew E. Kahn (2011), “Understanding cross-national trends in high-
       tech renewable power equipment exports to the United States,” National Bureau of
       Economic Research Working Paper #17217.
Sathaye, J., A. Najam, C. Cocklin, T. Heller, F. Lecocq, J. Llanes-Regueiro, J. Pan, G. Petschel-
       Held , S. Rayner, J. Robinson, R. Schaeffer, Y. Sokona, R. Swart, H. Winkler (2007),
       “Sustainable Development and Mitigation,” in Climate Change 2007: Mitigation.
       Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
       Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [B. Metz, O.R. Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R.
       Dave, L.A. Meyer (eds)], Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
       New York, NY, USA.
Schneider, M., A. Holzer and V. Hoffmann (2008), “Understanding the CDM’s contribution to
    technology transfer,” Energy Policy, 36, 2930-2938.
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York: Harper.
Smith, K.R., J.M. Samet, I. Romieu, N. Bruce (2000), “Indoor air pollution in developing
    countries and acute lower respiratory infections in children,” Thorax, 55, 518-532.
Snyder LD, Miller NH, Stavins RN. 2003. The effects of environmental regulation on
    technology diffusion: The case of chlorine manufacturing. Amer. Econ. Rev. 93 (2): 431-35.
Verdolini, Elena and Marzio Galeotti (2011), “At home and abroad: An empirical analysis of
    innovation and diffusion in energy technologies,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
    Management, 61(2), 119-134.
Wang, Bo (2010), “Can CDM bring technology transfer to China?—An empirical study of
   technology transfer in China’s CDM projects,” Energy Policy, 38, 2572-2585.
Winkler, Harald, André Felipe Simões, Emilio Lèbre La Rovere, Mozaharul Alam, Atiq Rahman
   and Stanford Mwakasonda (2011), “Access and Affordabilty of Electricity in Developing
   Countries,” World Development, 39(6), 1037-1050.
World Bank (2009), The Little Green Data Book, World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank (2008a), International Trade and Climate Change: Economic, Legal, and
      Institutional Perspectives, World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank (2008b), Global Economic Prospects: Technology Diffusion in the Developing
      World, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Wuchty, Stefan, Benjamin F. Jones, and Brian Uzzi (2007), “The increasing dominance of teams
      in production of knowledge,” Science, 316, 1036-1039.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, Jonathan Furner, Robert C. Liu, and Hongyan Ma (2007),
       “Minerva unbound: Knowledge stocks, knowledge flows and new knowledge
       production,” Research Policy, 36(6), 850-863.

                                               53
      Figure 1. Number of EPO Patent Applications for Renewables by Type of Technology




Source: Based on data from Johnstone et al. (2010)

The number of European Patent Office (EPO) applications for patents pertaining to various
renewable energy technologies, sorted by the year of application. Patent counts for wind and
solar technologies are on the left vertical axis, with counts for the remaining technologies on the
right vertical axis.




                                                54
                     Figure 2. Share of Global R&D by Country, 2007




                       China          ROW

                                                          US
                            other
                            OECD
                 Italy
               Canada                              Japan
              Russia
                       UK
                 S. Korea
                                   France Germany

Source: Author’s calculations using data from National Science Board (2010)




                                             55
Table 1. Public R&D Spending in International Energy Agency Countries, selected years and topics

Energy Efficiency                1990       1995         2000   2005         2006    2007    2008     2009    2010
IEA Total                         738       1345         1566   1486         1592    1901    2150     3958    3174
IEA Americas                      326        746          722    595          522     642     747     2260    1477
IEA Europe                        374        324          257    373          502     675     843     1217    1237
IEA Asia Oceania                   38        275          587    518          568     584     560      481     460
Fossil Fuels
IEA Total                        2228       1105          663   1249         1356    1474    1562    4636     1838
IEA Americas                     1500        483          317    545          567     617     731    3614      830
IEA Europe                        321        190          135    320          362     402     371     399      473
IEA Asia Oceania                  407        432          211    384          427     455     460     623      535
Renewable Energy
IEA Total                         758        877          826   1159         1253    1688    1664     3775    3119
IEA Americas                      182        388          293    320          289     641     533     2351    1456
IEA Europe                        440        364          356    525          597     727     794     1067    1188
IEA Asia Oceania                  136        125          177    314          367     320     337      357     475
Total Energy R&D
Budgets
IEA Total                       11280       9885         9405   11298        11666   12804   13195   19528   14747
IEA Americas                     4289       3631         3105    4109         3913    4751    5032   10761    5744
IEA Europe                       3783       2547         2524    2918         3307    3588    3813    4452    4736
IEA Asia Oceania                 3208       3707         3776    4271         4446    4465    4350    4315    4267
All data are in millions of 2010 US dollars, using PPP




                                                                        56
Table 2. Patent and Publication Counts for Indoor Cooking Stoves

                                                       South
                                    China      India   Africa     Japan        US   Germany    France       UK      Korea     Total
Patents:
solar stoves                          483         0         0        69        56          8        12        8         2      665
biomass stoves                        273         2         0         5        16          3         0        0         0      307
LPG stoves                            304         1         0        10         8          0         0        1         5      358
kerosene or butane stoves             143         0         1       112        21          2         4        2        18      313
Publications:
solar stoves                            7        86       12           6       17          9         4        7         0      215
biomass stoves                         40        61        3           7      101          8         7       17         4      319
LPG stoves                              1        26        2           2       18          2         0        2         2       68
kerosene or butane stoves               3        50        2           3       41          4         0        4         1      132
Source: Author’s calculations. Both data sets includes patents and publications through 2010. Patent counts start as early as 1963,
       although data availability for some countries, such as China, begins later. Publication counts begin in 1990.




                                                                  57
                             Appendix A – Indoor Cooking Stove Search Terms

Patent searches
       kerosene or butane stoves
       ( (A47J 027<or>A47J 027??<or>A47J 027???<or>A47J 027????<or>A47J
       037<or>A47J 037??<or>A47J 037???<or>A47J 037????<or>F24B*<or>F24C*) <in>
       IC ) <AND> ((kerosene<OR> butane) <in> AB))

            liquefied petroleum gas stoves
             (( (A47J 027<or>A47J 027??<or>A47J 027???<or>A47J 027????<or>A47J
            037<or>A47J 037??<or>A47J 037???<or>A47J 037????<or>F24B*<or>F24C*) <in>
            IC ) <AND> (( (LPG<OR>"liquefied petroleum gas") <in> AB))

            biomass stoves
            (( (A47J 027<or>A47J 027??<or>A47J 027???<or>A47J 027????<or>A47J
            037<or>A47J 037??<or>A47J 037???<or>A47J 037????<or>F24B*<or>F24C*) <in>
            IC ) <AND> (biomass <in> AB))

            solar stoves
            ((solar AND (cooker OR oven OR stove)) <in> AB)


Publication searches

            solar stoves
            TS=("solar cooker" OR "solar oven" OR "solar stove" OR "solar cookers" OR "solar
            ovens" OR "solar stoves" OR "solar cooking").27

            biomass stoves
            TS=(biomass SAME (stove OR stoves OR oven OR ovens OR cooker OR cooking))

            LPG stoves
            TS=((LPG OR ‘’liquefied petroleum gas’’) SAME (stove OR stoves OR oven OR ovens
            OR cooker OR cooking))

            kerosene or butane stoves
            TS=((kerosene OR butane) SAME (stove OR stoves OR oven OR ovens OR cooker OR
            cooking))

NOTES: AB = abstract, IC = International Patent Classification, TS = topic search (includes
    title, abstract, and keywords)




27
     “TS” represents a “topic search” that looks for the search terms in the title, abstract, or keywords of the article.

                                                              58
