                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   SURVEY EVIDENCE ON DIFFUSION
                        OF INTEREST AMONG
                     INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS




                        Robert J. Shiller

                           John Pound




                      Working Paper No. 1851




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             March 1956




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                     NBEIR Working Paper #1851
                                     March 1986




             Survey   Evidence on Diffusion a-f Interest

                  Among Institutional Investors



                               ABSTRACT

      Contagion or epidemic models a-F financial markets are

proposed in which interest in or attention to individual stocks
is spread by word of mouth. The models give alternative
interpretations of the random walk character o-F stock prices. A
questionnaire survey of institutional investors was undertaken to
ascertain the relevance of such models. Questions elicited what
fraction of these investors were unsystematic and allowed
themselves to be influenced by word—of—mouth communications or
other salient stimuli. Rough indications of the infection rate
and removal rate were produced. Investors in stocks whose price
had recently increased dramatically to a high P/E ratio were
contrasted with a control group of investors.


Robert J. Shiller                    John Pound
Department of Economics,             Office of the Chief Economist
Cowles Foundation and                Securities and Exchange Commission
School of Management                 Roam 6O23 Stop 6—3
Yale University                      450 Fifth St. NW
Box 2125 Yale Station                Washington, D. C. 20549
New Haven, CT 06520                  (202) 272—7147
(203) 436—0685
             Survey Evidence on Diffusion of Interest

                   Among Institutional Investors


      Contagion models., like those used by epidemiologists to
study the transmission of disease Ce..   g., Bailey [1975]) or
social psychologists to study rumors or fads Ce.    g., Bartholomew
[1982]) would seem to be naturally of relevance to understanding
the spread of investor interest in specific financial assets, and

hence to understanding the predictability o-f returns.1 volatility

of prices or volume of trade in financial markets.. Psychologists
have shown that direct interpersonal communication among peers is
of singular importance in the transmission of attitudes (see for

example McGuire [1949]). Interpersonal communication among peers
seems to produce the kind of attention and reassurance that leads
to changes in behavior.. This fact is well recognized today in
marketing: advertisements often try to create the impression of
such communication..


      The relevance of such contagion models in finance remains
today one of conjecture; there is little concrete evidence

concerning them. Researchers perhaps despair o-f studying them,
since they feel that they do not know how to disentangle such
behavior from behavior that is purposeful and intelligent. It
should be noted, though, that the psychological literature does
not hypothesize that the above models apply only to the less



                               —1—
intelligent individuals. Our hypothesis here is that the above
models apply     in   important ways to many o-F those investors, whom
we will call "diffusion      investors", who do not use trading rules
that    cause them to   respond systematically to evidence but allow
attitudes to diffuse through them by word of mouth         0-F   course,
other    "systematic investors" may tend to offset somewhat the
effect of the diffusion investors on price.


         The present study is concerned only with professional
institutional investors, who would seem likely to be more
intelligent and knowledgeable than most other investors. The
object of our study was to ascertain by survey methods the
importance among them o-f diffusion investors and to inquire into
the source, time pattern, and interpersonal extent of their
attention to particular stocks. Since diffusion investors may
not    be equally distributed across stocks, the study distinguishes
between a control group of randomly selected stocks and a group
of    stocks in which diffusion investors were thought possibly
concentrated -




Models of Investor Behavior


         The classic general epidemic model a-f   Kermack and
McKendrick [1927] used to represent the spread of contagious
diseases has also been used to represent the time pattern of

rumors, attitudes or fads.. The model in its simplest form
hypothesizes that the number          of infectives (or, in our

application, interested people) is       increased by an amount per
unit o-F   time   equal to an infection rate bt times the number of
infectives, while bt is itself proportional to the number St of

susceptibles.. At the same time, infectives cease to carry the
disease (in our application, lose interest> and become immune to
the disease at a rate per unit of time equal to a constant
removal rate g times the number of infectives. The time path of

   can show a hump shaped pattern through time, rising at first
and then declining, or a decaying form in which the epidemic only
declines from its initial intensity.


      A number of modifications to this model may seem
appropriate for modelling word—of—mouth communications. There
may be an additional source of "infection" other than just
word—of—mouth communication, Bartholomew E1982]. Something had
to start the epidemic, and it may continue to exert influence.

The assumption that persons are ultimately immune may be
inappropriate, and it may be that persons removed from the
infective pool become again susceptibles, Bartholomew E1982].
The constant removal rate assumption may be replaced by the

assumption that persons stop spreading after encountering others
who have already heard (Daley and Kendall E1965]). The complete

mixing assumption that underlies the simple general epidemic
model may be replaced by assumptions of a spatial pattern to
transmission (Mollison E1972]).




                                  —
      Common to all these variations on the classic general
epidemic model are same notions of an infection rate and removal
rate. We can get some rough idea a-f      their   values directly from

survey data.     In this paper, we shall estimate the infection
rates and removal rates as constants, and in particular we shall
modify the general epidemic model so that the in-fection rate does
not depend on the number of susceptibles. This makes sense in
terms a-f the general epidemic model if the number of infectives
remains su-fficiently small in our sample that the number of

susceptibles is always close to the entire population.. The
differential equation for the total amount of interest for a

particular stock among all people I. is then just:

(1)            dlt/dt = (b—g)It   ÷ u

where u, is due to the source" o-f the epidemic.


      Supposing that q      b and that the source ut of the epidemic

has an in-Fluence only + or an instant (as would be the case i-f,

f or example, the source was a single widely publicized news story
at time 0) then the total interest in the stock would follow an

exponential decay pattern.. However, hump shaped patterns For
total demand -for the stack could still be produced by assuming
that total demand for the stork is a distributed lag on I (i-f
investors take time to invest after their initial interest) or if
the "source continues to attract interest + or a while, as + or
example if it too had an exponential decay pattern.




                                  -4---
        Other plausible assumptions will produce      that closely
resembles a random walk. Suppose that g is only a little smaller
than   b and that the "source" is serially   uncorrelated   noise
(formally   we may replace utdt with the stochastic differential of
a Wiener process).. Such serially uncorrelated u might come
about as attention is drawn to the stock by random associations
with other events. Here the uncorrelated shocks to demand are
cumulated by an (ever changing> pool of interested investors, to
produce a level o-F interest whose change is nearly

unforecastable. Such an outcome could be part of the reason for
the approximate "random walk" behavior o-F stock prices, though of

course the actions of some systematic investors must also play a
role in producing such behavior,.




       A control group of 10 stocks was selected at random from
the Standard and Poor's Daily Stock Price Records + or the New

York Stock Exchange American Stock Exchange and Over the Counter
Stocks.    An "experimental" or "boom" group   of 10 stocks was
selected from the list of 25 stocks experiencing highest price
increases in the preceding year., as reported on the first page of
Trendline's Current Market Pers8ectives of June 1985 and the OTC
Chart Manual of May—June 1985 Each stock in the list was given a
score equal to the average o-f the standardized values of the




                                -5-
stock's price increase over the preceding year, and
price/earnings ratio. A news search was done for the stocks, to
exclude special events; these were merger and acquisition
announcements in which the company was the target. Also excluded
were stocks that had had higher split—adjusted price in an

earlier year than the maximum achieved in the sample year. From
the remaining, the stocks with the top 10    scores were selected. 1

         The average (weighted by number of completed
questionnaires) E/P ratio in the experimental group in June 1985
was .025, compared with 056 in the control group. The weighted

average price increase -from the end of June 1984 to the end o-f
June 1985 in the experimental group was 184.5%, compared with
9.07.   in   the control group2 The weighted average turnover rate
of shares (all investors, individual as well as institutional) in
June 1985 in the experimental group was 8.07.. compared with 4.7%

in the control group. The weighted average change between June
1984 and June 1985 in the consensus forecast a-F fiscal 1985

earnings as reported on the IBES Earnings Forecast Data Base was




1. The experimental group stocks for which we have completed
questionnaires (number in parentheses) were: Barns Industries
(1), Chilton Corp (1). Limited, Inc.   (11), Marion Labs (3),
Mylan Labs (4), Rollins Environmental Services (5), Sa-fecard
Services (1), U. S. Health Care Systems (12), and Zenith Labs
(3)   The control group stacks were Continental Illinois Holding
Company (2), NCR Corporation (12). Pittston (5). Service
Fracturing (1), Stocker and Yale (2). and Unitrode (8).
2. E/P ratios and price increase figures exclude Continental
Illinois Holding Company.


                                 —4—
35.67. in the experimental group and —25.3% in the control group

      The experimental group was chosen in response to recent

studies showing negative abnormal returns -for high price increase
and high P/E stocks.. DeBondt and Thaler (1985] found that stocks

whose price had risen very dramatically tended to have negative
abnormal returns in subsequent years.. A number of other studies
have shown that stocks whose price is high relative to earnings
tend to have negative abnormal returns. Reinganum (1981] claimed
that the effect of the price relative to earnings was really
subsumed by a "size effect," however Reinganum's finding was
disputed by Basu (1983] and Peavey and Goodwin E1983]      These

studies thus   suggest that high   price increase and high P/E stocks
may be overpriced (perhaps because of a fashion or fad) and thus

tend to do poorly subsequently.

      Our survey chanced upon a boom in companies related to the
movement toward cutting health care costs: there were three

generic or consumer drug companies in our experimental group and
a manager of health maintenance organizations Labs. Others in
the experimental group were diverse: there were a producer of

young women's apparel, and a disposer of concentrated industrial


3. These data on earnings forecast changes exclude Barns
Industries, Chilton Corporation and Safegaurd Services (these
accounting for a total of three respondents) in the experimental
group and Continental Illinois (2 respondents) in the control
group   Most firms in the experimental group experienced little
earnings forecast change: the percentage changes were Limited,
Inc.., O..8%, Marion Labs, 6.9%, Mylan Labs., 0.0%, Rollins, 44.97.,
U. S. Health 89.0% and Zenith Labs 10.87.


                                   —7-
waste. Five of the nine firms on which we had responses had
doubled their earnings between 1982 arid 1984. Four paid no

dividends in 1984.

      Institutional stockholders in each of the 20 stocks were
randomly selected from those -firms who had reported to the

Securities and Exchange Commission that they held one of the
stocks on either March 31 or June 30, 1985. It was found that a
number of institutions were selected twice, as holding more than
one of the stocks ir our sample.      It was considered infeasible to
ask participation regarding more than one stock by a single
institution. Thus    institutions   were dropped from the lists of
stocks until each institution appeared only once.

      0-f course, since for our experimental group we selected

investors in stocks whose prices have increased a lot, we perhaps
also selected for successful investors, since most bought some of
the stock before the full price increase. However, since our
sample was based on stockholders of    record   in March or June,

1985, they also held the stock after the price increase that
caused stocks to be singled out for our study. Moreover, 73% of
those in the experimental group (as also 85% in the control
group) reported that they still held shares as of the survey


4. All institutional investment managers exercising discretion
over accounts with combined equity assets exceeding $100 million
must report on Form 13-f. Equity holdings below 10,000 shares and
also below $200,000 in market value need not be reported. We
accessed this information using Computer Directions Advisors,
Inc, SPECTRUM III: 13f Institional Stockholders Survey.


                               -8-
date.


         The survey of the decision makers then followed Dillman's
[1978] "total design method" fairly closely, and was implemented
by Donald Deluca at the Roper Center at Yale University. All
letters were sent to senior officers c-F   the   institutions asking
that the questionnaire be forwarded to the "decision makers" who

were responsible for the institution's holding of the stock in
question. We emphasized that only actual decision makers should
fill out the questionnaire. Respondents were urged to call us
collect if they had any questions (we received about 2C) phone
calls).


         Great effort was made to keep the response rate high by

repeated followups of those who did not respond first. A high
response rate is more important to the validity of questionnaire
results than is sample in the thousands, since a high response
rate diminishes the likelihood of important sample selection

bias. Questionnaires were first mailed September 17, 1985 with a
letter, self—addressed envelope and printed brochure describing
the project. The letter emphasized that the results of the
project would serve a useful social purpose, and that results
would be made public. It was promised that all respondents would
remain anonymous and that they would promptly receive a report
giving    all of our results. The report would include results
broken down by individual stocks, so long as this did not reveal
identities c-F participants. The report to them was offered as an



                                —9--
incentive to participate, as well as some assurance that we were
not trying to secure private advantage from the information
gathereth On September 23 a -Followup letter was mailed,
reminding them of the questionnaire and reasserting its
importance for research on financial markets. On October 9 a
third letter was sent out to those who had not yet responded,
with a duplicate questionnaire (in case the respondent had lost
the first) and another letter (noting the lack of response) and

self—addressed envelope. On November 13 a final letter was sent
to those who still had not responded, certified mail, with

another questionnaire and self—addressed envelope.. The timetable
and letter format con-Formed closely to those that Dillman found

yielded high response rates..


      Initially, 216 questionnaires were sent, 89 to the control
group and 127 to the experimental group    There were 74 completed
questionnaires, although after we classified three questionnaires
(based on margin comments) as out of frame the total was reduced
to 71, 30 in the control group and 41 in the experimental group..

We received 54 letters or phone calls that indicated that the
respondent was out of frame, so that a total o-F 57 were out o-f

frame. 0+ these, 24 said that they never held the stock, and 24
said that they did not decide to buy the stock (that the stock
was in a custodial account only, or that it was received as a
part of a distribution).. We believe that some who said they
never held the stock actually held it as part of custodial
accounts, which they did not check for us. The remainder of the


                                — 10 —
57 was accounted for by 6 index funds. 3 institutions that used a
rigid formula for their investments, and one options manager

whose holdings were due solely to rising options premiums. We
received 14 letters declining to fill out the questionnaire, and
1 letter indicating that the decision maker was deceased. The
remaining 73 institutions did not respond in any way to our
letters.


      We thus received cooperative responses from (71 + 57)1216 =
597. of those in our sample. We are pleased with this response

rate. It is lower than those attained by Dillman, but our study
suffered the handicap that we had to obtain the cooperation of
two persons for each questionnaire, and that the questionnaire
asked questions that respondents may feel are sensitive.




      g1gE!
      Separate questionnaires were prepared using a word
processor for each of the 20 companies in our sample. The name
of the company appeared throughout the questionnaire, to affirm
clearly our interest in investor behavior with regard to that

stock only.

      Some of the questions on the questionnaire were aimed at
evaluating and calibrating the kinds of models described above,
and some were aimed at stimulating the interest of the



                              —   11 —
respondents. Their interest was important, as the only incentive
offered to participate in the survey was that respondents were
promised all the results of the survey. When possible the
questions were worded so that the same question could be directed
to individual investors if there is a subsequent survey of them

      In each of the questions that follows, the average answers

among those answering the question to the question are shown in
brackets [3 -for   the   control group first, and then the

experimental group. In questions in which respondents answer by
choosing among items, the numbers in parentheses are the percent
among those answering the question who chose that item in the
control and experimental groups respectively. Standard errors
(in percentage points when what appears above is a percent)
appear below, in parentheses () -       Also   shown, after n: ,   are the
number answering the question in the two groups.




Sources a-f Initial Interest



      It is important for our purposes to identify to what extent
attention was drawn to the stocks by interpersonal

communications.. Moreover, the identification of the "diffusion
investors" is necessary for the estimation of         parameters   o-F the




                                    I
model above which describes them."
        Did any of the following motivate your initial interest
        in a way that led to your purchase            Corp.
        stock?
                                                 [CIRCLE ONE NUMBER FOR EACH)
                                                            Yes        No

              a. An investment professional.
                                                               1           2
                                                          [537., 757.)     [477., 257.]
                                                            (97.,7/.)      (9/.,77.)

n: 30 40
              b. A person who is not an investment
              professional.
                                                              1
                                                          [107.,   307.]   [907., 707.)
                                                           (5_J.,7/.)



     30. 40

              cradioA show.
                      newspaper, magazine, television or

                                                              1             2
                                                          [07.,   157.]    [100%,G5X]
                                                           t—,67.)          (—,6Y.)
                                                        n: 30,40
                   If YES,    name   of periodical or      show




5. This question asks subjects to report on the sources of their
own behavior, and thus is o-F the kind that is widely criticised.
However, even critics of such questions will admit that "Accurate
reports will occur when influential stimuli are salient and are
plausible causes of the responses they produce.." (Nisbett and
Wilson, 1977.) We think that it is plausible that investors can
accurately report what first attracted serious interest in a
stock.


                                       -.   13   -
           d. An Investment advisory newsletter or
           brokerage house recommendation.

                                                      1           2
                                                    E30.,Z2X1     E70Y,48Y.]
                                                     (8Y,8V.)      (BX.,BX)


  30, 40
                 If   YES, name of newsletter
                             or brokerage house:


           e. My initial interest was the result of my.1
           or someone else's, systematic search over a
           large number o-f stocks (using a computerized
           or other similar search procedure) for a
           stock with certain characteristics.
                                                      I
                                                    [67X,25X]     [33X,75X]
                                                     (9X.,7X)      (9Y...7X)



n :30,40


      The wording "motivate your initial interest that led to
your- purchase" in the above question was chosen with the idea
that it would induce the respondent to think of a discrete event
when serious active attention was -First shown the stock. They
often checked more than one as yes, but      it    is plausible that more
than one of these items were involved in the event,. For example,
both a and e   could be   yes i-F a professional   colleague reported a
systematic search. A number of      respondents    circled only yes's.
and left other lines blank. If a respondent checked only yes's
in a multiple—item question like this, the blanks were
interpreted as no's in the percentages reported here..


      The most striking contrast between the control and



                                    14 —
experimental groups is in item e. Notably, most of the investors
in the   experimental group denied that they were systematic   in

their decision to buy the stock, that is, they answered no to

part e..6 We regard this result as providing significant support
to the general notions in the contagion models described above as
applied to stocks in the experimental group. Those answering no
to part e will be defined as "dif fusion investorsu + or what

follows.


      The experimental group also showed somewhat more tendency,
relative to the control group, to be influenced by other
investment professionals, as well as by nonprofessionals, mass
media, and investment newsletters.

         If the respondents indeed interpreted this question as we

intended, we see that interpersonal communications among peers
were quite important as a source of interest. For both the
experimental group and control groups, the majority asserted that
their initial interest was prompted by discussions with other
investment professionals. The results are emphatic that initial
interest is not generally produced by individuals outside the
investment community or by general news media.

      Of course, these results might also be interpreted as

confirming   what we might expect of any professionals: they learn

6. Only 2 respondents, or 57. of the 757. reported above as
answering no had left the line blank, the others actually circled
no and thereby asserted that they were unsystematic.


                                — 15 —
from each other more than from primary sources. But the fact
that    they   are professionals does not itself necessarily imply
that initial interest in individual stocks comes from

colleagues. Professionals might well interact by discussing
broader strategy or exchanging general information, and interest
in individual stocks could well be the result of calculations
made by individual decision makers. We see that this is not
generally the case.


        Further evidence on the plausibility of contagion of

interest, particularly among the experimental group, can be found
in their reported recollections of their expectations, on the
date when their shares held reached their maximum, for the
percentage increase in their holdings in the succeeding year: an
average increase expected of 337. for the control group and 547.

-f or the experimental group. We also asked whether the respondent
was "sufficiently enthused about your purchase of

Corp. that you thought about it during your leisure hours." 0-F
the control group, 377. said yes, a-F the experimental group, 637.

said yes. We did not think it feasible to ask respondents to
recall their level o-f enthusiasm before they purchased, so the
difference between groups on this question may be due only to the
success of the experimental group. But with such expectations
and enthusiasm contagion     of interest is certainly plausible.




                                  —   16 —
Removal Rates and Infection Rates



         As a preliminary, the following two questions about timing
were asked:

     As nearly as you can rememberq on what date was it that
     the number of shares you held (in your own portfolio or
     portfolios you manage) in            Corp. reached its
     max i mum?7


             month                         year
                                                  E1984.55, 1984.80]
                                                     (..47.,..25)   n:29,39
     Roughly how long had it been before the DATE WHEN
     SHARES HELD REACHED MAXIMUM (preceding question) that
     you were first actively involved (thinking about
     investing or actually investing) in            Corp.?
             months
                            [24.3,12.5]
                               (7.4,3.2)      n:27,39

         We will call      the date of the questionnaire minus the answer
to the first    of these questions t1, represented in units of
years.     and the answer to the second (in years) t2. Then we will
define the total time since the individual became interested in
the stock as T =
                      t1   +   t.,.
         To estimate the parameter g. the rate of decay of interest,
we made use of the following question:




7. The distribution of dates in the answer was quite skewed to
the left; most dates were more recent than the average date.


                                       — 17 —
      Approximately what percent of your total time did you
      spend thinking about analyzinqq and discussing
                  Corp. in a typical week near the date when
        a     held r ached maximum (question 1 above)?
                                               E 4 57. 9.07.)
                                                   (.89,1.7)    n:28,39
       In a typical week, approximately what percent of your
      total time do you currently spend thinking about,
      analyzing, and discussing            Corp.?
                                               [1.57., 2.37.]
                                                   (..27,.40)   n28,39

       Calling the answers to the above questions yl and y2

respectively, for     each individual   the estimate of g was taken as
g =   ln(y2/yI)/t1.   The sample average g was computed for
diffusion investors who did not round either yl or y2 to zero and
for whom ti was at least 4 months. There were 18 such
investors. The estimate o-f average g was 1.42 with a standard
error of .35. This estimate a-f average g implies a half life
(ln2/g) for interest of .49 years. One survey (McGuire [1969])
on estimates in the psychology literature of removal rates from
memory after persuasive communications concluded that the
"typical persuasive communication has a half—life of six months"
but that different experiments produced widely different half
lives.8 Thus, our estimate of average g is consistent with the
notion that the decline of interest is due to the same process of
forgetting that has been studied by psychologists.




                           Attitudes," pp. 253—4. There is also
8. Mc6uire., "The Nature o-F
a literature in marketing which produces estimates of half lives
+ or memory that are not widely different from these. See Bagozzi
and Silk [19833.


                                  — 18 —
      To get an idea of b, the infection rate, the following
questions were asked:

     Roughly how many people have you personally talked to
     explicitly about            Corp. stock?
                                [7.2, 21. 0)
                                 (1.4.6.5)     n:28,41
     How many of these people would you guess might have
     become seriously interested in            Corp. as a
     result of your discussion with them?
                              [4.2,10.0]
                               (1.2.4.1)     n:27,37
     How many institutional investors in            Corp.
     (outside your own firm, if you are affiliated with an
     institution)
                    have you spoken to about
     Corp.?
                                [0.8,2.9]
                                 (.32,.58)     n:29.39

      We   were surprised at how big the answers to the above
questions were. If we take the answers to the second question at
face value, there is extensive contagion of interest. The
answers to the third question suggest, given the relatively small
number of institutional investors in the individual stocks, that
the set of institutional investors in a particular stock in the
experimental group is so interconnected that it might even be
regarded as a "small group" as defined by social psychologists.
However, 447. of the respondents in the experimental group
answered zero to the third question.




9. Two extreme outlier answers were dropped from the sample. We
thought that the question must have been misinterpreted.


                               — 19 —
          The total interest engendered by the individual is, by the

model ,




(2)          b        I(s)ds =    (b10/g)(1_e9T).
                                     -
                 Jo

To convert the total interest engendered to the total number of

people who became interested, we may divide the above expression

by 1n Setting the resulting expression equal to the answer x to
the second of the above questions and solving for b, we -find that
b =   xg/(1_eQTL.        This estimate of b was computed for each
individual and the individual estimates averaged to produce an
estimate o-f average b           For the experimental group the average
infection rate was 1.64, with a standard error of 6.03, while
for the control group the average infection rate was 7.46 with a
standard error of 2.23.


          The estimated infection rates are so high as to be wildly
implausible as inputs to our model. Since it is so much higher
than the removal rate, this estimated infection rate would imply
a rapidly exploding interest for both experimental groups and
control groups.. We believe that answers to the second question
above an which the estimate o-f the infection rate is based cannot
be taken at face value.           It will probably be very difficult to
pin down the value of the infection rate with any accuracy;
suffice it to say only that our results are consistent with the
notion that it may be significantly greater than zero.
      What is certainly suggested by the estimated infection
rates, even if they have an LLpward bias, is that the infection
rate is higher for the experimental group than it is for the
control   group.
                   1 C




IitEL_g±_Pi!i2E!

      An important aspect of our view of contagion of interest is

that interest spreads from person to person and does not tend to
bunch around dates o-f news events. To check this, we asked:
     Whenwere you most active in discussing
     Corp. stock with others:
                                            [ENTER DATE IN BOXES)
                                        Month:           Year
                                                              E1984. 16,1984.55]
                                                                 (.30. .56)
                                                                    24. 35


      There was little such apparent bunching of dates. For two
firms (Zenith Labs and Stocker and Yale) there was one date given
twice. For one firm, Limited Inc., one date was given by three
respondents. But there was no other such coincidence of dates
For the experimental group, active discussion came on average 1.6
months (s.    e.         1.4) before the date when holdings reached



1O The experimental group was selected in such a way that it
contains a large number of successful investors, and if people
like to boast this may account -for the fact that those in the
experimental group talked more to others about their investment.
This consideration alone would not suggest that they got more
people seriously interested in the stock.


                                      — 21 —
maximum, for the control group 32 months Cs. e          1.7).




Di SCLLSS1 On



       While    there   is no proof here, and we should not always take
answers at fare value, we have seen a number of indications that

contagion of interest, along lines described in the simple

epidemic models, may be important in describing the behavior of
institutional investors.


       As noted before, it is likely that contagion of interest
does not proceed evenly for all stocks at all times: only certain
stocks are 'interesting' We selected our experimental" or
ubooml stocks for which we thought such contagion likely to be

important. This selection was done on the basis of price.. We do
not have information that any of the stocks in the experimental

group were mispriced, only that behavior was observed that might,
given information in psychology, suggest that they might be

mispriced.


       The differences between the groups sorted as they were
using price are striking: those in our experimental or boom group
were less likely to be systematic, were more influenced by

interpersonal communications, talked more to others, were more
enthusiastic and optimistic. These differences are likely of
course to be due in part to the arrival of some genuine new
information that reached some institutional investors, which they

then spread. This environment, however, is conducive to the
judgmental errors uncovered by psychologists, and that may
explain why high P/E stocks experiencing high price increases as
a group tend to have negative abnormal returns subsequently.

       We think these results are in a way confirming of the idea!
already expressed in the literature on anomalous statistical
evidence, that notions of market efficiency need to be modified.
Vet it is far from our minds that we should reject the notions

altogether. Certainly there is some tendency F or some "smart
money" to move prices in the direction indicated by efficient
markets theory There is already a substantial literature that
describes how this might happen, models with both optimizing
investors and "noise" investors, "rule of thumb" investors, or
the like..




                              —   23 -
                            References


Bagozzi, Richard P, and Alvin J. Silk. "Recall, Recognition and
      the Measurement of Memory + or Print Advertisements,"

      Marketing Science vol. 2, pp. 95—134, Spring 1983.

Bailey. Norman T. J. I        ti1 IPgy I±ctLg
      Diseases, London, Griffin, 1975.

Bartholomew. D. J, Stochastic Models for Social Processes, 3rd
      edition, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester., 1982.


Basu, Sanjoy, "The Relationship between Earnings Yield, Market
      Value and Return: Further Evidence," Journal of Financial

      Economics, 12:129—56, June 1983.


Daley, D. J, and D, 6, Kendall, "Stochastic Rumors," Journal of
      t     S       Qf        Apl,     1:42—55, 1965.

DeBondt, Werner F. H.. and Richard Thaler. "Does the Stock Market

      Overreact?" Journal of Eioc, 40:793—805, July 1985.

Dillman, Don A., j1       Is1 y: Ib I1 Psig
      Method John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1978.

Friend, Irwin and Marshall Blume, The Changing ole gf
      Institutional Investor, John Wiley & Sons, 1978.

Kermack, W. 0., and A. 6. McKendrick, "Contributions to the

      Mathematical Theory of Epidemics," Proceedings of te Royal



                              — 24 —
 Number         Author                           Title                        Date
 1789      Charles R. Nelson and    Long-Term Behavior of Yield Curves         1/86
           Andrew F. Siegel

 1790      Martin Feldstein         U.S. Budget Deficits and the European      1/86
                                    Economies: Resolving the Political
                                    Economy Puzzle

 1791      Martin Feldstein and     The Effect of Federal Tax Deductibility    1/86
           Gilbert Metcalf          in State and Local Taxes and Spending

 1792      Martin Feldstein         Supply Side Economics: Old Truths and      1/86
                                    New Claims

 1793     Robert J. Barro and      A Reformulation of the Economic Theory      1/86
          Gary S. Becker           of Fertility

 1794     Robert J. Barro          Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy    1/86
                                   with Incomplete Information

 1795     James E. Pesando         Discontinuities in Pension Benefit         1/86
                                   Formulas and the Spot Model of the Labor
                                   Market: Implications for Financial
                                   Economists

1796      James M. Poterba and     Money in the Utility Function: An          1/86
          Julio J. Rotemberg       Empirical Implementation


1797      Stanley Fischer          1944, 1963 and 1985: Modiglianiesque       1/86
                                   Macro Models

1798      Raaj Kumar Sah and       The Invariance of R&D to the Number of     1/86
          Joseph E. Stiglitz       Firms in the Industry

1799      Jacob A. Frenkel and     The International Transmission and Effects 1/86
          Assaf Razin              of Fiscal Policies

1800      Warwick McKibbin and     Coordination of Monetary and Fiscal        1/86
          Jeffrey Sachs            Policies in the OECD

1801      Joshua Aizenman and      Sectorial Wage and the Real Exchange Rate 1/86
          Jacob A. Frenkel

1802      Robert W. Fogel          Nutrition and the Decline in Mortality     1/86
                                   Since 1700: Some Additional Preliminary
                                   Findings
1803      Alan J. Auerbach and     Tax Reform, Investment, and the Value of   1/86
          James R. Hines Jr.       the Firm

1804      Benjamin M. Friedman     Implications of the U.S. Net Capital       1/86
                                   Inflow
      Societ A115, 700—21. 1927.

Keynes, John Maynard, Ths      r1                             1ott
      and Mgy, Harbinger, 1964.

McGuire, William 3., "The Nature of     Attitudes   and Attitude

      Change," in Gardner Linzey and Elliot Aronson eds., Iti
      Handbook of Social Pscholoqy. Second Edition, vol. III,

      Addison Wesley, Reading Mass, 1969.

Nisbett. Robert E., and Timothy DeCamp Wilson, "Telling More Than
      We Can Know: Verbal Reports on Mental Processes,

      Psychological Review Vol. 84 No. 3, pp. 231—59, May 1977.


Peavey    III, John W.. and Dave A.. 6oodwin, "The Significance of

      PiE's for Portfolio Returns," Journal of Portfolio

      Management, 9:43—7, Winter 1983.


Reinganum, Marc R... "Misspecification of Capital Asset Pricing:
      Empirical Anomalies Based on Earnings Yields and Market

      Values,"            of Eiai1 Economics, 9:19—46, 1981.

Shiller, Robert 3... "Stock Prices and Social Dynamics," Brooking

                 Q cguQ!tc   ctLytty,   pp 457—97, 1984—Il.


Taylor,    Shelley E., and Suzanne C. Thompson. "Stalking the

      Elusive Vividness Effect," Psycholggic Review, 89:155—81,
         1982.




                                 - 25 -
