NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX:
SALIENCE, TAX RATES, AND TAX REVOLTS
Marika Cabral
Caroline Hoxby
Working Paper 18514
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18514
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

The authors owe special thanks to Joan Youngman and the Lincoln Land Policy Institute, without
whose support the data for this study could not have been gathered. The authors also thank Joshua
Angrist, David Autor, Douglas Bernheim, Michael Boskin, George Bulman, Raj Chetty, Sean Chu,
Jane Dokko, Amy Finkelstein, Michael Greenstone, Jonathan Gruber, Damon Jones, Christopher Mayer,
Luigi Pistaferri, James Poterba, Jesse Shapiro, John Shoven, and William Wheaton for comments,
help with data, and their expertise on property taxation. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Marika Cabral and Caroline Hoxby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Hated Property Tax: Salience, Tax Rates, and Tax Revolts
Marika Cabral and Caroline Hoxby
NBER Working Paper No. 18514
November 2012, Revised April 2013, Revised February 2015
JEL No. B12,H2,H24,H3,H71,P16
ABSTRACT
Because of the obtrusive manner in which they are normally paid, property taxes are likely the most
salient taxes in the U.S. However, they are much less salient to homeowners with tax escrow. Exploiting
geographical variation in tax escrow, we test how salience affects property tax rates and limits. We
instrument for tax escrow using bank holding companies' national mortgage servicing assets, focusing
on companies that have local branches but do most of their business outside the area. We find that
a one standard deviation increase in tax escrow produces about a one standard deviation decrease in
property tax rates.
Marika Cabral
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
One University Station
BRB 1.116, C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
marika.cabral@austin.utexas.edu
Caroline Hoxby
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Building, 579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
choxby@stanford.edu

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

1

I. Introduction
Because people typically pay property taxes in the U.S. by writing one or two very large checks each
year, the property tax is an obtrusive tax.2 It is more likely to be salient than taxes that are indirect, rolled
into gross-of-tax prices, collected through withholding, fragmented, or otherwise difficult to compute or
notice. All other major taxes--income, payroll, sales and excise taxes--are much less obtrusive. The
property tax has fairly unique politics also. Unlike all other major taxes, property taxes have fallen in
relative terms. Between 1970 and 2000, property taxes declined from 3.3 to 2.5 percent of GDP. In
sharp contrast, other taxes increased from 28.9 to 35.5 percent of GDP over the same period. Property
taxes fell sharply as a share of state and local government revenue: from 31 to 18 percent. See Figure 1.
Property tax "revolts" not infrequently occur and generate property tax limits that successfully bind for
many years. People report disliking the property tax more than any other tax even though they
simultaneously report that property tax revenue is better spent than any other tax revenue.
In this paper, we investigate how the salience of the property tax affects tax rates and contributes to
its unique politics. To study the effect of salience, we exploit the fact that about half of homeowners
with mortgages pay their property taxes through tax escrow. Tax escrow is a payment method that
converts the obtrusive property tax into an indirect, fragmented, difficult-to-compute tax that is often
collected through automatic methods rather like withholding. By comparing homeowners' self-reported
taxes to administrative records, we show that property taxes are truly less salient to people with tax
escrow. They report their property taxes much less accurately than otherwise similar homeowners who
pay taxes with one or two large checks per year.
Tax escrow is useful empirically because its prevalence varies among areas of the U.S. in an
idiosyncratic way. This allows us to test whether tax salience affects property tax rates and the
prevalence of property tax limits. Our tests are based on comprehensive data for the entire U.S. in 2000,
1990, and 1980. Our data are geographically disaggregated to a fine level that is appropriate given how
property taxes are determined.
Because the variation in tax escrow is crucial to our empirical strategy, we carefully research why the
variation is seemingly so random. (We show that there is substantial variation in tax escrow even once
we account for geography and all the observable variables that banks use to write mortgages.) We use
the results of this research to construct an instrument for tax escrow that deliberately excludes variation
that could potentially be endogenous to unobserved local determinants of property taxes such as

2

Among those who pay their property taxes by check or cash, 65 percent pay them once per year. Most of the remaining
households pay them twice per year.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

2

amenities or preferences for local public goods. Specifically, we find that bank holding companies with
a larger mortgage servicing business find tax escrow more profitable because it is a low marginal cost
"add-on" to mortgage servicing. Because mortgage servicing businesses are national and the servicing
industry is much more concentrated than lending, only about half of loans are associated with lenders
who have mortgage servicing businesses. Our instrument for tax escrow, explained in detail below, is the
ratio of mortgage servicing assets to mortgage loans originated where we use only the holding companies
that (i) are associated with a local lender but (ii) do the vast majority of their business outside the area
and the state. By construction, these holding companies could not be conducting their national mortgage
servicing businesses in response to unobserved conditions in a local area. The instrument has a Bartik
logic: it takes variation in tax escrow profitability that is set outside the area and links this variation to
lenders who lend inside the area. Our instrument not only addresses concerns about endogeneity and
unobserved variables, it also remedies measurement error in tax escrow caused by Census imputation and
sampling. The instrumental variables estimates are robust to variations in specification and are hardly
affected by whether we control for the characteristics of the local area. The latter finding confirms that,
once instrumented, the variation in tax escrow is fairly random.
This paper contributes to the large, distinguished literature on "fiscal illusion" which argues that
people underestimate non-salient taxes and other sources of government revenue, thereby allowing
government to expand beyond what voters prefer. This paper also contributes to a small recent literature
investigating the causal effects of salience on tax incidence, efficiency, and rates--for instance, Chetty,
Looney and Kroft (2009), Finkelstein (2009), Jones (2009), and Saez (2010). We review these literatures
in the next section.
We contribute to the older fiscal illusion literature in a few ways. First, we identify a source of
variation in tax salience that is credibly exogenous. Thus, our estimates are more likely to reflect the
causal effects of salience than are those of many previous studies. Second, we actually demonstrate that
tax escrow reduces the salience of property taxes. Previous authors often simply trust that illusion rises
with their measure of tax indirectness, complexity, or fragmentation. Third, because we find that tax
escrow makes people much less informed about the taxes they pay but it does not cause them to
underestimate their taxes systematically, we provide a simple model that does not depend on
underestimation but that nevertheless predicts that salient taxes are lower. Most previous models depend
on underestimation.
There are a few additional ways in which we contribute to the recent, causal literature on salience.
Ours is so far the only study in this literature that investigates how salience affects a major, ubiquitous

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

3

tax in the medium- to long-term. Second, we are able to observe not only the outcomes of politics (tax
rates) but some of the intermediating mechanisms (the enactment of tax limits, beliefs about property
taxes). Third, we identify effects of salience that run purely through politics, not through incidence or
efficiency. We can do this because, as discussed below, tax escrow does not vary among homeowners
until after home purchases have been made. Finally, we generate results that are representative of the
entire U.S. so there should be no concerns about external validity as there may be with experiments or
taxes that affect only a nonrepresentative group of taxpayers.
The plan of the remainder of the paper is as follows. In section II, we review closely related work.
In section III, we explain how the property tax and tax escrow works. We lay out the foundations for our
instrument. In sections IV and V, we describe our data and demonstrate that tax escrow does actually
reduce property tax salience. We clarify our empirical strategy in section VI. We present our findings
on property tax rates and property tax limits in sections VII and VIII. In section IX, we study the
psychology of salience by exploring beliefs about the property tax and other taxes. In section X, we
summarize the implications of our results.

II. Models of and Evidence on Tax Salience
The seminal discussions of tax salience are often attributed to J. R. McCulloch (1845) and John Stuart
Mill (1848). McCulloch argues that direct taxes impose a burden on taxpayers that is obvious to them
whereas indirect taxes do not. Indirect taxes can take many forms: excise taxes rolled into the price,
firms that pay the government for the right to a monopoly, and so on. Mill elaborates, coining the term
"fiscal illusion" and reasoning that direct taxes will force the government to be more economical:
The unpopularity of direct taxation, contrasted with the easy manner in which the public consent
to let themselves be fleeced [by indirect taxes] in the prices of commodities, has generated in
many friends of improvement a directly opposite mode of thinking to the foregoing. They
contend that the very reason which makes direct taxation disagreeable, makes it preferable.
Under it, every one knows how much he really pays.... If all taxes were direct, taxation would be
much more perceived than at present; and there would be a security which now there is not, for
economy in the public expenditure.
Amilcare Puviani (1903) postulates a government whose objective is maximizing revenue and which
intentionally manipulates the form of taxes to make them non-salient. He assumes that fiscal illusion
causes people to underestimate taxes. Puviani lays out a menu of manipulations, three of which are
particularly relevant for our analysis: (i) bundling a tax into a gross-to-tax price; (ii) fragmenting a tax
into many pieces so that individuals must sum up for themselves if they are to know what they are taxed;
(iii) tax complexity so that individuals must make various computations and actively seek auxiliary

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

4

information if they are to know what they are taxed.
Buchanan (1967) and Wagner (1976) explicitly build upon Puviani. Buchanan models government
as self-aggrandizing--a Leviathan. He and Milton Friedman (1998) argue that automatic withholding
decrease the salience of income taxes and allows government to grow.3 They argue against the valueadded tax on similar grounds: it is probably less salient than an equivalent retail sales tax. Downs
(1957), Buchanan, and Wagner all observe that fiscal illusion need not be irrational but can be a response
to information costs.4
There is a large empirical literature that attempts to test fiscal illusion. This literature, surveyed by
Dollery and Worthington (1996), is incredibly rich.5 Nevertheless, within it, modern causal methods are
rare and authors usually assume that tax indirectness or fragmentation generates a lack of salience.
Recently, some papers have attempted to estimate the causal effects of tax salience using experiments
or quasi-experimental methods. Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) run an experiment in which gross-oftax prices are shown along with net-of-prices in randomly selected grocery stores. (Normally, the tags
show only net-of-tax prices.) During the experiment, consumers purchase fewer of the goods whose
gross-of-tax prices are shown. The only downside of this carefully designed experiment is external
validity: because the experiment is necessarily of short duration, people might find the novel price tags
confusing and fail to buy for that reason. Chetty, Looney and Kroft also study how consumers respond to
increases in excise and sales taxes on beer. Excise taxes are bundled into the gross-of-tax price, while
sales taxes are charged at the check-out counter. They find beer purchases decrease more in response to
excise tax increases than to equivalent increases in sales taxes.
Sausgruber and Tyran (2005) conduct a laboratory experiment in which subjects earn "income" in a
trading game. They then vote on a proposal to tax trades and redistribute tax revenues. The authors find

3

"It never occurred to me at the time that I was helping to develop machinery that would make possible a government that I
would come to criticize severely as too large..." (Friedman and Friedman, 1998, p. 123).
4

Indeed, a government could not exploit fiscal illusion were it wholly irrational. On this point, Buchanan says: "The
individual who behaves irrationally makes inconsistent choices; he does not behave in such a way that an external observer can
make predictions, even should his utility function remain unchanged. By contrast, the individual who behaves in the presence of
an illusion will act consistently; given the same choice situation on two separate occasions he will tend to make the same
decision, provided that 'learning from experience' does not dispel the illusion and provided that his utility function does not shift
in the interim. Conceptually, the external observer can make predictions here if he knows the effects of illusion on choice
behavior. This amounts to saying that 'theorizing' about individual behavior under illusion is possible, whereas 'theorizing' about
individual behavior that is genuinely irrational is not possible."
5
For instance, see Goetz (1977); Pommerehne and Schneider (1978); Filimon, Romer, and Rosenthal (1982); Cullis and
Jones (1987); Feenburg and Rosen (1987); Oates (1988); McCaffery (1994); Heyndels and Smolders (1995); Holsey and
Borcherding (1997); Gemmell, Morrissey, and Pinar (2003); and Krishna and Slemrod (2003).

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

5

that 90 percent of inexperienced subjects (those who have not seen the consequences of repeated votes)
vote in favor of proposals that are not in their self-interest if the taxes are framed in an indirect way. If
the same taxes are framed in a direct way, 90 percent vote against such proposals.6
Finkelstein (2009) uses switches from cash to transponders on roads and bridges to show that
demand responds less to toll increases when transponders are more prevalent. She also shows that when
transponders are more prevalent, toll increases are more likely to occur in election years, suggesting that
politicians are less afraid of voter backlash.
Suppose we are convinced by the existing evidence that tax rates are higher for less salient taxes.
We could not conclude that government is necessarily self-aggrandizing. This is because, as noted by
Finkelstein and others, a benevolent social planner would set higher rates for taxes when they are less
salient if lower salience means less deadweight loss.7 Fortunately, variation in salience that arises
through tax escrow produces evidence that is unambiguous about benevolence. This is because tax
escrow has no effect on demand for property and, thus, no effect on incidence or efficiency. At the time
a property is bought, the gross-of-tax property price is equally salient to those who will and will not-after the purchase--have tax escrow. (We elaborate on this below.) Thus, in contrast to the prior
literature, our estimates isolate the impact of salience on tax rates that operate solely through the channel
of politics.
Dollery and Worthington classify models of fiscal illusion according to their mechanism: taxes that
are indirect, complex, fragmented, or withheld; governments' use of debt or non-tax revenue; taxes on
extremely inelastic demand. However, in all the models they survey, fiscal illusion causes people to
underestimate government revenue. Such models may well describe much of what occurs in reality.
Nevertheless, because we find that tax escrow causes people to estimate the taxes they pay with much
less accuracy but without systematic underestimation, we want to offer a simple model that does not
depend on an asymmetric bias.
In Appendix I, we do this, building upon the model of Lupia (1992) who is interested in how the
outcomes of direct democracy vary with the information environment. (Direct democracy is especially

6
Sausgruber and Tyran also find some evidence that subjects learn about the burden of indirect taxes as the experiment is
repeated. However, in the laboratory, voting is repeated at short intervals with all other conditions remaining exactly the same.
Updating in the real world would naturally be much slower and more difficult: real tax proposals are more complicated than the
experimental ones; voting occurs only at long intervals; the real environment contains many confounding variables.
7
It might seem intuitive that non-salience is just like inelasticity so that non-salient taxes do not generate deadweight loss.
However, this intuition is wrong as shown by Chetty, Looney and Kroft. How a non-salient tax affects efficiency depends on
how people react when they find their budget goes less far than they thought it would.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

6

relevant for property taxes because referenda are the key means by which property tax rates change.) We
assume that voters have less accurate but unbiased information about the taxes they pay when the tax is
less salient. They vote on tax rates in referenda, but a politician or bureaucrat has agenda-setting power:
he chooses the tax policy that is put on the ballot as the alternative to the status quo. We show that,
under these circumstances, political outcomes are closer to the agenda-setter's ideal and further from the
median voter's ideal when voters are less well informed. The more salient are taxes, the better informed
are voters, and the more likely are they to end up with an outcome preferred by the median voter. Thus,
if politicians and/or bureaucrats are self-aggrandizing, lower salience predicts higher tax rates. See the
appendix for details of the game theoretic model.

III. The property tax, tax escrow, and logic of our instruments
A. Property taxes
In the U.S., property taxes are traditionally used to fund local public goods, such as schools, police,
fire protection, recreational facilities, local roads, and local public transportation. In a Tiebout-like
environment where households can choose among many jurisdictions, capitalization tends to make
property taxes equivalent to user fees.8 This well-known user fee equivalence leads economists to expect
people to resent the property tax less than other taxes, which have no similar automatic mechanism
forcing them into line with the benefits they fund. Although a Tiebout-like environment certainly does
not prevail everywhere, the point is that, compared to other major taxes, property taxes are somewhat
closer to being user fees.
In the U.S., over 95 percent of property taxes are collected by local governments--municipalities and
school districts being the most important. The remaining 5 percent of property taxes are collected by
state governments.9 In 2002, property taxes accounted for 46 percent of local governments' revenue.
However, the degree to which local governments depend on property taxes varies from state to state. In
Alabama, property taxes make up only 20 percent of local revenue; in the New England states, property
taxes make up more than 80 percent of local revenue (Emrath 2002).

8
If a local government tries to overtax its residents given the services that it provides, people moving into the area will
choose to live in other local jurisdictions that provide similar services with a lower tax. This will drive down property prices
(and consequently property taxes) in the overtaxing jurisdiction until indifference between jurisdictions is reestablished. This
automatic mechanism forces property taxes into line with the value of the public goods they fund. See Appendix G of Marshall's
Principles of Economics (1948), Tiebout (1956), Oates (1969), Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1984), Hoxby (1999).
9

This 95-to-5 ratio is somewhat deceptive because some states redistribute a share of localities' property tax revenue so that-though local governments collect all of the property taxes--the state controls part of the revenue.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

7

The practical way to measure the tax rate on a property is to divide the property taxes paid by the
property's market value. This sounds simple but property taxes are determined in a complicated way. A
property is linked to all of the local jurisdictions in which it is situated. This may be a single jurisdiction
but is usually a combination such as a municipality, a school district, a county, a water district, a sewer
district, and so on. These usually do not have boundaries that coincide so two neighbors may vote and
pay taxes in the same municipality, say, but in different school districts or water districts. (It is a
common misunderstanding that a property typically resides in a single jurisdiction that performs
municipal, fire, school, water, and most other local functions. The misunderstanding may be perpetuated
because prominent U.S. universities happen to be disproportionately located in areas, like Massachusetts,
where this anomalous situation prevails.)
Each jurisdiction sets a property tax rate, and each property's market value is established by its
county's assessor.10 A residence-specific tax bill is computed that sums up over all the relevant
jurisdictions. When a resident votes, he is given a ballot with the right mix of jurisdictions.
Regardless of tax escrow status, property taxes' effect on the gross-of-tax price of property is salient
at the time that a property is purchased because the key calculation is the ratio of gross-of-tax housing
costs to the prospective buyer's income. Households cannot obtain a mortgage if lenders consider this
ratio to be too high. Thus, if two properties have the same net-of-tax price but one has higher property
taxes, a household may well be told that it cannot purchase the property with the higher taxes.
B. Tax escrow
Most people pay their property taxes simply by writing one or two checks each year. However, about
half of people with mortgages have tax escrow in which case the tax bill is sent to whichever lender
services the mortgage. This servicer bills the homeowner monthly for his combined mortgage, taxes, and
(usually) homeowners' and mortgage insurance. Thus, in order to deduce what property taxes they are
paying, households have to study their tax escrow statements deliberately and sort out how much of each
payment reflects the property tax as opposed to their mortgage or insurance. This deduction is not at all
easy because a tax escrow payment is designed to pre-accumulate an amount based on last year's tax bill

10

When choosing property taxes, local jurisdictions may be constrained by statewide limits as described below. County
assessors must follow state guidelines and tend to rely on a small number of firms that use hedonic estimation to predict market
values based on recent property transactions. If a homeowner believes that the estimated market value of his home is erroneous,
he may appeal the estimate. Appeals are successful if a homeowner has more accurate information than the assessor. Some areas
apply an assessment factor based on the homeowner's age or tenure in the house. For instance, in New York State, an assessment
factor of 0 is applied to the first $60,100 of property value for elderly households with less than a certain income. (This factor
applies only to property taxes raised by school districts.) In California, a formula keeps a property's assessed value equal to its
market value when last sold plus a 2 percent (maximum) annual increase.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

8

plus a "cushion." The cushion varies but can be anywhere up to one sixth of the previous year's tax bill.11
Moreover, 85 percent of households who use tax escrow have variation in their monthly payments that
comes not just from taxes but also from their insurance and the adjustable rates in their mortgages.
Indeed, the typical tax escrow statement is so confusing that there are numerous financial websites-including one set up by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)--devoted solely to
explaining tax escrow bills.12 In short, a tax escrow household that wants to focus on its property taxes
must make some effort to compute them--the household cannot simply attribute changes in its monthly
payments to a change in the property tax.
Tax escrow does not merely reduce salience by making it hard for households to deduce the current
month's property taxes. Tax escrow also means that, once a household has deduced its tax payment in
each month, it has to add up the payments. It cannot just multiply one month's payment by 12 since the
monthly payments vary. This is much harder than remembering the check paid most lately (and perhaps
multiplying it by 2). Since tax escrow payments are monthly, households do not need consciously to
save or dissave in order to pay their taxes. They can therefore be fairly inattentive. Just under half (46
percent) of households with tax escrow have their monthly payment deducted automatically from their
bank account (typically on the day after they receive a paycheck). As in a withholding system, property
taxes are then especially likely to be non-salient because the household need not see a monthly bill or
write a monthly check. Automated payment of property taxes in the absence of tax escrow is extremely
rare.13
Only households whose mortgages are backed by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) or

11

The following quotation from Anderson and Dokko (2009) suggests why tax escrow is confusing to many people.
"Because exact property tax bills are not known when the escrow account is created at closing, lenders must estimate the
anticipated annual property tax bill. Typically, escrow managers working on behalf of lenders use the previous year’s property
tax payment as an estimate of the anticipated property tax bill but may apply judgment to adjust the estimate for changes in
property tax rates. Lenders collect a minimum of 1/12th of this estimated tax bill each month, although they often collect an extra
'cushion' amount to ensure an adequate account balance. The account balance fluctuates over time, falling when the lender makes
scheduled disbursements. For a given year, the 'cushion' amount is defined as the lowest balance in the escrow account. The
Department of Housing and Urban Development's (HUD) Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA) limits the maximum
'cushion' amount to 1/6th of estimated annual property taxes. A borrower ensures an adequate 'cushion' over the course of the
year by making an initial deposit into the escrow account at closing...[I]f an escrow account has a 'cushion' amount below the
maximum, a lender could increase the cushion amount and increase the borrower's monthly payment by 1/12th of the 'cushion'
increase."
12

See, for instance, http://www.hud.gov/offices/hsg/ramh/res/respafaq.cfm.

13
In the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances, 0.09 percent of households claim to use automated payments to pay their
taxes--that is, their taxes not in combination with their mortgage. Since the question asks about automated payment of all taxes,
not just property taxes, it is safe to say that the 0.09 percent figure overstates that share of households who pay their property
taxes (not in combination with a mortgage) through automated payments.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

9

Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) are required to use tax escrow. Otherwise, lenders are free to
impose tax escrow or not.14
Why might or might not a lender use tax escrow? For a lender, the benefit of tax escrow is that it
makes delinquency on mortgage payments coincide with delinquency on tax payments. This offers a
little protection to the lender in the case of default because the tax authority has a primary lien on the
property. If an owner were to pay his mortgage regularly but pay no property taxes, the tax authority
might accumulate a lien without the lender knowing it. By the time the lender found out, its collateral
might be reduced. Thus, although tax escrow does not force an owner to pay his taxes any more than it
forces him to pay his mortgage, it prevents the tax lien from becoming large without the lender's
knowledge. Such cases are not common because people in financial distress usually fall behind on both
their mortgage and property tax payments, not just the tax payments. Thus, the alert generated by tax
escrow is only occasionally useful.
For a lender, the cost of tax escrow is the cost of examining and paying tax bills associated with
many local jurisdictions. In assessing whether a bill is correct, the lender is at a disadvantage relative to
the owner because it is far more obvious to the owner if, say, his age is listed incorrectly, the property
description is wrong, or the property is assigned to the wrong school district. To administer escrow and
pay the bills, the lender either needs to verify such information regularly to avoid errors or rectify errors
once they have been made (by negotiating with tax authorities and owners). While the lender can pay
specialist firms to supply them with information, it is impossible to administer tax escrow without
incurring administrative costs.
C, The logic of the instrument
In short, tax escrow has both benefits and costs for the lender. Why might some lenders find it profitable
and others not? We hypothesized that lenders who run mortgage servicing businesses were more likely
to find it profitable because they were already engaged in substantial administrative activity for

14

There is a rule-of-thumb that tax escrow ought to be used for mortgages with loan-to-value ratios greater than 80 percent.
However, data from the 1981, 1991, and 2001 Residential Finance Surveys indicate that this rule is not followed. Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac, which buy and repackage conforming loans, do not require that the loans they buy have tax escrow (Fannie
Mae 2009). Neither the Federal Reserve nor any other government agency gathers information on lenders' use of tax escrow.
Thus, the tax escrow decision is one that a lender makes for itself, considering the benefits and costs. It is not a decision that
could affect the lender's relationship with regulators. Regarding these points, we gratefully acknowledge conversations with
mortgage lenders and Jane Dokko, an expert on tax escrow in the Household and Real Estate Finance division of the Federal
Reserve Board of Governors. The FHA and VA requirements affect about 10 percent of first mortgages and about 6 percent of
all home loans according to the Residential Finance Surveys.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

10

properties so that the marginal cost of adding tax escrow was smaller.15 To understand this logic, realize
that many lenders do not service their own loans. After making the loan, they pay a mortgage servicer to
send bills, resolve billing errors, collect late payments, and manage pre-payments. Most mortgage
servicing business are owned by banks or other financial companies, and the mortgage servicing industry
is much more concentrated than is lending--a reflection of the economies of scale in these businesses.
For instance, Wells Fargo and Fleet are major mortgage lenders and own some of the largest mortgage
servicing businesses. Banc One and Citicorp are just as important as mortgage lenders, but they do
almost no mortgage servicing. We found that a good measure of a bank's involvement in the mortgage
servicing industry is the ratio of its mortgage servicing assets to its mortgage loans originated: the
"SALO" ratio. See Appendix Table 1 for a listing of the largest bank holding companies and their ratios.
If the SALO ratio is to serve as a valid instrument for a household's having tax escrow, it must both
be correlated with a household's having tax escrow and uncorrelated with unobserved local factors that
determine property tax rates. The estimates of our first-stage equation demonstrate that the first of these
conditions is fulfilled. If the bank branches in the area of a house are associated with bank holding
companies that have a higher SALO ratio, the homeowner is more likely to have tax escrow. We believe
that the second condition is likely to be fulfilled as a logical matter because:
(i) Bank holding companies are unlikely to go into the mortgage servicing business because they want to
use tax escrow on the loans they originate. Rather, mortgage servicing is the primary business because
mortgage payments make up most of the bills. Tax escrow is an afterthought--a small activity that can
added at relatively low marginal cost to existing mortgage servicing.
(ii) Mortgage servicing businesses are national, centralized operations. Thus, whether a bank holding
company has such a business is determined at a national level, far above any local area.
(iii) We construct the instrument so that a local bank branch is included in the calculation only if its bank
holding company does the vast majority of its business outside the local area and the state. It is
implausible that such holding companies get into the mortgage servicing business because of unobserved
determinants of the property tax rate in the locality. Thus, the instrument takes variation in tax escrow
profitability that is set outside the area and links it to lenders who lend inside the area. This Bartik-style
construction tends to guarantee independence from local circumstances.
We provide an exact equation for the instrument below.

15

There is very little research on tax escrow and, so far as we can tell, this hypothesis is original to us. It turns out to have
strong empirical support, however.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

11

D. Arbitrary variation in tax escrow
One might still be concerned that there was little or no conditionally random variation in tax escrow if
borrowers "shopped" for tax escrow just as they shop for interest rates and closing costs. However, they
cannot. When potential borrowers file preliminary applications for mortgages, they can get quotes on
interest rates, points, and closing costs, but the quotes will not include information on tax escrow.16 The
Federal Reserve Bank does not even recommend that people ask a question about tax escrow when
shopping for a mortgage--although they recommend numerous other questions.17 While the HUD and the
Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA) require lenders to inform borrowers about tax escrow at
the closing of a house purchase, it is too late for a borrowers to return to comparison shopping when they
are signing the closing paperwork: the house sale would likely fall through. Moreover, this requirement
was only put in place because borrowers complained that they did not learn about tax escrow even at the
closing. Thus, we are confident that borrowers are not selecting lenders based on whether they will end
up with tax escrow. A negligible percentage of borrowers change the tax escrow status that was in their
mortgage at closing.18
The key point is that, even with the same property and otherwise similar mortgages, a household may
end up with tax escrow if its mortgage is from one lender and without tax escrow if its mortgage is from
another. Indeed, when we test whether tax escrow varies arbitrarily among households, we find that it
does. Appendix II describes these tests in detail. In the first test, we use probit regression and a
propensity score algorithm to predict a household's tax escrow status (1 if tax escrow, 0 otherwise) on
every loan and household characteristic that a bank could use to determine whether to use tax escrow for
a loan. (We use data from the Residential Finance Survey which has accurate information on every
relevant characteristic of the mortgage and the borrower.) The estimated propensity score maximizes the
power of the observable variables to explain tax escrow status. Then, we demonstrate that the
16

Borrowers can most easily get comparison quotes by using a mortgage broker or by using an online service such as
LendingTree.com, mortgageloan.com, QuickenLoans.com, MSN Money's Mortgage Center, and bankrate.com.
17

18

See http://www.federalreserve.gov/PUBS/MORTGAGE/MortB_1.HTM (accessed January 2010).

We searched a large number of websites that dealt with mortgages and tax escrow. Numerous questions about tax escrow
are posed in these fora, mainly regarding the tax escrow calculations, which people find confusing. However, the only mentions
we could find of people getting rid of tax escrow were associated with a bank repeatedly failing to make property tax payments
on time or otherwise evincing severe problems with paperwork. However, even such changes are rare. We know this because
such changes begin with a "qualified written request" under RESPA, and HUD processed only 6,658 RESPA-related requests
and inquiries in 2009 (0.008 percent of mortgages). Only some these were qualified written requests so changing tax escrow
must be rare. See U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2009), p. 111. Gutenberg, in "How Can I Avoid Tax
Escrow On My Mortgage?" The Mortgage Professor's Website (2009) advises against dropping tax escrow except in the case of
paperwork problems. Other financial advising sites also note that the costs of dropping tax escrow are likely to exceed the
benefits. See http://www.mtgprofessor.com/A%20-%20Escrows/how_can_i_avoid_escrows.htm.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

12

distributions of the propensity scores for the treated (tax escrow) and control households are extremely
similar.
The second test is independent of the first. It is based on the idea that nearly all of the plausibly
problematic omitted variables--unobserved variables that affect both tax escrow status and tax rate-type
outcomes--would exhibit spatial autocorrelation. For instance, households might co-locate based on
unobserved local amenities. A reasonable test of whether tax escrow status is randomly assigned
conditional on observable variables is a test of the spatial autocorrelation of residual tax escrow status.
We regress the percentage of households with tax escrow in a Census block on the full set of variables
for which we control (including the instrument) and compute residuals. Using the two most-often used
statistics, Moran's I and Geary's C, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no spatial autocorrelation in
the tax escrow residuals.

IV. Data Sources
Our primary analysis relies on data from Summary Tape Files 1 and 3 of the 1980, 1990, and 2000
U.S. Censuses of Population and Housing (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1983b, 1993, 2002). We
begin with data at the census block group level.19
Neighboring houses can sit in, say, the same municipality but different school districts. Fortunately,
Census boundaries are drawn to minimize occasions in which some households in a block group have a
different "package" of jurisdictions than others. With only rare exceptions, all houses in a block group
have the same property tax schedule and vote in the same package of jurisdictions. Also, local
jurisdictions (of any type--municipalities, school districts, water districts, etc.) almost never cross county
lines. We relay these facts because they explain how we organize our regressions. See below.
Our most important variables from the census are tax escrow (our indicator of salience) and property
taxes (our key outcome). We commissioned special tabulations of the censuses that gave us block group
level information on these variables.20 We have compared the Census data on escrow to administrative
data for certain counties where escrow is a matter of public record. For those counties, the Census-based

19

In the 1980s census, the block group/enumeration district level is used. The average census block group contained 559
households in the 2000 Census and a slightly smaller number in the prior censuses.
20
U.S. Department of Commerce (2010). We are grateful to the Lincoln Land Policy Institute for supporting the purchase
of the special tabulations. Questions on tax escrow and property tax paid have consistently been asked in the Census, but they
have not been made available in the summary tape files. The exact wording of the questions is as follows. The question, "Does
your regular monthly mortgage payment include payments for real estate taxes on this property?," is asked of owners who report
having a mortgage or similar debt on their property. The question, "What were the real estate taxes on this property last year?," is
asked of owners (regardless of whether they have a mortgage). The answer to this is a dollar amount (exact, not categorical).

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

13

escrow data exhibits considerable classical measurement error which we attribute partly to sampling
error and partly to the Census' imputing 57 percent of the data on tax escrow using hot-decked data from
areas that are "nearby" but not necessarily in the same block group or even the same jurisdiction (U.S.
Department of Commerce, 2014). We expect ordinary least squares estimates to exhibit attenuation bias,
which is one of the motivations for our instrumental variables analysis.
We also use Census data to compute local property tax rates by dividing households' total reported
property taxes by households' total reported property value. This is the most accurate property rate data
that one can collect for all U.S. homeowners (Emrath 2002). Although these data are measured with
error too, we use them exclusively as a dependent variable so the error is less of an issue.
We condition on observable variables likely to covary with tax escrow and to affect property taxes
through channels other than salience. From the Censuses, we have average household income, the
average value of owner-occupied properties, the average monthly owner cost of housing, the percent with
a mortgage, the percent who rent their homes, and loan to value ratios.21 We also have the percent of
households who moved into their home 0 to 1 years ago, 2 to 5 years ago, 6 to10 years ago, 11 to 20
years ago, 21 to 30 years ago, and 31 or more years ago. The last variable is a good proxy for the share
of households that no longer have mortgages since nearly 100 percent of first mortgages (not including
refinancing) are for 30 years.22 Other Census variables we use are average household size and the
percent of people who are non-white, who are Hispanic, who are rural versus urban, who have a
household head age 65 or older, who have a child age 18 or younger.
We gathered the percent of mortgages that are FHA or VA from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
Loan Application Registers which are reported to the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council
(FFIEC, 1981-2000). Mayer and Pence (2008) generously provided us with data from HUD on the
percent of mortgages that are subprime. The subprime and FHA/VA variables are at the census tract
level.
For our instruments, we use data on the deposits in each local bank branch from the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation's (FDIC's) Summary of Deposits data (FDIC 1975-2000).23 We obtain the

21

Monthly owner costs are the sum of payments for mortgages, property taxes, insurance, utilities, fuels, and condominium

fees.
22
Refinanced mortgages are often only 15 years in length. In computing this number, we excluded mortgages acquired
from a previous owner (rare). The sources are the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances and the 2001 Residential Finance Survey.
23

The data are available online for 1994 through the present. Data from 1975 to 1993 were provided by the Federal
Reserve Board of Governors. We gratefully acknowledge Sean Chu for finding them for us.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

14

mortgage servicing assets and mortgage originations of each bank holding company from the FDIC's Call
Report and Thrift Financial Report (FDIC 1984-2000).24
Our data on property tax limits come mainly from Center for Urban Policy and the Environment at
Indiana University on behalf of the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (1995). To
extend these data to the year 2000, we use Winters (2008) and Tax Analysts (1996 through 2001,
annual).
Finally, we use the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances ("SCF", Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, 2001) and the 1981, 1991, and 2001 Residential Finance Surveys ("RFS", U.S.
Department of Commerce 1983a, 1991, 2001) to compute descriptive statistics on property taxes,
mortgages, tax escrow, and home values.
Apart from the Census data, much of the data we use are fairly error-free because they are from
administrative sources or surveys, like the RFS, linked to administrative sources.

VI. Does tax escrow actually reduce tax salience?
So far, our hypothesis that property taxes are less salient to homeowners who use tax is escrow is just
a hypothesis. In this section, we offer some direct evidence.
We surveyed homeowners in nine counties from the state of Ohio. We selected the counties because
they were representative of the state and had especially usable assessor data on property taxes and tax
escrow for all homeowners.25 Thus, before beginning the survey, we knew what taxes households paid
and whether they had tax escrow.
Our survey asks homeowners a few confidence-building questions which allow us to check their
accuracy. For instance, we ask when they purchased the property and what services (local, state, or both)
the property tax supports. We then ask two important questions (see Appendix III). The first, which was
on all homeowners' surveys, was: "Approximately how much did you pay in property taxes for your
house during the [past calendar] year? (Simply give us your best estimate. You need not go to the

24
Mortgage servicing assets are a "business methodology," one of the categories into which intangible assets (which
mortgage servicing assets are) fit. The data from 1984 to 1998 are from the FDIC's Research Information System. The data from
1999 onwards are available directly from the FDIC (most are online). We use the regulatory bank holding company.
25
The counties are a mixture of urban and rural from all parts of the state: Franklin (the primary county in the Columbus
metropolitan area), Cuyahoga (the primary county in the Cleveland metropolitan area), Champaign (a fairly rural county with
county seat Urbana), Erie (coincides with the Sandusky metropolitan area), Fulton (a secondary county in the Toledo
metropolitan area), Lawrence (a secondary county in the Huntington-Ashland metropolitan area, Mahoning (the primary county
in the Youngstown metropolitan area), Miami (a secondary county in the Dayton metropolitan area), and Williams (a fairly rural
county with county seat Bryan).

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

15

trouble of consulting your records.)" Thus, we check how accurately homeowners recall their property
tax payments. The second question, which was on half of the surveys, was "Does your regular monthly
mortgage payment include payments for property taxes on your house?" This lets us check whether
assessors and homeowners agree on whether tax escrow is being used. They do 95 percent of the time.
After stratifying homeowners on county, property value, and tax escrow status, we drew a stratified
random sample of 2,000. Their response rate was 53 percent.26 We find that owners with tax escrow
report their taxes much less accurately than those without tax escrow. Figure 2 contains histograms of
the difference between reported and actual taxes paid for the two groups: those with and without escrow.
It is clear that those with tax escrow have reported-versus-actual differences that are a mean preserving
spread of those without escrow. The standard deviation of the reported-actual difference is $2215 for
those with tax escrow but only $781 for those without escrow. Put in property tax rate terms, the
standard deviation of the reported-actual difference is 14.3 mils for those with tax escrow but only 3.2
mils for those without escrow.27 This evidence strongly confirms our hypothesis that property taxes are
less salient to homeowners with tax escrow.
We refine this evidence in Table 1, where we regress the reported-actual property tax differences on
(i) the variables we used for stratified sampling and (ii) a series of variables that describe the property
and the socio-demographics of its Census block group. By partialing out the covariates, we more
accurately assess the effect of tax escrow itself on salience. The left-hand side of Table 1 shows that, on
average, the absolute difference between reported and actual taxes is $868 or 5.2 mils more for those
with tax escrow than for those without it. These estimates are statistically significantly different from
zero at the 0.01 level.
Although our survey evidence indicates that home owners with tax escrow estimate their property
taxes less accurately, their estimates are not systemically higher or lower. That is, the average difference
between reported and actual taxes, as opposed to the average absolute difference, is not statistically
significantly different for owners with and without tax escrow. This is shown in the right-hand side of
Table 1. The evidence suggests that tax escrow causes people to make mistakes but not to over- or
under-estimate their property taxes systematically.

26
We find that homeowners with tax escrow are about 10 percent less likely to reply than those with no tax escrow. This
may be because they are less confident about how much property tax they paid. If so, we will underestimate differences in
salience between those with and without tax escrow.
27

In the U.S., property tax rates are most often expressed in mils (thousandths). 10 mils equal 1 percent.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

16

VII. Empirical Strategy for the Remainder of the Paper
The essence of our empirical strategy is simple. We run regressions of the form:
(1)
where PropTaxRate is the property tax rate, PctTaxEscrow is the percentage of households with tax
escrow, and X is the set of covariates listed in the data section that are potential determinants of the
property tax rate.
To mitigate issues like measurement error, omitted variables, and endogeneity, we instrument for the
percentage of households with tax escrow using a measure of the mortgage servicing of bank holding
companies that operate in the area but that do most of their business outside the area. This gives us a
first-stage equation of the form:
(2)
where SALO is the measure of mortgage servicing (see below).
This simple strategy requires certain clarifications.
A. Cross-section, not panel, data
We estimate equations (1) and (2) using cross-sectional data from each of the 2000, 1990, and 1980
Censuses. The Census geographies that we need (see below) cannot be linked across censuses, so
estimating a panel regression would be impossible. However, even it were possible, it would not make
sense. There is no model of salience and the political economy of property taxes that would lead us to
expect property tax rates to respond quickly to recent changes in tax escrow status. Cross-section
regressions are appropriate because they test whether the accumulated lack of salience over the fairly
recent past affects property tax rates.
B. Block group level data, with appropriate clustering, not jurisdiction-level data
It is perhaps natural to think that the above regressions should be run at the jurisdiction level where we
use some particular type of jurisdiction--municipalities, say. This thought is, however, based on the
misconception that all the property taxes on a household's bill are aligned with the same set of
boundaries. Such boundary alignment does occur in some areas but it is the exception, not the rule.
Instead, the typical property tax bill include some taxes that support school spending in a district with
one set of boundaries. It includes other taxes for municipal services in a municipality with another set of
boundaries. And so on for taxes that support police, fire, water, sewers, and parks--each service
potentially having its own boundaries.
Suppose we were to seize on a particular type of jurisdiction, municipalities say, and run regressions

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

17

with municipality-level observations. We would then be ignoring the fact that the property taxes reported
by a municipality's households (the dependent variable) include taxes determined in other jurisdictions
that contain households who are not in the municipality and who are thus not included in the independent
variables. The left-hand and right-hand side variables in the regression would be based on different
households, which would be wrong.
In an ideal world, we would find all of the homes that share the same "package" of services. The
residents of a package vote in exactly the same local elections, receive the same local services, and pay
property taxes at the same rates. We would then run the regressions at the package level (with
appropriate clustering of the standard errors to account for jurisdictions that overlap multiple packages).
Unfortunately, it is impossible to create data on the boundaries of each package. Even if we were to
gather all of the property tax bills in the U.S., most lack the detail that would allow us to assign
residences to packages.28 However, over the course of decades, the U.S. Census has worked closely with
local officials to draw boundaries that avoid having block groups straddle jurisdictions of any type. (The
Census avoids having block groups straddle any type of jurisdiction because a primary use of Census
data is the accurate targeting of federal funds. For instance, if block groups were to straddle school
districts, the U.S. Department of Education could not compute poverty accurately at the district level and
would therefore be unable to target Title I funds.)
In short, even though we cannot draw package boundaries, we do know that--nearly always--homes
in the same block group are in the same package. Thus, we run the regressions at the block group level.
To see that this regression will deliver the same point estimates as a package-level regression, consider
that we are using means of variables on both sides of the regression and the weight on each block group
is the number of people. Thus, block group-level and package-level regressions, each using population
weights, produce the same point estimates. If we could, we would cluster the standard errors in our block
group regression at the package level or a slightly higher level that accounts for jurisdictional overlaps.
Because, however, we do not observe which block groups are in which packages, we are forced to cluster
the standard errors much more conservatively (generating larger standard errors). We cluster our robustto-heteroskedasticity standard errors at the county level because we know that all the jurisdictions with
which a block group could be associated are in its county: local jurisdictions almost never spill across
county lines. In practice, we obtain larger standard errors than we would obtain by bootstrapping or

28

We tried this with data from the largest firm that specializes in gathering data from assessors. The data contain
insufficient detail to substitute for Census data.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

18

multi-way clustering.29
C. Why instrumental variables and how they are constructed
We use instrumental variables to mitigate measurement error, omitted variables, and other potential
sources of endogeneity. The tax escrow variable is based on the long form survey of the Census, asked
of only one sixth of households. Thus, there is sampling error. Moreover, the tax escrow variable is
imputed for 57 percent of households and the Census does not require that data for the imputation come
from the same block group or even the same jurisdiction.
Now consider potential omitted variables. Through what channels might local tax escrow tendencies
be correlated with unobserved determinants of property taxes? The main channel will be characteristics
of a potential borrower that are unobserved by us but observed by the lender and which indicate that he
will less reliably pay property taxes on his own. (The lender will tend to lose money on tax escrow if the
borrowers would pay taxes on their own.) For instance, lenders might subjectively assess a person's
attachment to his community or the stability of his family situation. A person who is more attached and
stable would probably pay property taxes more consistently so the lender would have less incentive to
use tax escrow. But, if people who are more attached and stable are more interested in local public goods
(as seems likely), property taxes will be higher where tax escrow is lower. The unobserved variables will
cause OLS to underestimate the effect of salience on property taxes.
Alternatively, suppose that an area has an unobserved amenity that attracts affluent people whose
demand is inelastic with respect to gross-of-tax property prices. Noting their inelasticity, local politicians
might set property taxes high. But, a lender should also take note and expect them to pay their taxes
consistently. Again, OLS will underestimate the effect of salience on property taxes.
OLS might overstate the effect of salience if property taxes are high in an area for some exogenous
reason. Lenders would then value tax escrow simply because the tax authority's lien would be a little
larger by the time the lender learned that the person was not paying his property taxes. Since, however,
property taxes are the outcome of a political process and not something created by nature, we found it
hard to think of an "exogenous reason." Most reasons why property taxes would be high conditional on
observables are associated with a high taste for public goods or a low elasticity of property demand,
scenarios we explored in the previous paragraphs.
Our proposed instrument is the SALO ratio. We consider the bank branches in the county where the

29

For multi-way clustering, see Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011). We thank Douglas Miller for confirming that
county-level clustering is more conservative in this situation than is multi-way clustering. The standard errors we compute are
robust to heteroskedasticity, which is useful because we expect households with tax escrow to report their property taxes less
accurately.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

19

block group is located.30 We assign each branch the national SALO ratio of its holding company, and we
then compute a weighted average SALO ratio for each county, where a branch's weight is its share of
deposits.31 Note that each holding company has just one national SALO ratio because mortgage
servicing businesses are completely centralized. Thus, the instrument varies not because, say, Bank of
America's SALO ratio varies but because Bank of America has more branches in some counties than in
others.
The instrument might not fulfil the exclusion restriction if it includes bank holding companies that
are small and operate only in one or a few counties. Such holding companies might examine local
conditions, decide whether they wanted to use tax escrow, and then get into the mortgage servicing
business as a consequence. Since experts say holding companies' primary choice is whether to be in the
mortgage servicing business and tax escrow is only an add-on, this narrative is not terribly plausible.
However, it is possible. We can exclude such possibilities, however, by basing the instrument only on
the branches of holding companies that do most of their business outside the local area. A holding
company, for instance, that does more than 95 percent of its business outside the county and more than
50 percent of its business outside the state cannot plausibly be setting its national SALO ratio in response
to local conditions that favor tax escrow. Of course, as we tighten the criterion to exclude more branches
from our instrument (for instance, by including only holding companies that do 75 percent of their
business outside the state), we lose representativeness because some counties have no value for the
instrument: they do not have any branches that meet the criterion. Thus, there is a trade-off between the
representativeness of our instrument and the degree to which it is (by construction) unrelated to local
circumstances. Therefore, we show how the results change as we tighten the criterion to exclude more
bank branches from the instrument. We also show an independent test of whether our instruments are, in
fact, unrelated to local circumstances. See below.
The exact equation for the instrument in county j is:

(3)

30

We obtain extremely similar results if we focus on the 10 or 20 bank branches closest to block group i within a 100 mile

radius.
31
Branches are weighted by their share of deposits to ensure that tiny thrifts, such as the savings and loan associations of
local churches, do not get undue weight. The weighting does not matter much, however, because such branches are dropped
from the instrument as soon as we impose any reasonable criterion on the share of business outside the county or state.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

20

where i indexes the Nj bank branches in county j and mi is an indicator for the branch's being associated
with a holding company that meets our business-outside-the-area criterion. For instance, our baseline mi
is an indicator for a branch being associated with a holding company that does at least 50 percent of its
business outside of the state. di is the branch i's deposits. SALOi is the national SALO ratio of the
holding company of branch i.

VIII. Results: Salience and Tax Rates
A. Our basic results in figures and simple estimates
In this section, we present a graphical version of the regressions we present more fully in the next
section. Because the relationships are easy to see in figures, we hope the figures make the upcoming
estimates more transparent. Each figure is constructed in the same way. The relevant independent
variable is on the horizontal axis, where it is divided into 50 quantile bins. Within each bin, we compute
the weighted mean of the independent variable and relevant dependent variable over all block groups.32
A scatter plot of these bin means is then shown. Thus, the figures show exactly the data that generate the
regression estimates. We use year 2000 data for all the figures although, later, we show estimates for
1980 and 1990 as well. We use the SALO ratio based on bank holding companies that do at least 50
percent of their business outside the state. This is our preferred SALO ratio because it is nearly
representative (it is available for 92 percent of block groups) yet it is likely to fulfill the exclusion
restriction because it relies only on bank holding companies that do the majority of their business outside
the state. Later, we show results for other SALO ratios.
Figure 3 shows a scatter plot of property tax rates on the vertical axis and the percentage of
mortgages with tax escrow on the horizontal axis. This is the "raw" relationship and corresponds to a
regression with no independent variables other than the tax escrow variable. It is immediately obvious
that property tax rates are rising in the percentage of mortgage holders with tax escrow. The
corresponding ordinary least squares (OLS) coefficient is 0.059.
We are going to instrument for the tax escrow variable with the SALO ratio. Figure 4 shows the
first-stage of that procedure for the case with no other covariates. The SALO ratio is the independent
variable on the horizontal axis and the percentage of mortgage holders with tax escrow is on the vertical
axis. Even with the data in this raw form, with no controls for other factors, there is a strong positive

32
We use population weights in both the figures and regressions to make them nationally representative, but the weighting
makes little difference to the results because Census block groups are designed so that each one contains about the same
population. We obtain almost identical results if we use household rather than population weights.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

21

relationship. The implied coefficient is 10.547 and the F-statistic is 31.11.
Figure 5 shows the reduced-form of the instrumental variables (IV) procedure: the SALO ratio is on
the horizontal axis and the property tax rate is on the vertical axis. Again, there is a clear positive
relationship: the implied coefficient is 3.510.
We can foresee that the second-stage coefficient will be positive because, in this simple case, it is
equal to the reduced-form coefficient divided by the first-stage coefficient. Nevertheless, Figure 6 shows
the second-stage of the instrumental variables procedure. The predicted percentage of mortgage holders
with tax escrow (predicted using just the SALO ratio) is on the horizontal axis and the property tax rate is
on the vertical axis. As foreshadowed, there is a clear positive relationship with an implied coefficient of
0.333.
Figures 7 through 10 repeat the exercise except that they control for the full set of covariates that
seem likely to affect property tax rates. Figure 7 corresponds to the OLS regression with the full set of
covariates. The residual (from the covariates) of the tax escrow variable is on the horizontal axis and the
residual of the property tax rate is on the vertical axis. There is an obvious positive relationship. The
implied coefficient is 0.024.
Figure 8 corresponds to the first-stage regression with covariates: the residual SALO ratio is on the
horizontal axis and the residual tax escrow variable is on the vertical axis. Again, there is a strong
positive relationship. The implied coefficient is 6.829 and the F-statistic on the residual SALO ratio (the
excluded instrument) is 20.63 --demonstrating that the first stage of our instrumental variable procedure
has plenty of statistical power even when we control for a full set of potential explanatory variables.
Figure 9 corresponds to the reduced-form regression with covariates: the residual SALO ratio is on
the horizontal axis and the residual property tax rate is on the vertical axis. The obvious positive
relationship can be summarized by the implied coefficient which is 2.114. Finally, Figure 10 shows the
second-stage with covariates. The residual of the predicted tax escrow variable is on the horizontal axis
and the residual property tax rate is on the vertical axis. The clear positive relationship implies a
coefficient of 0.303.
B. Interpreting the basic results
It is worthwhile pausing to interpret this coefficient. It indicates that a 10 percentage point increase in
the share of mortgage holders with tax escrow generates property tax rates that are 3 mils higher. In the
year 2000, the tax escrow variable had a standard deviation of 24. The property tax rate had a mean of
11.5 mils and a standard deviation of 5.8 mils. Thus, the coefficient suggests that a standard deviation
increase in tax escrow among mortgage holders raises property tax rates by 1.2 standard deviations.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

22

The IV estimate of the effect of tax escrow on property tax rates is similar regardless of whether we
control for nothing or for a full array of explanatory variables. This fact is important because it implies
that the instrumental variable has little relationship with the other covariates. That is, the variation in tax
escrow that is governed by the SALO ratio is not mediated by the other covariates. Put one way, this
result is just as expected. We constructed the instrument so that it would be independent of local
circumstances that might affect property tax rates: we based the SALO ratio on bank holding companies
that do most of their business outside the state. However, even if the result is as expected, this fact
constitutes important, independent verification of the claim that the instrumental variable has little
relationship with local circumstances.33
The IV coefficient is substantially larger than the OLS coefficient. We expected this because, as
mentioned above, most omitted variables and related scenarios would predict an OLS coefficient that
understates the true effect. However, we also believe that the OLS estimate is seriously attenuated by
measurement error. When we try the same regressions in a subset of counties where we have both a
Census-based and administrative measure of tax escrow, eliminating the measurement error causes the
OLS estimate to rise very substantially (though it remains lower than the IV estimate). This subset of
counties is far from representative of the U.S. so the results are only suggestive. However, they highlight
the importance of measurement error.
C. Variations on the basic specification
Table 2 shows the key estimated coefficients from OLS and IV regressions using data from the year
2000. The top row shows results for our preferred specification, which employs a SALO instrument
based on bank holding companies that do at least 50 percent of their business out-of-state. (Appendix
Table 2 contains descriptive statistics for all the variables included in the regressions. All the estimated
coefficients from this regression are displayed in Appendix Table 3.) The remaining rows show results
for other credible definitions of the SALO instrument--SALO ratios based on banks that always do at
least 95 percent of their business outside the county or at least 60, 70, or 75 percent of their business
outside the state. The table also shows results with and without controls for other covariates. (Estimates
based on our controlling for subsets of the covariates fall between the estimates shown for all covariates
and no covariates.) Note also that the first-stage regression is consistently statistically powerful. Despite
our very conservative standard errors, the F-statistic on the excluded instrument is 21.9 on average.

33

This verification is shored up, not undermined, by the fact that the other covariates affect the OLS coefficient. Their
effect on the OLS coefficient demonstrates that they are, in fact, statistically significant determinants of the local property tax
rate. This is a useful demonstration since the addition and subtraction of covariates that were irrelevant would not generate
independent verification.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

23

While the estimate of the effect of tax escrow on the property tax rate does vary with the exact
definition of the SALO instrument, it is always positive, statistically significantly different from zero at
the 0.001 level, and does not vary enough to alter our basic interpretation. The highest estimate suggests
that a 10 percentage point increase in the share of mortgage holders with tax escrow generates property
tax rates that are 3.8 mils higher. The lowest estimate suggests that the same increase generates property
tax rates that are 2.2 mils higher. (We expect the estimate to vary somewhat from row to row because the
number of banks contributing to the SALO ratio and the number of observations both vary as the
threshold rises on the share of business done outside the county or state.)
Table 3 shows some variations. Results from our preferred specification with 2000 data are shown in
the top row. The second and third rows of Table 3 show the same specification using 1990 and 1980
data.34 These years' data suggest that a 10 percentage point increase in the share of mortgage holders
with tax escrow causes property tax rates to rise by 2.6 mils (1990) and 3.1 mils (1980). Thus, the earlier
years' data broadly confirm the year 2000 estimates.
In the fourth row of Table 3, we return to the year 2000 data. Because the empirical distribution of
property tax rate is not approximately normal but, rather, has a pronounced right skew, we estimate a
median regression in the second stage of the instrumental variables analysis. This gives us a estimate
that indicates that a 10 percentage point increase in the share of mortgage holders with tax escrow causes
the property tax rate to rise by 2.8 mils.
D. A test of benevolence
Suppose that when tax salience falls and property tax rates rise, local government services improve so
much that voters are made weakly better off. This might occur if politicians were benevolent planners
who realized that low tax salience allows government to grow but also realized that voters would actually
prefer--even if they would not deliberately vote for--a world in which government was larger and could
provide more services.
This scenario would not change the results we find above: property tax rates would still rise as tax
salience falls. However, it might change how one would interpret the results: the benevolent versus the
rent-seeking politician. To test for this scenario, we run our preferred instrumental variables regression
on year 2000 data except that the local school district's math or reading performance is the dependent
variable rather than property tax rates. These are the only performance measures available for all areas
of the United States that can reasonably be interpreted as government value-added once one controls for

34

For the 1980 estimates, the Census and bank branch data are from 1980 but mortgage servicing assets are from 1983, the
first year such data were gathered. The error in the measurement of the 1980 SALO ratio makes it a less strong instrument.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

24

socio-demographics.35 Table 4 shows that the percentage of mortgage holders with tax escrow does not
have a statistically significant effect on math or reading. Of course, student achievement is only one
indicator of local government performance and imperfect one at that. Thus, we view this test of
benevolence as merely suggestive.
E. Alternative measures of the prevalence of tax escrow
So far, our measure of tax escrow has been the percentage of mortgage holders with tax escrow. This is
because mortgage holders generate all of the variation in our proxy for salience and in the instrument.36
However, residents without mortgages also vote on property tax rates. Thus, we might wonder whether
property tax rates might be better explained by the percentage of owner occupied homes with tax escrow
or the percentage of all residences with tax escrow. To examine these possibilities, consider Figures 11
and 12 which show the property tax rate plotted against the percentage of, respectively, owner-occupants
and renters with tax escrow. (These are graphical versions of OLS with no covariates.) Comparing
Figures 11 and 12 to Figure 3, which is the same except that it uses the percentage of mortgage holders
with tax escrow, one can see all of the relationship between tax escrow and property tax rates is
generated by the mortgage holders. That is, the relationship, which is positively sloped so long as there
are mortgage holders under consideration, plateaus as soon as households without mortgages are reached.
In consequence, if we use the alternative measures of tax escrow based on all owners or all residents, we
merely rescale our coefficient. That is, we obtain the approximately the same estimates we would obtain
if we rescaled our baseline estimate by the U.S.-wide average ratio of mortgage-holders to all owners or
all residents. This is indeed what occurs as shown in Table 5.
Thus, it appears that mortgage holders are sufficiently important in the political process that variation
in how salient taxes are for them generates substantial variation in tax rates. This is not terribly
surprising since households with mortgages are fairly likely to have school-aged children and may
therefore be disproportionately likely to vote. This is not to say that salience does not vary among
homeowners without mortgages or among renters. If we had indicators of how salient taxes were to
them, we might explain even more of the variation in property tax rates.

35

We standardize each school district's math and reading performance by translating its state's proficiency standards into a
common metric using the National Assessment of Education Progress. The same data are used in Hoxby (2004) and are
described there. We considered using crime statistics as a measure of performance but most measures--arrests, for instance--do
not bear a value-added interpretation. For instance, if the police prevent crime, there are presumably fewer arrests.
36

While it is technically possible for homeowners without mortgages to have tax escrow, fewer than 1 percent of them do.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

25

F. Interpreting the magnitude of our results using our survey-based measure of tax salience
Among studies of tax salience, it is highly unusual to have a direct measure of tax salience. However,
our Ohio survey gives us an estimate of how tax escrow affects individuals' reporting errors about the
property taxes they pay. We have just estimated how tax escrow affects property tax rates. By
combining estimates of these two types, we can say how an increase in reporting error affects the level of
property taxes.
It is essential that the two types of estimates be based on variation that is as analogous as possible.
Therefore, we run the following two (reduced-form) regressions using just the data from the nine Ohio
counties:
(4)
(5)
where AbsRptingError is the absolute value of the household's reporting error in mils and all other
variables are as previously defined.
The ratio
(6)

indicates how much the property tax rate rises for every mil of increase in the reporting error. We find
that this ratio is equal to 1.3 which suggests that an 1 mil increase in the absolute value of the average
person's reporting error generates a property tax rate increases of about 1.3 mils. Of course, this
calculation should be viewed as merely suggestive because the Ohio counties are not representative of
the entire U.S.

IX. Salience and tax limits
So far, we have found that greater salience generates lower property tax rates. These low rates can
be the result of various political mechanisms, but the mechanism that is perhaps most interesting is
voting on statewide referenda to limit property taxes. Referenda are revealing because, being based on a
popular vote (as opposed to a vote by representatives), they directly reveal voters' preferences.
Moreover, in a referendum, the proposition being voted upon is usually focused strictly on property
taxes. This is in contrast to elections or legislation in which property taxes are bundled with other public
choices.
Since property tax limits on local jurisdictions are enacted at the state level, our investigation of them

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

26

can exploit only state-level variation. We estimate an IV regression in which the dependent variable is a
measure of the limits in force in a state:
(7)
where k indexes states. Our first limit measure is the number of limit types in effect. Appendix IV
explains how experts assign limits to seven categories that reinforce one another: specific property tax
rate limits, overall property tax rate limits, property tax revenue limits, assessment increase limits, limits
on local government revenue, limits on local government expenditures, full disclosure and truth-intaxation. For instance, a property tax revenue limit makes it harder to evade a property tax rate limit.
Thus, a state with more types of limits is one on which people have voted for tighter constraints on
property taxation. The number of limit types ranges between 0 and 5.37
Our second limit measure is an indicator for the existence of an overall rate limit. Our third limit
measure is like the second except that it is zero when the limit rate is greater than 10 mils. That is, the
third measure focuses on limits that are very likely to be binding.
We weight states by their population to make the results nationally representative and because more
voters--who reside in more jurisdictions--must vote in favor of a tax limit in a more populous state. Thus,
enacting a limit is more meaningful in a larger state: the perceptions of a larger number of people are
involved. Nonetheless, we have also computed results in which each state gets an equal weight. These
results have signs that are same as those we describe below, but the coefficient estimates are less precise.
Table 6 shows the results of estimating equation (7) by OLS and IV for the year 2000. (The
estimates for 1990 and 1980 are similar.) Focusing on the IV results, we find that a 10 percentage point
increase in the share of mortgage holders with tax escrow generates a decrease of 0.76 in the number of
limits in force. The mean number of limits in the regression is 2.76 with a standard deviation of 1.35.
Thus, the decrease in the number of limits is considerable.
We also find that a 10 percentage point increase in the share of mortgage holders with tax escrow
decreases by 37 percent the probability that an overall limit has been enacted. (The overall limit
indicator has a standard deviation of 0.47.) The same 10 percentage point increase in tax escrow
decreases by 33 percent the probability that a stringent 10 mil or lower limit has been enacted. (The
stringent limit indicator has a standard deviation of 0.43.)

37

In theory, a state could have seven different types of limits but we never observe more than five types in operation.
Because different states have different numbers of functional jurisdiction types, we count a limit type as being in place if it affects
at least one local jurisdiction type. If a limit is enacted, it is usually placed on the type of jurisdiction that is primarily
responsible for property taxation.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

27

Summing up, the evidence suggests that property taxes that are more salient are more likely to trigger
the enactment of property tax limits. This suggests that referenda are a key mechanism by which salient
property taxes are lowered.

IX. Getting inside the "black box": beliefs about the property tax and property tax "revolts"
So far, we have shown that tax escrow decreases property tax rates, increases the likelihood that property
tax limits are enacted, and decreases salience as measured by homeowners' accuracy in reporting their
taxes. Thus, we have evidence for Mill's contention that when a tax is salient "every one knows how
much he really pays." This alone could lead to leaner government if voter underestimate taxes less or
find it easier to compare costs and benefits. But Mill also argues that salience makes a tax more
"disagreeable." This raises an interesting behavioral or psychological possibility. Does an obtrusive tax
give individuals a focal occasion on which they can experience memorable dissatisfaction? Does this
experience affect their choices beyond an analysis of the tax's costs and benefits? In this section, we
present suggestive evidence on these questions using survey and newspaper data.
A. People believe property tax revenue is spent relatively efficiently
When people are asked "Which tax gives you the least value for money?" they are least likely to say the
property tax.38 Removing the double negative: people think that the property tax gives them the most
value for money. Similarly, local government is consistently the most popular answer to the questions
"Which level of government do you think spends your tax dollars most wisely?" and "From which level
of government do you feel you get the most for your money?"39 Similarly, when asked "How many cents
of every tax dollar that goes to your [federal/state/local] government would you say is wasted?", people
rate their local government as least wasteful.40 In short, when asked to analyze taxes on value-for-money
grounds, people give the property tax the highest rating.
B. People nevertheless find the property tax disagreeable
The same survey respondents who say that property tax revenue is spent relatively efficiently dislike the
tax more than any other. In surveys from the 1970s through today, the property tax has consistently been
considered the most disagreeable tax. This disagreeableness does not depend on the question that is

38

For more detail and the exact wording of several survey questions, see Appendix Table 4.

39

See Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (1972 through 1994, annual).

40
The Gallup poll asked this question for the federal, state, and local governments in 1981, 2001, and 2009. See Gallup
(2009). The authors' survey of Ohio residents suggests that 99% of people know that the property tax is used mainly to fund
local government activities.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

28

asked. Some surveys ask which tax the respondent most "dislikes"; others ask which tax is "worst."
The question that has been asked most consistently over more than two decades is, "What do you
think is the worst tax...?" Figure 13 shows answers to this question in 1972 and 2005. 41 In both 1972 and
2005, about 38 percent of adults stated that the property tax was the worst tax. Between those years, it
was consistently cited as the worst tax. Home owners are slightly more likely to say that it is the worst
than renters. The tax next most likely to be cited as "the worst" is usually the federal income tax, but it
runs a distant second to the property tax.
C. Animosity toward property taxes is common and is associated with the enactment of limits
We might learn about the psychology of salience by tracing the use of the words "anger" and "revolt" in
conjunction with taxes. In U.S. newspapers from 1972 to 2005, 54 percent of the articles that used
"anger" with taxes and 63 percent that used "revolt" with taxes were about property taxes, not income,
sales, or other taxes. Moreover, the expressions of animosity were not mere idle talk. Figure 14 shows
the number of property tax limiting laws by year (left-hand vertical axis) and the number of newspaper
articles that contain "revolt" in conjunction with property taxes, by year (right-hand vertical axis). There
is an obvious correlation between the two time-series suggesting that limits are enacted in atmospheres of
animus, not in cool recalibrations of the tax rate. Howard Jarvis and Barbara Anderson who initiated the
propositions that led to arguably the two most binding limits in the U.S., California's Proposition 13 and
Massachusetts' Proposition 2½, are routinely described by newspapers as "tapping into voter anger."42
Jarvis' book on the subject is even entitled "Mad as Hell."43
D. Explanations other than salience for dislike of the property tax
There are at least two reasons other than salience why the property tax may be so disliked. First, people
may consider the assessment process to be unfair. Second, in areas where property prices have risen a
lot, homeowners (especially the elderly who bought their houses long ago) can find it difficult to pay
41

The question was asked almost annually in the poll supported by the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental
Relations. The poll was conducted from 1972 to 1994. After the Advisory Commission was disbanded, Gallup (the organization
that had done polling for the Commission) asked the question again in 2003 and 2005. Between 1972 and 2005, the question
changed only very slightly: starting in 1988, the Social Security tax was offered as an response option.
42
The source for all these facts is Google's historical newspaper archive. The coverage of this archive is more complete for
recent years so statistics for older years are measured with more error. If an article concerns several types of taxes--such as
income, sales, and property taxes--it is not counted as an article that focuses on the property tax. The statistic also excludes the
newspaper articles that describe tax revolts outside of the U.S. The 1973 increase in limits is not matched by an increase in
articles because the newspaper archive has poor coverage for that period.
43

For instance, Howard Jarvis, who initiated Proposition 13, was an appliance manufacturer and former newspaperman.
He and his wife personally collected tens of thousands of signatures to put the proposition on the ballot. Barbara Anderson, who
initiated Proposition 2½, was a housewife at the time. She is now the head of a popular anti-tax group called Citizens for
Limited Taxation. See Jarvis and Pack (1979) and Citizens for Limited Taxation (2010).

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

29

their property taxes because their unrealized housing wealth is large relative to their cash income. While
we concede that these explanations may matter, our empirical tests of the link between salience and
property tax levels are not plausibly confounded by these alternatives because, as an empirical matter, tax
escrow has a negligible correlation both with property-rich/cash-poor status and with arbitrariness in
assessment.44
In any case, when people are asked why they feel that the property tax is "not a good tax," only 16
percent choose the response "It is based on estimates of home value that are not always fair."
Furthermore, the percentage who choose this response has been trending downwards over time, probably
because assessment procedures have become more standardized and transparent.45
When people are asked why the property tax is "not a good tax," no more than 15 percent choose the
response "It taxes any increase in the value of a home over the original purchase price, even though that
increase is only on paper and not in the homeowner's hands unless he sells the house." Not only is the
percentage of all people who choose this answer falling over time, but a mere 6 to 10 percent of the
elderly, who are the most likely to be property-rich and cash-poor, choose this answer.46

X. Conclusions
We identify a source of variation--tax escrow--in the salience of one of the most important U.S. taxes, the
property tax. We also identify a reason why tax escrow varies with such arbitrariness, and we use this
knowledge to construct a credible instrument for tax escrow that remedies measurement error,
endogeneity, and omitted variables. We find that tax escrow really does reduce salience: homeowners
with tax escrow report their property taxes much less accurately. More importantly, we show that
salience decreases property tax rates and increases the likelihood that property tax limits are enacted. We
discuss mechanisms such as people underestimating non-salient taxes and salience limiting the power of

44

We rated a state as having non-arbitrary assessment practices if assessors were required to use an outside firm which
employed hedonic regression.
45

The question asked in the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations' annual survey is as follows. "Here are
some of the reasons that people give us for feeling that the property tax is not a good tax. Which one of these do you feel is the
most important reason for dissatisfaction with the property tax?" In the 1960s, most assessments were performed by local
assessors using fairly subjective processes, and a property owner who thought his assessment was unfair could not readily access
information on other owners' assessments. Today, most assessors contract with a firm that estimates hedonic regressions using
recent arms-length sale prices and property characteristics. In most states, people can easily look up their own and their
neighbors' assessments--not just the total value but also the detailed information used by the assessment firm.
46
Some states have "circuit breakers": limits on property taxes for owners whose assessed values have risen greatly since
they bought their houses. Most states now allow property-rich, cash-poor taxpayers to accumulate tax liability and pay it off
when the property is sold (see Baer 2003).

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

30

politicians' and bureaucrats' agenda control. Intriguingly, we find some evidence that suggests Mill was
right to connect salience with disagreeableness and resistence: Survey evidence on beliefs hints that
salient taxes generate more anti-tax sentiment than other taxes that are perceived to be similar or worse
on cost-benefit grounds.
Because the variation in tax salience that we exploit (tax escrow) does not affect property prices, our
results do not support a model in which less salient taxes have higher rates because they impose less
deadweight loss. (Less salient taxes do not necessarily generate less deadweight loss in any case.)
Our results imply that a non-benevolent, expansionist government will wish to enact taxes in forms
that make them non-salient: indirect, complex, fragmented, withheld taxes. Voters facing such a
government will wish to keep taxes in salient forms even if, as a result, they hate paying taxes.

XII. References
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations. 1972 through 1994, annual. Changing Public Attitudes on
Governments and Taxes. Washington DC: United States Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental
Relations. http://digital.library.unt.edu
Anderson, Nathan, and Jane Dokko. 2009. "Property Tax Escrow in Subprime Mortgage Markets," Proceedings of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 45th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, 2009.
http://www-personal.umich.edu/~jdokko/ad-bsc.pdf
Anderson, Nathan and Jane Dokko. 2009. "Mortgage Delinquency and Property Taxes," State Tax Notes, 52, no. 1:
49-57.
Baer, David. 2003. State Programs and Practices for Reducing Residential Property Taxes. AARP Report 200304. http://assets.aarp.org/rgcenter/econ/2003_04_taxes.pdf
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. "The Effects of Metropolitan Job Growth on the Size Distribution of Family Income,"
Upjohn Working Papers 91-06, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Monetary and Financial Studies Section, Division of Research
and Statistics. 2001. Survey of Consumer Finances. Electronic data. Washington DC: Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System. http://www.federalreserve.gov/PUBS/oss/oss2/2001/scf2001home.html.
Buchanan, James. 1967. Public Finance in Democratic Process; Fiscal Institutions and the Individual Choice.
Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina Press.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller. 2011. "Robust Inference with Multi-way Clustering,"
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29, no. 2.
Center for Urban Policy and the Environment at Indiana University on behalf of the Advisory Commission on
Intergovernmental Relations. 1995. Tax and Expenditure Limits on Local Governments. Report M-194. U.S.
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations. http://www.library.unt.edu/gpo/acir/Reports/
information/M-194.pdf
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. "Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence," American
Economic Review, 99, no. 4: 1145-77.
Cullis, John G. and Jones, Philip R. 1987. "Fiscal Illusion and Excessive Budgets: Some Indirect Evidence," Public
Finance Review, 15, no. 2: 219-228.
Dollery, Brian E. and Worthington, Andrew C. 1996. "The Empirical Analysis of Fiscal Illusion," Journal of
Economic Surveys, 10, no. 3: 261–297.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. "An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy," Journal of Political Economy,
65: 135-50.
Emrath, Paul. 2002. "Property Taxes in the 2000 Census," Housing Economics, 50, no. 12: 16-21.
http://www.nahb.org/fileUpload_details.aspx?contentid=31465

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

31

Epple, Dennis, R. Filimon, and Thomas Romer. 1984. "Equilibrium Among Local Jurisdictions: Toward an
Integrated Treatment of Voting and Residential Choice," Journal of Public Economics, 24: 281-308.
Fannie Mae. 2009. Fannie Mae Single Family Servicing Guide. Washington DC: Fannie Mae.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 1975 to 2000 annual. Summary of Deposits. Electronic data.
Washington, DC: FDIC.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 1984 to 2000 annual. Call Report and Thrift Financial Report.
Electronic data. Washington, DC: FDIC.
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). 1981 to 2000 annual. FFIEC Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act Loan Application microdata. Electronic data. Arlington, VA: FFIEC.
Feenburg, Daniel R. and Harvey S. Rosen, 1987. "Tax Structure and Public Sector Growth," Journal of Public
Economics, 32, no. 2: 185-201.
Filimon, Radu, Thomas Romer, and Howard Rosenthal. 1982. "Asymmetric Information and Agenda Control: the
Bases of Monopoly Power in Public Spending," Journal of Public Economics, 17, no. 1: 51-70.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2009. "EZ-Tax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, no. 3:
69-1010.
Friedman, Milton and Rose Friedman. 1998. Two Lucky People: Memoirs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gallup. 2009. "Americans: Uncle Sam Wastes 50 Cents on the Dollar; Figures are 42 Cents for State Governments;
38 Cents for Local." http://www.gallup.com/poll/122951/
Gemmell, Norman, Oliver Morrissey, and Abuzer Pinar. 2003. "Tax Perceptions and the Demand for Public
Expenditure: Evidence from UK Micro Data," European Journal of Political Economy, 19, no. 4: 793–816.
Goetz, Charles J. 1977. "Fiscal Illusion in State and Local Finance," in Thomas E. Borcherding (ed.), Budgets and
Bureaucrats: the Sources of Government Growth. Durham: North Carolina: Duke University Press: 176–187.
Heyndels, Bruno and Carine Smolders. 1995. "Tax Complexity and Fiscal Illusion," Public Choice, 85, no. 1-2:
127-141.
Holsey, Cheryl M. and Thomas E. Borcherding. 1997. "Why Does Government’s Share of National Income Grow?
An Assessment of the Recent Literature on the U.S. Experience," in D.C. Mueller (ed.), Perspectives on Public
Choice: 562–589. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 1999. "The Productivity of Schools and Other Local Public Goods Producers," Journal of
Public Economics, 74: 1-30.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 2004. "A Straightforward Comparison of Charter Schools and Regular Public Schools in the
United States," HIER paper, 2004. http://www.wacharterschools.org/learn/studies/hoxbyallcharters.pdf
International Communications Research. 2003. Survey by National Public Radio, Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation, the Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, February 5-March 17, 2003. Retrieved
from the iPOLL Databank, The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut.
Jones, Damon. 2009. "Inertia and Overwithholding: Explaining the Prevalence of Income Tax Refunds," American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4, no. 1: 158-185.
Krishna, Aradhna, and Joel Slemrod. 2003. "Behavioral Public Finance: Tax Design as Price Presentation,"
International Tax and Public Finance, 10, no. 2: 189–203.
Los Angeles Times. 1978. Survey by Los Angeles Times, December 1-December 19, 1978. Retrieved from the
iPOLL Databank, The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut.
Lupia, Arthur. 1992. "Busy Voters, Agenda Control, and the Power of Inforrmation," The American Political
Science Review, 86, no. 2: 390-403.
Marshall, Alfred. 1948. Principles of Economics. 8th edition. New York: MacMillan.
Mayer, Christopher and Karen Pence. 2008. "Subprime Mortgages: What, Where, and to Whom?" Finance and
Economics Discussion Series paper. Washington, DC: Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve. http://www.federalreserve.gov/PUBS/FEDS/2008/200829/
200829pap.pdf
McCaffery, Edward J. 1994. "Cognitive Theory and Tax," University of California Law Review, 41: 1862–1926.
McCulloch, J. R. 1845. A Treatise on the Principles and Practical Influence of Taxation and the Funding System.
London : Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans.
Mill, John Stuart. 1848. Principles of Political Economy. London: J.W. Parker.
Oates, Wallace E. 1969. "The Effects of Property Taxes and Local Public Spending on Property Values: An
Empirical Study of Tax Capitalization and the Tiebout Hypothesis," Journal of Political Economy, 77, no. 6:

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

32

957-971.
Oates, Wallace E. 1988. "On the Nature and Measurement of Fiscal Illusion: a Survey," in Geoffrey Brennan,
Bhajan S. Grewel and Peter D. Groenwegen (eds.), Taxation and Fiscal Federalism: Essays in Honour of Russell
Mathews: 65–82. Sydney: Australian National University Press.
Pommerehne, Werner W. and Schneider, Friedrich. 1978. "Fiscal Illusion, Political Institutions, and Local Public
Spending," Kyklos, 31, no. 3: 381–408.
Princeton Survey Research Associates. 1990. Survey by Times Mirror and Princeton Survey Research Associates,
June 1-June 4, 1990. Retrieved from the iPOLL Databank, The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research,
University of Connecticut.
Puviani, Amilcare. 1903. Teoria della illusione finanziaria. Milan : Remo Sandron.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2010. "Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy:
180-212.
Tax Analysts. 1996 through 2001, annual. "State Tax Actions [1995 through 2000, annual]," in State Tax Notes,
10(417), 11(1461), 14(1005), 16(1039), 18(919), 20(973).
Tiebout, Charles M. 1956. "A Pure theory of Local Expenditures," Journal of Political Economy, 64, no. 5: 416424.
Wagner, Richard E. 1976. "Revenue Structure, Fiscal Illusion and Budgetary Choice," Public Choice, 25, no. 1:
45–61.
Winters, John V. 2008. Property Tax Limitations. Fiscal Research Center Report 179. Atlanta, GA: Fiscal
Research Center, Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University. Reprinted in State Tax
Notes, Volume 49, Number 3, July 21, 2008. http://aysps.gsu.edu/Rpt_179FIN.pdf
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2009. Fiscal Year 2009 Performance and Accountability
Report.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1983a. 1980 Census of Housing: Volume 5, Residential
Finance. Census 1980 Report HC-80-5. Report and electronic data. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau,
U.S. Department of Commerce. The report is available in U.S. Government Documents sections of libraries.
The electronic data are available through the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration,
www.archives.gov.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1983b. Census of Population and Housing, 1980: Summary
File 1 and Summary File 3. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1991. 1990 Census of Housing: Residential Finance. Census
1990 Reports CH-4-1. Report and electronic data. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of
Commerce. The report is available at http://www.census.gov/prod/3/98pubs/CH-4-1.pdf. The electronic data
are available through the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration, www.archives.gov.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1993. Census of Population and Housing, 1990: Summary
File 1 and Summary File 3. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 2001. Residential Finance Survey: 2001. Census 2000
Special Reports, CENSR-27. Report and electronic data. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau, U.S.
Department of Commerce. The report is available at http://www.census.gov/prod/2005pubs/censr-27.pdf. The
electronic data are available at http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/rfs/datafile.html
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 2002. Census of Population and Housing, 2000: Summary
File 1 and Summary File 3. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2002.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 2010. Special tabulations of the 1980, 1990, and 2000
Census of Block Groups/Enumeration Districts for Selected Monthly Housing Cost Variables.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 2014. American Factfinder Table H120. "Imputation of
Mortgage Status and Selected Monthly Owner Costs for Specified Owner-occupied Housing Units." Census
2000 Summary File 3 Sample Data.
http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=DEC_00_SF3_H120&prodTy
pe=table (accessed December 2014)

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

Figure 1
Percentage of government revenue from property taxes

33

33

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

Figure 2
Does tax escrow change the salience of property taxes?
a. Homeowners with tax escrow

standard deviation of difference between
reported and actual taxes= $2215

b. Homeowners without tax escrow

standard deviation of difference between
reported and actual taxes= $781

34

34

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

Figure 3
Graphical version of OLS estimation with no covariates

Figure 4
Graphical version of first-stage estimation with no covariates

35

35

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

Figure 5
Graphical version of reduced-form estmation with no covariates

Figure 6
Graphical version of second-stage of IV estimation with no covariates

36

36

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

Figure 7
Graphical version of OLS estimation, controlling for covariates

Figure 8
Graphical version of first-stage estimation, controlling for covariates

37

37

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

Figure 9
Graphical version of reduced-form estimation, controlling for covariates

Figure 10
Graphical version of second-stage of IV estimation, controlling for covariates

38

38

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

Figure 11
Graphical version of OLS estimation with no covariates and
tax escrow measure based on owner occupants

Figure 12
Graphical version of OLS estimation with no covariates and
tax escrow measure based on all residents (including renters)

39

39

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

Figure 13
Survey evidence on the "worst tax", 1972 and 2005

Figure 14
Number of laws limiting property taxes enacted this year compared to
Number of newspaper articles containing the phrase "tax revolt" &
focused on property taxes

40

40

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

CABRAL AND HOXBY

41

Table 1
The effect of tax escrow on the salience of property taxes

covariate:
indicator for tax escrow
county by home value fixed effects
additional assessor-based and survey-based
covariates (see notes)
additional Census block group-based covariates
(see notes)

Dependent variable:
absolute value of the
difference between
reported and actual
property taxes
(in dollars)

Dependent variable:
difference between
reported and actual
property taxes
(in dollars)

868.0***
(132.4)

827.2***
(141.7)

216.0
(152.4)

255.4
(162.0)

yes

yes
yes

yes

yes
yes

yes

yes

Dependent variable:
absolute value of the
difference between
reported and actual
property tax rates
(in mils)

Dependent variable:
difference between
reported and actual
property tax rates
(in mils)

5.2***
(0.7)

5.1***
(0.7)

1.0
(0.8)

0.9
(0.8)

county by home value fixed effects
additional assessor-based and survey-based
covariates (see notes)
additional Census block group-based covariates
(see notes)

yes

yes
yes

yes

yes
yes

number of observations (both panels above)

724

covariate:
indicator for tax escrow

yes

678

yes

724

678

Source: Authors' calculations based on a survey of Ohio home owners. See text and Appendix III for detail.
Notes: The table shows regressions in which the dependent variables are differences between homeowners' reported
2008 property tax payments and their actual payments. All regressions control for county by assessed home value fixed
effects because these were the categories on which survey sampling was based. Assessed home values were recorded,
for the purpose of sampling, in categories. The first seven covariates shown in the table are based on the survey data or
Ohio assessor data. The remaining variables are averages for Census 2000 block groups. There are fewer observations
in the regressions with Census covariates owing to the fact that some homes were not built at the time Census 2000 was
taken. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10.
The additional Ohio assessor-based and survey-based variables are: the most recent sales price of the house;
and indicators for whether the residents have lived in the house 2-5 years, 5-10 years, 10-15 years, 15 plus years.
The additional Census block group-based variables are: average home value; average household income, its
square, its cube, and its fourth power; an indicator for rural area; share of households with a child 18 years or younger;
share of people who are non-white; average household size; average monthly cost (owners with a mortgage); share of
households with a member over 65 years old; share of all newly originated mortgages that are subprime; the loan to
value ratio, its square, its cube, and its fourth power.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

42

Table 2
The effect of tax escrow (proxy for nonsalience) on property tax rates
each cell in the table shows the result of a separate regression
controlling for other covariates
no covariates
Instrumental variables estimates
Instrument is SALO ratio based on
bank holding companies that do...
50% of their business outside the state
no. of obs. = 176737

0.303***
(0.072)
[F=20.63, prob>F<0.0001]

0.333***
(0.063)
[F=31.11, prob>F<0.0001

60% of their business outside the state
no. of obs. = 175136

0.338***
(0.077)
[F=21.70, prob>F<0.0001]

0.375***
(0.068)
[F=31.36, prob>F<0.0001]

70% of their business outside the state
no. of obs. = 171819

0.341***
(0.081)
[F=19.48, prob>F<0.0001]

0.381***
(0.072)
[F=28.64, prob>F<0.0001]

75% of their business outside the state
no. of obs. = 167887

0.234**
(0.096)
[F=14.25, prob>F=0.0002]

0.260***
(0.077)
[F=23.99, prob>F<0.0001]

95% of their business outside the
county
no. of obs. = 182443

0.216***
(0.073)
[F=14.93, prob>F=0.0001]

0.374***
(0.109)
[F=12.65, prob>F=0.0004]

Ordinary least squares estimates
with all 192808 observations

0.024***
(0.006)

0.059***
(0.007)

Ordinary least squares estimates with
only the

0.022***
(0.006)

0.056***
(0.007)

Notes: The SALO ratio is the ratio of mortgage servicing assets to mortgage loans originated. Instrumental variables and
ordinary least squares regressions with robust standard errors clustered at the county level shown in parentheses. Fstatistics from the first stage for the excluded instrument are shown in square brackets. Observations are at the block
group level and are weighted by population. See Appendix Tables II and III for, respectively, descriptive statistics and
estimated coefficients on all the covariates in the regressions shown in the top row.

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

CABRAL AND HOXBY

43

Table 3
Alternative specifications: the effect of tax escrow (proxy for nonsalience) on property tax rates
each cell in the table shows the result of a separate regression
Instrumental variables estimates
Instrument is SALO ratio based on bank holding companies that do 50%
of their business outside the state
year 2000 data (same as top left-hand cell of previous table)
no. of obs. = 176737

0.303***
(0.072)
[F=20.63, prob>F<0.0001]

year 1990 data
no. of obs. = 175136

0.264***
(0.068)
[F=19.01, prob>F<0.0001]

year 1980 data
no. of obs. = 171819

0.313***
(0.082)
[F=14.21, prob>F<0.0002]

median regression in the second stage
no. of obs. = 167887

0.278**
(0.092)
[F=21.70, prob>F<0.0001]

Notes: The SALO ratio is the ratio of mortgage servicing assets to mortgage loans originated. Instrumental variables
regressions controlling for other covariates as in the top left-hand cell of Table 2. Robust standard errors clustered at the
county level are shown in parentheses. Standard errors for the median regression in the bottom row are computed using
the block bootstrap clustered at the county level. F-statistics from the first stage for the excluded instrument are shown
in square brackets. Observations are at the block group level and are weighted by population. For descriptive statistics,
see Appendix Table II.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

44

Table 4
The effect of tax escrow (proxy for nonsalience) on test scores in local school district
each cell in the table shows the result of a separate regression
Instrumental variables estimates
Instrument is SALO ratio based on bank holding companies that do 50%
of their business outside the state
percentage of students who score at least proficient on math exam
(0-100 scale)

0.0003
(0.4741)
[F=16.01, prob>F=0.0001]

percentage of students who score at least proficient on reading exam
(0-100 scale)

0.5028
(0.3850)
[F=16.01, prob>F=0.0001]

Notes: The SALO ratio is the ratio of mortgage servicing assets to mortgage loans originated. Instrumental variables
regressions controlling for other covariates as in the top left-hand cell of Table 2. Robust standard errors clustered at the
county level are shown in parentheses. F-statistics from the first stage for the excluded instrument are shown in square
brackets. Observations are at the school district level and are weighted by population.

Table 5
Effect of tax escrow (proxy for nonsalience) on tax rates
dependent variable: property tax rate in mils
each cell in the table shows the result of a separate regression
group over whom tax escrow status is measured
mortgage

home owners

all households

ordinary least squares

0.024*** (0.006)

0.038*** (0.007)

0.036*** (0.012)

instrumental variables with SALO ratio
of bank holding companies that do at
least 50% of business outside the state

0.303*** (0.072)

0.415*** (0.107)

0.676*** (0.162)

Notes: The SALO ratio is the ratio of mortgage servicing assets to mortgage loans originated. Ordinary least squares and
instrumental variables regressions controlling for other covariates as in the top row of Table 2. Robust standard errors
clustered at the county level are shown in parentheses. Observations are at the block group level and are weighted by
population. For descriptive statistics, see Appendix Table 2. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10.

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: TAX SALIENCE, TAX RATES

CABRAL AND HOXBY

45

Table 6
Effect of tax escrow (proxy for nonsalience) on tax limit measures
dependent variable noted in rightmost column
each cell in the table shows the result of a separate regression
OLS

IV

number of property tax limit
types
(mean=2.76, std.dev.=1.35)

-0.029
(0.019)

-0.076*
(0.042)
[F=14.45, prob>F=0.0004]

indicator for an overall limit
(mean=0.31, std.dev.=0.47)

-0.016**
(0.007)

-0.037***
(0.014)
[F=14.45, prob>F=0.0004]

indicator for an overall limit of
10 mils or less
(mean=0.23, std.dev.=0.43)

-0.016***
(0.006)

-0.033***
(0.013)
[F=14.45, prob>F=0.0004]

Notes: The SALO ratio is the ratio of mortgage servicing assets to mortgage loans originated. Ordinary least squares
and instrumental variables regressions controlling for other covariates as in the top row of Table 2. Robust standard
errors clustered at the county level are shown in parentheses. Observations are at the block group level and are weighted
by population. F-statistics from the first stage for the excluded instrument are shown in square brackets. For descriptive
statistics, see Appendix Table 2. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

APPENDIX 1

Appendix I: A Model of Salience and Agenda Control
As noted in the body of the paper, there are a host of models of fiscal illusion and overspending that
depend on taxpayers' systematically underestimating the tax-price of a public good or government
spending. Some models suggest that underestimates occur when taxes are indirect, complex, or
fragmented. Others suggest that underestimates occur when governments use debt or have non-tax
revenue from intergovernmental grants or public utilities. Still others rely on underestimates of tax
prices by renters as opposed to owners. Finally, some models argue that taxes on inelastic demand are
underestimated. In all these models, there is greater government spending when fiscal illusion causes
underestimation.
Such models may well describe much of what occurs in reality. Nevertheless, because we find
that tax escrow causes people to estimate the taxes they pay with much less accuracy but without
systematic underestimation, we want to offer a simple model that does not depend on an asymmetric
bias. In our model, voters have less accurate but unbiased information about the taxes they pay when the
tax is less salient. Nevertheless, the model generates the prediction that lower salience generates policies
that are further from the median voter's preferred outcome and closer to the politician's or bureaucrat's
preferred outcome. Thus, so long as politicians or bureaucrat prefer larger government, the model
predicts that lower tax salience generates higher tax rates.
Our model depends on politicians or bureaucrats exercising agenda-setting power. Given the set
up, this power is more valuable to them when voters are less informed. Our model is a straightforward
adaptation of that of Lupia (1992) who is interested in how the outcomes of direct democracy vary with
the information environment. Direct democracy is especially relevant for property taxes because
referenda are the key means by which property tax rates change.
We use Lupia's notation wherever possible so that readers may refer to extensions and proofs in
his paper.
A. The Political and Information Environment
Consider the following political environment. In a referendum, voters can vote yes or no on a
proposition regarding a policy. It may be useful to think of the policy as the property tax rate, but the
model is general. An agenda setter (politicians, bureaucrats or some combination of the two) determines
the exact proposition--for instance, the tax rate. If the majority of voters do not vote yes on the
proposition, the status quo policy remains in force.
Suppose that the information environment is as follows. Each voter knows his or her own
welfare under the status quo but may or may not know the status quo policy. For instance, if a voter
knows exactly how much property tax he pays and what his property's assessed value is, he knows not
just his current utility but the current property tax rate. Hereafter, we call such voters "informed."
Conversely, a voter who is "uninformed" does not know how much property tax he pays and therefore
does not know the policy (property tax rate). The agenda setter is assumed to be fully informed.
Specifically,
(i) There are N voters indexed by i = {1,..., N}.
(ii) There is an agenda setter designated by the index 0.
(iii) The policy space is [0,1].
(iv) The setter's ideal point X 0 [0,1] is drawn from the CDF F with density f. His utility is single peaked
and diminishing in the distance between the current policy and his ideal: U0(x,X) = -|x-X| where x is the
policy in force.
(v) Each voter's ideal point Ti 0 [0,1] is drawn from the CDF G with density g. Each voter's utility is
single-peaked and given by Ui(x,Ti) = -|x-Ti |.
(vi) The setter has complete information.
(vii) Each voter knows his utility and the distribution G. He does not, however, know any other voter's

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

APPENDIX 2

ideal point.
(viii) Voters' prior beliefs about the setter's ideal point are given by F.
The timing works as follows. Let SQ designate the status quo policy: SQ0[0,1]. The setter
moves first and offers a referendum proposing s2(X) rather than the status quo. (s2 could be equal to SQ
so the referendum could be degenerate.) Voters vote yes or no on s2. If the majority vote yes, then s2 is
the new policy in force. If not, SQ continues as policy:

where vi=1 is a yes vote for s2 and vi= -1 is a no vote.
Assume that voters vote as though they were the pivotal voter and to maximize their expected
utility given what they know. That is:

In equilibrium, each voter's vote is his best response to the votes cast by others, given his information.
For more on this, see Appendix C of Lupia (1992).
B. All Voters are Uninformed
If all voters are uninformed, then the setter's weakly dominant strategy is s2=X. The logic is that, if
voters have no more information than their prior beliefs F, then the setter can in equilibrium choose any
s2 for which f>0. Thus, he might as well choose s2=X because it gives him the highest utility in the event
that the majority say yes to the proposition s2.
Formally, the setter chooses s2 to maximize

but vi is not a function of s2 so U0 is maximized at s2=X independent of 3vi.
The outcome of the vote is not, in fact, preferred by most voters whenever there is a majority of
voters who are ex post mistaken:
.
Ex post, they discover that they preferred the status quo to the setter's ideal point X. However, at the time
they voted, they expected to prefer the setter's ideal point to the status quo.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

APPENDIX 3

C. Translating the Uninformed Voter Case for the Property Tax Application
Let us translate this general case into property taxes. Suppose that voters do not know what they pay in
property taxes so they do not know the status quo property tax rate. The proposition that the setter puts
on the ballot is a property tax rate: she need not explain truthfully to each voter how the proposed rate
would affect his utility. Since each voter does not understand how the proposed rate would affect his
utility, he votes based on his priors about the setter's ideal point. We can think of his voting on the basis
of the politician's speeches where the speeches need not be grounded in fact but do influence beliefs
about the politician's objectives. Because the likelihood that the majority of voters say yes to the
proposition is unaffected by the reality of how the proposed tax rate would affect them, the politician
might as well propose the tax rate that would maximize her objectives. If her objective is to maximize
the size of government, the proposed tax rate will do that if it is passed. A majority of voters may realize
ex post that they preferred the original status quo to the government services, taxes, and consumption out
of net-of-tax income that they obtain after the referendum. However, they have no means of reverting to
the original status quo.
D. Voters are Informed about whether the Proposition is Better for Them
Suppose now that all voters know the location of s2 relative to status quo that applies to them. However,
they are not assumed to have an abstract understanding of the policy so they do not know what s2 will
imply for other voters or for the general equilibrium. Under these conditions, all voters use their
knowledge of their personal situation to make more accurate inferences about the setter's ideal point. As
a result, the referenda is more likely to be one that the median voter prefers ex post to the original status
quo. Moreover, if the setter's ideal point is on the opposite side of SQ from the median voter's ideal point,
the outcome of the referendum is always SQ. That is, the setter cannot fool the voters into voting to
increase the distance between their ideal point and the policy in force.
Formally, when the setter announces s2, each voter immediately knows whether s2 is to the left of
his own experience of SQ (mi(s2)= -1), the same as his own experience of SQ ((mi(s2)=0), or to the right
of his own experience of SQ (mi(s2)=1). Each voter then uses Bayes Rule to form posterior beliefs about
the setter's ideal point X. Since the setter has full information, she is aware how her choice of s2 will
affect each voter's posterior beliefs. Specifically, posterior beliefs are:

Given their posterior beliefs, voters choose yes or no to maximize their expected utility.
Formally:

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

APPENDIX 4

In fact, some voters know for certain that their own ideal point is in the range where f(X|mi)=0. That is,
they know for sure that s2 is on the opposite side of SQ from their ideal point. Such voters vote no on the
proposition so if the median voter is of this "certain no" type then the status quo prevails. Even if the
median voter is not of the "certain no" type, the outcome of the referenda is nevertheless less likely to be
bad for the majority of voters than was the referendum in the uninformed voter case. This is because the
number of voters who are ex post mistaken is necessarily smaller than in the uninformed voter case. That
is:

where d indicates being mistaken ex post:
.

.
This result is due to the fact that "certain no" voters cannot be mistaken ex post and to the fact that
remaining voters' posterior beliefs are less likely to be mistaken ex post because they have eliminated part
of the [0,1] policy space from their beliefs about the setter's ideal point.
E. Translating the Informed-About-Self Voter Case for the Property Tax Application
Let us translate this case, in which voters have information about their own situation but not full
information, for property taxes. The voter knows his property tax rate or can infer it from his property
tax payment and property's value. When a new rate is proposed, he immediately determines whether it
goes in the wrong direction --increasing his already-higher-than-preferred rate or decreasing his alreadylower-than-preferred rate. If it goes in the wrong direction, he is "certain no" voter who says no to the
proposition. If the new rate does not go in the wrong direction, he uses his updated beliefs about the
politician's objectives to form an expectation of how the new rate would affect his utility. He votes
accordingly. His expectations may be wrong ex post but this is less likely than in the case where he was
uninformed.
F. Predictions of the Model
If taxes are salient to only a fraction of voters and salience makes voters informed about the taxes they
pay, then the "fractional" case generates an outcome that is a mixture of the uninformed and informed
cases described above. If the probability that taxes are salient to a voter is orthogonal to his preferences
(ideal point), then lower salience generates taxes that are closer to the politician's objective and further
from the median voter's ideal point. That is, lower tax salience unambiguously generates higher tax rates
if politicians and/or bureaucrats like larger governments more than their median constituent does.
More generally, when taxes are salient to only a fraction of voters, the outcome is more likely to
be close to what the informed voters prefer. Thus, if the informed voters happen to have peculiar
preferences about taxes, it is not necessarily the case that the outcome in the fractional case will fall

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

APPENDIX 5

strictly between the outcomes in the uninformed and informed cases.
However, our instrument appears to be fairly randomly assigned with respect to characteristics of
households that predict preferred taxes and spending. (See the body of the paper for more on this point.)
Thus, our instrumental variables estimates should correspond to what the model predicts when we pick
voters to be informed at random and vary the vary the share of voters whom we inform. Put another
way, the orthogonal case described above is the relevant one for predicting the effects of the model:
lower tax salience generates higher property tax rates if politicians or bureaucrats like large government
and wield agenda control.

Appendix II: Tests of How Arbitrarily Tax Escrow is Distributed Among Households
A. The similarity of tax escrow and non-tax-escrow households
In this section, we demonstrate that there is almost complete overlap in the support of the distribution of
"treated" households (those with tax escrow) and the support of the distribution of control households
(those without tax escrow). Such overlap in support suggests that tax escrow treatment is arbitrarily
distributed among households.
To make this demonstration, we turn to the Residential Finance Survey (RFS, U.S. Census
Bureau 2001). The RFS has excellent information on every aspect of a mortgage: the parameters of the
mortgage itself, the financial characteristics of the borrower, and of course tax escrow status. Much of
the mortgage information in the RFS is obtained directly from the lender, who is required to look up the
loan. Thus, the mortgage information (including the tax escrow information) is accurate--it does not
depend on a home owner's ability to recall the terms of his loan. In fact, the RFS arguably contains every
variable that a bank would need to decide whether to recommend tax escrow. In addition, the RFS
contains variables that the owner himself reports, akin to variables we find in the Census: income,
current market value of the property, monthly housing costs (by type), mortgage status, tax escrow status.
Note that the bank's and owner's report of tax escrow status agree 96 percent of the time.
Using probit regression and a propensity score algorithm, we regress a household's tax escrow
status (1 if tax escrow, 0 otherwise) on every loan and household characteristic that a bank would
plausibly use to determine whether to use tax escrow for the loan.1 The estimated propensity score
maximizes the power of the observable variables to explain tax escrow status. Appendix Table 5 shows
the regression coefficients from the propensity score estimation for the 2001 RFS. Results for the 1991
RFS and 1981 RFS are similar.
Having computed a propensity score for each household, we demonstrate that the treated (tax
escrow) and control distributions are extremely similar in Appendix Figure 1. The figure shows that the
two distributions have almost identical support: the range of common support is literally 0.02 to 0.96.
The distributions also peak in the same range: a propensity score of about 0.4. In other words, when we
have nearly all of the relevant information on a mortgage, there is still a great deal of apparently arbitrary
1

These variables are: the year the property was acquired; the original amount of the mortgage loan; the assessed value
of the property at the time the loan was made; the mortgage insurance type; whether the loan is sub-prime; the interest rate on the
mortgage; points paid on the mortgage; the loan-to-value ratio at the time the mortgage was originated; an indicator for that loanto-value ratio being 80 percent or below; an indicator for that loan-to-value ratio being between 80 and 95 percent; the current
monthly housing cost; current household income; the current market value of the property (estimated by the owner); the current
approximate loan-to-value ratio; the current unpaid balance on the mortgage; the owner's Hispanic ethnicity; the owner's being
non-black; an indicator for a member of the household being 65 or older; whether the owner previously owned a home. We
compute the current approximate loan-to-value ratio using data on current mortgage payments, current property values, and
simple assumptions about the interest rate and increase in the property's value from purchase to the current time. We assume an
average interest rate of 6 percent on a 30 year mortgage that commenced when the property was purchased. We assume that the
current property value is equal to the property value at the time of purchase inflated by the state's house price FHFA index.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

APPENDIX 6

variation in tax escrow status among observably identical households.2
B. Tests of spatial autocorrelation in tax escrow residuals
Nearly all of the plausibly problematic omitted variables--unobserved variables that affect both tax
escrow status and tax rate-type outcomes--would exhibit spatial autocorrelation. This is both because
households might co-locate based on such omitted variables (for instance, preferences for local
amenities) and because of institutional factors that are geographically concentrated (for instance, houses
in a certain area tend to be built by the same builders and are therefore alike in hard-to-observe ways).
For instance, suppose that an area has land that naturally lends itself to recreation--excellent
opportunities for hiking and so on. Suppose that people interested in recreation are disproportionately
likely to locate in the area and that they support higher local property taxes because they wish to support
parks. Suppose that, knowing that they will pay higher taxes, they are keen on using tax escrow to spread
out their payments. Such a scenario would generate negative bias: lower salience associated with higher
tax rates (the opposite of what we find). For more on the likely sign of the biases, see the body of the
paper. The point is not the sign of the bias, however. The point is that nearly all scenarios with omitted
variables or endogeneity would generate spatial correlation. That is, so long as the amenity or other
omitted variable is spatially correlated--which it almost certainly would be--a "marker" for such problems
would be spatial correlation in residual tax escrow status.
Thus, a reasonable test of whether tax escrow status is randomly assigned conditional on the
observable variables for which we control is a test of the spatial autocorrelation of residual tax escrow
status. Specifically, we regress the percentage of households with tax escrow in a Census block on the
full set of variables for which we control (including the SALO instrument) and we then compute
residuals.3 We test these residuals for spatial autocorrelation using the two most-often used statistics,
Moran's I and Geary's C. If residual tax escrow status is approximately randomly assigned, we should
not reject the null hypothesis of no spatial autocorrelation.
Moran's I (Moran 1950) is a test of spatial autocorrelation in continuous data based on
cross-products of deviations from the mean. If the continuous variable x (the percent of households with
tax escrow, in our case) is located at latitude i and longitude j, then Moran's I is:

where n is the number of observations, x) is the mean of the x variable, and wij is the distance between
points i and j . The wij make up a spatial weight matrix. In the absence of spatial autocorrelation, the
expectation of Moran's I statistic is -1/(n-1), which tends to zero as n increases. A Moran's I statistic
greater than -1/(n-1) indicates positive spatial autocorrelation, and a Moran's I statistic less than -1/(n-1)
indicates negative spatial autocorrelation. The minimum possible Moran's I is -1 and the maximum
possible is 1.
Geary's C is defined as:
.

2
3

The regression has an R-squared of 0.11.

See the Data section of the paper for the list of control variables. Because we have demonstrated that it affects tax
escrow, we must also control for the SALO instrument.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

APPENDIX 7

Geary's C varies between 0 and 2. A value of 1 meaning no spatial autocorrelation, a value closer to 0
means positive spatial autocorrelation, and a value closer to 2 means negative spatial autocorrelation. In
comparison to Moran's I, which is a measure of global spatial autocorrelation, Geary's C is more sensitive
to local spatial autocorrelation.
For our tax escrow residuals, Moran's I is equal to 0.015, which is not statistically significantly
different from zero: the p-value is 0.441. Geary's C is equal to 1.014, which is also not statistically
significantly different from zero: the p-value is 0.516. Both of these results suggest that, conditional on
the observable variables, tax escrow status has so little spatial autocorrelation that it is unlikely to reflect
omitted variables that would bias our main results.

Appendix III: Text of Survey of Ohio homeowners
The following survey is part of a Stanford University research project on property taxation. We would
be grateful if you take a moment to answer the questions below. Your answers will be anonymous and
used purely for research, not for marketing or any other purpose. Please return your completed survey
using the provided postage-paid envelope. If you would prefer, you may use your unique survey number
located at the top right-hand corner of this page to complete the survey online at [insert link].
Do you own the house at which you received this survey?
Yes
No
How many years have you lived at your current house?
1
2-5
5-10
10-15

15+

Do your property taxes pay for local services, state services, or both?
local services
state services
both state and local services

do not pay property taxes

Does your regular monthly mortgage payment include payments for property taxes on your house?
Yes, taxes included in mortgage payment
No, taxes paid separately
No, have no mortgage/renting house
Approximately how much did you pay in property taxes for your house during the 2008 year? (Simply
give us your best estimate. You need not go to the trouble of consulting your records.)
$______________________________
Note that one half of the surveys did not include the question, "Does your regular monthly mortgage
payment include payments for property taxes on your house?"

Appendix IV: Property Tax Limit Categorization
Experts categorize property tax limits into seven categories:
(i) specific property tax rate limits, which cap the tax rate that a specific type of local government--for
instance, school districts--may use.
(ii) overall property tax rate limits, which cap the tax rate that all local governments combined may use.
These are important because local governments--counties, municipalities, and school districts--often
overlap. Without such an overall limit, local governments could potentially evade a specific limit by

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

APPENDIX 8

reducing the tax rate of the restricted type of local government, raising the tax rate of another type of
local government, and conducting intergovernmental transfers that negate the intention of the limit.
(iii) property tax revenue limits, which cap the total revenue collected by the property tax.
(iv) assessment increase limits, which cap the annual rate at which property assessments may increase.
They also occasionally roll assessments back to those in a particular starting year.
(v) limits on the general revenues of local governments, where those local governments are mainly
supported by property taxes. Such limits prevent local governments from employing fees, sales taxes, or
other revenue-raising devices to evade a property tax limit.
(vi) limits on the general expenditures of local governments, where those local governments are mainly
supported by property taxes. Such limits have approximately the same effect as general revenue limits.
(vii) full disclosure or truth-in-taxation laws, which force local governments to inform taxpayers of any
manner in which current proposals are likely to raise the property taxes they pay. These laws also force
local governments to hold public hearings on any such proposals. Full disclosure laws are intended to
prevent local government from evading property tax limits by obscure means, such as changing
assessment ratios (which effectively change the tax rate).
It will be seen that several types of limits exist because each type of limit offers potential
channels for evasion. Each type of limit reinforces one or more other limits.
Each type of limit can be imposed separately on each type of local government: municipality,
school district, county, etc. For our analysis, we count a state as having a type of limit if it has that limit
on any relevant type of government. This is necessary to make valid cross-state comparisons.

Appendix References
Geary, R.C. 1954. "The Contiguity Ratio and Statistical Mapping," The Incorporated Statistician, Vol. 5,
No. 3 (November), pp. 115-127 plus 129-146.
Lupia, Arthur. 1992. "Busy Voters, Agenda Control, and the Power of Inforrmation," The American
Political Science Review, Vol. 86, No. 2 (June), pp. 390-403.
Moran, P.A.P. 1950. " Notes on Continuous Stochastic Phenomena," Biometrika, Vol. 37,

No. 1/2 (June), pp. 17-23.
U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 Special Reports, CENSR-27. 2001. Residential Finance
Survey: 2001. Report and electronic data. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau, U.S.
Department of Commerce. The report is available at
http://www.census.gov/prod/2005pubs/censr-27.pdf. The electronic data are available at
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/rfs/datafile.html

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

Appendix Figure 1
Distribution of the estimated propensity to have tax escrow
for homeowners with and without tax escrow

APPENDIX 9

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

CABRAL AND HOXBY

APPENDIX 10

Appendix Table 1
SALO Ratios of the Largest U.S. Bank Holding Companies
Bank Holding Company Name
Nationsbank Corporation
First Union Corporation
Bankamerica Corporation
Chase Manhattan Corporation
Banc One Corporation
Wells Fargo & Co
Fleet Financial Group
Citicorp
Norwest Corporation
First Chicago NBD Corporation
U.S. Bank Corporation
PNC Bank Corporation
KeyCorp
Wachovia Corporation
Suntrust Bank
National City Corporation
Bankboston Corporation
Mellon Bank Corporation
Bank of New York Co
Bankers Trust New York Corporation
Comerica
Summit Bank Corporation
Mercantile Bank Corporation Inc
HSBC Hold PLC
Southtrust Corporation
BB&T Corporation
Huntington Bankshares
Regions Financial Corporation
Crestar Financial Corporation
Fifth Third Bank Corporation
First of America Bank Corporation
First Empire State Corporation
Marshall & Ilsley Corporation
Union Planters Corporation
Amsouth Bank Corporation
State Street Corporation
Star Bank Corporation
See notes at the bottom of the continuation of the table.

total deposits in
billions

SALO ratio
times 1000

160
134
130
126
77
71
69
63
56
54
50
43
40
37
36
36
33
30
28
28
23
22
22
21
21
21
20
20
18
17
16
15
14
13
13
13
12

25.2
6.5
18.5
51.5
1.3
21.5
99.6
1.7
0.0
5.7
1.9
20.6
0.4
1.7
0.0
19.8
0.0
126.8
0.7
0.0
8.8
1.0
5.3
11.2
7.7
9.0
19.8
13.7
10.4
7.5
14.0
18.2
0.0
17.9
0.3
0.0
25.4

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

CABRAL AND HOXBY

APPENDIX 11

Appendix Table 1 continued
SALO Ratios of the Largest U.S. Bank Holding Companies
Bank Holding Company Name
First Society Corporation
Greenpoint Financial Corporation
First Tennessee National Corporation
Compass Bankshares
Old Kent Financial Corporation
Northern Trust Corporation
Hibernia Corporation
Commerce Bankshares
Associated Bank Corporation
Dean Witter
Zions Bank Corporation
First American Corporation
First Virginia Bank
TB&C Bankshares
First Citizens Bankshares
First Commerce Corporation
Pacific Century Financial Corporation
J P Morgan & Co
Peoples Heritage Financial Group
TCF Financial Corporation
First National of Nebraska
Peoples Mutual Holdings
First Commercial Corporation

total deposits in
billions in 1998

SALO ratio
times 1000

11
11
11
11
11
11
9
9
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
7
7
7
7
7
7
7

33.7
0.7
91.9
0.0
47.8
0.0
6.9
0.0
2.6
0.0
9.6
1.9
0.3
15.7
1.6
0.1
2.7
0.0
24.2
3.9
0.0
4.7
23.7

Notes: The SALO ratio is the bank holding company's ration of mortgage servicing assets to mortgage loans originated. SALO
ratios are defined at the national level because mortgage servicing assets are centralized. The data shown are for 1998 which is
the end of the period (1994 through 1998) that we use to construct the instrument for the 2000 estimation. Some time needs to
elapse between mortgage origination and the experience of tax escrow.)

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

APPENDIX 12

Appendix Table 2
Descriptive statistics for variables used in this study
variable
year
geographic units
mean std dev
level
property tax rate
2000 block group mils
11.50
5.80
share of mortgage holders with tax escrow
2000 block group percentage 0-100 61.54 22.82
share of home owners with tax escrow
2000 block group percentage 0-100 44.52 21.41
share of all households with tax escrow
2000 block group percentage 0-100 55.84 20.46
share of newly originated mortgages that are subprime
2000 block group percentage 0-100 12.43
9.39
share of households that rent
2000 block group percentage 0-100 29.87 22.09
average household income
2000 block group thousands
58.09 29.38
average home value for owners
2000 block group thousands
152.21 113.12
indicator for rural area
2000 block group indicator 0/1
0.22
0.38
share of households with a child 18 years or younger
2000 block group percentage 0-100 38.26 11.94
share of households with a member over 65 years old
2000 block group percentage 0-100 23.05 10.39
average monthly housing cost, owners with mortgages
2000 block group thousands
1.18
0.54
share of people who are non-white
2000 block group percentage 0-100 23.20 25.26
average household size
2000 block group number
2.69
0.50
share of households with a mortgage
2000 block group percentage 0-100 40.19 20.98
share of households moved into house 3-5 years ago
2000 block group percentage 0-100 24.73 10.86
share of households moved into house 6-10 years ago
2000 block group percentage 0-100 18.01
7.94
share of households moved into house 11-20 years ago
2000 block group percentage 0-100 19.60
8.54
share of households moved into house 21-30 years ago
2000 block group percentage 0-100 13.47
8.49
share of households moved into house over 30 years ago 2000 block group percentage 0-100 13.88 11.63
property tax rate
1990 block group mils
10.50
6.00
share of mortgage holders with tax escrow
1990 block group percentage 0-100 59.34 27.93
share of home owners with tax escrow
1990 block group percentage 0-100 40.66 24.60
share of all households with tax escrow
1990 block group percentage 0-100 55.06 23.25
share of all newly originated mortgages that are subprime 1990 block group percentage 0-100 11.68 11.25
shares of households that rent
1990 block group percentage 0-100 31.40 22.01
average household income
1990 block group thousands
39.93 21.30
average home value for owners
1990 block group thousands
107.18 84.88
indicator for rural area
1990 block group indicator 0/1
0.29
0.45
share of households with a child 18 years or younger
1990 block group percentage 0-100 38.86 12.27
share of households with a member over 65 years old
1990 block group percentage 0-100 23.43 10.99
average monthly housing cost, owners with mortgages
1990 block group thousands
0.81
0.41
share of people who are non-white
1990 block group percentage 0-100 17.88 24.75
average household size
1990 block group number
2.79
0.52
share of households with a mortgage
1990 block group percentage 0-100 36.75 20.66
share of households moved into house 3-5 years ago
1990 block group percentage 0-100 24.20 12.43
share of households moved into house 6-10 years ago
1990 block group percentage 0-100 15.12
8.13
share of households moved into house 11-20 years ago
1990 block group percentage 0-100 24.42 10.97
share of households moved into house 21-30 years ago
1990 block group percentage 0-100 13.25
9.71
share of households moved into house over 30 years ago 1990 block group percentage 0-100 13.73 12.05

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

Appendix Table 2
Descriptive statistics for variables used in this study
variable
year
geographic units
level
property tax rate
1980 block group mils
share of mortgage holders with tax escrow
1980 block group percentage 0-100
share of home owners with tax escrow
1980 block group percentage 0-100
share of all households with tax escrow
1980 block group percentage 0-100
shares of households that rent
1980 block group percentage 0-100
average household income
1980 block group thousands
average home value for owners
1980 block group thousands
indicator for rural area
1980 block group indicator 0/1
share of households with a child 18 years or younger
1980 block group percentage 0-100
share of households with a member over 65 years old
1980 block group percentage 0-100
average monthly housing cost, owners with mortgages
1980 block group thousands
share of people who are non-white
1980 block group percentage 0-100
average household size
1980 block group number
share of households with a mortgage
1980 block group percentage 0-100
share of households moved into house 3-5 years ago
1980 block group percentage 0-100
share of households moved into house 6-10 years ago
1980 block group percentage 0-100
share of households moved into house 11-20 years ago
1980 block group percentage 0-100
share of households moved into house 21-30 years ago
1980 block group percentage 0-100
share of households moved into house over 30 years ago 1980 block group percentage 0-100

APPENDIX 13

mean std dev
10.30
57.90
39.87
61.24
29.65
21.25
54.83
0.27
42.91
84.08
0.31
14.84
2.91
43.11
28.27
16.34
17.35
9.57
6.92

6.90
28.83
25.57
21.06
20.80
8.64
31.56
0.43
13.24
11.35
0.13
24.28
0.50
22.01
9.52
7.23
9.21
7.75
7.00

Sources: U.S. Department of Commerce (1983, 1993, 2002, 2010); Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (1975-2000, 19842000); Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (2009); Mayer and Pence (2008)

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

CABRAL AND HOXBY

APPENDIX 14

Appendix Table 3
Effect of tax escrow (proxy for nonsalience) on tax rates, year 2000 data
dependent variable: property tax rate in mils
OLS

IV

share mortgage holders with tax escrow

0.024 (0.006)

0.303 (0.072)

share households that rent

0.048 (0.005)

0.012 (0.011)

share mortgages that are subprime

-0.022 (0.013)

-0.048 (0.017)

share mortgages that are FHA/VA

0.008 (0.009)

-0.115 (0.031)

average household income

0.212 (0.017)

-0.011 (0.067)

-1.42E-03 (1.80E-04)

5.65E-04 (6.77E-04)

3.85E-06 (6.69E-07)

-3.10E-06 (2.37E-06)

-3.60E-09 (7.91E-10)

3.95E-09 (2.60E-09)

loan to value ratio

3.474 (0.384)

5.629 (0.774)

indicator: loan to value in 2nd quartile

1.194 (0.136)

0.839 (0.249)

indicator: loan to value in 3rd quartile

2.932 (0.250)

3.040 (0.441)

indicator: loan to value in 4th quartile

4.532 (0.363)

5.443 (0.596)

average home value

-0.031 (0.003)

0.003 (0.009)

indicator for rural area

-1.526 (0.198)

2.904 (1.181)

share with a child 18 years or younger

-0.008 (0.013)

0.006 (0.019)

share with member over 65 years old

0.022 (0.006)

0.064 (0.013)

average monthly housing cost

6.892 (0.907)

3.403 (1.271)

share who are non-white

-0.050 (0.005)

-0.043 (0.010)

average household size

0.755 (0.396)

1.233 (0.521)

share with a mortgage

0.011 (0.007)

-0.039 (0.017)

share moved in 3-5 years ago

0.005 (0.003)

-0.003 (0.005)

share moved in 6-10 years ago

0.020 (0.005)

0.023 (0.007)

share moved in 11-20 years ago

0.055 (0.006)

0.091 (0.012)

share moved in 21-30 years ago

-0.049 (0.009)

-0.039 (0.014)

0.034 (0.009)

0.053 (0.013)

-10.830 (1.570)

-24.496 (3.742)

average household income squared
average household income cubed
average household income to 4th power

share moved in over 30 years ago
constant

Notes: Ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV) regressions with robust standard errors clustered at the
county level. The instrument is the SALO ratio based on bank holding companies that do at least 50% of their business outside
the state. Standard errors are in parentheses. Observations are at the block group level and are weighted by population. For
descriptive statistics, see Appendix Table 2.

CABRAL AND HOXBY

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

APPENDIX 15

Appendix Table 4
Responses to poll questions related to property taxes
Question

Answers and percentage of
respondents

Which one of these taxes gives you the least for your money's worth?1

26%
22%
21%
16%
15%

From which level of government do you feel you get the least for your
money?2

46% Federal
21% State
19% Local
13% Don't know/no answer

From which level of government do you feel you get the most for your
money?3

23% Federal
20% State
38% Local
20% Don't know/no answer

Which level of government do you think spends your tax dollars most
wisely--federal, state, or local?3

11% Federal
19% State
43% Local
27% Don't know/refused

How many cents of every tax dollar that goes to your [federal/state/local]
government would you say is wasted?4

45 cents Federal
38 cents State
34 cents Local

Some of the biggest taxes people have to pay are.... No one likes to pay
taxes, but thinking about those taxes, I'd like you to rank them, starting with
the one you dislike most.5

29%
9%
23%
36%
3%

Suppose your state government must raise taxes substantially, which of
these do you think would be the best way to do it?6

45% Sales tax
25% Income tax
10% Property tax
6% Other
14% Don't know

Of the taxes I name which would you least like to see increase...?7

26% Local property taxes
10% State sales taxes
7% State income taxes
22% Federal income taxes
9% Taxes on gasoline
18% Social Security taxes
7% Don't know

Social security tax
Federal income tax
State tax (sales/income)
Property tax
Not sure/all of them

Income tax
Social Security tax
Sales tax
Property tax
Other/don't know/refused

Sources: 1: Los Angeles Times poll, December 1978. Authors' calculations based on Survey of Consumer Finances, 2001. 2:
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (1994). 3: Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (1993).
4: 1981 results from Gallup Poll (2009). 5: International Communications Research poll, February 2003. 6: Advisory
Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (1976); see also note 31. 7: Princeton Survey Research Associates (1990).

THE HATED PROPERTY TAX: SALIENCE, TAX RATES

CABRAL AND HOXBY

APPENDIX 16

Appendix Table 5
Determinants of tax escrow status
probit regression results with dependent variable: tax escrow (0/1)
mortgage is subprime
household income
household income squared
household income cubed

-0.829 (0.087)
4.41E-06 (8.70E-07)
-2.11E-11 (5.11E-12)
2.87E-17 (8.75E-18)

household income 4th power

-1.12E-23 (4.16E-24)

estimated loan to value ratio

-0.499 (0.270)

indicator: est loan to value in 1st quartile

-0.102 (0.096)

indicator: est loan to value in 2nd quartile

-0.001 (0.074)

indicator: est loan to value in 3rd quartile

0.045 (0.058)

current home value

-0.001 (0.000)

rural area

-0.296 (0.044)

household member over 65 years old

-0.071 (0.049)

annual housing cost

-1.21E-06 (1.13E-05)

non-white

0.395 (0.320)

household size

0.046 (0.032)

moved in 3-5 years ago

-0.053 (0.043)

moved in 6-10 years ago

-0.157 (0.045)

moved in 11-20 years ago

-0.233 (0.049)

moved in 21-30 years ago

-0.156 (0.061)

moved in over 30 years ago

-0.176 (0.108)

previously owned a home

-0.069 (0.031)

mortgage insurance

-0.737 (0.039)

original amount of the mortgage

4.41E-06 (9.26E-07)

assessed value of property at purchase time

3.04E-07 (3.98E-07)

current balance on mortgage
current interest rate on mortgage

-4.39E-06 (7.53E-07)
-0.072 (0.005)

points on mortgage

0.210 (0.016)

actual loan to value ratio

0.868 (0.169)

indicator: loan to value ratio 0.95 or greater

-0.601 (0.050)

indicator: loan to value ratio 0.80 or smaller

0.284 (0.047)

constant

0.498 (0.194)

Notes: Probit regressions using data on property owners from the Residential Finance Survey 2001. Standard errors are in
parentheses. Observations are at the household level.

