                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  LEADS ON MACROECONOMIC RISKS TO AND FROM THE HOUSEHOLD SECTOR

                                          Jonathan A. Parker

                                         Working Paper 18510
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18510


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




This paper was prepared for the NBER volume on Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling. For helpful
comments, I thank Markus Brunnermeier, Andrea Eisfeldt, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and participants
in the April 2011 NBER conference on Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling. This research was funded
by the NBER Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling project and the Kellogg School of Management
at Northwestern University. In addition to being faculty at the Kellogg School, Parker serves as an
academic consultant and adviser for the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and served as a Special
Adviser on Financial Stability for the US Department of the Treasury during 2009. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jonathan A. Parker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
LEADS on Macroeconomic Risks to and from the Household Sector
Jonathan A. Parker
NBER Working Paper No. 18510
November 2012
JEL No. E44,G01,G18

                                               ABSTRACT

This chapter describes a system, called the LEADS system, for providing market participants, regulators,
and households with information on the reallocation of resources within, from, and to the household
sector in response to macroeconomic events. The household sector is both a propagator of shocks to
the economy, as wealth is redistributed across households with differing propensities to consume,
and an originator of risky claims held in systemically important places, as losses are shifted from households
to creditors such as financial institutions. Information about these exposures, like information generally,
is conveyed by prices and so is under-produced by markets. The LEADS system – collection, analysis,
and distribution of information on household exposures to macroeconomic risk factors – can potentially
lead to better macroeconomic performance through better informed public policy and private decision-
making


Jonathan A. Parker
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
Jonathan-Parker@Kellogg.Northwestern.edu
       The household sector is both a propagator of shocks to the economy, as wealth is
redistributed across households with differing propensities to consume, and an originator of risky
claims held in systemically important places, as losses are shifted from households to creditors
such as financial institutions. Information about these exposures, like information generally, is
conveyed by prices and so is under-produced by markets. Thus increased public collection,
analysis, and distribution of information on household exposures to macroeconomic risk factors
can potentially lead to better macroeconomic performance, both through better informed private
decision-making and through better public policy.
       This note describes a system for monitoring, measuring and publicizing exposures to and
from the household sector. This system, called the LEADS system, is designed to provide market
participants, regulators, and households with additional information to understand the
reallocation of resources within, from, and to the household sector in response to macroeconomic
events. The LEADS system has three components, of which the first is the main focus of this
paper. The first step is the collection of data on LEADS – Liabilities, Earnings, Assets,
Demographics, and financial Sophistication – at the household level. I argue that these
categories are the key dimensions to measure, that measurement at the household-level is critical
for accurate measurement, and that much of this information is available in institutions already
subject to government oversight and reporting requirements. The second step in LEADS is the
measurement of the exposure of each asset, each liability, and each income stream to
macroeconomic risk factors. This step is the subject of much of the field and practice of finance,
and describing the vast and evolving set of techniques for this step is beyond this paper. This
component of the system requires historical data on returns (at a minimum) and modeling of
future exposures.
       The final step is analysis and release of information. I propose analysis of the outcomes
of changes in risk factors in four important dimensions: the distributional impacts on both liquid
wealth and lifetime wealth; the resultant changes in household demand; the effects of balance
sheet adjustments on the prices and payouts of claims on the household sector held by other
sectors; and the resulting impact on the revenues and liabilities of the government, through


                                                 2
possible transfers and de jure and de facto guarantees to the household sector. Such projections
necessarily involve household decisions. This information on exposures across groups of
households is then combined with information on financial sophistication. Where exposures – to
or from the household sector – are large and sophistication low, macroeconomic risks may be
mispriced or amplified by lack of sophistication and knowledge. Finally, the results of the
analyses are made public – potentially pushed in some cases to ‘unsophisticated’ households –
and the underlying data made public in a suitably limited form that maintains privacy.
        Together the LEADS system would uncover information relevant to addressing the
following types of questions that are of interest to market participants and policymakers:
                How risky are loans to the household sector? Is a particular type of aggregate risk
                 concentrated among households with few resources or little sophistication and so
                 represents a potential source of losses for other claims on these households?
                Is a particular type of macroeconomic or systematic risk held primarily by
                 households with little financial sophistication and so potentially mispriced?
                How exposed is consumer demand to declines in different assets or asset classes?
                 Is a particular type of aggregate risk concentrated in liquid wealth or on
                 households whose demand is highly sensitive to losses?
                How likely are private losses to become public liabilities? Is a particular group of
                 households, like pensioners, holding enough of a specific macroeconomic or
                 systematic risk so that losses might lead to ex post public assistance?
With very narrow exceptions, these questions cannot be answered by analysis of existing
datasets.
        This paper -- and the NBER Initative on Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling of which it
is a part -- are both motivated directly by the credit market disruptions and financial crisis of
2007 and early 2008, the contemporaneous declines in asset values, and the large
macroeconomic consequences. At the time, most observers expected that the decline in demand
for investment and consumption goods following these events would be similar to that caused by
the stock market decline in the year 2000 and to be concentrated on the construction sector (e.g.
Bernanke (2008)).1 In fact, consumption demand fell significantly during the Great Recession –

1
 There were even reasons to believe the macroeconomic impact would be smaller than in 2000. Housing is
consumption, and as a house values decline, the (opportunity) cost of housing falls, providing insurance to

                                                         3
more than output – and has been slow to recover after (relative to most previous U.S. recessions).
        The financial crisis and recession of 2008 - 2009 illustrate the two main ways in which
the household sector is important for measurement of systemic risks. First, household demand is
critical for business cycles, and as such the monitoring of households’ balance sheets and wealth
is a natural part of the monitoring of macroeconomic risks. Second, systemically important
institutions hold claims on the household sector, and so that understanding the correlated risks of
these institutions requires understanding the value of these claims in different macroeconomic
scenarios.2 Section I contains a discussion of these issues.
        Section II presents the structure of the LEADS data and describes how this structure
allows one to measuring aggregate risks to and from the household sector. Section III describes
how the LEADS data can be collected and compiled. Current sources of information are
disparate, do not cover the same households, lack sufficient detail on asset holdings, and do not
measure household sophistication. The dataset for the LEADS system can be constructed by
merging administrative data on investments and debts with a panel survey of households that
focuses on demographics, income and financial sophistication.
        Section IV discusses analysis and dissemination. Analysis of the data can use existing
tools used in the study of financial risks and household finances. I sketch a three-step procedure
to first measure individual-asset exposures, calculate liquid wealth and lifetime wealth
exposures, and map these back to changes in household demand and in the value of claims on
households. To allow better management of aggregate risks, the analysis, summary data, and an
anonymous random sample of detailed data can be released to the public. Section V concludes,
and an appendix discusses the role of the government in the provision of this type of information.


I. Why monitor household exposures?
        The exposures to and from the household sector are important for monitoring and
measuring aggregate risks for three broad reasons.
        First, movements in household expenditures amplify and propagate shocks to the
economy. This was true in the recession of 2008-2009: during and following the recession,

households that own homes. Further, the structure of mortgages provides households with an option that increases in
value when house prices decline, transferring wealth from high-wealth high-saving households to low-wealth high-
consumption households.
2
  This stands in contrast to the Japanese banking crisis and slow growth of the 1990’s, during which financial
institutions suffered almost exclusively from losses on loans to the corporate sector.

                                                         4
sluggish household expenditures have amplified and propagated slowdown. This has also been
true more broadly. As Hall (1986 and forthcoming) shows, the volatility of GDP comes
primarily from household spending. And long slumps from the Great Depression to the recent
recession are arguably amplified by low consumer demand due in part to debt overhang (e.g.
Melzer (2010)).
         Since households own firms and are the government, household demand is exposed to
macroeconomic risks through changes in aggregate income and aggregate asset values (and gains
or losses on net asset postions with foreign countries). Thus, a major part of risk in household
demand can be measured from aggregate data on the share of wealth held in different asset
classes and an evaluation of the riskiness of each asset class. But household-level data on
individual asset holdings and their characteristics can provide a better understanding of the
exposure of aggregate demand to asset values.
        Any decline in any asset value has a disporportionate impact on household demand if it is
accompanied by transfers among households of differing propensities to consume. This
disproportionate effect can happen for example if shocks redistribute resources between middle-
aged households, whose behavior is reasonably approximated by the lifecycle model, and
younger households, whose behavior is better characterized by the buffers stock model of
consumption.3 In the recent recession and in the Great Depression for example, household
demand seems to have been reduced by the concentration of losses among households with
leverage.4
        Thus, the household sector has historically been an important proximate source of output
volatility and the household sector’s response to wealth changes is determined by the distribution
of wealth changes both across households and across two measures of wealth: short-term, liquid,
financial resources and long-term illiquid wealth, such as retirment accounts or future income.
        The second reason to monitor household exposures is that both the government and


3
  See Carroll (1997) and Gourinchas and Parker (2001). Kaplan and Violante (2011) provide a related model. Most
current models of the macroeconomy are largely linear, even those with heterogeneous agents, so that the
household-level data is not necessary in these models for predicting macroeconomic dynamics. This statement even
applies to models with precautionary saving that match the large share of households with low wealth (Krusell and
Smith (1998)), although these models typically miss the volatility of asset markets.
4
  See Fisher (1933), Eggertsson and Krugman (2010), Hall (2011). Parker and Vissing Jorgensen (2009, 2010) find
larger consumption declines for high consumption or high income households, implying an important role for
declines in asset prices and expected future prospects of high-income households.

                                                        5
systemically important institutions hold financial claims on the household sector. The ability of
households to meet these clams and not default in different macroeconomic scenarios determines
the exposure of these assets to systematic risks and thus the extent to which those holding the
financial claims are exposed.
         In the recession of 2008 – 2009, a significant reason for the depth and severity of the
recession was large losses on loans to households that were held by systemically important
financial institutions. These exposures may well have been smaller had the exposures to
aggregate risk factors of the various dimensions of wealth of the households with mortgages
been better understood by market participants or regulators.
         The final reason to monitor household exposures is that, like groups of banks, the
government cannot commit ex ante not to make large transfers to groups of households following
adverse outcomes.5 And in general, monitoring is helpful in dealing with the moral hazard
problems that accompany insurance. These types of assistance are public risks that expose
aggregate growth to the risks born by these households through increased tax rates and decreased
future spending and benefits.
         Examples of governments assisting a subset of households that lose significant resources
include those following natural disasters, and the bailout of the elderly following the Great
Depression with the Social Security System (enacted in 1935 and 1939) which paid retirees
benefits starting in 1940 to aid seniors whose wealth was wiped out by the Great Depression.6
As long as the government ex post makes transfers to households that have suffered large losses,
it is optimal for the government, like any private insurer, to monitor these households and react
to these risks.7
         These are the reasons that market participants and policymakers benefit from information
on household asset holdings, but why does the government have a role in gathering, analyzing
5
  Farhi and Tirole (forthcoming) clarify the point that it is not just that a single institution can be too big to fail, but
that groups of institutions can also. The Troubles Asset Relief Program provided equity investments not just in large
banks but in most small banks also.
6
  And we may observe it if the PGBC fails or some US states go bankrupt. On the other hand, households facing
foreclosure in the current recession were not bailed out. What little assistance that was provided – the Home
affordable Modification Program which affected less than a million mortgages – focused on overcoming an ex post
market inefficiency rather than being a transfer to households. Also, there was no government rescue for the
employees of Enron or Arthur Anderson, nor for the victims of the Madoff fraud.
7
  In terms of regulatory response, the government can simply disclose these exposures so that government
accounting is more informative, or the government can hedge the exposures so that tax rates can be smoothed and
market prices better reflect true risks, or finally, it can restrict or intervene to deter the exposures ex ante that lead to
bailouts in some states ex post.

                                                             6
and publicizing this information? There are two main reasons, addressed in more detail in the
appendix. First, as a general principle, in markets the social value of information exceeds its
private value, so information is under-produced by the market. Given too little information,
mistakes are made relative to the economy with the socially optimal amount of information. And
mistakes will tend to be based on the common information that exists, so that mis-estimation
leads to coordinated mistakes which are by definition macroeconomic. Second, lack of financial
sophistication (such as lack of financial knowledge, limited information processing abilities, and
limited time allocated to financial decisions) can lead some households to misprice aggregate
risks, both leading to misallocation by other sectors and exposing household demand and claims
on households to ‘mispriced’ aggregate risk factors.8 While it is efficient to have the downside
economic risk held by those most willing to hold it, it is generically inefficient to have it held by
those least able to understand it or who most underestimate it.
        These considerations imply that data collection and analysis focus on measuring the
systematic exposure of two measures of household financial wealth –liquid financial resources
over a few years and lifetime wealth – for not just the household sector but also for different
households grouped according to consumption response to these two measures of resources,
according to their importance for claims on the household sector, according to the likelihood of
losses being born by the government, and according to measures of financial sophistication of
the household decision makers.


II. LEADS data
        What information is required to measure exposures to and from the household sector?
First, household-level data is necessary so that the common risks of different types of households
can be studied across both different groups and risks of interest. That is, while the units of
analysis will typically be groups of households, to characterize exposures among groups of
households with differing propensities to consume for example, one has to have information for
many possible groupings defined by demographics and/or financial measures of interest such as
liquid wealth or homeownership status. Individual-level data allow the study of the history of
exposures and behavior of different groups or types of households through different aggregations

8
 Mispricing relative to a benchmark in which people are not limited in knowledge or information processing
capacity.

                                                        7
of historical data. Further, to calculate the exposure of claims on household resources to an
aggregate shock, one needs to model the default of each household which again is most
straightforward (and requires the least extraneous assumptions) using household-level data. For
example, to predict how much default would accompany a ten percent decrease in house values
for a group of households, it would be useful to know not just that the average loan to value ratio
of households in that group was 80 percent, but also the distribution of loan to value ratios and
how correlated other household assets and incomes were with the considered aggregate risks.
Finally, the study of household-level data is a useful input to risk calculations, such as under
what conditions households default or how different regulations might change household
behavior. That is, household-level data allows one to use existing variation in laws, regulation,
prices, etc. across households to study and measure household behavior and thus infer better
what losses to and from the sector would occur in response to what aggregate events.
        In terms of the information on each household, the arguments in section I imply that the
data contain enough detail on assets, income and liabilities to accurately measure the extent to
which a household’s liquid wealth and lifetime wealth are correlated with macroeconomic risk
factors. This requires knowledge about the nature of income, of assets held in each asset class,
and of credit terms for debt, so that the impact of changes in each on liquid wealth and on total
wealth can be calculated. For example, holdings in retirement accounts clearly expose lifetime
wealth and not liquid wealth, while temporary shocks to income affect liquid wealth more than
lifetime wealth. In sum then, a system to monitor systemic risk in the household sector requires
data on assets and liabilities both at the household level and in enough detail to assess their roles
in liquid wealth and lifetime wealth.
        What actual financial information about households is needed? As in the monitoring and
regulation of the U.S. banking system, one would like to observe sufficient detail about
household balance sheets to accurately measure the exposure of each asset and liability to
aggregate risk factors of interest. To this end, the data need to contain information not just on
the holdings in any asset class, but on the actual details of the securities held. It is insufficient to
measure the risk of a class of assets, because one group of households may differ significantly
from another in the actual securities held within that class and so actually have quite a different
exposure to a macroeconomic risk factor. As examples, among mortgages, the extent to which
household default will differ dramatically with the terms of the mortgage. Stocks can have high


                                                   8
exposure to aggregate risk or provide insurance against aggregate shocks. Hedge funds can be
highly levered and lose money in response to credit shock, or provide liquidity in a credit shock
and be highly profitable.
         A similar argument applies to labor and benefit income. One needs to know enough
details of the labor income of the household to measure the exposure of labor income to
macroeconomic risk factors to measure the household’s ability to avoid default or bankruptcy.
Some households have stable labor and benefit incomes and others are highly exposed to the
business cycles. The actual exposures, as for assets, can be estimated from existing data on
historical labor incomes of similar households. And benefits and income amounts from each
source are necessary to infer total exposure.
         Finally, an important part of monitoring banks is the quality of management and its plans
for future contingencies. The measurement of financial sophistication in the household sector is
similarly important for measuring and monitoring risks and for providing clues as to which risks
might be mispriced. In banking regulation, the quality of management informs the regulator
about the likelihood that the financial institution can manage the exposures inherent in the bank’s
asset and liability positions. In the recent financial crisis, measurement of this dimension for
Fannie Mae and AIG Financial Products would have shown poor management practices, been
easy to correlate with massive exposures to real estate prices and price impact, and potentially
been useful to other investors taking prices as informative about riskiness of mortgage backed
securities. While poorly managed firms tend to suffer a Darwinian fate, this argument has little
bite for households living well above subsistence. And regulation today reflects this: regulations
restrict most households from making many investment choices, which are available only to
qualified investors.9



9
  Would information on sophistication been helpful before the financial crisis and 2008-2009 recession? Probably
not (although Lusardi (2010) argues to some extent otherwise). This sort of information on households seems
unlikely to have been useful in monitoring the systematic risks and in avoiding them, since closely related data was
available. The information in credit ratings bureaus showed that subprime borrowers had very poor credit ratings,
which probably correlates highly with lack of financial sophistication. But this does not mean that this type of
information will not be useful next time. In the next potential crisis, it might be that households take on more risk
than they intend absent LEADS-type information, or that markets or regulators would find information on the
sophistication of the households driving financial flows to be a useful signal to help interpret price movements and
measure macroeconomic risks.


                                                          9
        While financial sophistication has many dimensions, the most pertinent to measure is the
extent to which households are informed about aggregate risks and their exposures to them. If
households are not informed, that is not proof that they are incorrectly exposed, but it suggests
that greater information about exposures might change behavior for the better. The measures,
discussed below, capture the extent to which households are informed about the financial
decisions they are making, the extent to which they have the abilities to make reasonable
financial decisions, and the extent to which they exhibit characteristics correlated with good
financial decision making. We would better understand macroeconomic risks if we were always
able to observe when credit was increasing to households with low financial sophistication and
when households with low financial sophistication were increasing their exposures to
macroeconomic risks.
        In sum, the needed data is information collected at the household level on the following
categories, summarized in Table 1: Liabilities, Assets, Earnings, Demographics, and financial
Sophistication. The system is named for the capitalized letters: LEADS. Table 1 also highlights
what is missing from current data sets. The two main missing items are 1) the details on assets
and liabilities at the household level and 2) measures of financial sophistication.
        The fact that the LEADS data would contain a host of information on household financial
positions raises important issues of privacy. It will be necessary to insure the anonymity of
households in any summary statistics released to the public or limited datasets released to
researchers. I do not address these issues in this paper, but merely note that these issues are of
great import and surmountable. They are important, as the provision of accurate information in
part relies on the confidence of the provider that the information will not be misused. That these
issues are surmountable is shown by the regulation of the banking sector in which bank
regulators have been able to preserve the privacy of confidential bank information.10


III. How to collect the LEADS data
        How could a statistical agency gather the LEADS data? While the details of the system
could rival the documentation of the measurement of risk in the traditional banking sector, in
short, there are several principles that are necessary to gather this information.

10
  The IRS has also not allowed leaks of confidential tax return documents while allowing researchers to use the data
for important social scientific research.

                                                        10
         First, the collection of data must rely heavily on administrative data. Survey response
rates are declining, and administrative data is increasingly detailed, already computerized, and
has low rates of error. Even cooperating households with good intensions are likely not to know
the details of their financial contracts or holdings. This happens in two ways. The household
may simply not know the details of the asset or liability that are available to them, like a
household not knowing the aggregate and idiosyncratic risks of the returns on a stock they own,
or whether their mortgage gives the lender recourse or not, or the covenants and seniority of a
bond they own. Or the household may not have access to this information, as would be the case
for a household holding a mutual fund or hedge fund, or having its investment advisor allocating
its assets.
         This information however is available through financial institutions, all of which are
already (or seemingly will be) covered under the large umbrellas of financial regulation and
reporting. The organizations that sell the assets or hold claims on households either understand
the details of the payments that must be made in different states of the world or have on file the
terms of the mortgage contract, CUSIP of the security, etc. One approach is for the appropriate
regulator to gather reports on all financial holdings by or against a given household by all
financial entities.11 The gold standard for information on financial positions – assets and
liabilities – is administrative data from universe of financial institutions, merged by household
for a subset of households. The universe of financial institutions would have to include
everything from hedge funds to payday lending to limited partnerships.12 Even if this is not
completely possible, it seems necessary to rely as much as possible on administrative data to
avoid significant loss in detail on holdings.
         Could statistical agencies use private companies that serve households and collect
financial information, such as Mint.com? Data from these private money management
companies suffers from a serious shortcoming: the sample of the population they cover are not
representative of households in the United States. These data cover only households that choose
to manage their finances and do so on-line. Households that use these types of services are not
11
   There are questions of feasibility and privacy issues that this paper does not address. Presumably one could gather
this administrative data with the consent of the surveyed household. Another option would be to require universal
reporting by financial institutions for certain types of financial transactions. Household information is gathered by
credit bureaus and households wishing to engage in certain financial transactions are also choosing to be monitored.
Tax law requires reporting of all dividends.
12
   It is unclear how to handle international holdings, although one could cover a large portion through intermediaries
who sell (or lend) from abroad.

                                                         11
the average household, and in particular they probably display more than average financial
sophistication -- certainly in the dimension of planning -- and so likely have different wealth and
incomes and take different financial risks.
          Second, household demographics are probably most accurately gathered by a household-
level survey or possibly even simply gleaned from existing household surveys. Administrative
data may provide better coverage, since any household survey will suffer the problems of
surveys, including potentially low response rates. But much of the basic demographic and even
income data already exists for many households in several extant datasets. Using the various
surveys of households conducted by the Census Bureau, combining data across existing datasets
within the US government at the household level could yield an accurate picture of household
demographics and income. With household permission, the government agency could merge this
extant survey data with the financial information provided by the financial sector to create a
close-to-ideal dataset. A further improvement would be to merge with the income and tax return
data in the Internal Revenue Service.13 There are of course many hurdles to these coordinated
efforts, including issues of consent, issues of biasing responses and data provision, and issues of
interference with the primary missions of the original datasources.
         Third, financial sophistication can be measured using a combination of data from
financial institutions and survey methods. Financial institutions have information on household
choices and responses to financial offers. These responses have been used by economists to
measure financial sophistication in behavior from dominated choices (see Agarwal et al (2009,
2010)). Detailed holding can also be used to ask to what extent observed behavior conforms to
an economic model’s views of what optimal behavior ought to be (see for example, Calvet,
Campbell, Sodini (2007, 2009)). In either case, financial institutions have some existing
information on the quality of financial management within a given household. However, this
information is unlikely to prove sufficient, and the collection of this type of information may
distort the incentives for financial institutions to create the information.
         Complementarily, many dimensions of financial sophistication can be measured by suvey
methods, as shown by existing surveys. A notable example is the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority (FINRA)’s National Financial Capability Study. At this point however, there is

13
  While historically these data have been very difficult to use for confidentiality reasons, the data at least could be
used to construct group-level statistics available outside the IRS.


                                                           12
insufficient previous research on the usefulness of different dimensions of sophistication to know
exactly which questions or information will be most useful. And to some extent flexibility must
be maintained in data collection so that measures can evolve with the financial situation and the
risks percieved as potentially most interesting.
         Despite these caveats to measurement of financial sophistication, three types of data are
potentially useful indicators of suboptimal responses of household spending or mispricing of
claims on the household sector. The first type of information is measures of household
contingency plans for macroeconomic events of interest.14 This information would be useful
directly for understanding default on credit instruments and indirectly for modelling whether
expectations of actions are inconsistent across households (and potentially financial institutions).
The information that everyone plans to run for the same exit in the event of a fire is useful
information for households themselves.
         The second class of useful information concerns whether households understand the
financial products they are using. Lack of understanding would suggest suboptimal exposure to
macroeconomic risk factors, and potentially exploitation leading to increased aggregate
exposures. Of course this is far from proof, as illustrated by the analogy of the pool player who
plays well but does not understand classical mechanics.15 But there is strong evidence that
measures of this type of financial sophistication are correlated wtih financial choices.16
         Note that the motivation to measure macroecomomic risk exposure is distinct from the
motive to protect investors that is the goal of the newly legislated Consumer Financial Protection
Agency. While the methods may overlap and data be of interest for both purposes, the
measurement of aggregate risk exposures requires a focus on common misunderstandings which
align with measured exposures.
         Finally, the third dimension of sophistication to measure is general abilities and behaviors
related to good financial decisions making. For example, saving for retirement is much larger
among households that report that they plan for vacations (Ameriks, Caplin, and Leahy (2003)).


14
   Brunnermeier et al (2011) provide a modeling strategy for financial institutions that makes use of these type of
questions of financial institutions.
15
   Note that an important aspect of the analogy is inconsistent with our modeling of agents as pool players. There is
no uncertainty in pool. If an economist’s agent played pool in theory, it would always win by sinking all the balls in
the right order on the first shot.
16
   See for example, Lusardi and Mitchell (2007).

                                                          13
While is is proably not realistic to measure IQ for these purposes, IQ does correlate with
financial decision making (Grinblatt, Keloharju, and Linnainmaa (forthcoming)).
       Turning to the structure of the data, for accurate measure of systemic risk, it will
generally be necessary that all data be in the same dataset – that is that one has all LEADS
information for a set of households. Short of this, if groups of interest can be defined based on
observables that are measured in two different datasets, then the group averages can be
constructed for each group in each dataset and combined. For example, if assets, liabilities and
income are well measured in one dataset with demographics and financial sophistication is well
measured in another dataset with demographics, then one can calculate statistics about financial
sophistication for any demographic group. What one cannot do is observe if, within any
demographic group, it is the less sophisticated households that are holding particular assets held
by that group and not other assets. With some loss of accuracy, one can extrapolate from a small
sample with complete information to a larger sample with information on different dimensions
for different households.
       Finally, to what extent is repeated cross-sectional data sufficient or would the LEADS
system be significantly stronger with panel data that follows the same households over time?
The risks of assets and liabilities require that one track the performance of these assets, and not
that one track the same households over time. To measure income dynamics and correlations
with macroeconomic risks requires repeated measures of a household’s income, but there are
datasets from which measures could be constructed with long time series already. The Panel
Study of Income Dynamics, the Current Population Survey, and the Social Security Earnings
Records in the Health and Retirement Study all provide long histories of earnings on households
that could be mapped to demographics and then applied to households in the new dataset. I
expect that the heterogeneity within a demographic group missed by this method would be of
little systemic interest. That said, repeated cross-sectional data will reduce the power of many
measures, particularly when studying household-specific changes to better understand behavior
or when tracking the impact of changes over longer periods of time.


IV. Outline of LEADS data analysis and dissemination
       The LEADS system is designed to allow the measurement of the exposure of the liquid
wealth and lifetime wealth of different groups of households to different macroeconomic shocks


                                                 14
and the construction of measures of the exposure of both aggregate consumption demand and
claims on the household sector to these macroeconomic shocks. This section first outlines a
framework for analysis of three steps: i) measure the risk exposure of each asset, each liability,
and each income stream to macroeconomic risk factors; ii) aggregate exposures to household-
level liquid wealth and lifetime wealth and then aggregate exposures to groups of households; iii)
model the exposures of aggregate consumption demand, claims on the household sector and
government liabilities. Second, dissemination of both analysis and anonymous raw data is
critical. While regulators may find patterns of exposure informative, the private sector also can
better respond to and price risks when it is better informed of their aggregate consequences as
would be the case if it had access to both the analyses and some of the data.
        To begin, the measurement of the risk exposure of assets and liabilities can be based on
textbook asset pricing and its application, which necessarily involves the difficulties of the real
world. This part of the analysis of the LEADS system is not novel and is reasonably well
understood y academics and practitioners. I simply propose standard modeling of asset and debt
cash flows that makes up the bulk of quantitative finance and fundamental analysis.17 Returns,
cash flows, and prices, are described as a sum of exposures (beta’s) times realizations of
aggregate risk factors and idiosyncratic or deterministic components. Modeling income risk is
similarly reasonably well understood and applied in labor economics. Here “understood” does
not mean straightforward. Perhaps the most important assumptions are those about the
behavioral responses over the period studied in cases where these responses affect cash flows,
which as noted subsequently, may depend on other holdings of a given household.
        Given estimated exposures, the liquid wealth of a household can be written as a sum of
stochastic cash flows into and out of liquid assets from income, assets, and liabilities, and of
terminal prices of liquid assets and liabilities. And the lifetime wealth of a household can be
written similarly but for all assets (not just liquid assets). Thus, we would have measures of the
exposure of these two concepts of wealth to variation in aggregate risk factors. Finally,
aggregating across households, one calculates the implications of a change in any set of
aggregate factors for the liquid wealth and lifetime wealth for any group of households.


17
  One danger going forward is that new financial products have limited histories and so are potentially the most
subject to mis-estimation.


                                                         15
        The third step in analysis is to use a model of the consumption sensitivity of different
households to these two types of wealth to measure of the exposure to aggregate risk factors of
the aggregate demand for consumption. As discussed shortly, this requires modeling household
behavior. But having modeled household saving, consumption, default, and portfolio behavior,
the LEADS system provides a measures of the exposure to default of any set of claims on the
household sector.18 Finally, one can examine under what scenarios there are significant direct or
possible effects on the government budget through explicit or implicit guarantees or legislative
responses.
        As noted, the modeling of household behavior is a critical step in the construction of both
income and asset/debt outcomes and as well as household consumption, saving and rebalancing
in response to events. In short, we need to model how households respond to changes over any
horizon considered. In terms of risks to the household sector, most relevant are exposure of
household income, where cash flows depend on household labor supply responses, and
exposures of household debt, where the household can choose to exercise an option to default or
change portfolio or saving behavior. In terms of outcomes, the LEADS analysis needs to model
household consumption behavior to understand which how the demand of different households
are more and less exposed to macroeconomic events. Further, to understand claims on
households, one has to make assumptions that determine the situations in which households
default. Fortunately, many of these behaviors have been or can be measured from past
experiences and existing data, so that modeling assumptions can be disciplined by data. Further,
one advantage of LEADS data is that, because it represents a significant increase in the quality of
available information, it will increase the ability to learn about these behaviors from future
events. Nevertheless, given the importance of these assumptions, any analysis will have to
carefully evaluate robustness to alternative assumptions.
        Household financial sophistication may be quite useful in modeling household behavior.
Household decision rules may differ importantly with financial sophistication. The second use of
financial sophistication is in grouping households for analysis, in combination with information
on exposures. Where exposures – to or from the household sector – are large and sophistication


18
  Similarly, given decision rules about portfolio choice, one can evaluate the change in asset demand from the
household sector. With assumptions about the potential other buyers of the asset, one can check the aggregate risk
factor exposures are reasonable or reasonably consistent with the household responses.

                                                         16
low, this is suggestive that macroeconomic risks may be mispriced or amplified by lack of
sophistication or information.
        In sum, the proposed analysis produces information on the exposure of aggregate demand
to various risks, information helpful for the private sector and the government. The analysis
measures the size of risks emanating from the household sector, and allows them to be evaluated
and tracked into other sectors of the economy. Finally, the analysis contains information on the
potential costs to the government in terms of likely payouts through automatic means-tested
programs and possible payouts through ex post bailouts to subgroups of the household sector.
        Finally, the LEADS information could be made public, in three ways. First, the results of
the analysis – the range of possible impacts on aggregate demand and defaults and asset prices
for many aggregate scenarios under any assumptions – are made public. This dissemination can
lead to many benefits, as discussed in section I and the appendix. Further, if regulators were
concerned about the possibility of ‘unsophisticated’ households unintentionally holding too
much risk, then particular results about riskiness could be pushed to the type of household that
might most benefit from this information. Similarly, if regulators were concerned about the
exposures of some market participants, they again could highlight the risks and allow
participants to react to the information as they see fit.
        Second, a dataset of aggregated data could be made publically available for analysis and
investigation by academics and investors. Ideally this dataset would combine analysis and raw
data. A large number of government agencies produce detailed table based on data that they
collect through surveys. A reasonable model for the LEADS summary data is the published
tables based on the SCF. But the LEADS tables would be better if summary statistics were
released by demographic groups of possible interest including financial sophistication, and if the
focus were not on current value of holdings but on asset detail and riskiness. Further, it would be
useful to observe not just mean holdings, but covariances of holdings across assets within a
group and quantiles of holdings – both of which would allow a better understanding of the
possibility that large shocks lead to large movements for some households in the group. Finally,
to be most useful, the statistics should to the extent possible convey information about exposure
to both liquid wealth and lifetime wealth.
        Third, a household-level dataset could be made accessible to researchers working to
improve our understanding or modeling of macroeconomic risks and financial stability. In


                                                   17
keeping with standard survey data protocols, this dataset can omit enough detail to ensure
confidentiality and anonymity of individual agents. The dataset would be useful to bring new
evidence on the behavioral assumptions inherent in the extant measures of systematic exposures.


       V. Conclusion
       Macroeconomic shocks can lead to large changes in demand from the household sector
and can lead to large changes in cash flows from debt claims on the sector. The LEADS system
outlined in this paper is designed to measure sufficient detail on household Liabilities, Assets,
Earnings, Demographics, and financial Sophistication, to project these large changes.
       This LEADS system would help households, firms and policymakers determine what
sources of aggregate risk are most pertinent for claims on the household sector and household
demand and when these exposures are likely to be large. More specifically, the system is
designed to allow measurement of i) the distributional impacts on both the distribution of liquid
wealth and lifetime wealth, and the resultant changes in household demand; ii) the effects of
balance sheet adjustments on the prices and payouts of claims on the household sector held by
other sectors; and iii) the resulting impact on the revenues and liabilities of the government,
through possible transfers and de jure and de facto guarantees to the household sector. While the
scope of the LEADS system implies that this paper can only provide an overview of the system,
methodologies exist for most of the individual component tasks.
       While it is beyond the scope of this note to lay out a complete framework for
macroprudential data analysis and regulation of the household sector, the analogy between banks
and households suggests that policymakers want to consider three tools. First, policymakers
might consider capital requirements, such as existed in mortgage markets in practice in the
period of the conforming mortgage. A related system is the Social Security system which
guarantees/imposes a basic standard of living for elderly households by requiring young
households to pay while working for health insurance and basic retirement income when elderly.
Second, policymakers might consider restrictions on what financial assets households can use.
This regulation is in place as restrictions on what investors can invest in unless they are qualified
investors. It seems suboptimal to make this determination based on wealth – errors are made
both by excluding sophisticated investors from markets and by allowing wealthy unsophisticated
investors to invest in any assets. A better regulation would license an investor on the basis of a


                                                 18
test, like required to get a driver’s license to drive. Finally, the regulator may want to inform the
public and warn them about specific exposures, or even lean against the wind and try to change
prices, limit access, or tax certain investments or strategies that they see as destabilizing. A good
data measurement system is an essential guide to evaluate the benefits and, just as important, the
costs of any potential active regulation.




                                                 19
                                           Appendix
        Why the government has a role in monitoring household systemic exposures
        There are two benefits to measuring the exposure of the household sector to systemic
risk.
        First, as a general principle, in markets the social value of information exceeds its private
value. Because information has some of the features of a public good, markets tend to lead to
the production of too little information. This result comes from the power of markets to create
efficient allocations given the available information. Prices aggregate and convey information to
market participants and optimizing agents can coordinate behavior to efficiently produce and
allocate goods. However, this benefit implies that when an individual produces information,
others benefit. Thus the social value of information exceeds its private value.
        When there is too little information, mistakes are made relative to the economy with the
socially optimal amount of information. And mistakes will tend to be based on the common
information that exists, so that misestimation leads to coordinated mistakes which are by
definition macroeconomic if not systemic. And misestimation propagates. Misestimation of the
positions of the household sector can lead to systemic risk elsewhere.
        This externality implies that there is a role for a governmental or quasi-governmental
agency to produce information. This is not a new role. The government does this for a large
number of macroeconomic variables. The government also regulates the production and
disclosure of information by firms. The goal of this paper – and this NBER project – is to
modernize data production and provision, updating it to account for the modern financial
landscape and redirecting some of its focus from the measurement of means to the measurement
of standard deviations – risks, and macroeconomic and systemic risks in particular.
        There are many potential benefits of more information. Market participants would be able
to allocate resources more efficiently across potential outcomes given better information on
exposures to aggregate risks in places in the household sector. Better measurement of the risk
exposure of consumer demand and claims on household resources also would allow the
government and the market to better predict consumption demand, and so better understand risks
given their observed prices.
        The second reason that the government has a role in monitoring household exposures is
that some households lack financial sophistication, due for example to lack of financial

                                                 20
knowledge, limited information processing abilities, and limited time allocated to financial
decisions. Thus, some households can make significant financial mistakes relative to the
decisions they would make if they had the ability and took the time to collect and process fully
all available information and knowledge. The provision of information about the holdings of
agents with different levels of sophistication can make behavior closer that of the full-
information or full-sophistication economy, which can increase the information content of prices,
and lead to better private decision making and better management of systematic exposures.
        When the mistakes of market participants are common, they can lead to noise or bias in
prices which other agents are using as sources of information for their choices, and may lead to
large a systemic exposure of both household demand and claims on households.19 In financial
markets, financial institutions that all expect to be able to sell the same assets or all draw on
credit but fail to recognize the extent to which other institutions have made the same plans create
a systematic risk. For households, this mis-estimation can create a similar dynamic or exposure.
In the recent crisis, households that had planned on using home equity to stabilize consumption
across bad shocks found that credit was available only at very high prices and that their collateral
values had declined further limiting the extent of borrowing.
        Further, when a sophisticated/informed investor observes a price, they must try to infer
the information in this price. This inference can involve estimating the shares of price movement
caused by agents with different levels of motivation and sophistication trading in the market.
And so the inference could be improved by information on these shares – whether observed
prices are due to the actions of other sophisticated/informed investors or instead the actions of
unsophisticated investors or ‘noise traders’ whose choices are not based on as much information
or are motivated by different concerns. For example, a large exposure among a group of
households that are (in some sense) making unsophisticated choices can distort prices and pass
systematic risk through the household sector into other parts of the economy through default on
claims on the household sector.
        Public provision of information about the sophistication of groups of agents who are
holding different assets can partly reveal how informative market prices are and again can lead to



19
  A typical argument is that agents do not make similar mistakes over many time periods, not that many agents do
not make similar mistakes at the same time.

                                                       21
better private sector decision making.20
         Finally, while it is efficient to have the downside economic risk held by those most
willing to hold it, it is generically inefficient to have it held by those least able to understand it or
who most underestimate it. Lack of sophistication can be exploited and there is always the risk
that this exploitation can cause systemic exposure.21 A signal of the size of systemic risk is its
price. And regulators interested in regulating systemic risks need to be able to observe clues as
to whether the risk is correctly priced and correctly placed.
         Thus, the LEADS data can be informative about whether downside economic risk is
being shifted to the unsophisticated part of the household sector, or passed through the
unsophisticated part of the household sector to other systemically important sectors. This
argument implies that data collection should support these types of inference and should be
designed to provide the information necessary for market participants and good regulatory
responses. There may be situations where aggregate risk can be reduced by some consumer
financial protection, where regulation of financial choices may avoid “unintentional” systemic
exposures.22 Even without government intervention, information on sophistication is likely to be
useful for targeting the provision of information about systemic exposures (or the provision of
the implications of analysis of systemic exposures), with the goal of allowing household and firm
choices that are more consistent with those that they would be made given complete information.




20
   This information would allow lenders to these households to observe their sophistication, which can be useful as a
signal of the quality of their financial decision making in other areas. Thus, an investor with insufficiently detailed
information (or sophistication) to evaluate the exposure of the household balance sheet might still learn from the
disclosed abilities of households that are holding certain assets.
21
   While not a group of households, one can make the argument that AIG financial products by mispricing credit
default swaps on mortgage backed securities lead market participants to underestimate the exposure of these assets
to aggregate risk and lead to its being held in systemically important places. Unsophisticated households could play
a similar role in the next crisis.
22
   The field of economics has a long history of taking individual choices as optimal and basing policy advice on
arguments that rely not on individual mistakes but on market failures due to externalities for example. Both of the
previous arguments -- that markets naturally produce too little information and so there is a government role in the
provision of information -- are in this spirit. However, the field tends to ignore the possibility that agents differ in
sophistication and sophisticated agents can regulate the behavior of the unsophisticated and improve welfare. The
general commitment to the sovereignty of the decision-maker is the real divide between behavioral economics and
the rest of the field. In cases where sophistication is about education and information, in theory, revealed-preference
tests and utility constructs could lead to welfare measures that proscribe such regulations as welfare improving in the
standard approach. Obviously, we are some distance from this point.


                                                          22
References

   Agarwal, Sumit, John Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson, 2009, “The Age of
      Reason: Financial Decisions over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation,”
      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. Fall, Pp. 51-117.

   Agarwal, Sumit, S. Chomsisengphet, C. Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2010, “Do Consumers
      Choose the Right Credit Contracts?” manuscript.

   Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy, 2003, “Wealth Accumulation and the
     Propensity to Plan,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 118, 1007—1047

   Bernanke, Ben, 2008, “Remarks on the economic outlook,” Speech at the International
      Monetary Conference, Barcelona, Spain (via satellite), June 3.

   Brunnermeier, Markus K., Gary Gorton, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2011, “Risk
      Topography,” manuscript.

   Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2009, "Measuring the Financial
      Sophistication of Households," American Economic Review, vol. 99(2), 393-98.

   Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2007, "Down or Out: Assessing the
      Welfare Costs of Household Investment Mistakes," Journal of Political Economy, 115(5),
      707-747, October.

   Carroll, Christopher D., 1997, “Buffer Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
      Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 1-56.

   Eggertsson and Krugman, 2010, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap” Manuscript,
      New York Federal Reserve Bank.

   Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole, “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch and
      Systemic Bailouts,” American Economic Review (forthcoming).

   Fisher, Irving, 1933, “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica, Vol.
       1, no. 4.

   Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan A. Parker, 2002, "Consumption Over the Life
      Cycle," Econometrica, Vol 70 No 1 (January), 47-89.

   Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Juhani Linnainmaa, 2010, “IQ and Stock Market
      Participation,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming

   Hall, Robert E., 1986, "The Role of Consumption in Economic Fluctuations" in Robert J.
      Gordon ed, The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, University of
      Chicago Press.


                                             23
Hall, Robert E., 2011, "The Long Slump" American Economic Review.

Hall, Robert E. (forthcoming), "Household Consumption and Debt Data." in Markus K.
   Brunnermeier and Arvind Krishnamurthy, eds, Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling,
   University of Chicago Press.

Kaplan, Greg, and Gianluca Violante. 2011, “A Model of the Consumption Response to
   Fiscal Stimulus Payments,” Penn Mauscript.

Krusell, Per and Anthony Smith, 1998, “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the
   Macroeconomy” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867-896.

Lusardi, Annamaria, “Americans’ Financial Capability” Testimony before the Financial
   Crisis Inquiry Commission, February 2010.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles of
   Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
   January 2007, vol. 54, pp. 205-224.

Melzer, Brian T., 2010, “Mortgage Debt Overhang: Reduced Investment by Homeowners
   with Negative Equity,” Manuscript, Kellogg School of Management, August.

Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, 2009, “National Financial Capability Study, 2009
   Questionnaire”
   http://www.finrafoundation.org/web/groups/foundation/@foundation/documents/foundati
   on/p120537.pdf

Parker, Jonathan A. and Annette Vissing Jorgensen, 2009, "Who Bears Aggregate
   Fluctuations and How?" with A. Vissing-Jorgensen American Economic Review, Vol 99
   No 2 (May), 399-405.

Parker, Jonathan A. and Annette Vissing Jorgensen, 2010, "The Increase in Income
   Cyclicality of High-Income Households and its Relation to the Rise in Top Income
   Shares", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 1-55.




                                          24
Table 1. An Overview of LEADS for Households

Data at the household level on:

Liabilites    Measure terms of each borrowing instrument and calculate exposure -- collateral
              information, commitment/term, interest rate determination, penalties, etc.

              Details almost completely lacking in current datasets

Assets        Details on each investment, including restricted accounts like retirement.
              Examples: name of hedge fund, actual security, house address, etc.

              Details almost completely lacking in current datasets

Earnings      Measure of current and past incomes at the household level as well as dynamics

               Current datasets strong (PSID, NLSY, CPS, ACS, IRS)

Demographics (age, family structure, geographic location, occupation, industry, etc.)
            For grouping households into groups to study exposure, for public data

              Details available not tied to data other than earnings and course measures of
              assets and liabilities

Financial Sophistication
              Measures of households expectations and subjective probabilities of different
              scenarios, and responses to tests of understanding of investment choices and
              consumption smoothing in the markets in which they are operating

              Completely lacking in current datasets




                                               25
