NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WRONGFUL DISCHARGE LAWS AND INNOVATION
Viral V. Acharya
Ramin P. Baghai
Krishnamurthy V. Subramanian
Working Paper 18516
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18516

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

We are grateful to Hanh Le and Ajay Yadav for excellent research assistance, to Jason Sturgess for
his kind help with the BEA data, Milo Bianchi (Third Paris Spring Corporate Finance Conference
discussant), Thomas Chemmanur, Gustavo Manso, and Amit Seru (EFIC Discussant) as well as seminar
and conference participants at the American Law and Economics Annual Meeting (2009), the Indian
School of Business, the Entrepreneurial Finance and Innovation Conference 2010 (EFIC), and the
Third Paris Spring Corporate Finance Conference 2011 for valuable comments and suggestions. We
would also like to thank Ashwini Agrawal and David Matsa for sharing with us their data on state
unemployment insurance benefits. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Viral V. Acharya, Ramin P. Baghai, and Krishnamurthy V. Subramanian. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Wrongful Discharge Laws and Innovation
Viral V. Acharya, Ramin P. Baghai, and Krishnamurthy V. Subramanian
NBER Working Paper No. 18516
November 2012
JEL No. G3,J5,J8,K31
ABSTRACT
We show that wrongful discharge laws – laws that protect employees against unjust dismissal – spur
innovation and new firm creation. Wrongful discharge laws, particularly those that prohibit employers
from acting in bad faith ex post, limit employers' ability to hold up innovating employees after the
innovation is successful. By reducing the possibility of hold-up, these laws enhance employees' innovative
efforts and encourage firms to invest in risky, but potentially mould-breaking, projects. We develop
a model and provide supporting empirical evidence of this effect using the staggered adoption of wrongful
discharge laws across the U.S. states.

Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Ramin P. Baghai
Stockholm School of Economics
ramin.baghai@hhs.se

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18516

Krishnamurthy V. Subramanian
Indian School of Business
Gachibowli
Hyderabad (A.P.)
India 500032
kvsubramania@gmail.com

1

Introduction
A recent strand of the literature emphasizes the critical role that laws and contracts play

in fostering innovation and economic growth. Manso (2011) shows that the optimal contract
to motivate innovation not only exhibits tolerance for short-term failure but also rewards
interim failure to create the incentives for successful innovation in the long-term; Ederer
and Manso (2010) find evidence supporting this thesis. Acharya and Subramanian (2009)
show that the ex-post inefficient continuations engendered by debtor-friendly bankruptcy
laws encourage ex-ante risk-taking and thereby promote firm-level innovation and countrylevel economic growth. In this overarching theme, we ask the following question: Can legal
protection against unjust dismissal from employment spur innovative effort by employees
and encourage firms to choose ex-ante risky yet value-enhancing innovative activities? We
develop a theoretical model to highlight that this may indeed be the case; furthermore, we
provide empirical evidence in support of the theory, in particular, that wrongful discharge
laws can be instrumental in advancing innovation and entrepreneurship.
As highlighted by the theory on property rights (Grossman and Hart, 1986; Hart and
Moore, 1990; and Hart, 1995), bilateral relationships suffer from hold-up problems when
contracts are incomplete. As the payoffs from a successful innovation are often large, innovative firms may armtwist employees that contributed considerable effort to a successful
innovation to appropriate a larger share of the ex-post surplus. A recent high-profile court
case filed against the video-game company Activision by its former employees highlights this
issue (see Section 2.1 for details).
When employment contracts are incomplete, wrongful discharge laws (hereafter WDL)
can help to limit such ability of the employer to hold up the innovating employee by imposing the burden of proof on the employer in the case of an alleged wrongful discharge. The
so-called “good-faith exception” to employment-at-will, which applies when a court determines that an employer discharged an employee in bad faith, can be effective in limiting an

1

employer’s capacity for holding up the innovating employee. Since “...the opportunity for
bad faith and the duty of good-faith are products of incomplete contracts” (Bagchi, 2003),
specifically, we assume in our model that an employer and an employee cannot commit to a
contract that prohibits either of them from acting in bad faith ex post. The likelihood of a
hold-up dampens the innovative effort by the employee. WDL – in particular the good-faith
exception – can thus enhance the employee’s innovative effort by reducing the possibility of
such hold-up and may therefore cause innovation to be quite valuable to firms. Furthermore,
this effect is likely to be disproportionately more pronounced in innovative industries when
compared to the “brick-and-mortar” ones.
To provide empirical evidence supporting these hypotheses, we exploit the natural experiment created by the passage of WDL by several U.S. states since the 1970s. States
adopted these laws in the form of common law exceptions to the employment-at-will doctrine. This setting is highly appealing from an empirical standpoint for two reasons. First,
the motivation behind the passage of these laws centered around state courts’ determination
to assure legally binding policy principles, address the changing nature of labor relations,
and assure the consistency with contract principles (see Walsh and Schwarz, 1996). Fortuitously, as these laws were not passed with the intention of promoting either innovation or
entrepreneurship, potential effects on our outcomes of interest are likely to be an unintended
consequence of the passage of these laws. Second, the staggered adoption of these laws across
U.S. states enables us to identify their effect in a difference-in-difference setup.1
To develop proxies for innovation, we use data on patents issued to U.S. firms by the
United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) and link these data to Compustat.
Apart from a simple count of patents, we use citations to patents to capture the economic
importance of innovations. To estimate the difference-in-difference, we compare changes in
innovation in states that passed such laws to the changes in states that did not. Our panel
1

Cross-country studies (e.g., Botero et al., 2004) cannot easily control for time-varying country-level
unobservables while U.S. studies investigating the impact of federal labor law encounter difficulties in disentangling the effect of the federal statute from contemporaneous changes in other relevant variables (see
Donohue and Heckman, 1991; Donohue, 1998; Autor et al., 2006).

2

regressions include the following controls for confounding factors. First, we include firm and
year fixed effects to capture invariant firm-level unobserved factors as well as secular trends
in innovation. Second, we include firm-level characteristics (Tobin’s Q, firm size, R&D) as
well as state and industry-level factors (competition, industry-level ratio of value added, real
state GDP, population, number of colleges, college enrollment, and unemployment benefits)
to account for time-varying firm, state and industry level omitted variables. Third, we follow
Autor et al. (2006) in adding interactions between the year dummies and indicators for the
four census tract regions, which enable us to account for any confounding linear and/or
non-linear regional trends in innovation. We find that the passage of WDL leads to more
innovation, with the good-faith exception having the strongest positive effect. Economically,
the adoption of the good-faith exception results in a rise in the annual number of patents
and citations by 12.2% and 18.8% respectively.
Our theoretical model predicts that the increase in innovation due to the passage of
WDL stems from increased employee effort in innovative projects. To provide evidence of
this channel, we repeat our tests with a modified set of dependent variables that measure
employee effort: patents and citations scaled by the number of employees and by R&D
expenditure. The findings for these dependent variables are in line with the previous results.
We also show that the impact of the good-faith exception is positive and significant only in
high innovation-intensive industries, while the effect is insignificant in industries that have
a lower propensity to innovate.
WDL are part of “common law” that evolved through seminal court decisions, which
were unlikely to be determined by aggregate trends in innovation. Nevertheless, to alleviate
any concerns about omitted variable bias and reverse causality, first, we examine potential
determinants of the timing of the passage of the good-faith exception and find that preexisting patterns of innovation are uncorrelated with the same. Second, in our tests of
the effect of WDL on innovation, we control for economic growth as well as the political
leanings of state governments and find that our results are unchanged. Third, we examine

3

the dynamic effect of the passage of the good-faith exception on innovation as in Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2003). While there is no effect on innovation prior to the passage of
the good-faith exception, we find that the effect starts manifesting two years after the law
passage, consistent with the long-run nature of innovation.
We then entertain alternative interpretations of our results. First, during our sample
period, California (CA) and Massachusetts (MA) provided particularly strong protection to
employees against dismissal and accounted for about 20% of U.S. patents filed. Furthermore, it is possible that firms may have specifically re-located to these two states to avail
the benefits of strong employment protection on firm-level innovation. However, excluding
observations from the states of CA and MA leads to similar results as with the full sample.
Second, our findings could be a manifestation of firms shifting to labor-saving technologies
rather than the result of stronger incentives provided for innovation. Shifting to labor-saving
technologies would lead to an observable increase in Research and Development (R&D) investment. However, we do not find a significant impact of any WDL on firm investment of
that type. Finally, it is also possible that the creation of the U.S. Court of Appeals of the
Federal Circuit in 1982, which is often credited with at least partially causing a surge in
U.S. patenting, is driving our results. We split the sample into two separate time periods
– before 1982 and thereafter – and find that our results are similar in either sub-sample,
thereby ruling out this possibility.
An important residual concern relates to the effect of legal restrictions on the mobility of
human capital. Fulghieri and Sevilir (2011) argue in a theoretical model that such restrictions
(through the strict enforcement of non-compete agreements) have a negative impact on
employee effort to innovate. If states that passed WDL are also less likely to enforce noncompete agreements, then our above results may be spurious. To distinguish the effect of
WDL from the effect of legal restrictions on mobility of human capital, we extend our basic
model to consider the possibility of employee effort generating both firm-specific and generic

4

innovations.2 In this extension to the basic model, we show that while WDL encourage
innovation by limiting the firm’s ability to hold up the employee when the innovation is
a firm-specific one, legal restrictions on the mobility of human capital limit the employee’s
ability to hold up the firm when the innovation is generic. Thus, if innovations are either firmspecific or generic, then the marginal effects of WDL and legal restrictions on the mobility
of human capital work independent of each other. We confirm that this prediction holds in
our empirical tests as well.
In the extended model, we also show that WDL increase creation of new firms by increasing employee effort in innovation (thereby also raising the likelihood of generic innovations
that are optimally implemented by new firms). Since new firms need employees, WDL may
also lead to greater employment creation. Using novel data from the Business Dynamics
Statistics database, we investigate the effect of the passage of WDL on the creation of new
firms as well as concomitant effects on job creation. Employing specifications that are similar
to those in our tests of innovation, we find that states that adopt the good-faith exception
experience a 12.4% increase in new establishments due to start-up firms and a 8.4% increase
in job creation by such establishments.
Taken together, these tests enable us to conclude that innovation and firm creation are
indeed fostered by laws that limit firms’ ability to ex post discharge their employees at
will. Thus, we surmise that employment protection laws present a trade-off: while they
may cause ex-post inefficiencies in the labor market (Lazear, 1990, Ljungqvist and Sargent,
1998, Botero et al., 2004), they can have positive ex-ante effects by fostering innovation
and entrepreneurship. As a large influential literature on endogenous growth (see Aghion
and Howitt, 2006) argues that innovation and entrepreneurship contribute significantly to a
country’s economic growth and development, our study points out the need to factor in these
incentive effects in any analysis of the net welfare implications of employment protection laws.
2

As illustrated by the celebrated start-ups Adobe and 3Com spun out of the research efforts at Xerox’s
Palo Alto Research Center, innovative effort by employees can indeed lead to firm-specific as well as generic
innovations that are optimally developed inside and outside existing firms respectively.

5

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information
on WDL and describes a case study to motivate the theoretical model. Section 3 presents the
basic model which considers the possibility of the employer holding up the employee. Section
4 documents empirically the effect of WDL on innovation. In Section 5, we extend the basic
model to incorporate the possibility of the employee holding up the employer. We show
theoretically and empirically that the results in Section 4 are robust to controlling for the
effect of laws governing mobility of human capital; we also derive empirical implications
for the creation of new firms. Section 6 presents the results on the effect of WDL on
entrepreneurship. In Section 7, we discuss related literature. Section 8 concludes.

2

Wrongful Discharge Laws
Since the 1970s, the vast majority of U.S. states have adopted common law exceptions

to the employment-at-will doctrine. These so-called “wrongful discharge laws” are part
of the common law, i.e., law created by court decisions (in this case, state courts). The
legal profession distinguishes three distinct WDL: the public-policy exception, the good-faith
exception, and the implied-contract exception. In a given state, courts recognize anywhere
from zero to all three of these exceptions. We refer the reader to Dertouzos and Karoly
(1992), Aalberts and Seidman (1993), Walsh and Schwarz (1996), Abraham (1998), Miles
(2000), Kugler and Saint-Paul (2004), Autor et al. (2006), and MacLeod and Nakavachara
(2007) for a detailed discussion.
The public-policy exception. This WDL assures that an employer cannot discharge an
employee for declining to violate lawful public policy, taking actions that are in the public’s
interest, or refusing to commit an illegal act. By 1999, 43 U.S. states recognized this WDL.
The implied-contract exception. This WDL is applied in situations where the employer
implicitly indicates that termination shall only occur due to just cause. Although 41 states
recognized the implied-contract exception by 1999, legal scholars claim that this exception
offers limited leverage in reducing employers’ ability to unilaterally decide the fate of an
6

employment relationship.
The good-faith exception. The good-faith exception applies in situations where a court
determines that an employer discharged an employee for “bad cause”. Importantly, unjust
dismissal can arise even when no implied contract exists between the employer and the
employee (for example, even if no indication had been made that the employment contract
was long-term). Many legal scholars deem the good-faith exception to be the most farreaching WDL (see Kugler and Saint-Paul, 2004). Due to the applicability of tort law –
which entails damages to punish the defendant and thereby deter future wrongdoing – the
good-faith exception is a potentially very costly one for employers. Between 1970 and 1999,
the good-faith exception was adopted in 13 states (Autor et al., 2006).3
Figures 1 and 2 show the adoption of all three WDL in U.S. states from 1970–1999.
Evidence on the costs of wrongful discharge trials. Dertouzos et al. (1988) examine
WDL trials in CA from 1980 to 1986. Plaintiffs win in 68% of the trials and on average
are awarded $650,000, of which about 40% constitute punitive damages. These amounts are
significant since the annual average salary of a plaintiff in their sample amounts to $36,254.
Jung (1997) studies WDL jury verdicts in CA and Texas between 1992 and 1996. In CA,
plaintiffs prevail in 54% of the cases brought to trial. Average compensatory damages equal
approximately $449,000, while average punitive damages are about $675,000. Such awards
were not exclusive to CA (see Edelman et al., 1992; Abraham 1998). Overall, the evidence
indicates that WDL trials, especially when punitive damages are applied, can be costly for
employers.

2.1

Wrongful Discharge in Innovative Industries: A Case Study

On the 3rd of March 2010, the attorney firm O’Melveny & Myers LLP filed a lawsuit
against Activision Publishing, Inc. in the Los Angeles County Superior Court, on behalf
3

These states were: Alaska (adopted in 1983), Arizona (1985), California (1980), Connecticut (1980),
Delaware (1992), Idaho (1989), Louisiana (1998), Massachusetts (1977), Montana (1982), New Hampshire
(adopted in 1974, repealed in 1980), Nevada (adopted in 1987), Oklahoma (adopted in 1985, repealed in
1989), Wyoming (adopted in 1994).

7

of video game developers Jason West and Vince Zampella (“WZ”), who were in charge of
Activision’s Infinity Ward (“IW”) subsidiary.4 The lawsuit alleges “wrongful discharge and
breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing”:5
“(The plaintiffs) are among the most talented and successful videogame developers in the world. They created for Activision two videogame franchises,
Call Of Duty and Modern Warfare, that became the most successful in the company’s – indeed, the industry’s – history, lining Activision’s pockets with billions
of dollars in revenue and creating a die-hard fan base in the millions. In November 2009, after over two years of nearly ’round-the-clock work, Messrs. West
and Zampella, and the rest of the Infinity Ward Studio delivered to Activision
Modern Warfare 2 – a video game that has already been responsible for over $1
billion in sales and was recently hailed by Activision itself as the largest launch of
any entertainment product ever. Just weeks before Messrs. West and Zampella
were to receive the royalties for their hard work on Modern Warfare 2, Activision
fired them in the hope that by doing so, it could avoid paying them what they
had rightfully earned,...”
On the other hand, Activision alleged in the counter-suit filed on the 9th of April 2010 that
WZ attempted to “steal” IW, “hold hostage” Modern Warfare 2, “delayed pre-production”
on Modern Warfare 3, and deliberately withheld royalty cheques from IW employees, in
addition to embezzling a significant fraction of the royalties. Activision maintains that WZ
are guilty of the following: (1) threatening to bring production of Modern Warfare 2 to a
stop in order to extort more control over the Call Of Duty franchise and the IW studio from
Activision; (2) engaging in discussions with Activision’s closest competitor and discussing
their plans with employees to persuade them to leave Activision and join them.
4

For further details about the case, we refer the reader to a news article published at
http://ve3d.ign.com/articles/news/54192/Activision-Counter-Sues-Fired-Infinity-Ward-Founders-SuitScanned-Broken-Down-Transcribed
5
This quote is taken from the original text of the complaint filed by West and Zampella in 2010 against
Activision in the Superior Court of the State of California (County of Los Angeles).

8

Two observations from the above case are pertinent as they play a crucial role in the
theoretical model below. First, the hold-up claims made by WZ relate to the breach of the
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Second, the claims made by both sides
suggest ways in which one party can hold up the other after effort has been exerted and the
project (or innovation) has proven successful. After the success of the project, the employer
can threaten to fire the employee in an attempt to reduce the employee’s bargaining power.
Furthermore, innovating employees may adopt tactics to retain bargaining power vis-a-vis
the employer, which may, in turn, prompt the employer to replace existing employees with
new ones who would possess little bargaining power. These observations, as we will see later,
will play an important role in both the theoretical model, as well as our empirical tests.

3

Theoretical Motivation
We develop a model in which a firm (F ) chooses between two projects that differ in their

degree of innovation. We denote the “routine” project by R and the “innovative” project
by I. The firm employs an employee (E ) who works on the project chosen by the firm.
Figure 3 shows the timing and sequence of events. There are three cash flow dates,
t = 0, 1, 2. At date 0, the firm recruits an employee and chooses to invest in either the
innovative or the routine project. The projects require the same initial investment and
generate cash-flows at date 2. At date 1, the employee exerts firm-specific effort ej ∈ [0, 1] ,
which affects the project outcome. We assume the effort to be observable but not verifiable.
The employee incurs a personal cost, which we assume to be

e2j
.
2

At date 1.5, i.e., before

the actual cash-flows accrue at date 2, all agents learn whether the project chosen at date 0
produced an innovation or not. If the employee chooses effort ej in project j then the project
generates a successful, firm-specific innovation with probability ej .
As in Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990) and Hart (1995), we assume
that E and F cannot write complete contracts ex ante (i.e., at date 0). As a result, at date
1.5, i.e., after E has made the firm-specific effort and the project’s outcome is known, E is

9

exposed to the possibility of hold-up by F . F could threaten to fire E and proceed with the
project by employing an alternative employee E 0 who has limited bargaining power vis-a-vis
F . We model the bargaining process between E and F as the 50 : 50 Nash Bargaining
solution with outside options.
To derive the outside options endogenously, we model the following extensive-form game
between E and F . After knowing whether the innovation was successful or not, F decides
whether to retain E or fire him. If F fires E, then E sues F for “wrongful discharge.” If
F fires E after the project is known to be successful, then E can claim in court that F ’s
action violates the “covenant of good faith and fair dealing” in an employment relationship
since E is deprived from sharing the surplus that she helped create through a successful
innovation. Even if the project fails, E may still be able to claim in court that the project
failed despite her best efforts and therefore F ’s action still violates the “covenant of good
faith and fair dealing” in an employment relationship. So, we assume that E sues F for
“wrongful discharge” even when the project fails and sues F fires E.6
WDL require the firm to prove in a court of law that the dismissal was not “unjust”,
which it may or may not be able to prove. Note that WDL do not make firing a worker
impossible; rather, they require the firm to ex post justify the dismissal in a court of law.
This facet of WDL is captured by assuming that E wins the WDL suit with probability µ;
the more stringent the WDL, the greater the difficulty faced by the firm in justifying that
the dismissal was not unjust, which corresponds to a higher probability of E winning the
lawsuit (i.e., µ is greater). ‘Employment-at-will’ nests as a special case since the firm does
not have to justify its dismissal as “just” in a court of law and therefore does not have to
pay a penalty, which corresponds to µ = 0 in the model.
If E wins the lawsuit, the court orders the firm to pay a penalty to the wrongfully
dismissed employee.7 Since F ’s action to fire E deprives E of her deserved share of the surplus
of the project and the surplus is greater when the project succeeds than when the project
6
7

We would like to thank an anonymous referee for pointing out this facet.
As evidence of such penalties, see Section 2.

10

fails, it is likely that the penalties are greater when the firm fires after the project succeeds
than when the firm fires after the project fails. Therefore, we assume that the penalties are
proportional to the project’s payoff. Specifically, the penalty equals c (0 < c < 1) times the
payoff of the project.
At date 2, cash-flows are realized and allocated based on bargaining outcomes at date 1.5.
For project j, j ∈ {I, R} , the project cash-flow equals αj if the project yields a successful
innovation, and βj ≤ αj if the project fails to generate an innovation, where:

βj ≤ αj < 1

(1)

Since the employee makes a firm-specific effort, the innovation generated is a specific one.
In other words, the cash-flows generated by E and F working together to implement the
innovation are significantly greater than the cash-flows generated when F implements the
innovation with another employee E 0 , in which case the cash-flows equal bαj (0 < b < 1)
if the project succeeds and bβj if the project fails. Since the innovation is firm-specific, E
cannot implement it without F . Furthermore, we assume the labor market to be competitive
with employees earning their reservation utility in equilibrium, which we normalize to zero.
Finally, the common discount rate equals zero.

3.1

Incompleteness of contracts

We assume that project cash-flows and the employee’s effort are observable but not verifiable ex ante. The non-verifiability of the employee’s effort as well as that of the cash-flows
stems from the fact that the contract at date 0 cannot specify in detail all the different
contingencies that may arise—a situation that Tirole (1999) labels “indescribable contingencies.” This assumption is natural to settings involving innovation (e.g., Aghion and Tirole,
1994) because it involves considerable exploration (see Manso, 2011). Given these “unknown
unknowns” involved in innovative endeavors, it is unlikely that the firm and the employee
will be able to contract upon the specific details of either the employee’s effort or the nature
11

of the signal. Furthermore, given such uncertainty, at date 0, the two parties cannot commit to a contract that would not be renegotiated at date 1.5. As Tirole (1999) points out,
indescribability results in contracts being incomplete when renegotiation is possible.
Specifically, we assume that E and F cannot write down a “good faith” clause that
prohibits either of them from acting in bad faith ex post. The duty of good faith is a
background condition imposed on all contracts that limits the negative effects of unequal
bargaining power. However, its enforcement is particularly challenging in the context of
most employment relationships since the employer typically has disproportionate bargaining
power. In fact, as Bagchi (2003) avers: “The opportunity for bad faith and the duty of good
faith go together. There is no need to impose a legal duty of good faith where there is no
opportunity for bad faith.” Therefore, it is natural to assume that an iron clad “good faith”
clause cannot be written ex ante and enforced ex post.

3.2

Innovative vs. Routine Project

Routine projects face risks mainly due to uncertainty in market demand and competition. In contrast, innovative projects entail additional risks associated with the process of
exploration and discovery. Therefore, in our model, the key difference between these projects
is that the innovative project is riskier than the routine one. We capture this difference as:

βR = R − 0.5a, αR = R + 0.5a

(2)

βI = a, αI = A

(3)

0 < a < 1.5a < R < A − 0.5a

(4)

Finally, we impose the limited liability condition that the penalty a firm has to pay for
wrongful discharge is bounded by the firm’s cash flows. The cash flows from the project
when F has fired E and produces with E 0 equal bαj if the project succeeds and bβj if the

12

project fails. Therefore the limited liability condition implies that:

c≤b

(5)

We discuss this assumption in section 3.5 below.

3.3

Analysis

First, consider the game that results if the firm chooses the innovative project I. We
solve this game by backward induction. Consider first the extensive form game played at
date 1.5. Let us denote E’s and F ’s expected payoffs at date 1.5 as U and V respectively.
If the project generates a successful innovation and F fires E, E sues F for wrongful
discharge. If E wins, the court orders F to pay damages equal to cA. Since F produces with
E 0 after dismissing E, the aggregate cash-flows from implementing the innovation equal bA.
As the labor market is competitive, F has all the bargaining power with E 0 and gets the
entire payoff bA in its bargaining with E 0 . However, F has to pay E penalties equal to cA.
Therefore, F ’s payoff equals (b − c) A while E’s payoff equals cA.
If E loses the lawsuit, then E’s and F ’s payoffs are respectively 0 and bA. Thus, E’s
and F ’s expected payoffs if F fires E after a successful innovation equal µcA and (b − µc) A
respectively. These are the values of E’s and F ’s outside options when they bargain with
each other if the innovation is successful and F decides to retain E. Since the total cashflows when F retains E equal A, 50 : 50 Nash bargaining yields the payoffs for E and F as
U = [0.5(1 − b) + µc] A and V = [0.5(1 − b) − µc] A respectively. In equilibrium, F retains
E since F ’s payoffs are greater in this case than when F fires E.
If the project does not generate a successful innovation, then the payoff from the project
equals a. following steps identical to those in the case of project success, we obtain payoffs
for E and F as U = [0.5(1 − b) + µc] a and V = [0.5(1 − b) − µc] a respectively. Again, in
equilibrium, F retains E since F ’s payoffs are greater in this case than when F fires E.

13

Since the probability of a successful innovation is eI , E’s expected payoff at date 1 is:
U (eI ) = eI · [0.5(1 − b) + µc] A + (1 − eI ) · [0.5(1 − b) + µc] a − 0.5e2I

(6)

where [0.5(1 − b) + µc] A denote E’s payoff when the innovation is successful and [0.5(1 − b) + µc] a
denote E’s payoff when the innovation fails, eI equals the probability of the project being
successful and 0.5e2I equals E’s private cost of effort. Thus, the equilibrium level of effort,
which is chosen by E to maximize U (eI ) , is:
e∗I = [0.5(1 − b) + µc] (A − a)

(7)

To highlight the effect of contractual incompleteness, consider the first-best benchmark scenario when complete contracts can be written between E and F so that F can incentivize
E to choose effort to maximize the total surplus generated from the project I:



eFI B = arg max eI · A + (1 − eI ) · a − 0.5e2I = A − a

(8)

eI

The game for the routine project is solved in an identical manner, which yields

e∗R = [0.5(1 − b) + µc] a; eFRB = a

3.4

(9)

Results

Proposition 1 The equilibrium level of effort exerted by an employee when contracts are
incomplete is lower than that in the first-best benchmark case when contracts are complete:

e∗j < eFj B ∀j = I, R

(10)

When contracts are incomplete, the employer cannot commit to not hold up the employee

14

after finding out that the innovation is successful. Since increased innovative effort by the
employee increases the likelihood of successful innovation, the likelihood of hold-up by the
employer decreases the employee’s effort in the innovative project.
Proposition 2 As WDL become more stringent, the effort exerted by an employee increases,
which brings his effort closer to the first-best level.
deFj B
de∗j
>
= 0 ∀j = I, R
dµ
dµ

(11)

As WDL become more stringent, the employee has a greater defense against hold-up
by the employer, which increases the outside option and thereby increases his share of the
surplus generated when the project is successful. Therefore, more stringent WDL increase
the employee’s effort when contracts are incomplete.
Proposition 3 An increase in the stringency of WDL disproportionately increases the employee’s effort in the innovative project relative to the increase in the routine project:
de∗I
de∗R
>
dµ
dµ

(12)

Intuitively, the result follows using the following steps. First, since the expected payoff
from the innovative project is greater than that from the routine project, the temptation for
the firm to hold up the employee is greater with the innovative project. Note that this effect
stems from the incompleteness of contracts and does not depend on the legal environment.
Second, irrespective of the nature of the project, WDL reduces the firm’s ability to hold up
the employee by allowing the employee to take the firm to court in the case of a wrongful
discharge. Putting these two facts together implies that WDL is disproportionately more
effective in reducing hold up in innovative projects than in routine projects. Since reduced
hold up in alleviates the underinvestment problem, an increase in the stringency of WDL
disproportionately increases the employee’s effort in the innovative project relative to the
15

increase in the routine project.
Since the labor market is competitive, employees earn their reservation wage in equilibrium. Therefore, the firm chooses between innovative and routine project at date 0 depending
on which one produces a greater joint payoff, which we denote by Wj , where j{I, R}.8 Then,
Propositions 4 and 5 summarize the effect of WDL on the ex-ante expected surplus from
pursuing an innovative project versus that from pursuing a routine project.
Proposition 4 An increase in the stringency of WDL increases the value of the innovative
project disproportionately more than the value of the routine project.
∗

∗

dW R
dW I
>
dµ
dµ

(13)

Proposition 5 Given the parametric restriction that the payoff from the routine project is
not very low, there exists a µ
b ∈ (0, 1) such that the value from the routine project is higher
than the value from the innovative project when WDL are not stringent; the reverse is true
when WDL are stringent
∗

∗

∗

∗

µ≤µ
b ⇒ W I (µ) ≤ W R (µ)
µ>µ
b ⇒ W I (µ) > W R (µ)

(14)
(15)

The intuition for both the above propositions follows directly from Proposition 3. As
WDL become more stringent, the underinvestment in effort becomes disproportionately lower
for the innovative project than for the routine project. Therefore, the ex-ante expected
surplus from undertaking an innovative project increases disproportionately more than that
from undertaking a routine project, which explains the fact that innovation becomes the more
attractive choice for the firm when WDL are more stringent. Thus, the increased employee
effort in innovation generated by WDL translates into a positive effect on the expected firm
value from innovation as well.
8

Lemma 1 in the Appendix formalizes this observation.

16

Note that this positive effect of WDL on innovation does not require WDL to apply in a
state-contingent manner, i.e. WDL having bite when the project succeeds but not when the
project fails. The intuition for this is similar to that obtained from Proposition 3. Since the
payoff from successful innovation is significantly larger than that from a failed innovation,
the temptation for the firm to hold up the employee is greater when the innovation succeeds
than when it fails. As a result, WDL is disproportionately more effective in reducing hold
up and thereby alleviating underinvestment when the project succeeds than when it fails.

3.5

Discussion

A key driving assumption of our model is lack of complete contracts between the firm
and the employee. A natural question arises: Could parties commit to contractual features
in the employment contract, such as generous severance packages, to avoid inefficiencies
stemming from contractual incompleteness? Note that given indescribability and renegotiation, revenue-sharing rules contracted at date 0, incentive contracts that specify severance
payments at date 2, contracts that explicitly specify performance at date 2, or mechanisms
that involve messaging between the two parties or to third parties, cannot fully address
the incentive problem that is analyzed in this paper (see Hart, 1995, for details).9 As Hart
(1995) explains, any ex-ante contractual features cannot lead to credible commitment against
hold-up in a setting such as ours. Given the ex-ante uncertainty associated with innovation,
ex-post efficient renegotiation cannot be ruled out, which destroys the credibility of any
ex-ante commitment through such contractual features.
Empirical evidence also indicates that for employees that do not constitute senior management in a firm, such severance packages are quite uncommon. Narayanan and Sundaram
(1998) examined a sample of Fortune 1000 and S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1980–1994.
They find that while 55% of the firms had a “golden parachute” agreement with top man9

For instance, while pre-committed severance packages may be written upfront to address the hold-up
problem, they would in general be “incomplete” given the indescribability of all ex-post outcomes in such
contracts. In other words, the extent of commitment the firm provides by agreeing to incur the cost of
severance packages would be insufficient in some states of the world to avoid the hold-up problem.

17

agement, only 7% of the firms had “tin parachutes”, i.e., severance agreements for employees
who are not officers of the company. Furthermore, they found that such “tin parachutes”
are limited to change-of-control events such as a merger or acquisition. In the context of
innovative firms, this rarity of severance payments in employment contracts of employees
below the level of senior management is consistent with the argument in Manso (2011), who
shows that even when complete contracts can be written, the firm may find it prohibitively
costly ex ante to commit to not fire its employees ex post.
The second material assumption we make is that given limited liability, the firm cannot
pay damages greater than the project’s payoff after the firm fires the employee and loses
the WDL lawsuit (c ≤ b) . Thus, we assume that the feasible range of WDL penalties satisfy
limited liability constraints. Note that the positive effect of WDL on innovation would be
obtained for an even larger range of WDL penalties, specifically for c ≤ 0.5 (1 + b) .10 In
fact, for c ≤ 0.5 (1 + b) , the value of the innovative project increases disproportionately
more than the value of the routine project with: (i) an increase in the stringency of WDL,
i.e. an increase in µ; and (ii) an increase in WDL penalty c. However, for c > 0.5 (1 + b) ,
the value of the innovative project decreases disproportionately more than the value of the
routine project with: (i) an increase in the stringency of WDL, i.e. an increase in µ; and
(ii) an increase in WDL penalty c. Ultimately, which of these WDL regimes—reasonable
[c ≤ 0.5 (1 + b)] or very high [c > 0.5 (1 + b)]—holds is an empirical question that can be
examined by investigating empirically the effect of WDL on innovation.

4

Wrongful Discharge Laws and Innovation
In this section, we empirically examine the effect of WDL on firm-level innovation. Propo-

sitions 3, 4 and 5 respectively lead to the following testable hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1: Passage of WDL – particularly that of the good-faith exception – leads to
greater innovation.
10

Since 0 < b < 1, b < 0.5 (1 + b) .

18

Hypothesis 2: Passage of WDL – particularly that of the good-faith exception – leads to a
larger increase in employee effort in innovative projects compared to more routine projects.
Hypothesis 3: Passage of WDL – particularly that of the good-faith exception – leads to
relatively more innovative effort by employees as well as relatively more innovation in the
innovation-intensive industries than in the traditional industries.
Next, we test these hypotheses by employing proxies for innovation.

4.1

Data and Main Proxies

We now describe the data, our proxies for innovation and the changes in WDL.
4.1.1

Proxies for Innovation

To construct proxies for innovation, we use patents filed with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) and citations to these patents, compiled in the NBER Patents File
(Hall et al., 2001). The NBER patent dataset provides among other items: annual information on patent assignee names, number of patents, number of citations received by each
patent, technology class of the patent, and year that the patent application is filed. In this
study we focus on patents filed by U.S. firms. To link the patent data with Compustat,
we exploit the fact that each assignee in the NBER patent dataset is given a unique and
time-invariant identifier. After matching these assignee names to the names of divisions and
subsidiaries belonging to a corporate family from the Directory of Corporate Affiliations, we
match the name of the corporate parent to Compustat.
We use two different proxies for innovation. First, we count the annual number of patents
filed by a firm. Second, we measure the number of subsequent citations to a firm’s patents
that have accumulated until a given year. Citations capture the importance and drastic
nature of innovation. This proxy is motivated by the recognition that a simple count of
patents does not distinguish breakthrough innovations from less significant or incremental
technological discoveries.11 Intuitively, if firms are willing to further invest in a project that
11

Pakes and Shankerman (1984) show that the distribution of the importance of patents is extremely

19

builds upon a prior patent, the cited patent has been influential and economically significant.
We follow the patent literature in dating our patents according to the year in which
they were applied for. This avoids anomalies that may be created due to the lag between
the date of application and the date of granting of the patent (Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg,
2001). Note that although we use the application year as the relevant year for our analysis,
the patents appear in the database only after they are granted. Hence, we use the patents
actually granted (rather than patent applications) for our analysis.
To examine Hypothesis 1, we use patents and citations as aggregate measures of innovation. To test Hypotheses 2 and 3, we employ patents and citations per employee and per
dollar of R&D by complementing NBER patent data with data from Compustat.
4.1.2

Wrongful Discharge Laws

Following the recent literature, we use Autor et al.’s (2006) coding of the passage of WDL.
This coding is particularly appealing as it attributes a law change to the year in which a
precedent-setting court decision occurs, which ensures that unexpected changes in the law
are employed to assess its effect on outcome variables. As the reason for the adoption of
the WDL was unrelated to our outcome variables of interest, employing these unexpected
changes alleviates any residual concerns about the endogeneity of these law passages. We
link the WDL data to our NBER-Compustat data using the variable ‘postate’ in the NBER
dataset, which lists the state in which the patent was filed.
We follow the previous literature in including separate indices for each WDL in our
regressions. Specifically, the variable GFst takes the value of one if a given state s has a
good-faith exception in place in year t, zero otherwise; the other two WDL indices (ICst and
P Pst ) are defined analogously. As seen in Figures 1 and 2, the three WDL indices exhibit
substantial cross-sectional as well as time-series variation, which enables our identification.
skewed, i.e., most of the value is concentrated in a small number of patents. Hall et al. (2005), among
others, demonstrate that patent citations are a good measure of the value of innovations.

20

4.1.3

Summary Statistics

Panel A of Table 1 lists the mean, median, standard deviation, and data sources for the
variables used in our tests on innovation. Our sample encompasses the years 1971–1999,
which is the time-span for which the Autor et al. (2006) coding of the WDL is available and
we can match Compustat firms to NBER patent assignees. Also, though the NBER patent
data is in principle available until 2002, the data beyond 1999 suffer from severe truncation
problems, particularly in the case of patent citations. Therefore, we end our sample in 1999.
Our sample includes 5,698 firms that can be merged from the NBER patent data file
to Compustat, which corresponds to about one-third of the relevant NBER data consisting
of patent assignees located in the U.S. Since the NBER data also includes patents assigned
to privately held firms while Compustat focuses on publicly listed firms, this reduction in
the sample size is expected. While our dataset without any control variables has 104,504
firm-year observations, this sample reduces to 48,433 observations for which we have data on
all our control variables.12 Since we use the log transformation, we have fewer observations
when using citations as the dependent variable due to patents with zero citations. Although
our results are unchanged when we use log of (1 + citations), we use log of (citations) to
be consistent with the other dependent variables, namely log of (citations/R&D) and log
of (citations/employees). When using these latter two dependent variables, the number of
observations is slightly reduced due to missing values for R&D and number of employees.

4.2

Empirical Strategy

We investigate whether the passage of WDL in the U.S. led to greater innovation. Figure
4 depicts the effect of the passage of the good-faith exception on innovation in adopting states
relative to non-adopting states. On the y-axis, the graph shows the logarithm of the number
12

The NCA enforcement score, as well as the Ratio of Value Added are only available from 1976 and
1977 onwards, respectively. The point estimates and significance of the main explanatory variables vary
slightly across specifications with and without control variables. As we show in Appendix Table A1 and the
corresponding discussion, these differences are due to the impact of the control variables rather than the
change in sample size.

21

of citations received to patents filed in a given year; the x-axis shows the time relative to
the year of adoption of the good-faith exception (ranging from five years prior to adoption
until ten years after). The two dashed lines in the figure correspond to the 90% confidence
intervals of the coefficient estimates.13 This figure clearly illustrates that innovation increases
after the passage of the good-faith exception. Consistent with the notion that innovation
practices in firms take some time to change, the increase in innovation particularly manifests
several years after adoption of this WDL, with a persistent long-run effect.
U.S. state courts adopted the three different WDL in different states and years during
the sample period. Thus, we can examine the before-after effect of a change in WDL in
affected states (the “treatment group”) vis-à-vis the before-after effect in states where such
a change was not effected (the “control group”). This is a difference-in-difference test design
in a multiple treatment groups, multiple time periods setting as employed by Bertrand,
Duflo and Mullainathan (2004) and Imbens and Wooldridge (2009). We implement this test
through the following panel regression:

yi,s→r,t = βi + βt + βr × βt + β1 GFst + β2 P Pst + β3 ICst + βXist + εist

(16)

where yi,s→r,t measures innovation by firm i in state s (of U.S. census region r)14 in year
t.15 βi and βt denote respectively firm and application year fixed effects. The application
year fixed effects enable us to control for inter-temporal technological shocks as well as the
13

We broadly follow Autor, Donohue, and Schwab (2006) in constructing this graph. The graph plots
the point estimates and 90% confidence intervals (based on standard errors which are clustered by state of
location of the patent assignee) of the parameters βτ from the following regression:
P10
yist = βt + τ =−10 βτ ∗ Good F aithτst + εist
where yist is the log of the number of citations (+1) received for patents applied for in year t by patent
assignee i in state s. Good F aithτst is a variable indicating the year relative to the adoption of a good-faith
exception in state s and year t. For example, Good F aith0st is a variable taking the value of one in the year
of adoption of the good-faith clause in state s and year t, zero otherwise; Good F aith6st is a variable taking
the value of one in the sixth year after adoption of the good-faith clause in state s and year t, zero otherwise.
βt is a set of year dummies. The time span underlying the regressions is 1970–1999; patent data is from the
NBER Patents File (Hall et al., 2001), with data limited to patent assignees residing in the US.
14
The U.S. Census Bureau distinguishes four U.S. regions: Northeast, South, Midwest, and West.
15
Howells (1990) and Breschi (2008) show that large firms locate their R&D facilities close to the company’s
headquarters and do not disperse them geographically.

22

fact that citations to patents applied for in later years would on average be lower than those
in earlier years. Similarly, the firm fixed effects also allow us to control for time-invariant
differences in patenting and citation practices across firms. In order to alleviate concerns
from autocorrelation, we cluster standard errors at the state level. GFst , P Pst , and ICst
measure whether a given WDL is in place in a given state and year. As explained by
Imbens and Wooldridge (2009), the employed fixed effects lead to β1 –β3 being estimated as
the within-state differences before and after the WDL change vis-à-vis similar before-after
differences in states that did not experience such a change during the same period. These
tests are less subject to the criticism that geographical or industry-level unobserved factors
influencing innovation are correlated with the level of dismissal laws in a state. Xist denotes
the set of time-varying control variables.
As in Autor et al. (2006), we also control for regional time trends through the interaction
of region dummies with year dummies (βr × βt ). We include these region-specific time trends
to control for potential sources of endogeneity in the passage of WDL. First, Autor et al.
(2004) point out that the Southern states lagged behind the non-Southern states in enacting
these laws. Furthermore, over the time-period 1940-2000, the Southern states lagged behind
non-Southern states in filing patents. Second, the adoption of the good-faith exception – the
main focus of our theory and empirical tests – was more common in the West, particularly
the North-Western U.S. region. Therefore, βr × βt enable us to non-parametrically account
for time-varying differences between geographical regions of the U.S. in innovation as well
as in the enactment of WDL. We also account for additional differences between Northern
and Southern states of the West region in additional tests (see Appendix C).

4.3
4.3.1

Results
Tests of Hypothesis 1

Hypothesis 1 states that the adoption of WDL, in particular the good-faith exception,
leads to greater innovation. Table 2 provides support for this hypothesis by using patents

23

and citations as the dependent variables. Columns 1 and 2, which report the results for
the tests without control variables (except for year and firm fixed effects), show that the
passage of WDL led to an increase in firm-level innovation as measured by both patents and
citations; specifically, we observe that the good-faith and implied-contract exceptions had a
positive and significant impact on innovation; the coefficient of the public-policy exception
is positive and statistically significant in Column 2 but not in Column 1. The good-faith
exception particularly pertains to the mitigation of hold-up problems (which are at the center
of our model and theoretical predictions). Furthermore, as we mentioned in Section 2, legal
scholars deem the good-faith exception to be the most far-reaching WDL. Consistent with
this, our results show that the good-faith exception has the largest effect on our innovation
measures.
Columns 3–4 show the results after controlling for regional trends (through the interaction
of region and year dummies), as well as other variables that may affect innovation:
Firm-level controls To account for the possibility that larger firms might innovate more
on average, we include firm Size, which is the natural logarithm of assets (in 2005 dollars);
we also include Size2 , which is Size ∗ Size, to capture possible non-linear effects of firm
size on innovation. To control for investment opportunities, which may also affect a firm’s
innovation policies, we include Market-to-Book.16 Furthermore, R&D constitutes an important input into the innovation process, and our hypotheses (specifically, Hypothesis 2) imply
that stricter dismissal laws should entail more innovation for a given level of R&D spending.
Therefore, we include the log of R&D to Sales in the tests.
State-level controls Aghion et al. (2005) find that competition and innovation share
an inverted U-shaped relationship. Therefore, we control for in-state competition (variable
16

Market value of assets is total assets (Compustat item at) plus market value of equity minus book value
of equity. The market value of equity is calculated as common shares outstanding (csho) times fiscal-year
closing price (prccf ). Book value of equity is defined as common equity (ceq) plus balance sheet deferred
taxes (txdb). In order to eliminate the impact of outliers, we winsorize Market-to-Book at 1% and 99%.

24

Competition) and its square (variable Competition 2 ).17 A key determinant of innovation
is the comparative advantage that a state possesses in its different industries, which could
affect our interpretation of the effect of the passage of WDL on innovation. We control
for this effect via our variable Ratio of Value Added.18 We also account for various timevarying state characteristics in our regressions. Since richer and larger states may innovate
more and may also be more likely to pass employment protection legislation, we include
the logarithm of real GDP in a state and year (ln(Real State GDP)). As we stated above,
over the time-period 1940-2000, the Southern states lagged behind non-Southern states in
filing patents. If the non-Southern states were more likely to invest in education than the
Southern states, such factors may have led to these differences in patenting. Therefore, we
also control for a state’s intellectual resources via the number of degree-granting institutions
of higher education in a given state (ln(Colleges)), as well as via enrollment in institutions of
higher education (ln(Enrollment)). We also control for number of state inhabitants through
the logarithm of annual state population.19
Labor Unemployment Risk Agrawal and Matsa (2011), using changes in state unemployment insurance benefit laws, show that firms adopt conservative financial policies (i.e.,
lower corporate leverage, ceteris paribus) to mitigate worker exposure to unemployment risk.
Similarly, employees in firms that are located in states with generous unemployment insurance benefit laws may be more willing to take more risk when choosing innovative projects.
17

We define Competition as the fraction of total (2-digit SIC) industry sales generated by competitors in
a given state. The state corresponds to the location of the firm’s headquarters; Howells (1990) and Breschi
(2008) show that large firms locate their R&D facilities close to the company’s headquarters and do not
disperse them geographically. Note that to construct the variable Competition, we use sales information for
all Compustat firms in a given state and industry, not only sales from firms in our patent data-Compustat
matched sample. In order to eliminate the impact of outliers, we winsorize Competition and Competition 2
at 1% and 99%.
18
In order to construct the variable Ratio of Value Added, we obtain data on the gross state product (GSP)
per sector, state and year from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (available for the years 1977–1999).
We combine the 63 BEA sectors to 18 sectors based on the BEA classification of two-digit SIC codes. In
each year, the variable Ratio of Value Added corresponds to the GSP in a given sector and state divided by
the total GSP in that state.
19
Data on both state GDP as well as population is from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. The data
on the number of colleges and college enrollment is taken from the annual Statistical Abstracts from the
U.S. Census Bureau (1970-1999). For a few years, this data is not available (1973, 1979, 1989, 1993, 1996,
1998); in these cases, we replace a given missing year’s value with the preceding year’s value.

25

To control for this possibility, we use data on unemployment benefits provided by states.
Following Agrawal and Matsa (2011), we employ the logarithm of the maximum total unemployment benefit (calculated as the maximum number of weeks that the benefit can be
obtained times the maximum weekly benefit amount) as a proxy for the total unemployment
insurance benefits that a claimant can receive in a given state and year.
Employing the full set of these covariates does not change our results materially. In
particular, the point estimates and significance of the impact of the passage of the goodfaith exception are almost unchanged. The control variables have the expected sign: firms
with more R&D expenditure innovate significantly more. As in Aghion et al. (2005), instate competition has an inverted U-shaped effect on innovation. Consistent with the notion
that more insurance may encourage more risk-taking, we find that increases in state unemployment insurance benefits are associated with more innovation; this effect is (marginally)
significant for one of our two innovation proxies.
Economic magnitudes In addition to being statistically significant, the economic magnitude of the impact of WDL on innovative activity is also large. In particular, if we use
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 to estimate these economic magnitudes, we find that the adoption
of the good-faith clause led to an increase in the annual number of patents and citations by
12.2% and 18.8% respectively, when compared to firms located in states which did not pass
this WDL; the effect of the adoption of the public-policy exception on the two innovation
proxies is 6.7% and 8.2% respectively while the implied-contract exception has no significant
effect. Overall, these results confirm our main Hypothesis 1.
4.3.2

Tests of Hypothesis 2

To test Hypothesis 2, we repeat our tests of equation (16) using patents and citations
scaled by the number of employees and, alternatively, by R&D expenditure (see Table 2,
Columns 5–8). Ln(Patents/Employee) is the log of the number of patents per 1,000 firm
employees; ln(Patents/R&D) is the log of the number of patents per million R&D dollars.

26

Ln(Citations/Employee) and ln(Citations/R&D) are defined analogously. Both dependent
variables provide a more direct measure of employee effort.
The results reported in Columns 5 & 6 of Table 2 confirm our Hypothesis 2: after
the passage of WDL, patents and citations scaled by the number of employees increased
significantly. In other words, innovative effort per employee increased significantly as WDL
were adopted. This finding is robust to employing the full set of control variables described
earlier. As before, it is again the good-faith exception that has the largest positive impact on
innovation. We find that patents and citations per 1,000 employees increase by respectively
12.3% and 19.0% in states that adopt a good-faith exception vis-à-vis states that do not.
Columns 7 & 8 of Table 2 further underscore these findings. From Columns 7 and 8, we find
that adopting a good-faith exception increases patents and citations per million dollars of
R&D by 12.9% and 19.5% respectively.20
4.3.3

Tests of Hypothesis 3

Hypothesis 3 suggests that the effect of the passage of WDL, in particular the good-faith
exception, should be stronger in innovation-intensive industries than in other industries. In
order to test this, we divide industries into those which have a high (low) propensity to innovate; our industry classification is based on the 48 Fama-French industries. Specifically, the
dummy variable High Intensity takes the value of one if the median number of patents filed
in a given Fama-French industry in a given year exceeds the median value of these median
number of patents across all industries in that year; Low Intensity is (1 − High Intensity).
These dummy variables are then interacted with the indicator for the good-faith exception.
The results can be seen in Table 3. Columns 1 and 2 report the results for patents and citations as the dependent variables, while Columns 3 & 4 (5 & 6) employ patents and citations
scaled by the number of employees (scaled by R&D dollars). All regressions employ the full
set of control variables. The results are striking: we find that the effect of the good-faith
20

To avoid mechanical correlation of the dependent variable with our regressors, we do not use
ln(R&D/Sales) as a control variable in these tests.

27

exception in high innovation-intensive industries is highly significant, while it is virtually absent in low innovation-intensive industries. The difference between high- and low-innovation
intensive industries of the effect of the passage of the good-faith exception on innovation is
significant in all six specifications (at the 10% level or higher).
Summary In sum, we find strong support for our hypotheses relating to innovation. Consistent with the theory, the passage of WDL, particularly the good-faith exception, leads to
more innovation overall as well as to more innovative effort per employee and R&D dollar.
Furthermore, these effects are stronger in the innovation-intensive industries.
4.3.4

Endogeneity concerns

We address concerns about other sources of omitted variable bias and the direction of
causality in this section. As mentioned in Section 2, Walsh and Schwarz (1996) argue
that states passed WDL for reasons largely orthogonal to the objective of promoting statelevel innovation. In fact, the judicial decisions in the precedent setting cases were mainly
concerned with enhancing fairness in employment relationships and consistency with general
contracting principles rather than economic concerns.21 Furthermore, WDL were based on
judicial decisions, which are more likely to be driven by the merits of the case than political
economy considerations. Nevertheless, to address residual concerns about omitted variable
bias and reverse causality, we examine the potential determinants of the passage of WDL.
The adoption of WDL may have been driven by underlying political or economic conditions at the state-level. For example, the passage of the laws may follow a period of low
economic growth, and the positive trend in innovation after law adoption may merely reflect
mean reversion in economic (and hence patenting) activity. We confirm in Table 4 that
the timing of the adoption of the good-faith principle, which is the main focus in our the21

For example, the precedent setting case in California (“Cleary v. American Airlines, Inc. (10/29/80),
168 Cal. Rptr. 722 (Cal. Ct. App. 1980)”) involved an airline employee who argued that he was wrongfully
dismissed by his former long-term employer, American Airlines, Inc. During the trial, the court decided
that it was necessary to extend contracting principles from another law domain into employment contracts.
Specifically, the court concluded that the “concept of good faith and fair dealing was first formulated by the
California courts in insurance contracts. But it is clear that it has reference to all contracts.”

28

ory and tests, was not a function of political, economic, or other prior observable factors.
We estimate different Weibull Hazard models where the “failure event” is the adoption of
the good-faith exception in a given U.S. state. Columns 1 and 2 show that the adoption
of the good-faith exception was unrelated to pre-existing state-level innovation activity (as
measured by the log of patents and citations per state-year, respectively). In the remaining
columns, we additionally control for other state-level factors, including lagged GDP growth,
the political balance in a given state (measured as the ratio of Democrat to Republican state
representatives in the House of Representatives), and the state’s unemployment rate. Only
the wealth of a U.S. state (as measured by real state GDP) increases the “hazard” of adoption
of the good-faith exception. None of the other variables significantly load, which indicates
that such factors did not determine the timing of the adoption of good-faith exceptions by
state courts. Indeed, Autor (2003, p.16) points out that “because a court’s issuance of a
new precedent is an idiosyncratic function of its docket and the disposition of its justices,
the timing of a change to the common law is likely to be in part unanticipated.” The fact
that the adoption of these laws was at least partly unanticipated allows us to identify their
causal effect on innovation by firms.
Table 5 further highlights that political and economic factors that may accompany the
adoption of WDL are not accounting for our findings. In these tests, we examine the impact of the good-faith exception on innovation by firms, but in addition to our usual set of
explanatory variables we also control for lagged state GDP growth, as well as for a state’s
political climate. While lagged GDP growth is not related to innovation by firms, we find
that a higher ratio of Democrat to Republican state representatives in the House of Representatives has a negative impact on innovation by firms. Importantly, however, we find that
the adoption of the good-faith exception continues to have a positive and (statistically and
economically) significant impact on innovation by firms.

29

4.3.5

Dynamic effects

In Table 6 we examine the dynamic effect of the passage of the good-faith exception on
innovation. We follow Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003) in decomposing the passage of the
good-faith exception into separate time periods for each state: Good Faith (-2,-1) is a dummy
that takes the value of one in the two years before the passage, zero otherwise; Good Faith
(0) is a dummy that takes the value of one in the year of the passage, zero otherwise; Good
Faith (+1) is a dummy that takes a value of one in the year after the passage, zero otherwise.
Finally, Good Faith (≥ +2) that takes the value of one for the second year after the passage
and thereafter, zero otherwise. Similar to what we observed in Table 4, pre-existing patterns
of innovation are not correlated with the passage of the good-faith exception as seen in the
coefficient of Good Faith (-2,-1) being statistically indistinguishable from zero in all but one
specification. Furthermore, consistent with the long-run nature of innovation, the posited
positive effect on innovation is robustly evident from two years after the passage of the
good-faith exception onwards (as seen in the coefficient of Good Faith (≥ +2)).
4.3.6

Alternative Interpretations

We now examine several alternative interpretations for our above results.
Effect of California and Massachusetts CA and MA are two U.S. states known for
their innovative vigor. For example, both states have high-tech industrial districts: Silicon
Valley in CA and Route 128 in MA. In addition, both states had all three WDL in place
from the late 1980s onwards and offered their employees significant protection against unjust
dismissal.22 Therefore, we would like to ascertain that our results are not driven entirely by
these two states. To alleviate these concerns, we estimate our main specification (equation
(16)) with the full set of control variables and for all dependent variables (as in Table 2), but
22

In particular, California was not only the first state to adopt a wrongful discharge law, but also the state
whose Court of Appeals ruled on the most influential good-faith case according to legal scholars (Cleary v.
American Airlines, 1980 ). Furthermore, the good-faith exception in California was the most far-reaching
one, at least in the first decade after the ruling. This exception barred Californian employers from dismissing
any worker without good cause (see Autor et al., 2007). Finally, Californian state courts tended to be most
receptive to wrongful discharge litigation (see Edelman et al., 1992).

30

exclude observations from CA and MA. We do not report results from these tests in a separate
table to conserve space. As in the full sample, the coefficient on the good-faith exception
stays positive and significant (at the 5% level or higher) in all specifications. Furthermore,
the coefficient magnitudes are very similar to those obtained using the full sample, which
suggests that the effect of WDL was similar in CA and MA to that in other states.23
Shift to labor-saving technologies The positive effects of WDL on innovation may
stem from firms’ efforts to save on labor costs by shifting to less labor-intensive and moreinnovative technologies. Indeed, if a majority of firms shifts to labor-saving technologies,
this should manifest as an observable increase in the investment in R&D after the passage
of WDL. We however do not find any evidence of such increases. In unreported tests, we
run regression (16) using log of R&D scaled by sales (or assets) as the dependent variable
and do not find any significant impact of any of the three WDL on the investment in R&D.
Creation of the Court of Appeals of the Federal Circuit The U.S. Court of Appeals
of the Federal Circuit (CAFC) was created by Congress in 1982, and its main jurisdiction
are appeals made regarding U.S. patent law. Following the establishment of the court, there
was a large surge in patenting in the U.S. which was commonly ascribed to the creation of
the Court, but which Kortum and Lerner (1999) attribute to other factors such as changes
in the management of research. The spur in patenting activity also overlaps with the period
when many WDL were adopted (see Figure 1).
To ensure that our results are not driven by the creation of the CAFC in 1982, we divide
the sample period into pre-1982 and post-1982. We then re-run our difference-in-difference
regressions (equation (16)) for each sub-sample, using the full set of control variables. In un23

In our Theoretical Motivation, we argued that the passage of WDL enabled firms to commit to their
employees not to hold them up in the case of successful innovation. Therefore, a possible alternative interpretation for our results is that innovation-driven firms (re-)located to states that offered their employees
greater protection against wrongful discharge. As CA and MA arguably provided the strongest legal protection of this type, firms pursuing innovation may have been inclined to re-locate to either CA or MA after the
passage of these laws. If this alternative interpretation were true, the passage of WDL would significantly
further innovation in CA and MA, but not in the other states. However, as our results are robust to the
exclusion of CA and MA from the sample, this does not appear to be the case.

31

reported results, we find that in both sub-periods, the impact of the passage of the good-faith
exception on innovation remains consistent with the results from the full sample. This also
highlights that the adoption of good-faith exceptions was quite evenly spread out over time
across states. However, importantly, our findings allow us to rule out that the establishment
of the CAFC in 1982 is causing our results.
More Patenting by Firms to Offset Employees’ Increase in Bargaining Power
WDL increase employees’ bargaining power vis-a-vis employers. As a result, even if firms
do not become more innovative, they may be more prone to patent their inventions in
order to counter possible attempts of rent appropriation by employees.24 Hence, the surge
in corporate patenting activity after the passage of good-faith exceptions may reflect an
increased propensity to patent inventions, rather than an increase in innovation per se.
We indirectly address this in our main tests by showing that not only do firms patent
more after the passage of good-faith exceptions, but citations to these patents also rise.
As citations capture the economic importance of patents, this does indicate that innovation
increases, not just patenting activity. However, in Column 9 of Table 2 and Column 7 of Table
3, we also examine the ratio of citations to patents filed, which provides an alternative test
of the hypothesis that innovation increases after the good-faith exception passage. Indeed,
as citations per patent increase, these results confirm that innovation by firms increases after
the adoption of good-faith exceptions, particularly so in innovation-intensive industries.25
Other robustness tests We conduct additional robustness tests, the results of which are
omitted for brevity. First, we collapse the innovation proxies (patents and citations) at the
state, year level by computing their aggregate measures by state, year and find in panel
24

We are grateful to an anonymous referee for pointing this out.
Another alternative interpretation of our results may be that passage of WDL leads to firms filing more
patents because the adoption of these laws may be correlated with an increase in the probability of intellectual
property litigation. In other words, is it the case that our results are an outcome of firms’ increased efforts to
protect themselves against intellectual property litigation? Since citations to patents capture the economic
value of an innovation, our results indicate that not only do firms file more patents after the passage of WDL
but they file more valuable patents. An effort to patent more to protect against possible litigation should
not necessarily lead to firms filing more valuable patents.
25

32

regressions that include state and year fixed effects that our results are similar. Second,
in figure 4, we observe a post-event trend in innovation in the treatment group of states
vis-à-vis the control group. Since identification in difference-in-difference settings comes
from a before-after comparison in levels between the treatment and control groups, the
counterfactual trend behavior of treatment and control groups should be the same (Angrist
and Pischke, 2008, pp. 165). Figure 4 and Table 4 suggest that this requirement is satisfied
in our setting. Nevertheless, to check purely for a difference in trend due to the good faith
exception (rather than a difference in trend over and above the difference in levels), we run
regressions where we interact the dummy for the good faith exception with a linear time
trend and exclude the level of the good faith exception. Consistent with the observation in
figure 4, we find that the trend for innovation is greater after the passage of the good faith
exception (see Appendix C).

5

Robustness to Mobility of Human Capital
Fulghieri and Sevilir (2011) argue in a theoretical model that legal restrictions on the

mobility of human capital (through the enforcement of non-compete agreements) have a
negative impact on employee effort to innovate. If states that passed WDL are also less likely
to enforce non-compete agreements, then the effect of WDL on innovation we documented so
far may be spurious. To distinguish the channels through which WDL and legal restrictions
on mobility of human capital affect innovative effort, we extend the basic model to allow
for the effect of laws restricting human capital mobility. We then empirically examine the
robustness of our result to controlling for the effect of such legal restrictions.

5.1

Extension of the basic model

In our basic model in Section 3, we allowed for the possibility of hold-up by the employer
only. As we highlighted in Section 2.1 using the case of Activision, both the entrepreneur
and the employee could, in principle, hold each other up. Therefore, in this section, we
extend the basic model by introducing the possibility of employee E holding up employer F
33

by implementing the innovation outside the firm with the help of a Venture Capitalist. E’s
ability to hold up F is reduced by the legal restrictions placed on the mobility of human
capital in a state. If courts do not enforce non-compete clauses in employment agreements,
then human capital is perfectly mobile. However, if such clauses are enforced rigidly, then
human capital mobility is restricted, which reduces E’s ability to hold up F .
To model a scenario where both E and F can hold each other up, we allow for the
innovative project to generate both generic and firm-specific innovations. To motivate the
possibility that innovative projects could fall into these two categories, consider the innovations generated by Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center (PARC). Since the late 1970s, PARC
pursued a research agenda that was intended to: (i) support Xerox’s existing businesses by
enhancing scientific understanding of its core technologies; and (ii) create new growth opportunities for the company to move beyond its current businesses. Of the many innovations
at PARC, Xerox selected those that fit its businesses and provided a graceful exit to those
innovations that were deemed not to fit its core businesses (Chesbrough, 2003). For example, the ethernet networking protocol was a firm-specific innovation developed to connect
Xerox Star workstations to Xerox laser printers. However, the generic local area networking
technology that it created formed the basis for the start-up company 3Com. Similarly, the
technology underlying Adobe was developed as a component for the Xerox Star, a networked
workstation intended for the corporate office environment. However, this innovation helped
to create the generic “desktop publishing” market pioneered by Adobe.
Appendix A develops the extended model in detail. Here, we describe the salient differences with respect to the basic model in Section 3 and state the results that we obtain from
this extended model. After recruiting the employee E at date 0, we assume that the firm F
invests to increase the generic human capital of E; such investment can be interpreted in a
variety of ways such as training E to be innovative and entrepreneurial, as well as introducing
him to suppliers, customers, venture capitalists, etc.26 Such generic investment introduces
26

The firm’s generic investment in the employee can be rationalized based on the argument in Acemoglu
and Pischke (1999), who show that if labor market frictions reduce the wages of skilled workers relative to

34

the possibility that E generates an innovation that falls outside the core business of F .
We assume that commercializing a generic innovation outside F with the help of an
investor such as a Venture Capitalist (VC) generates greater value than commercializing it
inside F . Conversely, commercializing a firm-specific innovation inside F generates greater
value than commercializing it outside F .
Finally, before F decides whether to retain or fire E, E chooses either to stay with F
and commercialize the innovation within F or to start a new firm and commercialize the
innovation with the support of the VC. If E chooses to start a new firm, F sues the departing
employee for violation of non-compete agreements.
Proposition 6 Propositions 3, 4 and 5 and the corresponding Hypotheses 1-3 remain robust
to the effect of laws restricting the mobility of human capital in a state.
Intuitively, WDL limit the firm’s ability to hold up the employee when the innovation is
firm-specific (and therefore has to be implemented within the incumbent firm). In contrast,
legal restrictions on the mobility of human capital limit the employee’s ability to hold up
the firm when the innovation is generic (and is therefore optimally implemented through a
new firm). Since innovations can be either firm-specific or generic, the effect of WDL on
innovation survives the presence of legal restrictions on mobility of human capital.
As in Fulghieri and Sevilir (2011), the extended model also predicts that legal restrictions
on the mobility of human capital have a negative impact on employee effort to innovate, and
thereby on the value from innovation.
5.1.1

Controlling for legal restrictions on mobility of human capital in the tests

In Table 7, we examine whether the results are consistent with Proposition 6 in two
separate ways. First, in Panel A, we explicitly control for the legal restrictions on the
mobility of human capital in a given state and year. For this purpose, we obtain data on
the enforceability of non-compete agreements from Bird and Knopf (2010), who extend the
wages of un-skilled workers, firms may provide and pay for general training.

35

coding of Garmaise (2010) back to 1976.27 Higher values of the variable N CA indicate more
pronounced non-compete enforcement and, in turn, greater legal restrictions on the mobility
of human capital. Second, in Panel B, we exclude states which changed the enforcement of
such non-compete agreements during our sample period.28 As predicted by Proposition 6,
the positive effect of the good-faith exception on innovation remains positive and significant.
We find the coefficient of N CA to be negative but insignificant. This is possibly because even though the employees’ effort to innovate decreases with an increase in N CA, as
predicted by our theoretical model and in Fulghieri and Sevilir (2011), an increase in N CA
increases the firm’s incentives to invest in the employee, which may in turn increase employees’ effort. Garmaise (2010) formalizes both these effects simultaneously and finds that
consistent with both these effects being at play, N CA does not have a statistically significant
effect on R&D. Similarly, we do not find the effect of N CA on innovation to be significant.

6

Wrongful Discharge Laws and Entrepreneurship
Apart from showing that our results on the impact of WDL on innovation are robust to

the effect of legal restrictions on mobility of human capital, the extension to the basic model
described in Section 5.1 above also generates testable implications relating the passage of
WDL to entrepreneurship, i.e., creation of new firms. Proposition A6 formally stated in
Appendix A generates the following testable implication:
Hypothesis 4: Passage of WDL – particularly that of the good-faith exception – leads to
(a) creation of new firms; and (b) greater employment from the creation of new firms.
The intuition behind this result is as follows. WDL improve the employee’s effort in
innovation by reducing the possibility of hold-up by the firm. An increase in the employee’s
effort increases the possibility of both generic and firm-specific innovations. Since the generic
innovation is optimally implemented by creating a new firm, this increased possibility of
27

We mainly employ the Bird and Knopf (2010) coding (from 1976 to 1991); from 1992, when the Garmaise
(2010) coding starts, we complement it with the coding in Garmaise (2010).
28
These states are Florida, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Montana, Texas, Virginia, and Wyoming.

36

generic innovation leads to the increase in creation of new firms. Part (b) follows from the
fact that the creation of a new firm also leads to employment creation.29

6.1

Data and Proxies

The analysis in this section employs a novel data set developed by the Center for Economic Studies of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Business Dynamics Statistics (henceforth
simply “BDS”) database.30 The data encompass measures of establishment openings, firm
startups, and job creation from new establishments.31 In particular, the BDS database covers all non-agricultural sectors in the U.S. economy for the years 1977–2005. The data is
made available in annual aggregates by categories, such as industry sector, firm age, state
where the establishment is located, and the size of the establishment, where size in year t is
defined as the average of the number of employees in years t − 1 and t.
This dataset is particularly suited for the empirical analysis of entrepreneurship since the
age of an establishment is defined based on the age of the ultimate parent firm. Specifically,
establishment age is defined as the difference between the current year of operation and the
ultimate parent firm’s birth year. Therefore, age-zero establishments correspond to those
created by new firms. The most detailed data available in the BDS database are by “category
triples”. As the state of location and establishment age are the most important categories
for our empirical analysis, we use data by establishment age, size, and state of location.32
29
This empirical prediction is consistent with the Xerox view of entrepreneurial spawning highlighted by
Gompers, Lerner and Scharfstein (2005), where entrepreneurial spawning from incumbent firms is high not
because of any sort of inefficiency at these firms, but rather because these firms wisely choose to focus on
their core business or “core competence.”
30
The BDS data are drawn from the Longitudinal Business Database, which is a database of U.S. business
establishments and firms. Most of the information on the BDS database discussed below is drawn from the
BDS Technical Note, available at the U.S. Census website: http : //www.ces.census.gov/index.php/bds
31
An establishment is defined as a fixed physical location where economic activity occurs; a firm may
consist of one or more such establishments.
32
The second BDS data “triple” currently available is the triple establishment age, size, and industry
sector, which is less useful for our purposes due to the lack of information on the state of establishment
location (which we need to link with the wrongful discharge law data).

37

6.1.1

Proxies for Entrepreneurship

Hypothesis 4 predicts that the passage of WDL leads to greater firm creation, with attendant effects on job creation. To test this, we use the following dependent variables which are
all measured annually by firm size and state of establishment location:33 Ln(Establishments
created by start-ups) corresponds to the log of the number of establishments of age zero.
Since the age of an establishment corresponds to the age of its ultimate parent in the BDS
dataset, this variable captures only those establishments that are created by new firms. The
majority of new firms are single-establishment firms. Ln(Establishment entries) measures
the log of the number of establishment entrants, defined in the database as establishments
with positive employment in the current year and zero employment in the prior year. Establishment entries can be either due to greenfield firm start-ups (as captured by the variable
Ln(Establishments created by start-ups) above) or due to existing firms opening a new establishment. Finally, Ln(Job creation from new establishments) measures the number of new
jobs resulting from the creation of new establishments.

6.2

Results

For our tests on entrepreneurship, we employ a difference-in-difference strategy similar
to that described in Section 4.2, implemented by following panel regression:

yklst = βl + βs + βt + βr × βt + β1 GFst + β2 P Pst + β3 ICst + βXklst + εklst

(17)

where yklst is a measure of the dependent variable for establishment size category k, firm
age category l in state s and year t. βl , βs , and βt denote respectively firm age, state and
year fixed effects. In some specifications, we also control for regional trends through βr × βt
(interaction between region and year dummies).34 Furthermore, all specifications include
the following set of state characteristics: ln(Real GDP p.c.), the logarithm of real (in 2005
33

A more detailed description of the variables is available on the U.S. Census homepage; see http :
//webserver03.ces.census.gov/index.php/bds/bds home.
34
When focussing on start-ups, which by definition have a firm age of zero, we do not include age dummies.

38

$) state GDP per million state residents and year; ln(Colleges p.c.), the logarithm of the
number of degree-granting institutions of higher education in a given state per million state
residents and year; and ln(Enrollment p.c.), the logarithm of enrollment in institutions of
higher education in a given state per million state residents and year. NCA is the score of
non-compete enforcement per state and year; finally, UI is the logarithm of the maximum
total potential benefit available under the unemployment insurance system in a given state
and year.35 As in our tests for innovation, we cluster standard errors at the state level.
Summary statistics for all dependent and explanatory variables are reported in Panel B of
Table 1.
6.2.1

Test of Hypothesis 4

In Table 8, we investigate the effect of WDL on the creation of new establishments. The
results are reported in Column 1 (resp. 4, which additionally includes regional trends). We
find a statistically significant positive effect of the passage of the good-faith exception on
establishments created by start-up firms. The economic magnitude of the effect is quite
large: based on the specification with region trends (Column 4), the adoption of the goodfaith clause in a state led to an increase in the entry of establishments by 12.4% in that state
when compared to the control group of states which did not adopt this particular WDL. The
other two exceptions do not have statistically significant effects.
We also examine the effect of WDL on establishments created by all firms, i.e., not only
by start-up firms. The results are displayed in Column 2 (resp. 5, with regional trends)
of Table 8. We find a statistically significant positive effect of the good-faith exception on
the entry of establishments. As before, the other two exceptions do not seem to matter.
Based on estimates from Column 5, the adoption of the good-faith clause in a state led to an
increase in the entry of establishments by 8.7% in that state when compared to the control
group of states which did not adopt this particular WDL.
35

Unlike the tests for innovation, we cannot employ firm-level control variables. Also, since the dataset
does not have the industry level granularity, we cannot include competition or the ratio of value-added.

39

In Column 3 (resp. 6, with regional trends), we explore the concomitant effect on employment due to the creation of new establishments. We find that the passage of the good-faith
clause resulted in a significant increase in job creation from new establishments (by 8.4%, according to the estimate in Column 6) vis-à-vis states that did not adopt this WDL. Overall,
we find strong support for Hypothesis 4.

7

Related Literature
Existing theoretical arguments make conflicting predictions about the welfare implica-

tions of employment protection laws. Early studies argued that such laws lead to inefficient
resource allocation because firms cannot at their sole discretion terminate jobs that have lost
their productive value. Furthermore, if job destruction is made difficult, it may lead to less
job creation and higher unemployment (Lazear, 1990; Ljungqvist and Sargent, 1998).
However, more recent theoretical work argues that employment protection may also have
positive economic effects. Bertola (2004) shows that employment protection can increase
aggregate output when job switching is costly because such protection enables risk-neutral
firms to insure risk-averse employees against negative income shocks. Baumann (2010) argues that employment protection laws may improve the average productivity of hired workers by equalizing the share of low-productivity workers across the states of employment and
unemployment and, thereby, reducing adverse selection in labor markets. Our study complements Bertola (2004) and Baumann (2010) by highlighting the positive incentive effects
of employment protection on innovative output when contracts are incomplete.
In other related work, Sevilir (2010) shows that established firms’ investment in their
employees’ human capital leads to the creation of entrepreneurs as well as greater innovation
within the firm. In contrast, we model how WDL and the enforcement of non-compete
clauses limit holdup by the employer and the employee respectively to show that the two
effects operate independent of each other.
Autor et al. (2007) study whether WDL reduce productivity by distorting production

40

choices. They find that wrongful discharge protection reduces employment fluctuations and
firm entry rates; furthermore, these provisions led to changes in production techniques that
resulted in a decline in plant-level total factor productivity.36 These results, however, are not
at odds with the findings in our paper. First, while Autor et al. (2007) employ data drawn
from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM), which is exclusively from manufacturing
plants, our study includes all innovating industries, including high-tech sectors. Second, the
ASM sample “focuses on intensive adjustments in large plants operating in stable business
climates; by conditioning on survival, the extensive margin is suppressed” (p.F198). This
sample restriction will clearly not cover many highly innovative firms operating in unstable
business climates, e.g., high-tech or other innovating firms. Furthermore, as we argue in
Hypothesis 4 and the corresponding tests on entrepreneurship, a significant part of the
increased innovative activity attributable to the passage of the good-faith exception is likely
due to changes at the extensive margin. Third, the negative effect of the good-faith exception
on TFP documented by Autor et al. (2007) is not statistically significant at conventional
levels after accounting for plant fixed effects. Fourth, Autor et al. (2007) report that
labor productivity significantly rose after the adoption of the good-faith exception, which is
consistent with the findings supporting Hypothesis 2 in our study.
In contrast to the empirical studies that highlight the negative effects of WDL, MacLeod
and Nakavachara (2007) find that the passage of WDL increased employment, particularly
in occupations that required a high level of skill.37 Theoretically, they argue that employers’
mistakes in the subjective evaluation of employees may lead to lower wages and productivity
by workers. However, WDL arrest decreases in wages and productivity by requiring employers to put into place systems of employee evaluation that produce verifiable information that
is usable in court. Since a priori subjective evaluations are more likely to be erroneous in
36

Bird and Knopf (2009), in a study focussing on the banking industry, find that the implied-contracts
exception increased labor expenses and had a negative impact on profitability. Schanzenbach (2003) reports
that the adoption of the implied-contract exception increased job tenure, while returns to tenure as well as
wages did not increase.
37
Dertouzos and Karoly (1992), Miles (2000), Autor (2003), Autor et al. (2004), Kugler and Saint-Paul
(2004) and Autor et al. (2006) are other empirical studies that examine the effect of WDL on employment.

41

occupations that require a high level of skill, this effect is greater in such occupations.

8

Conclusion
Can laws that limit employment-at-will encourage employees to undertake risks and get

around the difficulties encountered by firms in promoting innovation and entrepreneurship?
In this paper, we develop a model in which WDL limit the possibility of hold-up by a firm of
its employees, and thereby encourage innovative effort by employees and innovative pursuits
by firms. We provide empirical evidence to show that laws that inhibit the common-law
doctrine of employment-at-will can indeed motivate firms and their employees to undertake
innovative and entrepreneurial pursuits. We provide this evidence by studying the effects of
the staggered passage of WDL across several U.S. states (as a series of natural experiments)
on patent- and citation-based measures of innovation in a comprehensive sample of U.S.
firms and on establishment-level measures of entrepreneurship and job creation.
This evidence complements the findings in Acharya, Baghai, and Subramanian (2012),
who show in a cross-country setting that stringent dismissal laws lead to greater innovation.
Given the corroborating results of this paper, we conclude that laws affecting employment
and dismissal are an important part of the policy toolkit for promoting innovation and
possibly economic growth. An interesting and open question pertains to the relative merits
and interactive effects of various laws such as creditor right laws, labor laws, and protection
of intellectual property rights on innovation and economic growth. This appears to be a
fruitful area for further inquiry.

Appendix: Proofs
Lemma 1: The optimal project maximizes the aggregate payoff to firm and employee.

42

Proof of Lemma 1: The optimal project choice is given by

max V j e∗j
j

s.t. U j e∗j ≥ 0

(18)

e∗j = arg max U j (ej )
ej

where the employee’s reservation utility in equilibrium equals 0. Since the labor market is competitive, the IR constraint is satisfied with equality. Therefore, U j = 0. Since V j = W j − U j , the
above problem reduces to

(19)
max W j e∗j
j

where e∗j = arg max U j (ej ) ♦
ej

Proof of Proposition 1 : Using equations (7) , (8) and (9) , we get
eFI B − e∗I = [0.5 (1 + b) − µc] (A − a) > 0 using (5) and 0 < µ < 1, A > a.
eFRB − e∗R = [0.5 (1 + b) − µc] a > 0 using (5) and 0 < µ < 1.♦
Proof of Propositions 2, 3 : Differentiating equation (7) , (8) and (9) w.r.t.
c (A − a) > 0;

de∗R
dµ

= ca > 0;

B
deF
j
dµ

= 0∀j = I, R. From (4), A > 2a ⇒

de∗I
dµ

>

µ we get

de∗I
dµ

=

de∗R
dµ .♦

Proof of Proposition 4 :
W I = e∗I A + (1 − e∗I ) a − 0.5 (e∗I )2 ; W R = e∗R (R − 0.5a) + (1 − e∗R ) (R + 0.5a) − 0.5 (e∗R )2
de∗
dW I
= [A − a − e∗I ] I = c {0.5 (1 + b) − µc} (A − a)2 > 0 using (5) and 0 < µ < 1, A > a.
dµ
dµ
de∗
dW R
dW I
= [A − a − e∗R ] R = c {0.5 (1 + b) − µc} a2 <
∵ a < A − a from (4) .♦
(20)
dµ
dµ
dµ
Proof of Proposition 5 : We make the following parametric restriction for Proposition 5. To allow for
the fact that in some legal environments, choosing the routine project may be optimal, we assume
that

3
(3 + b) (1 − b) 2
R< a+
A − 2Aa
2
8
For the innovative project:
W I = e∗I A + (1 − e∗I ) a − 0.5 (e∗I )2 = a +

1
(3 + b − 2µc) (1 − b + 2µc) (A − a)2
8

By using the payoffs for the routine project, we get:
W R = e∗R (R + 0.5a) + (1 − e∗I ) (R − 0.5a) − 0.5 (e∗I )2 = R − 0.5a +

43

1
(3 + b − 2µc) (1 − b + 2µc) a2
8

Therefore



1
3
2
W I (µ = 0) − W R (µ = 0) =
(3 + b) (1 − b) A − 2Aa − R − a
8
2
< 0 using the parametric restriction

Now



1
3
(3 + b − 2c) (1 − b + 2c) A2 − 2Aa − R − a
8
2
2
A − 2Aa
>
c [1 + b − c] using the parametric restriction
2
> 0 using (5) and A > 2a

W I (µ = 1) − W R (µ = 1) =

Therefore, using the mean value theorem, the result follows.♦

References
[1] Aalberts, R.J. and L.H. Seidman, 1993, “Managing the Risk of Wrongful Discharge Litigation:
The Small Business Firm and the Model Employment Termination Act,” Journal of Small
Business Management, 31, 75–79.
[2] Abraham, S.E., 1998, “Can a Wrongful Discharge Statute Really Benefit Employers?,” Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 37(4), 499–518.
[3] Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke, 1999, “The Structure of Wages and Investment in General
Training,” The Journal of Political Economy, 107(3), 539–572.
[4] Acharya, V., R. Baghai and K. Subramanian, 2012, “Labor Laws and Innovation,” Working
paper, New York University Stern School of Business.
[5] Acharya, V., K. V. Subramanian, 2009, “Bankruptcy Codes and Innovation,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(12), 4949–4988.
[6] Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Griffith, and P. Howitt, 2005, “Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 701-728.
[7] Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (2006), “Appropriate Growth Policy: A Unifying Framework,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 4, 269-314.
[8] Aghion, P. and J. Tirole, 1994, “The Management of Innovation,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 109(4), 1185–1209.
[9] Agrawal, A. and D. Matsa, 2011, “Labor Unemployment Risk and Corporate Financing Decisions,” Working paper, New York University Stern School of Business.
[10] Angrist, J. and J.-S. Pischke, 2008, “Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion,” Princeton University Press.
[11] Autor, D., 2003, “Outsourcing at Will: The Contribution of Unjust Dismissal Doctrine to the
Growth of Employment Outsourcing” Journal of Labor Economics 21(1), 1–42.

44

[12] Autor, D., J. Donohue III, and S. Schwab, 2004, “The Employment Consequences of WrongfulDischarge Laws: Large, Small, or None at All?” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 93:2, 440–446.
[13] Autor, D., J. Donohue III, and S. Schwab, 2006, “The Costs of Wrongful-Discharge Laws,”
The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(2), 211–231.
[14] Autor, D., W. Kerr, and A. Kugler, 2007, “Does Employment Protection Reduce Productivity?
Evidence From US States” The Economic Journal 117, F189—F217.
[15] Bagchi, A., 2003, “Unions and the Duty of Good Faith in Employment Contracts,” Yale Law
Journal 112, 1881–1910.
[16] Baumann, F., 2010, “On unobserved worker heterogeneity and employment protection,” European Journal of Law and Economics 29, 155–175.
[17] Bertola, G., 2004, “A Pure Theory of Job Security and Labour Income Risk,” The Review of
Economic Studies 71(1), 43–61.
[18] Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., and S. Mullainathan, 2004, “How Much Should We Trust Differencesin-Differences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249–75.
[19] Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan, 2003, “Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance
and Managerial Preferences,” Journal of Political Economy, 111, 1043–1075.
[20] Bird, R. and J. Knopf, 2009, “Do Wrongful-Discharge Laws Impair Firm Performance?” The
Journal of Law and Economics, 52(2), 197–222.
[21] Bird, R. and J. Knopf, 2010, “The Impact of Labor Mobility on Bank Performance,” Working
Paper.
[22] Botero, J., Djankov, S., La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes and A. Shleifer, 2004, “The Regulation of Labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4), 1339–1382.
[23] Breschi, Stefano, 2008, “Innovation-specific agglomeration economies and the spatial clustering
of innovative firms,” Handbook of research on innovation and clusters, Charlie Karlsson Ed.,
Edward Elgar Publishing Inc., 167-190.
[24] Chesbrough, H., 2003, “The governance and performance of Xerox’s technology spin-off companies,” Research Policy, 32, 403–421.
[25] Dertouzos, J., E. Holland, and P. Ebener, 1988, “The Legal and Economic Consequences of
Wrongful Termination,” Rand Corporation document R-3602-ICJ. Santa Monica, CA: Rand
Corporation, 1988.
[26] Dertouzos, J. and L. Karoly, 1992, “Labor-Market Responses to Employer Liability.” Rand
Corporation document R-3989-ICJ
[27] Donohue, J., 1998, “Did Miranda Diminish Police Effectiveness?” Stanford Law Review, 50,
1147–1178.
[28] Donohue, J. and J. Heckman, 1991, “Continuous versus Episodic Change: The Impact of
Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks,” Journal of Economic Literature, 29,
1603–1643.

45

[29] Edelman, L., S. Abraham, and H. Erlanger, 1992, “Professional Construction of Law: The
Inflated Threat of Wrongful- Discharge,” Law & Society Review, 26, 47–83.
[30] Ederer, F. and Manso, G. 2010, “Is Pay-for-Performance Detrimental to Innovation?,” Working
Paper presented at the Entrepreneurship Finance and Innovation Conference.
[31] Fulghieri, P. and M. Sevilir, 2011, “Mergers, Spin-offs, and Employee Incentives,” Review of
Financial Studies forthcoming.
[32] Garmaise, M., 2010, “Ties that Truly Bind: Non-competition Agreements, Executive Compensation and Firm Investment,” Journal of Law, Economics & Organization, forthcoming.
[33] Gompers, P., J. Lerner, and D. Scharfstein, 2005, “Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public Corporations and the Formation of New Ventures, 1986-1999,” Journal of Finance, 60, 577–614.
[34] Griliches, Z., 1990, “Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 28, 1661–1707.
[35] Grossman, G. and O. Hart, 1986, “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical
and Lateral Integration,” The Journal of Political Economy, 94(4), 691–719.
[36] Hall, B. H., A. Jaffe and M. Trajtenberg, 2001, “The NBER Patent Citations Data File:
Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” NBER working paper.
[37] Hall, B., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg, 2005, “Market value and patent citations,” RAND
Journal of Economics 32, 101–128.
[38] Hart, O., 1995, “Firms, Contracts and Financial Structure,” Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[39] Hart, O. and J. Moore, 1990, “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,” Journal of
Political Economy 98(6), 1119–1158.
[40] Howells, Jeremy, 1990, “The location and organisation of research and development: New
horizons,” Research Policy, 19(2),133-146.
[41] Imbens, G. and J. Wooldridge, 2009, “Recent Developments in the Econometrics of Program
Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1), 5–86.
[42] Jung, D., 1997, “Jury Verdicts in Wrongful Termination Cases,” Public Law Research Institute
Report, University of California Hastings College of the Law.
[43] Kortum, S. and J. Lerner, 1999, “What is behind the recent surge in patenting?,” Research
Policy, 28, 1-22.
[44] Kugler, A. and G. Saint-Paul, 2004, “How Do Firing Costs Affect Worker Flows in a World
with Adverse Selection?” Journal of Labor Economics, 22(3), 553–584.
[45] Lazear, E., 1990, “Job Security Provisions and Employment ,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 105(3), 699–726.
[46] Ljungqvist, L., and T. Sargent, 1998, “The European Unemployment Dilemma,” Journal of
Political Economy, 106(3), 514–550.

46

[47] MacLeod, W., and V. Nakavachara, 2007, “Can Wrongful Discharge Law Enhance Employment?” The Economic Journal, 117, F218–F278.
[48] Manso, Gustavo, 2011, “Motivating Innovation,” Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
[49] Miles, T., 2000, “Common Law Exceptions to Employment at Will and U.S. Labor Markets,”
Journal of Law, Economics and Organizations, 16(1), 74–101.
[50] Narayanan, M., and A. Sundaram, 1998, “A Safe Landing? Golden Parachutes and Corporate
Behavior,” Working Paper, University of Michigan.
[51] Pakes, A., and M. Shankerman, 1984, “The rate of obsolescence of patents, research gestation
lags, and the private rate of return to research resources,” in Zvi Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents
and Productivity, University of Chicago Press, 98–112.
[52] Schanzenbach, M., 2003, “Exceptions to Employment at Will: Raising Firing Costs or Enforcing Life-Cycle Contracts?” American Law and Economics Review, 5(2), 470–504.
[53] Sevilir, Merih, 2010, “Human capital investment, new firm creation and venture capital,”
Journal of Financial Intermediation, 19(4), 483-508.
[54] Tirole, J., 1999, “Incomplete Contracts: Where Do We Stand?” Econometrica, 67(4), 741–781.
[55] Walsh, D., and J. Schwarz, 1996, “State Common Law Wrongful-Discharge Doctrines: Update,
Refinement, and Rationales,” American Business Law Journal, 33, 645–689.

47

Figure 1: Adoption of Wrongful Discharge Laws Across States in the U.S.
The figure shows the annual number of U.S. states that have adopted a given wrongful discharge law. The sample spans the
years 1970 to 1999. The data is from Autor, Donohue, and Schwab (2006).

Figure 2: Cross-Sectional and Time-Series Variation in the Wrongful Discharge
Laws
The figure shows the evolution of the wrongful discharge laws across U.S. states and time (1970–1999). Each line represents a
unique U.S. state. Specifically, we plot the aggregate annual number of wrongful discharge laws adopted by a given state. The
wrongful discharge data coding is from Autor, Donohue, and Schwab (2006).

48

Figure 3: Timing of Basic Model.
This figure illustrates the timing of events in our basic model from Section 3.

Figure 4: Effect of the Passage of the Good-Faith Exception on Innovation.
This figure shows a visual difference-in-difference examining the effect of the passage of the good-faith exception on innovation
in adopting states relative to non-adopting states (see Autor, Donohue, and Schwab, 2006, for similar graphs). On the y-axis,
the graph plots the logarithm of the number of citations filed; the x-axis shows the time relative to the year of adoption (ranging
from five years prior to adoption until 10 years after the passage of the good-faith exception). The dashed lines in the figure
correspond to the 90% confidence intervals of the coefficient estimates; the confidence intervals are based on standard errors
which are clustered by state of location of the patent assignee.

49

50
Obns.
104,504
104,504
104,504
96,849
81,935
73,496
76,012
68,175
96,849
104,504
104,504
104,504
75,658
83,891
83,891
73,101
78,301
78,301
67,838

Variable

Number of patents
Number of citations
ln(Patents)
ln(Citations)
ln(Patents/Employee)
ln(Patents/R&D)
ln(Citations/Employee)
ln(Citations/R&D)
ln(Citations/Patent)
Good Faith
Public Policy
Implied Contract
Market-to-Book
Size
Size2
ln(R&D/Sales)
Competition
Competition2
Ratio of Value Added

6.552
52.438
0.831
2.608
-1.296
-2.373
0.438
-0.575
1.723
0.193
0.622
0.558
1.706
7.188
57.224
-3.432
0.056
0.009
0.091

Mean
2
11
0.693
2.485
-1.548
-2.339
0.247
-0.535
1.792
0
1
1
1.247
7.545
56.922
-3.509
0.024
0.001
0.082

Median

Data Source

25.326
216.107
1.098
1.514
2.229
2.279
2.451
2.555
1.012
0.394
0.485
0.497
1.371
2.356
32.164
1.405
0.079
0.026
0.051

NBER Patents File (Hall et al., 2001)
NBER Patents File (Hall et al., 2001)
NBER Patents File (Hall et al., 2001)
NBER Patents File (Hall et al., 2001)
NBER Patents File (Hall et al., 2001);
NBER Patents File (Hall et al., 2001);
NBER Patents File (Hall et al., 2001);
NBER Patents File (Hall et al., 2001);
NBER Patents File (Hall et al., 2001)
WDL coding from Autor et al. (2006)
WDL coding from Autor et al. (2006)
WDL coding from Autor et al. (2006)
Compustat
Compustat
Compustat
Compustat
Compustat
Compustat
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis

Panel A: Innovation Sample

Std. Devn.

data
data
data
data

on
on
on
on

employees from Compustat
R&D from Compustat
employees from Compustat
R&D from Compustat

Panel A reports summary statistics for the variables used in the innovation tests (see Tables 2–7). The dependent variables are: ln(P atents), ln(Citations);
ln(P atents/Employee), the log of the number of patents per 1,000 firm employees; ln(P atents/R&D), the log of the number of patents per million R&D dollars;
ln(Citations/Employee) and ln(Citations/R&D) are defined analogously. Finally, ln(Citations/P atent) is the natural logarithm of the ratio of citations to patents. The
explanatory variables are: Good Faith is a dummy that takes a value of one if a state has adopted a good-faith exception to the employment-at-will doctrine in a given year,
and zero otherwise; Implied Contract and Public Policy are defined analogously. Market-to-Book ratio is the market value of assets to total book assets. Market value of assets
is total assets plus market value of equity minus book value of equity. The market value of equity is calculated as common shares outstanding times fiscal-year closing price.
Book value of equity is defined as common equity plus balance sheet deferred taxes. Size is the natural logarithm of assets (deflated to 2005 dollars); Size2 is Size ∗ Size.
ln(R&D/Sales) is the natural logarithm of the ratio of research and development expenditures to firm sales. Competition is the fraction of total (2-digit) industry sales generated
by competitors in a given state and year (the state variable is based on the location of the firm’s headquarters). Competition2 is Competition ∗ Competition. Ratio of Value
Added corresponds to the annual gross state product (GSP) in a given sector and state divided by the total GSP in that state (data for 1977–1999). ln(Colleges) is the logarithm
of the number of degree-granting institutions of higher education in a given state per year. ln(Enrollment) is the logarithm of enrollment in institutions of higher education
in a given state per year (in thousands). ln(Real State GDP) is the logarithm of annual real state GDP (in 2005 $ millions). Real State GDP Growth is the continuously
compounded real state GDP growth per state and year. ln(Population) is the logarithm of a state’s population (in million) in a given year. U I is the logarithm of the maximum
total potential benefit available under the unemployment insurance system in a given state and year. Political Balance is the ratio of Democrat to Republican representatives
in the Lower House (House of Representatives) for a given state and year; this variable is not available for the state of Nebraska, as it has a nonpartisan legislature (unicameral
body) whose members are elected without party designation. N CA is the score of non-compete enforcement per state and year (data for 1976–1999). Unemployment Rate is a
state’s unemployment rate in a given year (data for 1976–1999). The sample spans 1971–1999, unless indicated otherwise above.
Panel B reports summary statistics for the variables used in the entrepreneurship tests (see Table 8). The dependent variables are: ln(Establishments Created by Start-Ups),
the logarithm of the number of start-up establishments; ln(Establishment Entries), the logarithm of the number of establishment entrants (new and existing firms); ln(Job
Creation from new Establishments), the log of the number of new jobs resulting from the creation of new firm establishments. The explanatory variables are: Good Faith is a
dummy that takes a value of one if a state has adopted a good-faith exception to the employment-at-will doctrine in a given year, and zero otherwise; Implied Contract and
Public Policy are defined analogously. NCA is the score of non-compete enforcement per state and year. UI is the logarithm of the maximum total potential unemployment
benefit available per state and year. ln(Real GDP p.c.) is the logarithm of real (in 2005 $) state GDP per million state residents and year. ln(Colleges p.c.) is the logarithm of
the number of degree-granting institutions of higher education (colleges) in a given state per million state residents and year. ln(Enrollment p.c.) is the logarithm of enrollment
in institutions of higher education in a given state per million state residents and year. The sample spans 1977–1999.

Table 1: Summary Statistics.

51

5.332
3.561
6.119
0.156
0.713
0.681
4.307
8.592
10.296
2.727
10.864

52,990
52,990
94,861
94,861
94,861
94,861
94,861
94,861
94,861
94,861

4.636
6.001
12.310
0.033
2.047
8.438
2.163
3.873
6.411

Mean

6,532

104,504
104,504
104,504
104,504
104,504
104,504
103,980
87,324
87,324

ln(Colleges)
ln(Enrollment)
ln(Real State GDP)
Real State GDP Growth
ln(Population)
UI
Political Balance
NCA
Unemployment Rate

ln(Establishments Created
by Start-Ups)
ln(Establishment Entries)
ln(Job Creation from
new Establishments)
Good Faith
Public Policy
Implied Contract
NCA
UI
ln(Real GDP p.c.)
ln(Colleges p.c.)
ln(Enrollment p.c.)

Obns.

Variable

0
1
1
5
8.600
10.284
2.724
10.860

3.296
5.911

5.127

4.691
6.016
12.374
0.035
2.049
8.505
1.415
5
6.200

Median
Annual Statistical Abstracts of the U.S. Census Bureau
Annual Statistical Abstracts of the U.S. Census Bureau
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
Data from Agrawal and Matsa (2011)
Annual Statistical Abstracts of the U.S. Census Bureau
Data based on coding from Bird and Knopf (2010) and Garmaise (2010)
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

Data Source

0.363
0.452
0.466
1.726
0.351
0.222
0.363
0.169

1.586
1.651

2.102

WDL coding from Autor et al. (2006)
WDL coding from Autor et al. (2006)
WDL coding from Autor et al. (2006)
Data based on coding from Bird and Knopf (2010) and Garmaise (2010)
Data from Agrawal and Matsa (2011)
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
Annual Statistical Abstracts of the U.S. Census Bureau; BEA
Annual Statistical Abstracts of the U.S. Census Bureau; BEA

Business Dynamics Statistics database of the U.S. Census Bureau
Business Dynamics Statistics database of the U.S. Census Bureau

Business Dynamics Statistics database of the U.S. Census Bureau

Panel B: Entrepreneurship Sample

0.796
0.908
0.936
0.032
0.854
0.515
4.090
2.077
1.973

Std. Devn.

Table 1: —Panel A: Innovation Sample – continued

52

Firm and Year dummies
Region x Year dummies
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

UI

ln(Population)

ln(Enrollment)

ln(Real State GDP)

ln(Colleges)

Ratio of Value Added

Competition2

Competition

Size2

Size

Market-to-Book

ln(R&D/Sales)

Implied Contract

Public Policy

Good Faith

Y
N
104,504
0.157

0.124**
(0.051)
0.082
(0.056)
0.095**
(0.044)

(1)
ln(Patents)

Y
N
96,849
0.218

0.180***
(0.054)
0.108**
(0.052)
0.142***
(0.041)

(2)
ln(Citations)
0.115**
(0.055)
0.065**
(0.032)
-0.024
(0.032)
0.057***
(0.012)
0.006
(0.006)
0.145***
(0.046)
-0.001
(0.003)
5.109***
(0.815)
-8.027***
(1.780)
0.352
(0.562)
-0.054
(0.064)
-0.118
(0.192)
-0.174
(0.173)
0.413
(0.263)
0.114
(0.081)
Y
Y
48,433
0.178

(3)
ln(Patents)
0.172**
(0.067)
0.079*
(0.041)
-0.020
(0.036)
0.092***
(0.015)
-0.002
(0.008)
-0.025
(0.059)
0.004
(0.004)
5.404***
(0.996)
-7.981***
(2.133)
0.268
(0.615)
-0.111
(0.076)
-0.061
(0.205)
-0.053
(0.194)
0.282
(0.296)
0.178*
(0.091)
Y
Y
44,718
0.244

(4)
ln(Citations)
0.116**
(0.055)
0.065**
(0.032)
-0.035
(0.032)
0.091***
(0.013)
-0.009
(0.007)
-0.807***
(0.062)
0.015***
(0.003)
5.168***
(0.827)
-8.335***
(1.769)
0.499
(0.606)
-0.055
(0.064)
-0.082
(0.192)
-0.181
(0.175)
0.389
(0.261)
0.111
(0.081)
Y
Y
48,072
0.778

(5)
ln(Patents
/Employee)
0.174**
(0.067)
0.079*
(0.041)
-0.029
(0.035)
0.130***
(0.016)
-0.019*
(0.011)
-0.997***
(0.070)
0.022***
(0.004)
5.501***
(1.006)
-8.401***
(2.124)
0.412
(0.642)
-0.113
(0.077)
-0.035
(0.205)
-0.058
(0.196)
0.267
(0.294)
0.174*
(0.091)
Y
Y
44,398
0.690

(6)
ln(Citations
/Employee)

-0.042***
(0.011)
-0.801***
(0.084)
0.014***
(0.004)
4.893***
(0.867)
-7.452***
(1.839)
0.321
(0.616)
-0.057
(0.066)
-0.138
(0.204)
-0.195
(0.174)
0.466*
(0.271)
0.126
(0.085)
Y
Y
48,686
0.743

0.121**
(0.058)
0.068*
(0.034)
-0.033
(0.035)

(7)
ln(Patents
/R&D)

-0.048***
(0.013)
-0.990***
(0.088)
0.021***
(0.005)
5.264***
(1.036)
-7.640***
(2.174)
0.210
(0.655)
-0.114
(0.078)
-0.098
(0.217)
-0.069
(0.199)
0.346
(0.306)
0.188*
(0.095)
Y
Y
44,915
0.671

0.178**
(0.069)
0.084*
(0.043)
-0.030
(0.038)

(8)
ln(Citations
/R&D)

0.050***
(0.018)
0.017
(0.020)
0.010
(0.017)
0.030**
(0.011)
-0.015**
(0.006)
-0.173***
(0.029)
0.005**
(0.002)
0.145
(0.252)
0.281
(0.597)
-0.023
(0.163)
-0.060**
(0.028)
0.046
(0.070)
0.156***
(0.057)
-0.148*
(0.088)
0.068***
(0.025)
Y
Y
44,718
0.422

(9)
ln(Citations
/Patent)

The OLS regressions below implement the following model:
yi,s→r,t = βi + βr × βt + βr + βt + β1 ∗ GFst + β2 ∗ P Pst + β3 ∗ ICst + β · Xist + εist
where yi,s→r,t is a measure of innovation for firm i from state s (belonging to region r) in year t. βi and βt denote respectively firm and application year fixed effects. βr × βt
captures general regional trends through the interaction of region dummies with year dummies (Columns 3–9); region dummies are based on four U.S. regions as defined by the
U.S. census: Northeast, South, Midwest, and West. Xist denotes the set of control variables; variable descriptions can be found in Table 1.
The sample spans 1971–1999 in Columns 1&2, 1977–1999 in Columns 3–9. Robust standard errors (clustered at the state level) are given in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 2: Effect of Wrongful Discharge Laws on Innovation.

Table 3: Relative Impact of Wrongful Discharge Laws on Innovation in Different
Industries based on their Innovation Intensity.
The OLS regressions below implement the following model:
yi→j,s→r,t = βi + βr × βt + βr + βt + β1 ∗ GFst ∗ High Intensityjt + β2 ∗ GFst ∗ Low Intensityjt + β3 ∗ High Intensityjt + β4 ∗ P Pst +
β5 ∗ ICst + β · Xist + εist
where yi→j,s→r,t is a measure of innovation for firm i (belonging to industry j) from state s (belonging to region r) in year t. βi and βt
denote respectively firm and application year fixed effects. βr × βt captures general regional trends through the interaction of U.S. Census
region dummies with year dummies. High Intensityjt takes the value of one if the median number of patents filed in a given Fama-French
48 industry in a given year exceeds the median value of these median number of patents across all industries in that year; Low Intensityjt is
given by (1 − High Intensityjt ). Xist denotes the set of control variables. In the table below Controls denotes the following set of variables:
ln(R&D/Sales) (not included in Columns 5 & 6), Market-to-Book, Size, Size2 , Competition, Competition2 , Ratio of Value Added, ln(Real State
GDP), ln(Colleges), ln(Enrollment), ln(Population), UI ; for the description, see Table 1. The sample spans 1977–1999. Robust standard errors
(clustered at the state level) are given in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Good Faith * High Intensity
Good Faith * Low Intensity
High Intensity
Public Policy
Implied Contract
Controls
Firm and Year dummies
Region x Year dummies
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(1)
ln(Patents)

(2)
ln(Citations)

(3)
ln(Patents
/Employee)

(4)
ln(Citations
/Employee)

(5)
ln(Patents
/R&D)

(6)
ln(Citations
/R&D)

(7)
ln(Citations
/Patent)

0.124**
(0.055)
0.056
(0.059)
0.091***
(0.018)
0.065**
(0.032)
-0.024
(0.032)
Y
Y
Y
48,433
0.179

0.183***
(0.066)
0.101
(0.081)
0.046**
(0.017)
0.078*
(0.041)
-0.019
(0.036)
Y
Y
Y
44,718
0.244

0.125**
(0.055)
0.054
(0.060)
0.084***
(0.020)
0.064*
(0.032)
-0.035
(0.032)
Y
Y
Y
48,072
0.778

0.185***
(0.066)
0.103
(0.082)
0.039**
(0.019)
0.078*
(0.041)
-0.028
(0.035)
Y
Y
Y
44,398
0.690

0.128**
(0.057)
0.078
(0.063)
0.053**
(0.020)
0.067*
(0.034)
-0.032
(0.035)
Y
Y
Y
48,686
0.743

0.186***
(0.068)
0.123
(0.080)
0.015
(0.021)
0.084*
(0.043)
-0.029
(0.038)
Y
Y
Y
44,915
0.671

0.051***
(0.017)
0.034
(0.031)
-0.048***
(0.013)
0.017
(0.020)
0.010
(0.017)
Y
Y
Y
44,718
0.422

Table 4: Duration Model for Timing of Passage of Good-Faith Exception.
The table below reports the coefficients from a Weibull hazard model where the “failure event” is the adoption of the good-faith exception in
a given U.S. state. States are dropped from the sample once they pass the good-faith exception (which is adopted in 13 U.S. states during the
sample period). The explanatory variables (all lagged by one year) include ln(Patents), the log of the total number of patents applied for by U.S.
inventors in a given state and year, and ln(Citations), the log of the number of citations to these patents. The description of the other explanatory
variables can be found in Table 1. l· in the table below denotes the lag operator; e.g., l2 denotes the second lag. The sample spans 1971–1999,
except for Columns 7 & 8 where we control for the unemployment rate (available from 1976–1999) and political balance (no data for Nebraska).
Robust standard errors (clustered at the state level) are given in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.
(1)
ln(Patents)

(2)

-0.233
(0.244)

ln(Citations)

(3)

(4)

0.469
(0.295)
-0.165
(0.220)

ln(Colleges)
ln(Real State GDP)
ln(Enrollment)
ln(Population)
UI

(5)

(6)

0.480
(0.315)

-0.338
(0.848)
2.533**
(1.115)
1.172
(2.216)
-4.327*
(2.372)
-1.641
(1.585)

0.418
(0.273)
-0.315
(0.838)
2.542**
(1.089)
1.067
(2.257)
-4.196*
(2.362)
-1.538
(1.664)

1,269

1,269

l1(Real State GDP Growth)
l2(Real State GDP Growth)
l3(Real State GDP Growth)

-0.387
(0.879)
2.385**
(1.191)
1.019
(2.253)
-3.988
(2.440)
-1.579
(1.656)
-1.597
(4.947)
0.347
(5.133)
4.020
(3.269)

0.423
(0.279)
-0.362
(0.865)
2.449**
(1.156)
0.920
(2.287)
-3.910
(2.433)
-1.488
(1.733)
-1.901
(4.890)
0.521
(5.192)
3.796
(2.934)

1,269

1,269

Political Balance
Unemployment Rate
Observations

1,269

1,269

53

(7)

(8)

0.411
(0.377)

-0.754
(0.894)
2.569*
(1.403)
2.024
(2.003)
-4.684*
(2.564)
-1.948
(2.261)
-1.587
(4.699)
0.624
(4.141)
2.604
(3.112)
-0.116
(0.140)
0.131
(0.112)
948

0.247
(0.292)
-0.824
(0.809)
2.646*
(1.406)
2.123
(2.024)
-4.606*
(2.527)
-1.877
(2.315)
-2.132
(4.796)
0.662
(4.172)
2.651
(3.077)
-0.124
(0.132)
0.106
(0.113)
948

Table 5: Robustness Test for the Effect of Wrongful Discharge Laws on Innovation
after Accounting for Potential Endogeneity of Dismissal Laws.
The OLS regressions below implement the following model:
3
3
P
P
yi,s→r,t = βi + βr × βt + βr + βt +
βh ∗ W DLhst +
β(k+3) ∗ Growths,t−k + β7 ∗ P olitical Balancest + β · Xist + εist
h=1

k=1

where yi,s→r,t is a measure of innovation for firm i from state s (belonging to region r) in year t. βi and βt denote respectively firm and application
year fixed effects. βr × βt denotes the interaction of U.S. Census region dummies with year dummies. Xist is the set of control variables. In
the table below Controls denotes the following set of variables: ln(R&D/Sales) (not included in Columns 5 & 6), Market-to-Book, Size, Size2 ,
Competition, Competition2 , Ratio of Value Added, ln(Real State GDP), ln(Colleges), ln(Enrollment), ln(Population), UI ; for the description, see
Table 1. l· in the table below denotes the lag operator; e.g., l2 is the second lag. The state of Nebraska is omitted in these tests, as it has a
nonpartisan legislature (unicameral body) whose members are elected without party designation. The sample spans 1977–1999. Robust standard
errors (clustered at the state level) are given in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Good Faith
Public Policy
Implied Contract
l1(Real State GDP Growth)
l2(Real State GDP Growth)
l3(Real State GDP Growth)
Political Balance
Controls
Firm and Year dummies
Region x Year dummies
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(1)
ln(Patents)

(2)
ln(Citations)

(3)
ln(Patents
/Employee)

(4)
ln(Citations
/Employee)

(5)
ln(Patents
/R&D)

(6)
ln(Citations
/R&D)

0.135**
(0.054)
0.057*
(0.032)
-0.024
(0.033)
-0.139
(0.371)
0.221
(0.317)
-0.465
(0.348)
-0.021***
(0.006)
Y
Y
Y
48,339
0.179

0.203***
(0.063)
0.069
(0.041)
-0.012
(0.037)
-0.043
(0.489)
0.400
(0.473)
0.091
(0.395)
-0.029***
(0.009)
Y
Y
Y
44,634
0.245

0.138**
(0.053)
0.056*
(0.032)
-0.034
(0.034)
-0.275
(0.362)
0.317
(0.315)
-0.344
(0.360)
-0.023***
(0.006)
Y
Y
Y
47,980
0.777

0.206***
(0.063)
0.069*
(0.041)
-0.020
(0.037)
-0.186
(0.499)
0.515
(0.480)
0.231
(0.410)
-0.031***
(0.009)
Y
Y
Y
44,316
0.690

0.140**
(0.056)
0.061*
(0.034)
-0.034
(0.036)
-0.310
(0.369)
0.191
(0.324)
-0.323
(0.351)
-0.019***
(0.006)
Y
Y
Y
48,592
0.742

0.207***
(0.065)
0.076*
(0.043)
-0.024
(0.040)
-0.273
(0.505)
0.361
(0.479)
0.211
(0.392)
-0.028***
(0.009)
Y
Y
Y
44,831
0.671

Table 6: Dynamic Effect of Passage of Good-Faith Exception on Innovation.
The OLS regressions below implement the following model:
yist = βi + βt + β1 ∗ Good F aith(−2, −1) + β2 ∗ Good F aith(0) + β3 ∗ Good F aith(+1) + β4 ∗ Good F aith(≥ +2) + β5 ∗ P ublic P olicyst + β6 ∗
Implied Contractst + εist
where yist is a measure of innovation for firm i from state s in year t. βi and βt denote respectively firm and application year fixed effects. We
follow Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003) in decomposing the passage of the good-faith exception into separate time periods: Good Faith (-2,-1) is
a dummy that takes the value of one in the two years before the passage, zero otherwise; Good Faith (0) is a dummy that takes the value of one in
the year of the passage, zero otherwise; Good Faith (+1) is a dummy that takes a value of one in the year after the passage, zero otherwise. Finally,
Good Faith (≥ +2) is a dummy that takes the value of one for the second year after the passage and thereafter, zero otherwise. Robust standard
errors (clustered at the state level) are given in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Good Faith (-2,-1)
Good Faith (0)
Good Faith (+1)
Good Faith (≥ +2)
Public Policy
Implied Contract
Firm and Year dummies
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(1)
ln(Patents)

(2)
ln(Citations)

(3)
ln(Patents
/Employee)

(4)
ln(Citations
/Employee)

(5)
ln(Patents
/R&D)

(6)
ln(Citations
/R&D)

0.015
(0.047)
-0.009
(0.042)
-0.009
(0.044)
0.137**
(0.056)
0.082
(0.056)
0.097**
(0.044)
Y
104,504
0.157

0.067
(0.057)
0.056
(0.062)
0.043
(0.053)
0.194***
(0.058)
0.108**
(0.053)
0.142***
(0.041)
Y
96,849
0.218

0.035
(0.054)
0.019
(0.050)
0.017
(0.046)
0.131*
(0.074)
0.113**
(0.056)
0.096**
(0.048)
Y
81,935
0.750

0.097
(0.064)
0.077
(0.073)
0.050
(0.059)
0.187**
(0.075)
0.144**
(0.055)
0.135***
(0.044)
Y
76,012
0.658

0.059
(0.064)
0.039
(0.059)
0.061
(0.056)
0.130*
(0.075)
0.144**
(0.060)
0.113**
(0.055)
Y
73,496
0.733

0.131*
(0.069)
0.116
(0.076)
0.077
(0.069)
0.188**
(0.076)
0.179***
(0.058)
0.152***
(0.051)
Y
68,175
0.663

54

Table 7: Robustness Test for the Effect of Wrongful Discharge Laws on Innovation
after controlling for Changes in the Enforcement of Non-Compete Agreements.
The OLS regressions below implement the following model:
yi,s→r,t = βi + βr × βt + βr + βt + β1 ∗ GFst + β2 ∗ P Pst + β3 ∗ ICst + β4 ∗ N CAst + β · Xist + εist
where yi,s→r,t is a measure of innovation for firm i from state s (belonging to region r) in year t. βi and βt denote respectively
firm and application year fixed effects. βr × βt captures general regional trends through the interaction of U.S. Census region
dummies with year dummies. N CAst is the score of non-compete enforcement per state and year. Xist is the set of control
variables. In the table below, Controls denotes the following set of variables: ln(R&D/Sales) (not included in Columns 5
& 6), Market-to-Book, Size, Size2 , Competition, Competition2 , Ratio of Value Added, ln(Real State GDP), ln(Colleges),
ln(Enrollment), ln(Population), UI ; for the description, see Table 1. Panel A explicitly controls for NCA enforcement, while
Panel B excludes states which change NCA enforcement during the sample period. The sample spans 1977–1999. Robust
standard errors (clustered at the state level) are given in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.
Panel A: Controlling for NCA Enforcement

Good Faith
Public Policy
Implied Contract
NCA
Controls
Firm and Year dummies
Region x Year dummies
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(1)
ln(Patents)

(2)
ln(Citations)

(3)
ln(Patents
/Employee)

(4)
ln(Citations
/Employee)

(5)
ln(Patents
/R&D)

(6)
ln(Citations
/R&D)

0.114**
(0.055)
0.065**
(0.032)
-0.028
(0.032)
-0.005
(0.011)
Y
Y
Y
48,433
0.178

0.172**
(0.067)
0.079*
(0.041)
-0.020
(0.037)
-0.001
(0.013)
Y
Y
Y
44,718
0.244

0.115**
(0.055)
0.064*
(0.032)
-0.038
(0.032)
-0.004
(0.011)
Y
Y
Y
48,072
0.778

0.174**
(0.067)
0.079*
(0.041)
-0.029
(0.036)
-0.000
(0.014)
Y
Y
Y
44,398
0.690

0.120**
(0.057)
0.067*
(0.034)
-0.037
(0.035)
-0.006
(0.012)
Y
Y
Y
48,686
0.743

0.178**
(0.069)
0.084*
(0.043)
-0.032
(0.040)
-0.002
(0.014)
Y
Y
Y
44,915
0.671

Panel B: Excluding States that Change NCA Enforcement

Good Faith
Public Policy
Implied Contract
Controls
Firm and Year dummies
Region x Year dummies
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(1)
ln(Patents)

(2)
ln(Citations)

(3)
ln(Patents
/Employee)

(4)
ln(Citations
/Employee)

(5)
ln(Patents
/R&D)

(6)
ln(Citations
/R&D)

0.166***
(0.059)
0.061
(0.045)
-0.016
(0.038)
Y
Y
Y
38,477
0.186

0.230***
(0.072)
0.063
(0.055)
-0.013
(0.040)
Y
Y
Y
35,499
0.255

0.164***
(0.059)
0.061
(0.046)
-0.027
(0.037)
Y
Y
Y
38,195
0.784

0.230***
(0.071)
0.063
(0.055)
-0.024
(0.037)
Y
Y
Y
35,250
0.699

0.177***
(0.060)
0.057
(0.048)
-0.028
(0.040)
Y
Y
Y
38,693
0.751

0.242***
(0.073)
0.062
(0.058)
-0.027
(0.041)
Y
Y
Y
35,666
0.680

55

56

Age Group dummies
State and Year dummies
Region x Year dummies
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

ln(Enrollment p.c.)

ln(Colleges p.c.)

ln(Real GDP p.c.)

UI

NCA

Implied Contract

Public Policy

Good Faith

0.116**
(0.053)
-0.051
(0.051)
-0.063
(0.052)
-0.026
(0.016)
-0.150
(0.141)
0.433**
(0.162)
-0.182*
(0.104)
0.148
(0.349)
N
Y
N
6,532
0.066

(1)
ln(Establishments
Created by Start-Ups)
0.105***
(0.036)
0.014
(0.019)
-0.026
(0.019)
-0.009
(0.006)
-0.058
(0.049)
0.171**
(0.075)
-0.157***
(0.049)
0.120
(0.091)
Y
Y
N
52,990
0.449

(2)
ln(Establishment
Entries)
0.106**
(0.043)
0.037*
(0.020)
-0.036*
(0.020)
0.002
(0.008)
-0.062
(0.057)
0.558***
(0.088)
-0.188**
(0.073)
0.108
(0.133)
Y
Y
N
52,990
0.728

(3)
ln(Job Creation
from new Establishments)
0.117*
(0.064)
-0.063
(0.052)
-0.060
(0.048)
-0.028*
(0.016)
-0.163
(0.125)
0.375*
(0.195)
-0.187*
(0.104)
0.179
(0.350)
N
Y
Y
6,532
0.059

(4)
ln(Establishments
Created by Start-Ups)

0.083**
(0.035)
0.013
(0.020)
-0.027
(0.019)
-0.008
(0.006)
-0.063
(0.054)
0.171**
(0.082)
-0.172***
(0.048)
0.194*
(0.096)
Y
Y
Y
52,990
0.448

(5)
ln(Establishment
Entries)

0.081*
(0.042)
0.019
(0.018)
-0.025
(0.017)
0.004
(0.007)
-0.019
(0.051)
0.610***
(0.085)
-0.192***
(0.067)
0.079
(0.126)
Y
Y
Y
52,990
0.728

(6)
ln(Job Creation
from new Establishments)

The OLS regressions below implement the following model:
yklst = βl + βs + βt + βr × βt + β1 ∗ GFst + β2 ∗ P Pst + β3 ∗ ICst + β · Xklst + εklst
where yklst is the dependent variable, measured at the establishment size (k), firm age (l), state (s) and year (t) level. βl , βs , βt , and βr × βt denote respectively firm age, state
and year fixed effects, and regional trends (interaction between U.S. Census region and year dummies). GF, PP, and IC measure whether a given wrongful discharge law is in
place in a given state and year. Xklst denotes the time-varying control variables; descriptions can be found in Table 1. The sample spans 1977–1999. Robust standard errors
(clustered at the state level) are given in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 8: Effect of Wrongful Discharge Laws on Creation of New Firms and Employment Creation due to New
Firms

