NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GAMES AND RESOURCES
Bård Harstad
Matti Liski
Working Paper 18519
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18519

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

This article is prepared as Ch. 154 in the forthcoming Encyclopedia of Energy, Natural Resources
and Environmental Economics, Elsevier (Ed: Jason Shogren). The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Bård Harstad and Matti Liski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Games and Resources
Bård Harstad and Matti Liski
NBER Working Paper No. 18519
November 2012
JEL No. C7,H7,Q0
ABSTRACT
This article presents a sequence of simple and related models to analyze the strategic use of natural
resources. Game theory is the natural tool for such an analysis, whether the resource is private or publicly
owned, whether it is renewable or exhaustible, whether the game is static or dynamic, and whether
or not the users can strategically invest in technologies. Equilibrium extraction is too large and comes
too early for public resources, but the opposite is true for private resources. The effects add up nicely
when the resource has both private and public-good aspects.

Bård Harstad
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
harstad@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Matti Liski
Aalto University School of Economics
Helsinki
matti.liski@aalto.fi

1

Introduction

Game theory is the natural tool when analyzing the strategic use of natural resources.
This article presents a sequence of related simple two-stage games to illustrate a range of
problems, generating a large number of lessons. We study environments that are static as
well as dynamic; resources that are publicly owned as well as privately owned; strategic
investments in substitute (or green) technology as well as complementary technology
(such as extraction technology). The lessons vary greatly across the institutional settings,
but the lessons have in common that they are all derived from the use of simple game
theory. This way, the article provide a survey of how game theory can be fruitfully
employed when studying environmental and resource economics. The resource itself
can be, for instance, …sh, forests, fossil fuel, fresh air, or fresh-water lakes, to mention
examples starting with the letter f .
We start by studying the common-pool problem, assuming that the resource is publicly owned. Each user is then extracting too much, ignoring the negative externality
on the other users. Still, e¢ ciency is further reduced in a simple dynamic common-pool
problem with two stages: Each user then has an incentive to extract a lot at the …rst
stage, since this will discourage the other users from extracting at the second stage. The
outcome is that even more of the resource is extracted. Furthermore, the intertemporal allocation of the extracted amounts is also ine¢ cient: too much is extracted in the
beginning, and too little later on (conditional on the total amount extracted). These
negative results continue to hold if the users can invest in substitute technologies, such
as abatement technology or renewable energy sources. Each user then has an incentive
to invest strategically little, as a visible and credible commitment to extract more of the
resource at the second stage. This is bene…cial to the investor, since the other users will
then …nd it optimal to extract less. For the same reason, the users prefer to invest a
lot in complementary technologies, such as extraction technologies, since this, too, will
e¤ectively commit an investor to extract a lot and thus discourage the other users from
extracting.
Our third section …nds that, if the resource is privately owned, the main results are
reversed. While privatization solves the common-pool problem, concentrated ownership
generates market power that will be exploited. As a result, the seller prefers to extract
strategically little in order to raise the price, or the buyer buys strategically little to
reduce the price. Also the intertemporal allocation of extraction rates is ine¢ cient, and
it becomes too conservative. The owner prefers to conserve the resource in order to
raise the price today, to discourage competitors from producing in the future, as well
as to discourage buyers from investing in substitute technologies that could reduce their
willingness to pay in the resource.
The fourth section lets the resource have private as well as public-good aspects. The
owner decides how much to extract, but extraction generates a negative externality.
This is the natural model when analyzing global warming, for example. If a country,
or a coalition of countries, implements a policy consisting of quotas or taxes, then the
equilibrium policy is going to re‡ect the public-good aspect (i.e., the environmental harm)
as well as the private aspect (i.e., the coalition prefers a policy improving its terms-oftrade). The outcome is, again, far from e¢ cient.
2

2

Public Resources

This section presents a very simple model of common resources. However, after describing
the model, we will argue that it can capture quite complicated situations. This will
be demonstrated throughout the paper as we, progressively, analyze static commonpool problems, dynamic common-pool problems, strategic situations with technological
choices, and private resources. We start with a perfectly symmetric model (asymmetries
are discussed in the next section, where the resource can be privately owned).
The resource stock is measured by s 2 (0; 1) and the set of users is I = f1; 2; :::; ng.
Each user, i 2 I, decides to extract zi of the resource. Such extraction may harm the
other users, creating a negative externality. This externality arises because i’s extraction
depletes the resource stock, and each user’s valuation of the stock is v (s). In particular,
i’s utility is:
U (xi ; zi ; s) = u (xi ; zi ) + v (s) , and
(1)
X
s = s0
zi .
(2)
I

So, s0 is the initial level of the resource. Variable xi represents other decisions made
by user i, assumed to not generate any direct externalities. It can be interpreted as
a policy parameter or a technology choice. We assume u ( ) is concave in xi and that
arg maxxi u (xi ; zi ) + v (s) is always interior.
Note that many applications …t the functional forms (1)-(2). For example, s may
represent the stock of clean air if zi is i’s pollution level, reducing this stock.
P The
environmental harm
from
pollution
is
then
given
by
the
convex
function
c
(
I zi )
P
v (s0 ) v (s0
I zi ), where v (s0 ) is simply a constant, and it can be ignored without
loss of generality.
A technical note: The functional forms (1)-(2) can capture the essence of a wide
class of resource problems, even settings that are dynamic and without the additive structure as in (1). In dynamic settings, more extraction today leads to a lower amount of resource for the future. But even then,P
we can typically write i’s payo¤ as Ut (xi;t ; zi;t ; st 1 ) =
u
e (xi;t ; zi;t ; f (st 1 )) + ve (f (st 1 )
I zi;t ), where f ( ) is the growth-function of the resource, and the continuation
value, starting in the subsequent period, is captured by
P
v (s)
ve (f (st 1 )
I zi;t ). In Markov-perfect equilibria, the continuation value will
depend only the stock, exactly as captured by (1)-(2). Consequently, most symmetric
settings with common resources can be formalized by the model (1)-(2), even if they are
dynamic and not necessarily additive in the dynamic setting. In fully dynamic models,
v ( ) is endogenized. In this article, we simply take v ( ) as exogenously given to further
analyze simpler one and two stage games.

2.1

The Static Common Pool Problem

For simplicity, we refer to the …rst-best as the outcome preferred by a social planner
maximizing the sum of the users’payo¤s.
De…nition 1. The …rst-best is an allocation of fxi ; zi gi2I maximizing the sum of

3

utilities:
max

fxi g;fzi g

@u (xi ; zi )
@zi

,

X

U (xi ; zi ; s)

I

= n

@v (s)
@u (xi ; zi )
and
= 0:
@s
@xi

p
The second-order conditions for the planner’s problem are satis…ed when ju12 j
u11 (u22 + n2 v 00 )
2
2
2 00
2
2
since @ u (xi ; zi ) =@qi + n v < 0 and @ u (xi ; zi ) =@xi < 0.
However, in the game referred to as the problem of the commons, the variables are
not chosen by a social planner, but by the individual users. When all the users act
simultaneously, the natural equilibrium concept is Nash equlibrium.
De…nition 2. A Nash equilibrium is a set of choices, fxi ; zi gi2I , such that, when
user i takes as given the other users’ choices, fxj ; zj gj2Ini , then fxi ; zi g maximizes
U (xi ; zi ; s).
We use superscript s to denote the static version of the game, where all users act
simultaneously and only once.
Proposition 1 Consider the static common-pool problem: (i) Each user’s extraction zis
is larger than the …rst-best:
@u (xi ; zis )
= v 0 (s) < nv 0 (s) :
@zis
(ii) For any given zi , the equilibrium xsi is socially optimal:
@u (xsi ; zi )
= 0:
@xsi
Since user i does not internalize the negative externality on the other users, i extracts
too much. In other words, i extracts more from the common resource than what a social
planner would prefer and as speci…ed by the …rst-best. Note that the di¤erence between
the equilibrium extraction and the …rst-best increases in the number of users, n. Since
choice-variable xi was assumed to create no externality, it is optimally chosen. This fact
is natural in the static setting but it might no longer hold in dynamic settings, as we
soon will learn.
In principle, v ( ) can be concave or convex. If v ( ) were convex, extraction levels are
strategic complements, in the sense that i bene…ts more from increasing zi if zj , j 6= i,
large:
@ 2U
> 0 , v 00 (s) > 0:
@zi @zj
In this situation, user i prefers to extract more if the other users are expected to extract
a lot. A convex v ( ) may be reasonable for resources close to extinction or depletion, for
example, where reducing extraction levels is bene…cial for one user only if also the other
users attempt to conserve the resource. The second-order condition, when choosing zi ,
may then not hold, and, in fact, it never holds if u ( ) is linear in zi . When the second-order
4

condition fails, the consequence is multiple equilibria, where user i’s optimal extraction
level zi is large (small) if the other users are believed to extract a lot (little). The
extraction game is then a coordination game.
If v ( ) is concave, instead, extraction levels are strategic substitutes, in the sense that
i bene…ts more from increasing zi if zj , j 6= i, is small:
@ 2U
< 0 , v 00 (s) < 0:
@zi @zj
One user is then preferring to extract less if another user is expected to extract a lot. This
may be reasonable for most resources. Fish-stocks, for example, typically have smaller
growth-rates at high levels, contributing to a concave v ( ). The harm from pollution is
typically assumed to be an increasing and convex function, implying that the utility of
less pollution, or clean air, is an increasing and concave function. Since the second-order
conditions tend to hold, in this case, the equilibrium is unique. The rest of the section
presumes that v ( ) is concave.

2.2

A Dynamic Common Pool Problem

The above simple model can illustrate the forces at play also in simple dynamic common pool problems. One interpretation of variable xi is that it measures user i’s early
extraction level. Suppose there are two stages: i …rst extracts xi for the …rst stage and
yi for the second stage. The total extraction level is zi
xi + yi , as before. Suppose
consumption equals extraction and generates the utility wt ( ), t 2 f1; 2g, where wt ( ) is
assumed to be increasing and concave. Then, user i’s utility u ( ) over the two stages can
be written as:
u (xi ; zi ) = w1 (xi ) + w2 (zi xi ) :
In the static or normal-form version of this game, user i will simply set both xi and
zi at the same time. In that case, it follows from Proposition 1 that:
w10 (xi ) = w20 (zi

xi ) = v 0 :

Hence, given user i’s total extraction zi , i’s extraction in period 1 is e¢ cient. In other
words, the intertemporal allocation of the extracted amount is e¢ cient even if the total
amount itself is suboptimally large.
However, if the users cannot commit, they will choose the extraction levels for the
two states sequentially. The …rst-stage extraction xi is chosen, and observed by everyone,
before the users choose the second-stage extraction, zi xi . With this dynamic or twostage extensive form game, it is natural to limit attention to subgame-perfect equilibria.
That is, we will require that the strategies at stage two continue to constitute a Nash
equilibrium in the game that is played at that stage, no matter what the …rst-stage
actions turned out to be. Since the xi s are observed before the zi s are set, the latter
choices are likely going to be functions of the set of xi -choices. That is, zi = zi (x), where
x = (x1 ; :::; xn ).
De…nition 3: The strategies (xi ; zi (x))i2I constitute a subgame-perfect equilibrium
if they constitute a Nash equilibrium and if also (zi (x))i2I constitute a Nash equilibrium
at the second stage for every feasible x = (x1 ; :::; xn ).
5

In our two-stage model, the total payo¤ for i from choosing xi , given x i , is
X
u(xi ; zi (xi ; x i )) + v(s0
zj (xi ; x i )):
j2I

Player i can thus anticipate how its …rst-stage action xi in‡uences extraction not only by
i but also by every other j. We use superscript d to distinguish the dynamic game from
the static. There is a unique subgame-perfect equilibrium.
Proposition 2 Consider the dynamic common-pool problem:
(i) User i’s total extraction zid is larger than the …rst-best.
(ii) Given zid , …rst-period extraction is too large and given by:
w10 (xi ) =

1

(n 1) v 0 v 00
nv 00 + w200

v0 < v0:

(3)

(iii) Consequently, both xi and zi are larger than in the static version of the commonpool problem, while every payo¤ Ui is smaller:
zid

zis ; sd

ss ; and Uid

Uis :

All inequalities are strict as long as v 00 < 0.
Proof: The proof is ommitted as it would simply be a special case of the next proof.
QED
In other words, each user extracts more when the other users can observe early extraction and thereafter modify their next extraction rates. Since v is concave, more
extraction today induces the other
P users to extract less tomorrow, since the marginal
0
cost of extracting more, v (s0
I xi ), is larger if xi is large. Anticipating this, each
user extracts more than in a similar static game.
Note that (3) implies that equilibrium extraction is more aggressive compared to the
optimum if n is large and v very concave compared to the concavity of w2 ( ) (i.e., if
v 00 =w200 is large). If v were linear, there would be no such distortion and xi would be
…rst-best, given zi . For any strictly concave v ( ), however, the dynamic common pool
problem is strictly worse than the static version of the game. If v ( ) were convex, the
opposite would be true: user i would then want to extract little at stage one, since this
would raise the bene…t for the other users to conserve the resource at stage two.
If the resource s is interpreted as clean air and zi as pollution, then the corollary is
simply that each polluter emits more today in order to induce the other users to pollute
less in the future. The consequence is more aggregate pollution. If the resource is the
stock of …sh, each …sherman …shes more than the …rst-best - not only because he fails to
take the static externality into account - but also because more extraction today implies
that the other …shermen …nd it optimal to …sh less tomorrow. If the resource-stock grows
between the two stages, the model should be slightly modi…ed but the main results would
continue to hold.

6

2.3

Technology and Commitment

The rather general lesson from the previous subsection is that when v ( ) is concave,
implying that the extraction rates are strategic substitutes, then each user would bene…t
if it, somehow, could commit to extract more, since the other users would then …nd
it optimal to extract less. In reality, user i has several opportunities to make such a
commitment: any policy set in advance, or any investment in technology, may in‡uence
user i’s future preference, and these choices can be captured by the parameter xi . Thus,
the …rst-stage action xi does not need to be early extraction. It can be anything that
does not, by itself, generate externalities on the other users. We will now refer to xi
as a technology. Although xi itself is assumed to not generate any externality, it may
in‡uence i’s preferences for extraction at stage two. Anticipating this, the other users
may extract less if the technology xi is strategically chosen.
Using the similar de…nition as before, we will say that the technology is a strategic
complement to extraction if u12 > 0 and a strategic substitute if u12 < 0.
Proposition 3 Consider the sequential game where the xi s are chosen before the zi s. In
the subgame-perfect equilibrium, the …rst-order condition for xi is:
(n 1) v 0 u12 =u22
@u
:
=
@xi
n + u22 =v 00

(4)

(i) Thus, if xi is a complement to zi (i.e., if u12 > 0), then xdi > xsi . If xi is a substitute
to zi (i.e., if u12 < 0), then xdi < xsi .
(ii) Sequential moves worsen the common-pool problem: zid zis , sd ss , and Uid Uis .
All inequalities are strict as long as u12 6= 0.
Proof : Anticipating all the e¤ects from setting xi , the …rst-order condition is
u1 + u2

dzi
dxi

v0

dzi
+ (n
dxi
u1

dzj
= 0)
dxi
dzj
1)
= 0:
dxi

1)

v 0 (n

(5)
(6)

dz

The strategic e¤ect dxji can be evaluated by totally di¤erentiating all second-stage …rstorder conditions (for i and j 6= i). Consider thus the impact of a small increase in xi of
size dxi (keeping ever other xj constant):
v 00

u12 dxi + u22 dzi =

X

(7)

dzl ;

l2I

v 00

u22 dzj =

X
l2I

dzj =

dzl )

v 00
(u22 + v 00 (n

1))

dzi :

(8)

Substituting (8) into (7), we can, after a few steps, obtain
dzj
u12 =u22
=
< 0 if u12 > 0,
dxi
n + u22 =v 00
7

(9)

while, from (8), we know that dzi =dxi and dzj =dxi have opposite signs. Combining (6)
and (9) gives
(n 1) v 0 u12 =u22
u1 =
:
n + u22 =v 00
QED
Complementary technologies are, for example, drilling technology, investments in polluting industries, …shing boats, or the breeding of cows for the common grassland. All
such investments are larger than what is …rst-best and, furthermore, they are larger than
what the users would have chosen were they not observed and reacted to by the other
users of the resource. Since every user invests too much in complementary technology,
the result is that extraction is larger, and the resource stock is smaller, than what would
be the outcome in a static setting where xi were not chosen strategically before zi .
Substitute technologies are, for example, renewable energy-sources, investments in
abatement technologies, a district’s re-education of …shermen or a gradual exit from the
extracting industry. Every such investment level is, in equilibrium, sub-optimally low
and, furthermore, it is smaller than the investment levels preferred by the users at the
extraction stage (or in a static setting where xi and zi are set simultaneously). Since
good substitutes are not invested in to a su¢ ciently degree, all users will extract too
much and more than they would in the similar static game.
As a simple illustration and example, suppose that each user can invest in windmills
and consume the generated renewable energy in addition to the energy from fossil fuel.
If xi measure the level of renewable energy investment, i enjoys the utility u (xi ; zi ) =
b (xi + zi ) k (xi ), where b ( ) is the bene…t from energy consumption while k ( ) is the cost
of investing in renewable energy sources. Naturally, u12 = b00 k 00 < 0, so the technology
is, in this case, a substitute to extraction. Thus, each user invests strategically little in
windmills.
In sum, it does not matter whether xi is …rst-stage extraction or investments in
technology. It does not matter whether the technology is a substitute or a complement
to later extraction. As long as i can set xi …rst, it sets xi such as to commit to more
extraction later on. The marginal direct impact on own utility is negligible, but the
consequence that other users will extract less is bene…cial and of …rst-order magnitude
for i. When everyone act in this way, total extraction increases and utilities decline.

3

Private Resources

Privatization is both the natural and the celebrated answer to the problem of the commons. Intuitively, a user’s incentive to extract is weaker if this user is the residual
claimant of the remains. However, privatization may create strategic powers through the
resource ownership which, when combined with the dynamic nature of the resource, lead
to distortions opposite to those that we have seen for the publicly owned resources. This
section discusses market power on the supply side and the demand side before analyzing
asymmetric settings with strategic investments in substitute technologies.

8

3.1

Suppliers with Market Power

We start with a simple symmetric setting. Thus, there are two identical owners (i and
j) each holding a stock s0 of a perfectly storable homogenous good, to be sold in two
periods (t = 1; 2). Productions for i are xi and yi in the …rst and second periods,
respectively. Cumulative productions cannot exceed total availability, xi + yi = zi s0 .
Let u = u( ) denote the periodic consumption utility as a function of the total quantity
o¤ered to the market. The market price is p = u0 ( ), or p = p(xi + xj ) and p(yi + yj )
for the two periods, respectively. If producer i sells xi units while j sells xj units in the
…rst period, then i’s pro…t is 1 (xi ; xj ) = p(xi + xj )xi ; similarly, second-period pro…t is
2
(yi ; yj ) = p(yi + yj )yi . We assume that the pro…t function is strictly concave. This, in
turn, implies that productions of i and j are strategic substitutes: If j produces more, i’s
bene…t from producing more is reduced (as the price is then lower).
Extraction is costly and, the more one extracts, the deeper into the sea one must
drill, or the more remote deposites in the mountain one must mine. We assume that if
the cost of extracting xi units is given by c (xi ), then the cost of afterwards extracting yi
units is given by the total extraction cost, c (xi + yi ), minus the cost already paid, c (xi ).
Over the two periods, i’s payo¤ is thus:
Ui (x; y; si ) =

1

(xi ; xj ) +

2

(yi ; yj )

c (xi + yi ) .

We will consider two main situations in oligopolistic resource markets: economic and
physical exhaustion of the resource. In the former, the economic environment determines
how much of the resource is used in total, whereas in the latter case the total supply will
be inelastic.
Economic exhaustion: The …rst-best requires that marginal utilities are equal
across the periods as well as equal to the marginal extraction costs:
u0 (xi + xj ) = u0 (yi + yj ) = c0 (xi + yi ) = c0 (xj + yj )
) xi + xj = y i + y j :
We solve the game by backwards induction. The second-period supply for i and j solve:
@

2

()
= c0 (xi + yi );
@yi

(10)

re‡ecting the fact that the equilibrium choices depend on the history of extractions
captured by (xi ; xj ), that is, yi = yi (xi ; xj ). Condition (10) implies that own past
@y
@yi
production decreases current equilibrium production, @x
< 0; and also that @xji > 0,
i
because productions are strategic substitutes. Given this, reducing the …rst-period choice
of xi can be seen as a strategic investment: the larger is the i’s stock in the ground (i.e.,
the lower is xi ) at the beginning of the second period, the tougher is i as a competitor
to j, and the lower is j’s optimal second-period extraction level.
The equilibrium …rst-period extraction, xi , must satisfy the …rst-order condition:
@

1

( ) @ 2 ( ) @yj @yi (xi ; xj )
+
= c0 (xi + yi ):
@xi
@yj @yi
@xi
9

(11)

The second term on the left is the strategic investment e¤ect, which is negative: using
the resource today is costly not only because of the extraction cost but also because of
the second period market share contest. Due to the concavity pro…ts, …rms then produce
less in the …rst period than in the second period: xi < yi .
Proposition 4 Under economic exhaustion, too little is extracted relative to the …rstbest. Given the extracted amount, too little is extracted in the …rst period (xi < yi ).
Proof. Comparing (10) and (11),
@

@ 2( )
()
>
) xi < yi :
@xi
@yi
1

(12)

Together with (10), result (12) gives for both i and j
@

2

()
@yi

= c0 (xi + yi ) < u0 (yi + yj )
) xi + yi < xi + yi

(13)

where xi + yi is the socially optimal extraction satisfying u0 (xi + xj ) = u0 (yi + yj ).
QED.
Physical exhaustion and discounting: The corner-solution zi = s0 occurs when
the resource in the ground has little or no …nal value, and when the demand is large
enough to absorb the available supply. The resource owners cannot, then, manipulate
the overall use in the equilibrium, and the above strategic-investment e¤ects cannot
arise. Indeed, when the pro…ts from both periods are the same and zi = s0 , …rms tend
to allocate their resource evenly, leading to equalized prices p1 = p2 in periods t = 1 and
t = 2 , respectively. But time horizons in resource use are typically long, and it would
be a gross simpli…cation to ignore discounting, leading to time-di¤erentiated extraction
payo¤s and distortions in olipolistic resource use even when the total resource use is …xed.
If we ignore extraction costs, for now, i’s payo¤ is:
Ui (x; y; s0 ) =

(xi ; xj ) +

(yi ; yj ) ;

where 2 (0; 1) is the discount factor and xi + yi = s0 for i and j.
The …rst-best requires that the present-discounted value of the resource is equal across
the periods:
u0 (xi + xj ) = u0 (yi + yj ) )
x i + xj > y i + y j :

(14)

In equilibrium, the strategic interaction between the oligopolists is e¤ectively a oneshot game, as yi = s0 xi is going to hold under physical exhaustion, implying that
interior choices at t = 1 for every i must satisfy:
@

1

()
@ 2( )
=
:
@xi
@yi
10

(15)

Comparing (14) and (15) shows that oligopolists follow a quite di¤erent allocation principle than the one describing …rst-best, although the outcomes could potentially coincide.
Whether the sellers can intertemporally price discriminate depends on the elasticity of
marginal utility, de…ned as M U (c)
u00 (c)c=u0 (c) > 0 where c is consumption that
equals extraction in both periods. The elasticity of demand, at extraction level c; is then
1= M U (c). Firm i that extracts share i of c, has iD (c) 1= i M U (c).
D (c)
Proposition 5 Under physical exhaustion and discounting, both oligopolistic and monopolistic resource extraction coincide with the …rst-best if and only if 0M U ( ) = 0. If
0
M U ( ) > 0, too little is extracted in the …rst period (xi + xj < xi + xj ).
Proof: Let u1 and u2 denote equilibrium utilities in periods 1 and 2, respectively. For
symmetric oligopoly allocation, we have ti = ti for t = 1; 2, and each i; j , and we can
consider following:
u02
u01
,

@ 2
@yi
,
@ 1
@xi
u002
yi
u02

,

1i
D

,

2
MU

2i
D

u002
yi + 1
u02

u001
xi + 1
u01

,

u001
xi
u01
1

(16)

1

1 1
i MU

2 2
i MU

1
MU :

(17)

As xi +xj > yi +yj , we obtain from (16) and (17) that the planner’s and the oligopolists’
…rst-order conditions (14) and (15) coincide if and only if tM U is a constant at varied
consumption levels:
@ 2
u02
@y
= @ 1i , 1M U = 2M U :
u01
@x
i

On the other hand,
u02
=1<
u01

@ 2
@yi
@ 1
@xi

,

2
MU

<

1
MU :

That is, the oligopolists have a higher return for saving the resource to the second period
than the planner at the …rst-best allocation xi + xj > yi + yj i¤ M U decreases as we
move to t = 2. For the monopoly case, the market share is t = 1 in both periods. The
asymmetric oligopoly case is similar and the proof is omitted. QED
Under constant elasticity of marginal utility, and thus demand, the marginal pro…t
is proportional to price, and therefore the ratio of prices and marginal pro…ts remains
constant at all extraction levels: strategic powers do not distort extraction in this case.
However, in general, elasticity of demand increases when quantities contract and prices
increase; for example, if consumers have a …nite choke price at which consumption ceases,
p = u0 (0) < 0, we have D (0) = 1 or M U = 0 and D ( ) < 1 for positive consumption
levels. The marginal pro…t condition then implies di¤erentiated intertemporal prices,
that is, consumers pay more for the resource in the …rst period than in the second:
@ 1
@xi

@ 2
= 0 =) u01 > u02 :
@yi
11

3.2

Buyers with Market Power

The dynamic relationship between resource consumers and suppliers involves strategic
decisions also on the buyer side, arising, for example, from the consumer demand management through policies such as consumption taxes, import tari¤s and subsidies to
alternative technologies, and also from investments in development and adoption of resource substitutes. The policies coordinate the consumer side behavior, and therefore
lead to the question of how the consumer side should optimally manage its demand of
the resource over time. The key features of this problem are conceptually quite di¤erent
from those of the oligopolistic setting above: the government (buyer) faces a commitment problem, causing distortions and making the demand management di¢ cult. We
illuminate these di¤erences by considering a setting where one single buyer decides on
its purchases of the resource from competitive private property resource sellers.
For this, let us assume that there is a continuum of price-taking sellers, each holding a
unit of the resource, indexed by z 2 [0; s0 ]. The aggregate cost of extracting the amount
z is c (z) ; as in previous section, and the marginal cost is c0 (z) which, in equilibrium,
must be the price when z units are expected to be purchased. Thus, we can let supply be
represented by the function p(z) c0 (z), showing the equilibrium price when, in total,
z units are bought; we assume that the supply reservation price p(z) is strictly convex.
Note that, when there is no discounting, the price must be the same in both periods,
and it must be equal the marginal extraction cost when x + y units are extracted. The
buyer’s pleasure when consuming x units in period one, and y units in period two, is
given by u (x) + u (y), where u ( ) is assumed to be increasing and strictly concave.
The …rst-best is thus requiring:
u0 (x) = u0 (y) = c0 (x + y) = p (x + y) ) x = y:
In equilibrium, the buyer buys x in the …rst and y in the second period at price
p (x + y), and obtains the payo¤:
U (x; y; s) = u(x) + u (y)

(x + y) p(x + y)

where we assume that the buyer’s utility is quasi-linear in money. The utility-function
is assumed to satisfy u0 (0) < p(s0 ), implying that the resource is economically exhausted
(the last unit is too expensive to extract).
Consider, …rst, the static or normal-form game, where the buyer sets x and y simultaneously in the beginning of the game. In this case, the buyer choses Ux (x; y; s0 ) =
Uy (x; y; s0 ) = 0, that is, the marginal consumption utilities are equalized with the marginal purchasing cost for the total amount x + y = x + y :
u0 (x ) = u0 (y ) = p(x + y ) + p0 (x + y )(x + y ):

(18)

This is the buyer’s commitment solution: the buyer would like to announce consumptions
x = y satisfying (18) in the …rst period. Note that the intertemporal allocation is
e¢ cient even though too little of the resource is extracted, compared to the …rst-best.
Consider, next, the extensive form game where the buyer sets x in the …rst period,
unable to commit to y, set in the second period. As the second period arrives, the buyer
would like choose y = y d satisfying the …rst-order condition:
12

u0 (y d ) = p(x + y d ) + p0 (x + y d )y d :

(19)

As this equation is di¤erent from (18), it is clear that the ideal policy under commitment
is not time consistent. Once the second period arrives, there is no need to pay attention
to how a larger y should have raised the price in the …rst period, and y is thus larger
than what the buyer would have preferred to commit to at the beginning of the game.
Proposition 6 Under monopsony, too little is extracted compared to the …rst-best. Given
the extracted amount, too little is extracted in the …rst period (x < y).
Proof. In equilibrium, the buyer must respect the sellers’ arbitrage and thus the
…rst-period price equals the anticipated second-period price,
(20)

p1 = p(x + y(x)):
The f.o.c. for x is:
u0 (x) + u0 (y)y 0

(1 + y 0 (x))p

(x + y(x))(1 + y 0 (x))p0 ;

(21)

where y 0 = y 0 (x), as given by (19). By substituting (19) into (21) and rearranging, we
get:
u0 (x)

u0 (y) = (1 + y 0 (x))xp0 (x + y) > 0:

(22)

By di¤erentiating (19), we can verify 1 < y 0 (x) < 0, con…rming the inequality in (22).
The fact that too little is extracted in total follows since, even in the second period,
u0 (y) > p, (19) shows. QED
As in the static version of this game, too little is extracted. The buyer buys little in
order to keep the price low. In contrast to the static version, i.e., for the case where the
buyer can commit, the buyer ends up consuming more in the second period than in the
…rst. Ideally, the buyer would like to commit to consume little in both periods, such that
the price would stay low throughout the two periods. Once the second period arrives,
however, the price paid for x is sunk and the buyer can raise y without changing that
price. Of course, the sellers anticipate that y is going to be large and rational expectations
ensure that the price stays the same across both periods.
The comparison illustrates a general phenomenon: …rst-best policies for the buyer,
designed to in‡uence resource consumption over time, are not generally time consistent.
We will discuss particular policies such as tari¤s on resource imports in a richer setting in
Section 4, but the time-inconsistency of tari¤s follows directly from the current analysis.
To make a sharp case, consider a government regulating consumption using a unit tax .
The …rst-best tax, implementing (18), is de…ned by:
u0 (x ) = u0 (y ) = p(x + y ) +

:

Without commitment, the resource market expects the buyer to deviate from this and
set lower taxes in the future, d < . The equilibrium taxes, 1 and 2 , will implement
equilibrium consumptions, as given by (22). Thus, the taxes must decline over time:
u0 (x)

p=

1

> u0 (y)
13

p=

2:

Connections to durable goods and Coase conjecture. It turns out that the
resource buyer’s commitment problem is conceptually equivalent to that of the durablegood monopoly. Indeed, rather than assuming a strategic resource buyer, consider a
monopoly producing and selling a durable-good with zero cost. Buyers have measure
z 2 [0; s0 ] and their reservation price for purchase p(z) is declining in index z which, in this
monopoly case, is the consumer stock that is served. Assuming that the monopoly can
come to the market twice, selling …rst x units and then y units while satisfying x+y s0 ,
we could follow the steps above to demonstrate the monopoly’s commitment problem:
the monopoly has incentives to lower prices in the future to serve more demand than
initially announced. Anticipating this, consumers will not accept the high prices in the
…rst period, so the monopoly has to serve the customers with a low price in both periods.
If the monopoly can frequently interact with the market, the price tends to approach
the seller’s reservation price. Ronald Coase conjectured that, in such a situation, the
monopoly power vanishes "in the twinkling of an eye". The subsequent literature has
identi…ed a number of settings where the monopoly can escape the conjecture, including
cost-structures that allow commitment to production-smoothing over time and strategies
that build reputation for the monopolist. This conceptual connection to durable goods is
valuable, since the lessons from the well-explored theory of the durable-good monopoly
can be imported to the resource context.

3.3

Technologies and Strategies

We will now consider a situation with one buyer, one seller, and a resource that will be
physically exhausted. The seller owns the resource stock s0 and decides how much to
extract in the …rst period, y. The remaining part, s0 y, will be extracted in the second
period. For simplicity, we assume that there are no extraction costs. The buyer’s utility
from consumption is u ( ), as before. In addition, the buyer decides on x, now interpreted
as a substitute technology. Assume x 2 [0; 1] is investment in an R&D program that
produces a substitute for the resource, valued v, with probability x. The investment
cost, C(x), is assumed to be increasing and strictly convex in x. Both the buyer and the
seller has utility functions that are quasi-linear in money. If w (p1 ) = maxy u (y) p1 y
represents the buyer’s indirect utility for period one, given the price p1 , and similar for
period two, then the buyer’s total payo¤ is:
w(p1 ) + (1

x)w(p2 ) + xv

C(x):

The seller’s payo¤ is
p1 y + (1

x)p2 (s0

y):

The …rst-best is given by x and y satisfying the …rst-order conditions:
u0 (y) = (1 x) u0 (s0 y) ,
C 0 (x) = v u (s0 y) :
As above, we simply assume that the second-order conditions hold. We will now contrast
the …rst-best with strategic interaction outcomes where one side has the …rst-mover
advantage. The timing of moves can make a huge di¤erence in the resource use settings,
14

and the appropriate approach is not always obvious. For example, if the buyer can …rst
commit to the investment level, then it might be able to extract part of the resource rent.
Alternatively, if it is natural that the resource market is active before investments are
contemplated, then the seller side can potentially in‡uence and manipulate the buyer’s
investment to its own advantage. We start with simultaneous moves.
Investment-extraction contest: Assume, …rst, simultaneous moves: the buyer
chooses x and the seller decides on sales y for the …rst period. It is easy to show that the
equilibrium choices must satisfy the …rst-order conditions:
C 0 (x) = v w(p2 )
@ 1( )
@ 2( )
= (1 x)
;
@y
@y

(23)
(24)
2

1

where @ @y( ) = p1 + yp01 (y) is the marginal revenue for period 1, and @ @y( ) similarly for
period 2. Interestingly, the seller will not distort sales if there is no investment: 1 x
takes the role of the discount faction in Section 3.1 where we saw that no discounting
leads to …rst-best extraction. Moreover, we saw that under constant elasticity of marginal
utility "0M U ( ) = 0, the seller side distortion vanishes even for x > 0:
Proposition 7 Under simultaneous moves, the buyer invests too much in substitute technologies. If "0M U ( ) > 0, …rst-period extraction is too conservative, given x.
Proof: Since w(p2 ) < u (s0 y), comparing (23) to the …rst-best reveals that the buyer
invests too much, tilting the supply towards the present. The seller’s policy follows from
Proposition 5. QED
We will now explore how changing the timing of events alter the results.
Strategic investments: Suppose the buyer …rst chooses x. After observing x, the
seller thereafter allocates the resource optimally according to (24), as before.
The buyer’s …rst-order condition can be written as:
C 0 (x) + [v

w(p2 )] = v 0 (p1 )
=

where

@p1
@x

=

@p @y
@y @x

and

@p2
@x

=

y

@p1
+ (1
@x

@p1
@x

(1

@p2
@x
@p2
y)
;
@x

x)w0 (p2 )
x)(s0

@p
@y
.
@(s0 y) @x

Proposition 8 Under buyer’s leadership, the investment level is the same as with simultaneous moves when "0M U ( ) = 0. If "0M U ( ) > 0, the investments are larger under
buyer’s leadership, and this leads to more …rst-period conservation, than under simultaneous moves.
Proof: We can rewrite the equilibrium condition as
C 0 (x)

[v

w(p2 )] =

[y

= [p1

@p1
@y
(1
15

(1

x)(s0

x)p2 ]

@y
@x

y)
0

@p2
@y
]
@(s0 y) @x

where the inequality follows from Proposition 5. If "0M U ( ) = 0, then p1 (1 x)p2 = 0;
if "0M U ( ) > 0, the equality is strict. QED
Let us then move on to the seller’s leadership in the relationship.
Strategic extraction: Consider now the same model with the reversed timing: the
seller is …rst setting supplies, and then the buyer decides on e¤ort x: After observing
y, the buyer takes the future resource scarcity as given, and follows the rule (23), given
w(p2 ). But w(p2 ) is not exogenous: the seller can manipulate the buyer’s payo¤ from
e¤ort by optimally choosing y subject to (23).
Proposition 9 Under seller’s leadership, …rst-period extraction is more conservative
than under simultaneous moves, since extracting less today reduces the buyer’s investment in substitute technology.
Proof: The seller’s the …rst-order condition is
@

1

()
@y

(1

x)

@

2

()
@y

= x0 (y)p2 (s0
) p1 > (1

y) > 0
x)p2

(25)

where x0 (y) = w0 (p2 )p0 (s0 y)=C 00 (x) > 0 from (23). Thus, even without the seller’s
price-discrimination option, "0M U ( ) = 0, the seller over-saves the resource to pre-empt
investments. QED.

4
4.1

Private Inputs and Public Outputs
A model with extraction, emission, and policies

The two proceeding sections present models that are di¤erent, but note that they are not
mutually exclusive. In reality, some aspects of the resource may be private, while other
are public. Fossil fuel deposits may be owned by individual countries (or companies) but
the emission generated when consuming the fuel equals extraction of a public good: clear
air. A realistic model should capture both aspects.
This section presents a classic model where the resource is privately owned but extraction generates an externality. One country, or coalition of countries, is harmed by this
externality and it can commit to a policy at the beginning of the game. The equilibrium
policy will re‡ect the public as well as the private aspect of the resource in illuminating
ways.
First, a policy is set by a climate-coalition, M . Second, the producers and consumers
in nonparticipating countries decide how much to extract and consume. We abstract
from internal con‡icts within M and treat M as one player. We will now let yi denote
i’s consumption of fossil fuel while xi denotes i’s extracted amount. A country bene…ts
from consuming fuel, but extraction is costly. The extraction costs can, as mentioned
above, be captured by the cost ci (xi ) = vi (si xi ). With trade in fossil fuel, i can
consume a di¤erent amount, yi , than what it extracts. If p is the world price for fossil
fuel, we assume that the payo¤ to every nonparticipating country, i 2 N InM , is:
Ui = ui (yi )

ci (xi )
16

p (yi

xi ) , i 2 N:

Assume that the function ui (yi ) is twice di¤erentiable and satis…es u0i > 0 u00i . The
total consumption of fossil fuel is also equal to extraction of clean air, measured by s.
For simplicity, assume only M cares about clean air. M ’s utility is then
!
X
UM = uM (yM ) cM (xM ) + v s0
yi
p (yM xM ) , i = M:
I

In the …rst stage of the game, M sets environmental policies. This amounts to setting
the policy-pair (xM ; yM ) if relying on quotas for extraction and consumption, for example.
The price for fuel will then adjust to ensure that the market clears:
X
X
yi =
xi :
I

I

In the second stage of the game, each i 2 N maximizes Ui by choosing (xi ; yi ), taking
the price p as given. Thus, by assumption, only M recognizes its e¤ect on the price.
Alternatively, we can assume that the individual consumers decide yi and the individual
suppliers decide xi , and that these take p as given.

4.2

The Equilibrium Policy

The …rst-best is given by equalizing every country’s marginal bene…t of consumption to
the marginal cost of production, plus the marginal environmental harm:
!
X
u0i (yi ) = u0j yj and u0j yj = c0j (xi ) v 0 s0
yi 8i; j 2 I:
(26)
I

In equilibrium, however, at the second stage, nonparticipating countries consume
according to:
u0i (yi ) = p ) yi = Di (p) u0i 1 (p) :
(27)

The demand by i 2 N is thus given by Di (p). A country’s extraction level satis…es:
p = c0i (xi ) ) xi = Si (p)

c0i

1

(p) 8i 2 N:

(28)

At the …rst stage, M sets its policy such as to maximize UM , taking into account that
the market must clear at the second stage, i.e.:
I

yM

xM = S (p) D (p) , where
X
S (p)
Si (p) ;

(29)

N

D (p)

X

Di (p) :

N

M must take (27)-(29) into account and, by di¤erentiating these equations, we can learn
how M ’s policy a¤ects the world price and nonparticipants’behavior:
9
8
dp
1
(
)
=
>
0 (p) D 0 (p) >
0
dx
dy
S
=
< M M
dxi = Si (p) dp 8i 2 N
Si0 (p)
dxi
=
dyi = Di0 (p)Pdp 8i 2 N
:
)
0
0
dxM dyM
S (p) D (p)
>
>
;
:
Di0 (p)
dxM dyM = N (dyi dxi )
dyi
= S 0 (p) D0 (p)
dxM dyM
17

Given these constraints, it is straightforward to derive M ’s equilibrium policy at the …rst
stage:
Proposition 10 At the …rst stage, M ’s equilibrium policy will satisfy:

1

S 0 (p)
yM
v0 + 0
0
0
S (p) D (p)
S (p)
0
S (p)
yM
0
v
S 0 (p) D0 (p)
S 0 (p)

xM
= u0M (yM ) p;
D0 (p)
xM
= p c0M (xM ) .
D0 (p)

(30)
(31)

If M implements its policy using taxes on domestic consumption and extraction, these
must be equal to the left-hand sides of (30)-(31):
y

=

x

=

S 0 (p)
y M xM
v0 + 0
,
0
0
S (p) D (p)
S (p) D0 (p)
S 0 (p)
yM xM
1
:
v0
0
0
0
S (p) D (p)
S (p) D0 (p)

It is interesting to disenthangle the di¤erent e¤ects determining the equilibrium taxes.
First, isolate the private aspect of the resource by abstracting from the negative
externality. When v 0 = 0, the …rst terms on the right-hand side vanishes. In this case, M
prefers to tax/subsidize its own extraction and consumption only because this a¤ects its
terms of trade. If M is importing fossil fuel, yM > xM , M prefers to subsidize extraction
and tax consumption, since committing to such policies reduce the world price of fossil
fuel. By committing to consume little, for example, the price declines, bene…tting the
importer. This incentive is somewhat similar to lessons from the previous section with
market power. If M is exporting, M would prefer to subsidize consumption and tax
extraction in order to raise the equilibrium price.
Second, isolate the negative externality by assuming that M is consuming approximately the same amount which it extracts, such that yM
xM . Then, M prefers a tax
on both consumption and extraction. The magnitude of each tax depends on the elasticity of supply and demand in the nonparticipating countries. Suppose supply is quite
inelastic (S 0 is small) while demand is elastic (D0 is large). Then, if M tries to reduce
its consumption, p drops and the other countries will just consume more. This creates
carbon leakage on the demand side. Given this carbon leakage, M is better of taxing
and reducing its supply rather than its consumption. After all, global consumption must
equal global supply. Suppose, instead, supply is very elastic (S 0 is large) while demand
is inelastic (D0 is small). Then, if M tries to reduce its supply, p increases and the other
countries will just extract more. This creates a carbon leakage on the supply side, and M
is better of by focusing on reducing and taxing its consumption rather than its supply.
Interestingly, note that the coalition sets taxes such that the sum of the taxes is
always equal to the Pigouvian tax, v 0 . Furthermore, when setting the optimal taxes,
the e¤ects of the public-good aspect (the negative externality) and the private aspect
(the concern for M ’s terms-of-trade) are simply additive. Unfortunately, the outcome
if far from …rst-best: Neither marginal bene…ts nor marginal costs are equalized. The
nonparticipants typically consume too much and extract too much. The composition of
18

the taxes are driven by both the concern for carbon leakage as well as M ’s concern for
its terms-of-trade, and this distorts trade.
No matter the choice among these tax instruments, this equilibrium is highly ine¢ cient: marginal extraction costs are not equalized (nonparticipants tend to extract too
much), marginal bene…ts are not equalized (nonparticipants tend to consume too much),
and the …rst-stage policy is set such as to improve the coalition’s terms-of-trade. However, since the countries can trade fossil fuels, one may argue that they might also be able
to trade the fossil fuel deposits. If so, the coalition M may want to purchase deposits in
the nonparticipating countries, to prevent them extracting more as soon as M decides
to extract less. Such trade may take place in equilibrium and be highly bene…cial in the
present model, it can be shown.

5

Conclusions

Game theory is the natural tool for analyzing the strategic use of natural resources. In
this article, we have been interested in private as well as public resources, static as well
as dynamic common pool problems, technologies that can reduce the need to extract
or make extraction cheaper. Although we have employed a very simple two-stage game
throughout the article, we found that it could generate a number of important lessons:
1. In the static common-pool problem, where the resource is publicly owned, each
user extracts too much.
2. In a dynamic common-pool problem, each user tries to discourage the other users
from extracting in the future. This is achieved, in equilibrium, by ine¢ ciently extracting
a lot early on, and by investing heavily in complementary technologies (such as extraction
technology) but strategically little in green technologies. In all these cases, the dynamic
common-pool problem is worse than the static common-pool problem.
3. If the resource is privately owned, instead, the results are reversed: Whether the
buyer or the sellers have market power, extraction rates tend to be too small. Furthermore, the intertemporal allocation of extraction tends to be too conservative (too little
is extracted in the beginning), since each seller would like to commit to extract more in
the future to discourage the competitors from extracting then, or to discourage the buyer
from investing in substitute technology.
4. The above insights are combined if the resource has some aspect that is private
(e.g., the right to extract) and other aspects that are public (e.g., the environmental
harm). The party that is a¤ected by the externality prefers to commit to a policy
mitigating it. In equilibrium, however, the policy will be set such as to improve the
party’s terms-of-trade as well as the environment.
The lessons from these simple games are quite negative, but the following nonexhaustive reading-list is also including a few articles discussing solutions. The world
is still imperfect, so the reader is encouraged to contribute to the list in their future
research.

19

6

Further Reading

Beccherle, Julien and Tirole, Jean (2011): "Regional Initiatives and the Cost of Delaying
Binding Climate Change Agreements," Journal of Public Economics, Volume 95,
Issues 11–12, Pages 1339-1348.
Bergstrom, T. C. 1982. “On Capturing Oil Rents with a National Excise Tax”, American
Economic Review 71, 194-201.
Buchholz, Wolfgang and Konrad, Kai (1994): "Global Environmental Problems and the
Strategic Choice of Technology," Journal of Economics 60 (3): 299-321.
Coase, Ronald H. (1960): "The Problem of Social Cost," Journal of Law and Economics
3: 1-44.
Dasgupta, P., R. Gilbert, and J. Stiglitz (1983), Strategic Considerations in Invention
and Innovation: The Case of Natural Resources, Econometrica 51, 1439-1448.
Dasgupta, P., and G. Heal (1980): Economic Theory and Exhaustible Resources, Cambridge University Press.
Dutta, Prajit K. and Radner, Roy (2006): "A Game-Theoretic Approach to Global
Warming," Advances in Mathematical Economics 8: 135-53.
Fudenberg, Drew and Tirole, Jean (1991): Game Theory. MIT Press.
Gerlagh, Reyer, and Liski, Matti (2011): "Strategic resource dependence," Journal of
Economic Theory, Volume 146, Issue 2, Pages 699-727.
Golombek, Rolf, and Hoel, Michael (2004): "Unilateral Emission Reductions and CrossCountry Technology Spillovers." Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy 4 (2),
Article 3.
Harstad, Bård (2012): "Climate Contracts: A Game of Emissions, Investments, Negotiations, and Renegotiations," Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Harstad, Bård (2012): "Buy Coal! A Case for Supply-Side Environmental Policy,"
Journal of Political Economy, 120 (1), 2012: 77-115.
Hoel, Michael (1994): "E¢ cient Climate Policy in the Presence of Free Riders," Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management 27 (3): 259-74.
Hörner, J., and M. Kamien. 2004. “ Coase and Hotelling: A Meeting of the Minds”,
Journal of Political Economy 112, 718-723.
Karp, L., and D. Newbery. 1993. “Intertemporal Consistency Issues in Depletable
Resources”,·In Handbook of Natural Resource and Energy Economics, vol. 3, edited
by Allen V. Kneese and James L. Sweeney. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

20

Levhari, David and Mirman, Leonard J. (1980): "The Great Fish War: An Example
Using a Dynamic Cournot-Nash Solution," Bell Journal of Economics 11 (1): 32234.
Liski, Matti, and Montero, Juan-Pablo (2011): "Market power in an exhaustible resource market: The case of storable pollution permits," The Economic Journal,
121: 116-144.
Markusen, James R. (1975): "International externalities and optimal tax structures,"
Journal of International Economics 5 (1): 15-29.
Maskin, E., and D. Newbery. 1990. “Disadvantageous Oil Tari¤s and Dynamic Consistency ”, American Economic Review 80, 143-156.
Ploeg, Frederick van der and de Zeeuw, Art (1992): "International aspects of pollution
control," Environmental and Resource Economics 2 (2): 117-39.
Reinganum, J. F., and N.L. Stokey (1985), Oligopoly Extraction of a Common Property Natural Resource: The Importance of the Period of Commitment in Dynamic
Games, International Economic Review 26, 161-173.
Van Long, Ngo (2012): "Di¤erential Games and Resources," chapter 148 in the Encyclopedia of Energy, Natural Resource and Environmental Economics.

21

