                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        DOLLAR FUNDING AND THE LENDING BEHAVIOR OF GLOBAL BANKS

                                          Victoria Ivashina
                                         David S. Scharfstein
                                           Jeremy C. Stein

                                        Working Paper 18528
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18528


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




We are grateful for helpful comments from Michael Palumbo, and from seminar participants at Northwestern
University (Kellogg), the Banque de France/OSEO Conference, and the 4th Paris Spring Corporate
Finance Conference. We thank Peter Crane from Crane Data LLC for sharing money-market-fund
data with us, Toomas Laarits and Chris Allen for research assistance, and the Division of Research
at Harvard Business School for research support. The analysis and conclusions set forth are those
of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by other members of the Board of Governors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18528.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Victoria Ivashina, David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dollar Funding and the Lending Behavior of Global Banks
Victoria Ivashina, David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 18528
November 2012
JEL No. F36,F44,F6,G01,G21

                                            ABSTRACT

A large share of dollar-denominated lending is done by non-U.S. banks, particularly European banks.
We present a model in which such banks cut dollar lending more than euro lending in response to
a shock to their credit quality. Because these banks rely on wholesale dollar funding, while raising
more of their euro funding through insured retail deposits, the shock leads to a greater withdrawal
of dollar funding. Banks can borrow in euros and swap into dollars to make up for the dollar shortfall,
but this may lead to violations of covered interest parity (CIP) when there is limited capital to take
the other side of the swap trade. In this case, synthetic dollar borrowing becomes expensive, which
causes cuts in dollar lending. We test the model in the context of the Eurozone sovereign crisis, which
escalated in the second half of 2011 and resulted in U.S. money-market funds sharply reducing the
funding provided to European banks. Coincident with the contraction in dollar funding, there were
significant violations of euro-dollar CIP. Moreover, dollar lending by Eurozone banks fell relative
to their euro lending in both the U.S. and Europe; this was not the case for U.S. global banks. Finally,
European banks that were more reliant on money funds experienced bigger declines in dollar lending.


Victoria Ivashina                                  Jeremy C. Stein
Harvard Business School                            Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Baker Library 233                                  20th Street and Constitution Ave., N.W.
Soldiers Field                                     Washington, DC 20551
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vivashina@hbs.edu

David S. Scharfstein
Harvard Business School
Baker 239
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dscharfstein@hbs.edu
1. Introduction

       A striking fact about international financial markets is the large share of dollar-

denominated intermediation done by non-U.S. banks. This point is illustrated in Figure 1.

Drawing on data from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the figure shows that both

the dollar assets and the dollar liabilities of foreign banking entities have grown rapidly in the

last two decades, and currently are on the order of $10 trillion, which puts them roughly on a par

with U.S. banks (see also Shin, 2012). A significant part of this activity by foreign banks

represents interactions with customers located outside of the United States. However, foreign

banks also play a major role in domestic U.S. markets. As we discuss in more detail below,

European banks alone accounted for approximately 28% of the U.S. syndicated loan market over

the period 2005-2007.

                                           [FIGURE 1]

       The large footprint of global banks in dollar funding and lending markets raises a number

of questions.   Some of these have to do with the dollar’s role as a favored currency for

transactions by non-U.S. residents and firms—e.g., why is it that a Brazilian manufacturer might

prefer to borrow in dollars as opposed to in reals? Others have to do with understanding the

comparative advantage of foreign banks in lending to U.S. firms—e.g., why might an American

manufacturer end up borrowing from, say, Credit Agricole as opposed to J.P. Morgan?

       In this paper, we take the presence of global banks in dollar loan markets as a given, and

focus on exploring the consequences of this arrangement for cyclical variation in credit supply

across countries. In particular, we ask how shocks to the ability of a foreign bank to raise dollar

funding translate into changes in its lending behavior, both in the U.S., and in its home market.

This question is especially important in light of the observation that many foreign banks operate



                                                                                                 1
in the U.S. with a largely “wholesale” funding model. In other words, rather than relying in part

on sticky insured deposits—as do domestic U.S. banks—foreign banks raise the majority of their

short-term dollar financing from uninsured institutional sources, such as commercial paper

purchased by U.S. money-market funds.1 This makes the cost and availability of such dollar

funding highly sensitive to changing perceptions of their creditworthiness.

        To understand how such shocks might affect lending activity, we build a simple model,

which can be described as follows. Imagine a global bank based in France that lends in euros to

European firms, and in dollars to American firms. The bank has a fixed amount of equity capital

that it can use to support all of its lending.2 To finance the euro-denominated lending, it funds

itself by issuing insured euro deposits to its local retail deposit base. By contrast, to finance the

dollar-denominated lending, it funds itself by issuing uninsured commercial paper to a set of

U.S. money-market funds. Initially, the bank is viewed as having near-zero credit risk, so its

lack of insurance in the U.S. market does not have a material impact on its dollar funding costs.

        Now suppose that there is an adverse shock to the bank’s perceived creditworthiness.

Given the wholesale nature of its dollar liabilities (i.e., the lack of insurance), this leads to a

spike in its dollar funding costs, as the money-market funds rationally seek to cut their exposure

to the bank. At the same time, the cost to the bank of funding in euros is unchanged, given the

deposit insurance in that market. Said differently, as the bank becomes increasingly risky, the

advantage of funding in euros relative to dollars goes up, since the former enjoys an increasing

subsidy from the deposit insurance fund.



1
 When, as is often the case, foreign banks operate in the U.S. via a branch—as opposed to a separately
capitalized subsidiary—they are legally precluded from raising FDIC-insured deposits.
2
  This could be because the bank finds it costly to raise new equity in the short run, and because capital
regulation puts an upper bound on the ratio of total loans to book equity.
                                                                                                        2
       So we might expect the bank to shift its funding away from the U.S. commercial paper

market and back towards the European deposit market. But does this have any implications for

the geographic distribution of its lending? At first glance, one might think that there would be

none. After all, if it wants to maintain the volume of its dollar-based U.S. lending, the bank can

always tap its insured deposit base to raise more euros, use the proceeds to buy dollars, make the

same dollar loans as before, and hedge out the foreign exchange (FX) risk using the forward

market, by buying euros on a forward basis.3

       This logic is correct, so long as FX forward prices are pinned down by the usual covered-

interest-parity (CIP) relationship. In this case, a shock of the sort described above alters the

funding mix of the global bank, but leaves its lending behavior entirely unchanged. However, if

the induced funding realignment is big enough, we demonstrate that it begins to put pressure on

the CIP relationship. In other words, a large surge in the demand by the global bank for FX

forwards, combined with limited capacity on the part of arbitrageurs, endogenously leads to a

CIP violation such that synthetic dollar funding—composed of euro-based borrowing plus a

currency swap—also becomes more expensive. Indeed, in an interior equilibrium with a high

level of swap activity, synthetic dollar funding and direct dollar funding wind up being equally

costly to the bank, and both more expensive than direct euro borrowing.

       Once this is the case, implications for the geographic pattern of lending follow

immediately. Given the increased marginal cost of funding dollar loans, the bank cuts back on

these. And since it has a fixed capital base, this frees up capacity to expand its now relatively

more cost-efficient euro-based lending. So one distinctive and non-obvious conclusion from the

3
  We are implicitly assuming that the bank is prohibited from taking on naked exchange-rate exposure,
i.e. from borrowing in euros, and lending in dollars without a hedge. We discuss this assumption in more
detail below.



                                                                                                      3
model is that, in the presence of limited arbitrage and an endogenous CIP violation, an adverse

shock to the global bank’s perceived creditworthiness leads to a drop in its dollar-denominated

lending relative to its euro-denominated lending.

       We then go on to test the model’s key implications. To do so, we focus on events that

unfolded in the second half of 2011, a period that captures well the sort of shock to global-bank

creditworthiness envisioned in our model. During this period, the credit quality of a number of

large Eurozone banks began to be a source of concern, with Moody’s putting the French banks

BNP Paribas, Credit Agricole and Societe Generale on notice for possible downgrades on June

15, 2011. In the face of these concerns, U.S. prime money-market funds sharply reduced their

funding to Eurozone banks. Some of this reduction was likely spurred by investor redemptions

from money funds over the second half of 2011, but much of it appeared to preemptive on the

part of the money funds. Chernenko and Sunderam (2012) document that total money-fund

holdings of Eurozone bank liabilities declined by 37%, from $453 billion to $287 billion,

between May and August of 2011. Fitch reports further declines through the end of 2011.4

       Coincident with this contraction in dollar funding, there was a pronounced disruption in

the dollar-euro CIP relationship, in the direction predicted by our theory. The “euro basis”—i.e.,

the deviation (relative to CIP) in the forward price of euros in terms of dollars, and hence in the

cost of synthetic dollar borrowing—rose from a value of essentially zero at the beginning of May

2011, to over 70 bps in August, and continued to go up until reaching a peak of 150 bps in

November 2011. According to BIS, between the second and fourth quarters of 2011, despite a

contraction in dollar assets, Eurozone banks’ net dollar position (dollar assets minus dollar

liabilities) increased by $178 billion. The heightened currency mismatch suggests a greater


4
 “U.S. Money Fund Exposure and European Banks: Euro Zone Diverging,” Fitch Ratings, January 26,
2012.
                                                                                                 4
demand for FX swaps to hedge the risk. This is consistent with a key element of our model—

that strong demand for swaps from foreign banks puts pressure on the arbitrage mechanism and

thereby increases the euro basis.

       Using data on international syndicated lending activity from Thompson Reuters’

DealScan, we show that dollar lending by Eurozone banks fell relative to their euro lending,

while this was not the case for U.S. banks. As a control against possible confounding shocks, we

show that dollar lending to European firms by Eurozone banks also declined relative to their euro

lending. In other words, even holding fixed the nationality of the borrower, it appears that during

this period of dollar funding strain, Eurozone banks were shifting strongly away from dollar-

denominated lending. In addition, as a more general control for potential differences in the

composition of borrowers from Eurozone and non-Eurozone banks, we construct a panel that

allows us to incorporate borrower fixed effects. In particular, we are able to show that, during

the period of dollar funding strain, syndicates formed to make dollar-denominated loans to a

given firm were comprised of fewer Eurozone banks, while the same was not true of euro-

denominated loans. Thus, the same firms that borrowed in dollars from a syndicate comprised

largely of Eurozone banks were less likely to do so once these banks faced dollar funding

problems.

       In an effort to further isolate the mechanism in our model, we exploit the fact that

Eurozone banks differ in the extent of their reliance on money-market funds. We document that

in a cross-section of Eurozone banks, a greater reliance on money-market funds (defined as

liabilities held by money funds divided by total short-term debt plus deposits) is associated with

larger cuts in dollar-denominated loans relative to euro-denominated loans. As before, this

pattern holds regardless of whether one looks at dollar loans in the U.S. or restricts the sample to



                                                                                                  5
loans in Europe. In essence, the unconditional patterns that we find for lending during this

period of stress are more pronounced for the most money-fund-reliant Eurozone banks.

       The bottom line of our analysis can be summarized as follows: Given limited arbitrage in

FX forward markets, the wholesale dollar funding model typically employed by foreign banks—

whereby they rely heavily on short-term uninsured sources of dollar finance—exposes their mix

of lending activity to changes in perceived creditworthiness. In particular, adverse shocks to

creditworthiness lead them to curtail their supply of dollar loans, relative to their supply of loans

in their domestic currency. It is worth emphasizing that this is quite a different mechanism than

the more familiar capital-crunch channel (as in Peek and Rosengren 1997, 2000), according to

which a global bank hit with a negative shock to its capital base might be expected to cut back on

lending across the board, irrespective of the currency in which the lending takes place.

       This paper fits into a large literature that studies how financing frictions shape bank

lending behavior. A subset of this research focuses, as we do, on multinational banks and the

role they play in transmitting various kinds of shocks across borders.           In addition to the

important early contributions by Peek and Rosengren (1997, 2000), more recent papers include

Acharya and Schnabl (2010), Chava and Purnanandam (2011), Schnabl (2012), and Cetorelli and

Goldberg (2011, 2012a, 2012b). Perhaps most closely related to our work is that of Acharya,

Afonso and Kovner (2012), who investigate the differential effects of the 2007 collapse of the

asset-backed commercial paper market on U.S. and foreign banks.

       There is also a set of papers analyzing the strikingly large CIP violations that have

cropped up intermittently since the onset of the crisis, most notably in the aftermath of the

bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. These include Baba, Packer, and Nagano (2008), Coffey,

Hrung, and Sarkar (2009), Griffoli and Ranaldo (2010), and more recently Levich (2012). These



                                                                                                   6
papers discuss the frictions that can prevent arbitrage from eliminating a CIP deviation once it

emerges, but have less to say about what determines the direction and magnitude of the deviation

in the first place. By contrast, in our model the CIP violation is an equilibrium outcome, and we

show how it depends not only on the capital of arbitrageurs, but also on global banks’ funding

opportunities across dollar and non-dollar markets, and on the marginal product of their lending

in each currency. That is, we connect CIP violations to the real side of the economy.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model.

Section 3 discusses our data sources and provides background information on the three critical

components or our analysis: the role of Eurozone banks in syndicated lending in the U.S.; the

dependence of Eurozone banks on dollar financing from U.S. money-market funds along with

the decline in money fund assets in the second half of 2011; and the violation of covered interest

parity during that same period. Section 4 establishes our key empirical results, documenting

both the direct effects of Eurozone bank dollar funding difficulties on their dollar lending, and

the fact that these effects are larger for more money-fund dependent banks. Section 5 concludes.



2. Model

       A. Basic Assumptions

       Our model considers a global bank B that has lending opportunities in both the U.S. and

Europe.   If it lends an amount LD in dollars in the U.S. at time 0, it earns an expected gross

               D
return of g ( L ) at time 1, where g( ) is a concave function. Similarly, if the bank lends an

amount LE in euros in Europe at time 0, it earns an expected gross return of h( LE ) at time 1,

where again, h( ) is a concave function. To keep the notation simple, we assume that riskless




                                                                                                7
rates in the U.S. and Europe are both equal to r, and that the spot dollar/euro exchange rate, X S ,

is equal to one.

        The bank faces an overall capital constraint on lending, such that aggregate lending is

capped by: LD  LE  K . This constraint can be thought of as reflecting the combination of a

regulatory capital regime, along with frictional costs to the bank of raising external equity

finance (Myers and Majluf, 1984). We further assume that if the bank wishes to lend in dollars,

it must effectively fund in dollars, and analogously for euro lending—i.e., it cannot take on any

unhedged FX risk. We take this restriction as exogenous here, but it could easily be endogenized

by appealing to the real-world fact that if a bank were to take on FX risk in this way, it would

face an additional regulatory capital charge.5 Given that the capital constraint is assumed to be

binding in equilibrium, if the shadow value of the constraint is high enough, it will be optimal for

the bank to conserve its scarce capital by avoiding any FX exposure.

        The bank has a probability p of default. We assume that if the bank defaults, all of its

loans in both the U.S. and Europe turn out to be worthless, and it has no resources to pay to any

of its debts. Note therefore that if the bank earns an expected gross return of g ( LD ) on its dollar

lending, it must be that the return accrues entirely in the non-default state. So it is more precise

to say the bank earns a gross return of g ( LD ) / (1  p) with probability (1–p), and zero otherwise.

The same applies to its returns on euro lending.




5
  Under the current regulatory framework, increased exposure to FX risk is costly to the bank. This
treatment of FX risk dates back to Basel I. In a study conducted in the context of the Basel I discussion,
FX risk was identified as one the fundamental risks: “There are many activities of banks which involve
risk-taking, but there are few in which a bank may so quickly incur large losses as in foreign exchange
transactions.” (www.bis.org/publ/bcbs00e.htm.)



                                                                                                        8
       If the bank borrows from European depositors and it defaults, these depositors are made

whole by the government. Hence the rate that the bank pays on European borrowing rBE , is the

riskless rate: rBE  r . Said differently, there is a government subsidy associated with European-

sourced euro borrowing, and this subsidy is an increasing function of the default probability p.

By contrast, if the bank borrows in the U.S. market, its creditors are only partially insured.

Specifically, we assume that in expectation, U.S.-based lenders to the bank are only bailed out on

a fraction (1 – ) of their losses in the default state. As a result, the rate that the bank pays on

U.S. borrowing, rBD , is approximated by: rBD  r   p . A literal interpretation of the parameter

 is that it reflects the fraction of the bank’s dollar financing that comes from, say, uninsured

commercial paper, as opposed to deposits that are either explicitly insured, or that benefit from

some perception of implicit insurance.

       A less literal interpretation, but one that motivates our empirical work below, is that even

among different providers of uninsured finance, some may be structurally “flightier” than others,

and hence more sensitive to changes in bank creditworthiness. Money-market funds would seem

to fit this description, given the run-like incentives created by their policy of allowing investors

to redeem shares at a fixed value. We rely on this idea when we construct bank-level measures

of , associating higher values of  with those banks that raise more of their short-term funding

from money-market funds.

       Because it enjoys a bigger subsidy when borrowing in Europe, the bank would ideally

like to raise all of its funding there, and then enter into an FX swap to cover the dollar-

denominated portion of its lending. And indeed, this is what happens in the case where the FX

swap market is frictionless—i.e., when CIP holds. In this case, the bank’s funding and lending

decisions decouple from one another. Funding is done entirely in euros, while lending activity in

                                                                                                  9
the two countries is pinned down by equating the marginal product of dollar lending to the

marginal product of euro lending.          And swap activity fills in the gap, by converting the

appropriate amount of euro funding into synthetic dollar borrowing.



        B. Limited Arbitrage and Deviations from CIP

        Things are more complicated, however, when there are deviations from CIP. As we

demonstrate, these deviations arise when the bank’s swap counterparties have limited capital,

and are required to use this capital to post margin in their swap transactions. As a benchmark,

note that with interest rates being equal in the two countries, and with the spot exchange rate

normalized to one, a simplified version of the CIP relationship—which would always hold with

capital-unconstrained parties on both sides of the trade—is that the forward exchange rate must

be equal to one as well. In other words, denoting the dollar/euro forward rate for a transaction in

a frictionless world by X SF , we have that X SF  1.

        Now consider the case where the counterparty is a capital-constrained arbitrageur. Let

X BF be the forward price paid by the bank in this case. To pin down this price, we make two

further assumptions. First, the arbitrageur has to set aside a haircut H when it enters the swap

transaction; this can be thought of as the initial margin required as collateral for its position.6 To

keep things simple, we follow Garleanu and Pedersen (2011) and assume that this haircut is

proportional to the size S of the swap position. So the haircut is given by H = γS. Second, when

6
 We do not explicitly analyze the collateral posted by the bank, as opposed to by the arbitrageur. Instead,
we just assume that the bank never defaults on its obligations under the swap contract, even if it does
default on its short-term debt obligations. However, none of our main results are changed if there is a risk
of default on the swap by the bank. This is because what matters for the bank in deciding how much
swap activity to do is the premium it pays relative to the default-risk-adjusted actuarial value. Since this
premium is a function of the arbitrageur’s collateral constraint, and not the bank’s, we focus on the former
for the sake of clarity.



                                                                                                         10
the arbitrageur sets aside H for swap trading, he has to take it away from another productive

activity—e.g., lending, or another arbitrage trade. This other productive activity has a net return

given by f(I), where I is the amount invested. The arbitrageur has wealth of W, so his budget

constraint is that I = W – H, or I = W – γS.

       It follows that in an interior optimum where the arbitrageur is doing both activities, an

equilibrium condition is that the expected excess return per unit earned on doing the swap,

denoted Δ, must satisfy:    f (W   S ) . A convenient simple case is where f(I) = θ log(I) – I,

in which case we have that:

                          
                      1                                                                (1)
              (W   S ) 

In order to ensure that Δ is always non-negative, we assume that the net returns on the alternative

investment are non-negative even when the level of swap activity S is zero, or that θ ≥ W.

       The forward price paid by the bank is now given by:

                                                                                           (2)

       Looking at equations (1) and (2), we can see the fundamental tension facing the bank. As

its creditworthiness declines—i.e., as p goes up—it would like to increasingly fund its dollar

lending with synthetic dollar borrowing, that is, by borrowing in euros and pairing this with an

FX swap. However as the magnitude of its swap position S grows, this puts increasing strain on

the capital of the arbitrageurs who must take the other side of the trade, and hence creates a CIP

deviation in which synthetic dollar borrowing becomes more expensive—as reflected in the

higher forward price that the bank must pay to buy back euros with dollars when its dollar loans

mature at time 1.




                                                                                                   11
        C. The Bank’s Optimization Problem

        We are now ready to write down the bank’s optimization problem. Denote the bank’s

direct dollar-based borrowing as B D , and the amount of euro borrowing that it swaps into dollars

as S. Note that this implies that its total dollar lending, LD , is given by LD  B D  S. The

bank’s optimization problem can then be written as follows:

        max{LD , S}: g ( LD )  LD (1  r )  h( LE )  LE (1  r )   pB D  S                 (3)

subject to the constraint that LD  LE  K .

        The first four terms in (3), g ( LD )  LD (1  r )  h( LE )  LE (1  r ) , capture the net value

created by the bank’s lending in a frictionless world. The latter two terms embody the two key

frictions in the model. The  pB D term reflects the fact that the bank views dollar funding as

more expensive than euro funding, because it carries less of an insurance subsidy. And the S 

term captures the economic cost to the bank of engaging in swap transactions with arbitrageurs

who charge a capital-scarcity premium.

        The bank’s problem can be solved by taking first-order conditions with respect to LD and

S. Note that in doing so, the bank takes the frictional cost of doing the swap Δ as given, even

though in equilibrium Δ depends on S. That is, the bank is a price-taker in the swap market.

        The following proposition characterizes the bank’s behavior in equilibrium:


        Proposition 1: The bank’s behavior differs across two regions of the parameter space.

In an interior swap equilibrium, the bank funds some of its dollar lending directly in the dollar

market, and some via swaps, i.e., LD  S. In this equilibrium, the bank’s lending is pinned down

by g ( LD )  h( LE )   p , and its swap activity by    p . In a corner equilibrium, the bank does

not borrow in dollars, and obtains all of its dollar funding synthetically, via swaps, so that

                                                                                                        12
LD  S. In this case, the bank’s lending is pinned down by g ( LD )  h( LE )  ( LD ) , where

                                                                                         
( LD ) is the value of the swap premium when LD  S . That is, ( LD )               1 . The
                                                                             (W   L ) 
                                                                                      D




corner equilibrium obtains when  p is relatively high, or when the frictions associated with

arbitrage in the swap market are relatively low, i.e., when either the haircut γ is small or

arbitrageur wealth W is high. Specifically, let LD* be the solution to g ( LD )  h( LE )  ( LD ) .

The corner equilibrium obtains if  p  ( LD* ) , and the interior equilibrium obtains otherwise.

       Figure 2 illustrates the proposition. Suppose we start at the point where the bank’s

default risk p is zero. As long as we remain in an interior equilibrium, increases in p are

accompanied by: i) reductions in dollar funding; ii) increases in swap activity; iii) increases in

the CIP violation; iv) reductions in dollar lending; and v) increases in euro lending. Eventually,

we hit the corner, where the bank is doing no dollar funding at all, and swap activity is maxed

out. From this point on, further increases in p have no effect on dollar lending.

                                             [FIGURE 2]

       When arbitrage frictions are reduced (either because the haircut γ is smaller or arbitrageur

wealth W is higher), we hit the corner sooner, for a lower value of p. In other words, in response

to a decline in its creditworthiness, the bank shifts its funding mix away from direct dollar

borrowing more rapidly, because it finds it less costly to use synthetic dollars as a substitute. As

a consequence, the effects on its lending are muted. In the limiting case where arbitrage is

frictionless, we are always at the corner for any non-zero value of p. Thus, as soon as dollar

borrowing becomes a tiny bit costly, the bank shifts all of its funding to the European market,

and leaves its lending completely unchanged. Said differently, with perfect arbitrage, we have a




                                                                                                     13
sharp decoupling result: the model predicts very pronounced changes in funding behavior in

response to small shocks, but has nothing to say about lending or CIP violations.

       In our empirical work, we test the above comparative-statics implications from the

interior equilibrium, using the money-market-fund episode from the second half of 2011 as a

proxy for an aggregate shock to the value of p for all European banks Moreover, in addition to

focusing on this time-series variation in p, we also consider a set of cross-sectional tests. The

cross-sectional implications of the model arise from the fact that all the effects of interest are

driven by the interaction term p. If we think of two different banks as having different values

of α—say because one is more reliant on money-market funds than the other—then the above

predictions for lending should hold more strongly for the more money-fund-dependent bank. To

be precise, if p jumps from zero to a positive value, the model implies that the quantitative

impact on lending is greater for a bank with a higher value of .


       D. An Alternative Version of the Model

       The model described above predicts that, in the presence of a CIP violation, euro-

denominated lending actually increases in response to heightened concerns about bank solvency.

This follows directly from the assumption of a binding capital constraint, which in turn implies

that total lending is constant; if dollar lending falls it must therefore be that euro lending

increases. Now we briefly sketch an alternative—and arguably more realistic—version of the

model, which makes the more moderate prediction that a bank decreases its lending in both

currencies, but cuts back by relatively more on its dollar lending.

       Consider a setting in which there is no aggregate capital constraint, but where the bank

faces increasing, convex costs of raising external funding in both dollars and euros. Suppose

further that there is a shock that shifts out the cost curve for funding in dollars. This shock will

                                                                                                 14
lead the bank to shift its funding towards euros and to swap these euros into dollars to make up

for some of the reduction in dollar funding. But as euro-denominated borrowing increases, the

marginal cost of this form of borrowing also rises, leading the bank to cut its euro lending in

addition to its dollar lending.

        Now, in the frictionless-market case where there is no CIP violation, the bank equates the

marginal value of lending across currencies, so there is no reason to expect lending in dollars to

fall by more than lending in euros. By contrast, when there is a CIP violation, there is an extra

cost of lending in dollars, which, just as in the baseline version of the model above, is equal to

the premium paid when swapping euros into dollars. In this case, the shock to dollar funding has

a larger impact on dollar lending than on euro lending, even though both decline in equilibrium.

        The bottom line is that across both variants of the model, the robust prediction is that the

combination of a dollar funding shock and a CIP violation leads to a decline in dollar lending

relative to euro lending. By contrast, the prediction that euro lending actually goes up in

absolute terms is more dependent on the specific formulation of the model—i.e. on whether or

not there is a binding capital constraint. Accordingly, we focus attention on the former relative-

lending hypothesis in our empirical specifications.



3. Description of the Data and Background Facts

    This section describes our data sources and provides some background that will be useful for

our empirical analysis. In particular, we discuss the syndicated loan market in the U.S. and

Europe, and the important role that Eurozone banks play in the U.S. We also present data on

Eurozone bank reliance on U.S. money-market funds, and note the problems they faced in

tapping this financing source in the second half of 2011. Finally, we document that during this



                                                                                                 15
period there was a significant violation of covered interest parity. As the model shows, it is the

combination of wholesale dollar funding difficulties and violations of covered interest parity that

gives rise to a decline in dollar lending relative to euro lending.


    A. The Role of Eurozone Banks in the U.S. Syndicated Loan Market

       The loan data for our analysis come from Thompson Reuters’ DealScan database of loan

origination. Almost all these loans are syndicated, i.e., originated by one or more “lead” banks

and funded by a syndicate of banks and other investors. Throughout the empirical analysis we

measure a bank’s lending activity by the amount of syndicated loans it originates. Often there are

multiple lead banks originating a loan, and in those cases we prorate the loan amount by the

number of lead banks in the syndicate.7 The country of the borrower and lender are based on the

location of their headquarters as reported in DealScan.

       Table I shows that European banks have a large presence in the U.S. syndicated loan

market. During 2005-2007, the top European banks originated almost 25% of syndicated loans

in the U.S., with about 11% coming from Eurozone banks. (The shares are not changed much if

we base our lending numbers on participation in syndicated loans, not just origination.) Most of

the Eurozone banks that were active in the U.S. are headquartered in France and Germany, each

with about a 5% market share. Banks headquartered in countries with sovereign debt problems—

Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain (GIIPS)—had a less than 2% share of the U.S. market.

Almost 14% of U.S. syndicated loans were originated by non-Eurozone European banks—

mainly those located in the U.K. and Switzerland. These banks also do a lot of Eurozone lending



7
 We consider a lead bank to be one that is designated as a “Lead Arranger” or “Agent” in the DealScan
database.



                                                                                                  16
and raise some of their deposits in euros.8 Given this exposure to the euro, there is a case for

including these banks in our analysis, but we take the more conservative approach of reporting

the results only for Eurozone banks. However, our results are robust to including European

banks outside the Eurozone.

                                                [TABLE I]

        Table II highlights the fact that the syndicated loan market is global in nature; Eurozone

and U.S. banks lend not just in their home regions, but throughout the world. The table also

makes clear the importance of dollar lending. Indeed, outside of Europe, Eurozone banks do

almost all of their lending in dollars. Even within Europe, Eurozone banks do a significant

fraction of their lending in dollars—almost 9% in the Eurozone and 30% in the rest of Europe.

Overall, 43% of Eurozone bank lending is in dollars. Given that most of their retail deposits are

in euros, this creates a currency mismatch between their assets and retail deposits. The same is

not true of U.S. banks, which do 89% of their syndicated lending in dollars.

                                               [TABLE II]


    B. Eurozone Bank Reliance on U.S. Money-Market Funds and the Run in 2011

        In May 2011, financial markets became increasingly concerned about the exposure of

European banks to Greek sovereign debt, amidst growing worries about the country’s solvency.

Leading banks in France, Germany and Belgium were identified as having several billion euros

of Greek sovereign bonds on their books.9 In response, investors began withdrawing money


8
  Notoriously, the largest Icelandic banks had over two-third of their deposits in foreign currencies, most
of it in euros. See “The Collapse of Iceland’s Cross-Border Banks: Some Lessons for Deposits Insurance
and Resolution Policies,” presentation made by Mar Gudmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of
Iceland, in the BIS conference held in Basel on June 9, 2011.
9
  E.g., see “Investors Count Cost to Banks of Greek Default,” Financial Times, May 10, 2011 or “EU
Banks' Risks from Greece Default Exceed Their Direct Exposures,” Moody’s Investors Services, May 15,
2011.
                                                                                                        17
from U.S. prime money-market funds (MMFs), which, according to the SEC, had about one

quarter of their assets invested in paper issued by Eurozone banks. The withdrawals were greater

from those funds that had more exposure to Eurozone banks (Chernenko and Sunderam, 2012).

This in turn led MMFs to reduce their holdings of instruments issued by Eurozone banks.

According to Fitch, between May and December 2011, the 10 largest U.S. MMFs had reduced

their exposure to Eurozone banks from 50% to 10% of their total assets. French banks, which

were top lenders to U.S. firms, lost 94% of their funding from U.S. MMFs.10

       This was an important shock to the ability of Eurozone banks to fund themselves in

dollars. To measure the size of this shock for particular banks, we calculate the share of a bank’s

short-term funding that comes from U.S. MMFs as of the end of April 2011. This calculation is

based on MMF security-level holdings compiled by Crane Data LLC from data provided by fund

sponsors either on their websites or directly to Crane Data. These data cover roughly 85% of the

universe of MMF holdings (with some smaller funds missing from the sample).

       Our measure of MMF reliance is the sum of MMF holdings of certificates of deposit

(CDs), commercial paper (CP), asset-backed CP, repurchase agreements, and other short-term

bank notes and deposits scaled by the sum of banks’ deposits and short-term debt. Data on a

bank’s short-term liabilities are taken from Capital IQ and are measured as of the end of 2010.

We should emphasize that we are not scaling by banks’ short-term dollar funding as that

information is not available. Thus, our measure does not capture—and may greatly understate—

the extent to which a bank relies on U.S. MMFs for its dollar funding.

       Ideally, we would also want to distinguish between insured and uninsured dollar funding.

But there is very limited information on insured deposits, and almost none on insured deposits by


10
  “U.S. Money Fund Exposure and European Banks: Euro Zone Diverging,” Fitch Ratings, January 26,
2012.
                                                                                                18
currency. However, it is likely that the insured dollar deposits of Eurozone banks are limited.

Only five of the large Eurozone banks operate in the U.S. through subsidiaries and, with some

limited exceptions, only deposits of subsidiaries are eligible for FDIC insurance. On average,

deposits reported to the FDIC by these five banks are roughly 82% of their MMF funding. For

Deutsche Bank, deposits reported to the FDIC are only 43% of its MMF funding.

       Table III reports MMF funding reliance for the 11 Eurozone banks that were among the

top fifty lenders in the U.S. syndicated loan market between 2005 and 2007. We also include

MMF data for those European banks outside the Eurozone that were among the top 50 lenders.

As can be seen, MMFs were an important source of short-term funding for these banks. For

Deutsche Bank, the fifth-largest lender in the U.S., with 4.5% of syndicated origination volume,

7.7% of its short-term funding came from U.S. MMFs. The French banks—Societe Generale,

Credit Agricole, BNP Paribas and Natixis—on average, received 5% of their short term funding

from U.S. MMFs. These banks collectively represented nearly 4% of the origination volume in

the U.S. market.

                                      [TABLE III]

       As noted above, these calculations understate the significance of MMFs as a source of

dollar funding because they normalize by all short-term funding, including deposits. While no

systematic data are reported on funding currencies, information provided by Credit Agricole in a

presentation to analysts can give a better sense of the share of dollar funding share of U.S.

MMFs.11 The bank reported that in June 2011, 44% of its short-term debt was in dollars. Based




11
  “Credit Agricole: Adapting to the New Environment” presentation made by Jean-Paul Chifflet, Chief
Executive Officer in the Cheuvreux conference held in Paris on September 28, 2011.



                                                                                                19
on data we have on Credit Agricole’s short-term debt and MMF funding in April 2011, this

implies that approximately 30% of the bank’s short-term dollar funding came from U.S. MMFs.


     C. Breakdown of Covered Interest Parity in 2011

        Foreign exchange swaps are the primary means through which global banks manage the

currency mismatch between their assets and liabilities (e.g., Fender and McGuire, 2010). A swap

contract enables a bank to exchange local currency for U.S. dollars at the current exchange rate,

while agreeing to reverse the transaction—i.e., exchange U.S. dollars back to local currency—at

the forward exchange rate. The typical maturity of a FX swap is three months, but as an over-

the-counter instrument its maturity can be extended to several years. Counterparties typically

post collateral, which is adjusted depending on movements in currencies.

        In the absence of market frictions, the cost of an FX swap is pinned down by the

differences in interest rates in the two currencies that are being swapped. Specifically, covered

interest rate parity (CIP) implies that the differential in interest rates between two countries

should be equal to the differential between the forward and the spot exchange rates. In other

words, any profits that one could make by borrowing in one currency and lending in other should

be erased by the cost of converting interest back to the currency in which the bank borrows.12 A

deviation from CIP, however, offers a profit opportunity and, in principal, should be driven away

by arbitrageurs. So, if arbitrage is frictionless, the U.S. dollar premium (or “basis”)—defined as

the difference between the CIP-implied interest rate and the current unsecured U.S. interest

rate—should be zero. A positive basis implies that investors can make a profit by borrowing


12
  Specifically, in our context, CIP implies that                    where is the euro interest rate,
  is the dollar interest rate,    is the forward exchange rate, and is the spot exchange rate (where
exchange rates are expressed as euros per dollar). The CIP-implied dollar interest rate is the value of
  that solves this equation.


                                                                                                    20
funds in euros, converting them to dollars, investing at the existing dollar rate and converting the

dollars back to euros at the end of the investment period. If investors rush to do so, the spot

exchange rate will rise and the forward exchange rate will fall, which should drive down the

profits from this strategy.

          Given this seemingly riskless arbitrage, CIP deviations are rare (Taylor, 1987; Akram,

Dagfinn and Sarno, 2008). However there have been repeated breakdowns in CIP since the

beginning of the financial crisis in August of 2007. Coffey, Hrung and Sarkar (2009) document

that in September of 2008 the U.S. dollar basis with respect to euro (“euro basis”) shot up to over

200 basis points. Although in 2009 the euro basis declined substantially, the violation of CIP

persisted. What is important for our study is that the euro basis again rose dramatically in the

second half of 2011, the period characterized by the money-fund pullback from paper issued by

European financial institutions.13

          Panel A of Figure 3 shows the evolution of the euro basis for daily euro-USD exchange

rate data. To construct this series we use daily quotes for 3-month euro and U.S. dollar LIBOR

compiled by the British Bankers’ Association and downloaded from Bloomberg, and 3-month

daily spot and forward rates compiled by WM/Reuters and downloaded from Datastream.

          Our estimates for 2008 closely track Coffey, Hrung and Sarkar (2009). Their results are

robust to reporting frequency (daily vs. hourly) of the exchange rate data, so our use of daily

rates should not be a concern. Like Coffey, Hrung and Sarkar (2009), the CIP deviation shown in

Figure 3 is robust to alternative reference dollar rates. Similar patterns emerge if we use the New

York Funding Rate or the Treasury bill rate. Another noteworthy observation, depicted in Panel

B of Figure 3, is that CIP violation in 2011 shows up first, and is most acute, in the dollar-euro



13
     “Euro-Dollar Basis Swap Cost at 2008 Crisis Levels,” Wall Street Journal, November 16, 2011.
                                                                                                    21
exchange rate. This observation is consistent with the implication of our model, namely that the

increase in swap demand by Eurozone financial institutions is what drives the deviation in CIP.

                                      [FIGURE 3]


4. Lending Behavior Following the Shock to Money-Market Funds

        In this section, we examine bank lending behavior around the MMF shock. We first

show that Eurozone banks reduced their dollar-denominated loans relative to euro-denominated

loans. We then show that those Eurozone banks that were more MMF-dependent in their

financing reduced their lending by more than other Eurozone banks.


   A. Direct Effects of MMF Shock on Bank Lending

       To examine the behavior of Eurozone banks around the MMF shock we construct a panel

data set of bank-month observations from 2005-2011. Our focus is on the effect of the MMF

shock on DOLLAR LOAN SHARE, the ratio of a bank’s dollar-denominated loans to all its

dollar- and euro-denominated loans (excluding all other currencies). The exact specification is

explained in the captions to each table.

       The first column of Table IV reports the results of regressing the dollar loan share on

POST, a dummy variable that takes the value one if the loan occurs between May and December

2011, the period during which Eurozone banks experienced the funding shock. Only the 11

Eurozone banks are included in this specification. As in all regressions in the table, we also

include bank fixed effects since there is likely to be variation across banks in the extent to which

they lend in dollars and euros.

       As expected, the coefficient of POST is negative and statistically significant. Standard

errors are calculated to allow for correlation of the error term across an individual bank’s

observations within the pre-funding shock period and within the post-funding shock period. The
                                                                                                 22
coefficient implies that banks reduce their dollar loan share by 3.3 percentage points relative to

their pre-shock average. Given that the dollar loan share has a sample mean of 16.8%, this is a

fairly sizeable effect.

        In calculating the dollar loan share, we convert the value of euro-denominated loans into

dollars, using the spot exchange rate at loan issuance, so these loans can be compared directly to

dollar-denominated loans. This raises the concern that an appreciation of the euro, as happened

in the POST period, could mechanically lead to a decline in our DOLLAR LOAN SHARE

variable, even if the nominal volume of loan issuance in each currency was unchanged. This

mechanical effect could then potentially bias our inferences. To control for this possibility, in

columns (2) and (4) of Table IV we add a control for the dollar/euro exchange rate. Interestingly,

the coefficient on this variable is significantly positive—the opposite of what one would expect if

there was a purely mechanical effect at work—and including it in the regression actually leads

the coefficient on POST to increase somewhat.

        Why might a stronger euro lead to an increase in the share of dollar lending by Eurozone

banks? One hypothesis is as follows. If a Eurozone bank holds predominantly euro-denominated

assets, then an increase in the value of the euro strengthens its economic capital relative to that of

its U.S. counterparts. This in turns enables it to gain market share in those dollar-based loan

markets where it is most likely to be in direct competition with U.S. banks. By contrast, in euro-

based loan markets, where its competitors are more likely to be other European banks, a

movement in the exchange rate confers less of an advantage. The net result is an increase in the

share of activity the European bank does in dollar markets.14



14
  This logic is similar to that of Froot and Stein (1991), who argue that in an imperfect capital market, a
depreciation of the dollar increases inward foreign direct investment into the U.S., by raising the relative
wealth of foreign investors who bid for U.S.-based assets.
                                                                                                         23
           The leading alternative explanation for the drop in the dollar lending share of Eurozone

banks is that these banks experienced not so much a funding shock as a decline in dollar loan

demand relative to euro loan demand. On its face, this alternative hypothesis is somewhat

implausible given that the source of the shock in the first place was the Eurozone. So, if

anything, one would think that there would be more of a decline in the demand for euro-

denominated loans. Nevertheless, we explore this alternative hypothesis in a number of ways.

           First, we examine whether the decline in the dollar loan share is observed in U.S. banks,

which did not suffer from a funding shock given their limited exposure to Eurozone sovereign

debt. This is effectively a difference-in-difference specification. The third column of Table IV

reports the results from a regression that adds to the sample seven U.S. banks that are active in

syndicated lending in the Eurozone. The variable EUROBANK*POST is an interaction between

the POST dummy and a Eurozone bank dummy. Our funding-shock hypothesis implies that we

should expect to see a negative coefficient. And indeed, the coefficient is negative and

statistically significant. The magnitude of the coefficient implies that there is no change in the

currency composition of Eurozone lending by U.S. banks in the POST period; the effect is

specific to the Eurozone banks, which are the ones that suffered from the dollar funding shock.

           One might be concerned that these findings are driven less by dollar funding difficulties

of Eurozone banks and more by their preference to lend in Europe in response to the crisis. For

example, Eurozone banks may have longer-term relationships with European borrowers and may

give them priority in the allocation of scarce resources. To explore this alternative interpretation

we restrict the sample to loans made in the Eurozone.15 Despite being originated in the Eurozone,




15
     As before, we only look at the euro and dollar denominated loans.

                                                                                                  24
a significant fraction of these loans are dollar-denominated (Table II). As the second column of

the table shows, the dollar share of Eurozone loans falls in the POST period.

                                            [TABLE IV]

       Going further, another concern could be that the kinds of European firms that borrow in

dollars from Eurozone banks are somehow different from those that borrow in euros. To

investigate this possibility, in Table V we examine lending behavior at the loan level rather than

at the bank level. This allows us control for unobservable, time-invariant firm characteristics

because we observe multiple instances in which the same firm taps the syndicated loan market,

both before and after the shock.

       We run regressions for the period 2000 – 2011. Here the unit of observation is a loan and

the dependent variable is EUROBANK SHARE, the fraction of banks in the loan origination

syndicate that are from the Eurozone. We look at a longer period so there are more repeated

transactions per borrower. We include firm fixed effects and month-year fixed effects in the

regression. Our hypothesis is that EUROBANK SHARE will fall more after the MMF shock for

dollar loans than for euro loans. This can be seen in the first column of Table V where the key

variable of interest is the interaction of DOLLAR LOAN, a dummy variable for whether the loan

is in dollars, and POST. As predicted, this coefficient is negative and statistically significant. In

other words, in the wake of the dollar funding shock, the Eurozone bank share of dollar loan

syndications falls more than the Eurozone bank share of euro loan syndications.

                                             [TABLE V]

       This result is not surprising given that Eurozone banks cut their overall dollar lending

more than their euro lending. But the finding confirms our interpretation that the reduction in

dollar lending by Eurozone banks is not driven by unobservable, time-invariant differences in



                                                                                                  25
borrower characteristics. Indeed, our procedure may make it more difficult to find an effect. The

analysis is Table V is implicitly conditional on the set of firms that receive a loan following the

shock. These firms are likely to be the most creditworthy firms, which may be more prone to

borrow from Eurozone banks.

       Table VI provides more qualitative evidence that differences in borrower types between

Eurozone and non-Eurozone banks are unlikely to explain the relative decline in dollar lending

by Eurozone banks. Panel A of the table lists twenty randomly selected borrowers from

Eurozone banks in the U.S. in 2006. Using Capital IQ we look up the headquarters, business

description, and public or private status of the firms. They are all U.S. firms, not foreign firms or

their subsidiaries. On the flip side, as shown in Panel B, Eurozone borrowers of U.S. banks are

all Eurozone companies, not subsidiaries of U.S. firms that want to raise capital in the Eurozone.

       Panel A of Table VII provides additional evidence that a drop in dollar loan demand is

unlikely to explain our findings. The table reports loan characteristics for the January, 2005-

April, 20011 period (pre-shock period). The average U.S. borrower from a Eurozone bank is

larger, and less leveraged than the average U.S. borrower from a U.S. bank. Just the opposite is

true of European borrowers; if they borrow from Eurozone banks, they tend to be smaller, and

more leveraged.     Thus, banks tend to lend to riskier firms in their home markets.            The

implication for our study is that if one thinks that loan demand falls in response to the European

debt crisis, one would think that the effect would be larger among the smaller, riskier firms; these

are the types of firms that usually experience the sharpest drop in borrowing during recessions

(e.g., Kashyap, Lamont and Stein, 1994). If loan demand were driving our results, we would

expect to see a drop in euro loans by Eurozone banks relative to their dollar loans. We see just

the opposite, which again cuts against a loan-demand story.



                                                                                                  26
                                        [TABLES VI & VII]


   B. Cross-Sectional Effects on Bank Lending

       The model of Section 3 makes the cross-sectional prediction that those Eurozone banks

that are the most money-fund-dependent will cut their dollar lending (relative to their euro

lending) by more in response to the MMF shock. We examine this prediction by measuring

money-fund dependence as the fraction of short-term funding that comes from U.S. money

funds, as reported in Table III and discussed above. Recall that this measure, MMFSHARE,

normalizes by all short-term debt, both dollar- and euro-denominated.

       To start, for each of the 11 Eurozone banks in the sample we calculate their average U.S.

quarterly dollar loan origination for two periods: (i) the period between May 2010 and April

2011 (the one year before the shock); and (ii) May 2011 through December 2011 (after the

shock). The average change in dollar lending across these two periods is -3.9%. Panel A of

Figure 4 then plots this change variable versus MMFSHARE at the bank level. The figure

reveals a negative relationship between the two, suggesting that more MMF-dependent banks cut

their dollar lending in the U.S. by more. Just the opposite is true of their euro lending in Europe

as shown in Panel B of Figure 4. While, on average, banks increase their European euro lending

by 22.8%, more MMF-dependent banks increase their euro lending by more. Importantly, Panel

C shows that this is not the case for Eurozone banks’ dollar-denominated lending in Europe. On

average, banks cut their dollar Eurozone lending by 28.7%; as predicted, more MMF-dependent

banks cut their dollar lending in the Eurozone by more.

       To see whether these visual results are statistically significant, we return to the same

structure as the regressions in Table IV. The dependent variable is DOLLAR LOAN SHARE, the

fraction of a bank’s loans that are in dollars. The data are monthly observations for the 11


                                                                                                27
Eurozone banks from 2005-2011, and we include both bank fixed effects and month-year fixed

effects. To see whether those Eurozone banks that are most MMF-dependent cut their lending by

more, we include an interaction term MMFSHARE  POST.

                                   [FIGURE 4 & TABLE VIII]

       The first column of Table VIII, which includes lending in both the U.S. and Europe,

shows that the coefficient on MMFSHARE  POST is negative and statistically significant. The

coefficient implies that for a bank at the 25th percentile of MMFSHARE (1.25%), the drop in

lending following the MMF shock was 1.3 percentage points (8% of the sample mean), whereas

for a bank at the 75th percentile of MMFSHARE (6.25%) the drop over the same period was 6.6

percentage points (39% of the sample mean). These differences would seem to be quite

economically meaningful.

       The second column of Table VIII restricts attention to dollar lending within the

Eurozone. The results are very similar, indicating that the decline in MMF funding had an

adverse effect on dollar lending by European banks to Eurozone firms, not just on their dollar

lending to U.S. firms.



5. Conclusions

       In this paper, we have shown that one of the consequences of the European sovereign

debt crisis was that Eurozone banks cut their dollar-denominated lending. This is not surprising

in itself; one would expect these banks to cut lending in the face of capital and liquidity

constraints stemming from losses on their portfolios of sovereign bonds. More interestingly,

however, we show that Eurozone banks shifted the composition of their dollar and euro lending,




                                                                                             28
cutting their dollar lending by more, despite the fact that European economies were more

threatened by the debt crisis.

       We argue that this is a consequence of two features of the markets in which European

banks fund themselves. First, European banks rely on less stable wholesale dollar funding

sources to finance their dollar lending whereas a good deal of their euro lending is financed with

stickier euro deposits. Second, frictions in the foreign exchange swap market limit the extent to

which Eurozone banks can use euro deposits to fund their dollar lending. As swap demand from

Eurozone banks rises, there is only limited arbitrage capital available to take the other side of the

trade, which increases the cost of engaging in this synthetic dollar borrowing. Thus Eurozone

banks adjust to strains in wholesale dollar funding markets by borrowing more in euros, but also

by cutting back their dollar lending relative to euro lending.

       One issue that we have not addressed is the extent to which the reduction in dollar

lending by Eurozone banks created an overall tightening in credit supply to U.S. firms, and

thereby exerted a contractionary effect on the U.S. economy. To some extent other banks—

either U.S. or non-European banks—may have stepped in to fill the hole left by the retrenchment

of the Eurozone banks. Indeed, there is evidence that Japanese banks have increased their

presence in dollar loan markets (Fitch, 2012). And U.S. firms may also have turned to the bond

market, as suggested by the recent work of Becker and Ivashina (2012). Since European banks

tend to lend to large, highly-rated U.S. borrowers, one suspects that such substitution might be

smoother than it would be with a different population of borrowers.

        Thus, the ultimate cost of Eurozone bank retrenchment on dollar borrowers is difficult to

assess at this point. To address this issue we will need more analysis of the borrowing behavior

of firms that previously relied on the Eurozone banks for dollar funding. Nevertheless, this paper



                                                                                                  29
identifies a channel through which shocks outside the U.S. can affect the ability of U.S. firms to

borrow. Although dollar lending by foreign banks increases the supply of credit to U.S. firms

during normal times, it may also prove to be a more fragile source of funding that transmits

overseas shocks to the U.S. economy.




                                                                                               30
References

Acharya, V., G. Alonso, and A. Kovner, 2012. “How do Global Banks Scramble for Liquidity? Evidence
from the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Freeze of 2007,” Working Paper.

Acharya, V., and P. Schnabl, 2010. “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances? Asset-
Backed Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007-09,” IMF Economic Review 58,
37-73.

Akram , F., R., Dagfinn, and L., Sarno, 2008, “Arbitrage in the Foreign Exchange Market: Turning on the
Microscope,” Journal of International Economics 76 (2), 237-253.

Baba, N., F. Packer, and T. Nagano, 2008, “The Spillover of Money Market Turbulence to FX
Swap and Cross-Currency Swap Markets,” BIS Quarterly Review, 73-86.

Becker, B., and V. Ivashina, 2012, “Cyclicality of Credit Supply: Firm Level Evidence.” Working paper.

Chernenko, S., and A. Sunderam, 2012, “The Quiet Run of 2011: Money Market Funds and the European
Debt Crisis,” Working paper.

Cetorelli, N., and L. Goldberg, 2011, “Global Banks and International Shock Transmission: Evidence
from the Crisis,” IMF Economic Review 59, 41-76.

Cetorelli, N., and L. Goldberg, 2012. “Follow the Money: Quantifying Domestic Effects of Foreign Bank
Shocks in the Great Recession,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 102(3), 213-218.

Cetorelli, N., and L. Goldberg, 2012. “Liquidity Management of U.S. Global Banks:
Internal Capital Markets in the Great Recession,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Chava, S., and A. Purnanandam, 2011, “The Effect of Banking Crisis on Bank-Dependent Borrowers”,
Journal of Financial Economics 99, 116-135.

Coffey, N., W. Hrung and A. Sarkar, 2009, “Capital Constraints, Counterparty Risk, and Deviations from
Covered Interest Rate Parity,” Staff Report 393, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Fender, I., and P. McGuire, 2010, “Bank Structure, Funding Risk and the Transmission of Shocks across
Countries: Concepts and Measurements,” BIS Quarterly Review, 63-79.

Froot, K., and J. Stein, 1991, “Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investments: An Imperfect Capital
Market Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1191-1217.

Garleanu N., and L. Pedersen, 2011, “Margin-Based Asset Pricing and Deviations from the Law of One
Price,” Review of Financial Studies 24(6), 1980-2022.

Griffolli, T., and A. Ranaldo, 2010, “Limits to Arbitrage during the Crisis: Funding Liquidity Constraints
and Covered Interest Parity,” Swiss National Bank Working Paper.

Kashyap, A., O. Lamont, and J. Stein, 1994, “Credit Conditions and the Cyclical Behavior of
Inventories,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 565-592.



                                                                                                       31
Levich, R., 2012, “FX Counterparty Risk and Trading Activity in Currency Forward and Future
Markets,” NBER Working Paper 18256.

Myers, S., and N. Majluf, “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When Firms Have Information
that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-221.

Peek, J., and E. Rosengren, 1997, “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: The Case of
Japan,” American Economic Review 87(4), 495-505.

Peek, J., and E. Rosengren, 2000, “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank Crisis on Real
Activity in the United States,” American Economic Review 90(1), 30-45.

Schnabl, P., 2012, “The International Transmission of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from an
Emerging Market,” Journal of Finance 67(3), 897-932.

Shin, H., 2012, “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium,” IMF Economic Review 60, 155-192.

Taylor, A., and A. Sanson, 2007, “The Handbook of Loan Syndication and Trading,” The McGraw-Hill
Companies.

Taylor, M., 1987, “Covered Interest Parity: A High-Frequency, High-Quality Data Study,” Economica
54, 429-438.




                                                                                                32
                                                             Billion USD




                                         0
                                             2,000
                                                     4,000
                                                                 6,000
                                                                           8,000
                                                                                   10,000
                                                                                            12,000
                               1990:Q4
                               1991:Q2
                               1991:Q4
                               1992:Q2
                               1992:Q4
                               1993:Q2
                               1993:Q4
                               1994:Q2
                               1994:Q4
                               1995:Q2
                               1995:Q4
                               1996:Q2
                               1996:Q4
                               1997:Q2
                               1997:Q4
                               1998:Q2
                               1998:Q4




     U.S. dollar assets
                               1999:Q2
                               1999:Q4
                               2000:Q2
                               2000:Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                FIGURE 1




                               2001:Q2
                               2001:Q4
                               2002:Q2
                               2002:Q4
                               2003:Q2
                               2003:Q4
                               2004:Q2
                               2004:Q4
                               2005:Q2
     U.S. dollar liabilities




                               2005:Q4
                               2006:Q2
                               2006:Q4
                                                                                                               DOLLAR ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF FOREIGN BANKS




                               2007:Q2
                               2007:Q4
                               2008:Q2
                               2008:Q4
                                                                                                     Compiled from Bank of International Settlement locational banking statistics, July 2012.




                               2009:Q2
                               2009:Q4
                               2010:Q2
                               2010:Q4
                               2011:Q2
                               2011:Q4




33
                  FIGURE 2
     EQUILIBRIUM AS A FUNCTION OF




             LD

L*
                       S

            BD
                                    αp
                             Δ*




                                         34
                                                                    FIGURE 3
                                                    DEVIATIONS FROM COVERED INTEREST PARITY
Daily quotes for 3-month LIBOR are compiled by the British Bankers Association and downloaded from
Bloomberg, and 3-month daily spot and forward rates are compiled by WM/Reuters and downloaded from
Datastream.

                                                         Panel A: EURO basis, January 2007- January 2012
                               300


                               250


                               200
                Basis points




                               150


                               100


                                50


                                 0


                               -50
                                      Jan-07




                                                                                 Jan-08




                                                                                                                                  Jan-09




                                                                                                                                                                          Jan-10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan-12
                                                         Jul-07




                                                                                                       Jul-08




                                                                                                                                                       Jul-09




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul-11
                                                                      Oct-07




                                                                                                                     Oct-08




                                                                                                                                                                 Oct-09




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oct-10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oct-11
                                                Apr-07




                                                                                           Apr-08




                                                                                                                                             Apr-09




                                                                                                                                                                                       Apr-10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Apr-11
                                                   Panel B: Other currencies, January 2010- January 2012
                               160

                               140

                               120

                               100
             Basis points




                               80

                               60

                               40

                               20

                                0

                               -20
                                                                                                                         Oct-10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oct-11
                                     Jan-10




                                                                                 Jun-10




                                                                                                                                                      Jan-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jun-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-12
                                               Mar-10




                                                                                                                                             Dec-10



                                                                                                                                                                Mar-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec-11
                                                             Apr-10




                                                                                                                                                                              Apr-11
                                               Feb-10




                                                                                          Jul-10


                                                                                                                Sep-10




                                                                                                                                                                Feb-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul-11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-11
                                                                        May-10




                                                                                                                                                                                         May-11
                                                                                                    Aug-10



                                                                                                                                    Nov-10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Aug-11



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Nov-11




                                                                           EURO basis                                                        JPY basis                                            GBP basis


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  35
                                                                    FIGURE 4
                                               CHANGE IN LENDING AND MONEY-MARKET FUND RELIANCE
MMF reliance is defined as MMF holdings as of April 2011scaled by (Deposits + Short Term Debt) as of the end of
2010. Change in lending is calculated at the change between: (i) the period from May 2010 to April 2011 (one year
before the MMF shock) and (ii) May 2011 to December 2011 (after the MMF shock).

                                                                     Panel A: U.S., dollar lending




                                                            1
     Change in USD-denominated lending




                                                      .5
                                                            0
                                                      -.5
                                                      -1




                                                                0         2            4           6   8
                                                                                MMF reliance (%)




                                                                    Panel B: Europe, euro lending
                                                      .6
  Change in euro-denominated lending




                                                      .4
                                                      .2
                                                            0
                                                      -.2




                                                                0         2            4           6   8
                                                                                MMF reliance (%)




                                                                    Panel C: Europe, dollar lending
                                                            0
           Change in USD-denominated lending




                                                      -.2
                                                      -.4
                                                      -.6
                                                      -.8




                                                                0         2            4           6   8
                                                                                MMF reliance (%)




                                                                                                              36
                                                                   TABLE I
                       MARKET SHARE, LARGEST LENDERS IN EUROZONE, 2005-2007
Loan amount is prorated based on the number of the lead banks (“Lead”) or based on the total number of syndicate participants
(“All lenders”). Lead bank is identified based on whether the lender designated as “Lead Arranger” or “Agent” in the league
tables as reported in DealScan. The table reports the top 50 lenders in the Eurozone; Banesto’s share is aggregated together with
Santander’s share. Note that Lehman Brothers went bankrupt in 2008, and Fortis was acquired by BNP Paribas in 2009.

                                                            Market:     Share of Eurozone lending     Market share U.S.
                                                                         Lead        All lenders     Lead       All lenders
           Europe, “GIIPS”:
                  UniCredit                              Italy             3.02               3.21     0.05               0.31
                  Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria        Spain             2.33               2.23     0.06               0.43
                  Intesa Sanpaolo                        Italy             1.91               2.14     0.04               0.26
                  Banco Santander                        Spain             2.37               2.32     0.10               0.44
                  Mediobanca                             Italy             0.99               1.07        --                 --
                  Banco Financiero y de Ahorros          Spain             0.90               1.00     0.01               0.04
                  La Caja de Barcelona                   Spain             0.78               0.77        --                 --
                  Banco de Sabadell                      Spain             0.32               0.35        --                 --
                  Bank of Ireland Group                  Ireland           0.30               0.45     0.05               0.24
                  ICO [Instituto de Credito Oficial]     Spain             0.23               0.26        --                 --
           France:
                  BNP Paribas                            France            6.70               5.07     2.31               2.36
                  Credit Agricole                        France            4.91               4.29     1.03               1.25
                  Societe Generale                       France            4.57               3.64     0.48               1.02
                  Natixis SA                             France            3.01               3.22     0.09               0.47
                  CM-CIC                                 France            1.32               1.72     0.00               0.06
           BeNeLux:
                  ING Group                              Netherlands       2.72               2.47     0.33               0.81
                  Fortis Bank                            Belgium           1.71               1.89     0.38               0.66
                  Rabobank                               Netherlands       0.78               0.96     0.30               0.41
                  KBC Group                              Belgium           0.47               0.74     0.02               0.28
                  Dexia Bank                             Belgium           0.46               0.65     0.02               0.06
           Rest of Eurozone:
                  Commerzbank                            Germany           4.92               4.74     0.50            0.90
                  Deutsche Bank                          Germany           4.74               3.50     4.47            3.25
                  WestLB                                 Germany           1.32               1.41     0.14            0.29
                  BayernLB                               Germany           1.13               1.22     0.07            0.23
                  Landesbank Baden-Wurttemberg           Germany           0.98               1.14     0.01            0.04
                  Landesbank Hessen-Thuringen [Helaba]   Germany           0.42               0.62     0.04            0.08
                  DZ Bank                                Germany           0.42               0.56     0.01            0.10
                  KfW Bankengruppe                       Germany           0.41               0.68     0.00            0.01
                  HSH Nordbank                           Germany           0.38               0.38     0.06            0.09
                  NordLB Group                           Germany           0.24               0.31     0.03            0.08
                  Svenska Handelsbanken                  Sweden            0.31               0.26        --              --
                  SEB Merchant Banking                   Sweden            0.29               0.40        --           0.04
                  Nordea Bank AB                         Sweden            0.45               0.46     0.03            0.09
                           Total Eurozone:                                55.82              54.11    10.65           14.28
           Rest of Europe:
                  Credit Suisse                          Switzerland       1.60               1.64     3.76            0.09
                  UBS                                    Switzerland       1.26               1.23     1.73            3.37
                  Royal Bank of Scotland                 UK                9.21               7.71     3.87            2.01
                  Barclays Bank                          UK                3.16               2.87     2.27            3.77
                  HSBC                                   UK                3.08               2.87     1.18            2.07
                  Lloyds Banking Group                   UK                1.01               1.33     0.39            1.57
                           Total Europe:                                  75.14              71.75    23.86           27.68
           US:
                  Citi                                   USA               5.66               4.03    11.45            6.70
                  JP Morgan                              USA               3.75               3.13    17.08           10.13
                  Bank of America Merrill Lynch          USA               1.86               1.94    16.15            9.83
                  Goldman Sachs                          USA               1.68               1.79     2.55            2.71
                  Morgan Stanley                         USA               1.32               1.43     1.68            2.16
                  Lehman Brothers                        USA               0.52               0.60     2.26            2.18
                  GE Capital                             USA               0.52               0.56     2.36            2.29
                           Total U.S.:                                    15.29              13.49    53.53           36.00
           Other:
                  Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group         Japan             2.27               2.47     1.85               2.45
                  Mizuho Financial Group                 Japan             0.96               1.08     0.56               1.35
                  Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group        Japan             0.41               0.61     0.37               0.98
                           Total other:                                    3.64               4.15     2.78               4.77




                                                                                                                                  37
                                                TABLE II
              SYNDICATED LENDING AROUND THE WORLD BY CURRENCY, 2005-2007
Loan amount is prorated based on the number lead banks receiving league table credit.

                                                      Lending in      Lending in     Lending in   Lending in
                          Lending in    % of Total
                                                          Euro            USD          Euro         USD
                          the region     lending
                                                     (billion USD)   (billion USD)      (%)          (%)
Eurozone banks:
 Eurozone                    1,036.15        45.5%         941.64           89.11         90.9%         8.6%
 Rest of Europe                420.64        18.5%         124.04          127.12         29.5%        30.2%
 U.S.                          495.52        21.8%           4.30          490.53          0.9%        99.0%
 Rest of North America          17.89         0.8%           0.00           14.47          0.0%        80.9%
 Asia                          139.44         6.1%          10.06          102.92          7.2%        73.8%
 Latin America                  81.09         3.6%           2.27           78.81          2.8%        97.2%
 Middle East                    63.25         2.8%           3.40           59.78          5.4%        94.5%
 Africa                         21.27         0.9%           1.74           17.65          8.2%        83.0%
                 Total:      2,275.25                    1,087.46          980.39         47.8%        43.1%
U.S. banks:
 Eurozone                      313.96         7.8%         252.06           60.53         80.3%        19.3%
 Rest of Europe                234.74         5.8%          41.48           75.46         17.7%        32.1%
 U.S.                        3,269.47        80.8%           7.82        3,255.99          0.2%        99.6%
 Rest of North America          56.83         1.4%           0.12           47.79          0.2%        84.1%
 Asia                           89.91         2.2%           5.56           60.11          6.2%        66.9%
 Latin America                  56.79         1.4%           0.41           56.38          0.7%        99.3%
 Middle East                    15.54         0.4%           0.16           15.38          1.0%        99.0%
 Africa                         10.24         0.3%           0.32            8.69          3.1%        84.9%
                 Total:      4,047.48                      307.93        3,580.33          7.6%        88.5%




                                                                                                           38
                                                     TABLE III
                      U.S. PRIME MONEY-MARKET FUNDS AS A FUNDING SOURCE
This table reports money-market-funds (MMF) funding reliance for the 11 Eurozone banks that were among the top
fifty lenders in the U.S. syndicated loan market between 2005 and 2007. We also include MMF data for those
European banks outside the Eurozone that were among the top 50 lenders in the U.S.. Note that MMF
reliance=MMF holdings as of April 2011/(Deposits + Short Term Debt) as of the end of 2010.

                                                                          MMF reliance
                      Bank                                  Country
                                                                          as of April 2011
                      Eurozone:
                        Deutsche Bank                       Germany                    7.65
                        Rabobank                            Netherlands                7.63
                        Societe Generale                    France                     6.25
                        ING Bank                            Netherlands                5.14
                        Natixis                             France                     5.06
                        Credit Agricole                     France                     4.28
                        BNP Paribas                         France                     4.25
                        Commerzbank                         Germany                    1.90
                        Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria     Spain                      1.25
                        UniCredit                           Italy                      0.99
                        Banco Santander                     Spain                      0.78
                      Rest of Europe:
                        Credit Suisse                       Switzerland                4.92
                        Barclays Bank                       UK                         4.37
                        Lloyds TSB Bank                     UK                         3.97
                        UBS                                 Switzerland                3.32
                        RBS                                 UK                         2.29
                        HSBC                                UK                         1.49




                                                                                                           39
                                                                                    TABLE IV
                                                                         SHARE OF DOLLAR LENDING
The dependent variable is the fraction of loans originated by bank i in month t that is denominated in U.S. dollars (Sit). The sample includes all loans originated between 2005 and
2011that are denominated in U.S. dollars or euro; all other currencies are excluded from the sample. In specifications (1) through (4) we look at Eurozone banks only,
specifications (5) through (7) look at U.S. and Eurozone banks. Specifications (3) and (4) look at lending in the European market only; the rest of the specifications look at lending
in U.S. and European markets. Specifications (1) though (4) correspond to:
                                                                                  Sit =Di + β POST.

Di is an originating bank fixed effect and POST is a dummy variable equal to 1 for the May 2011-December 2011 period and 0 otherwise. Specification (7) includes month fixed
effects and corresponds to:

                                                                          Sit=Di + Dt + β EUROBANKi*POST.

EUROBANK is a dummy variable equal to 1 if bank’s headquarters are located in the Eurozone and 0 otherwise. Standard errors, reported in brackets, are clustered by bank
interacted with pre and post period; there are twice as many clusters as there are banks in the sample. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

                                                                                                                                       Eurozone and U.S. banks
                     Banks:                                           Eurozone banks
                                                                                                                                            (diff-in-diff)
                     Market:                       Europe and U.S.                            Europe                                        Europe and U.S.
                                                   (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)                    (5)                 (6)              (7)
                                                         **                 ***               ***               ***
         POST (05/2011-12/2011)               -0.0333          -0.0422             -0.0348           -0.0438                -0.0017             -0.0093                --
                                             [0.0124]         [0.0128]            [0.0123]          [0.0127]               [0.0124]            [0.0126]
                                                                                                                                        *                  *                 *
         EUROBANK*POST                              --               --                  --                --               -0.0316             -0.0316           -0.0316
                                                                                                                           [0.0174]            [0.0174]          [0.0180]
                                                                            ***                                 ***                                        **
         USD/Euro spot exchange rate                --         0.1995                    --          0.2034                       --             0.1713                 --
                                                              [0.0523]                              [0.0532]                                  [0.0430]
         Fixed effects:
           Bank (Di)                             Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes                     Yes                Yes               Yes
           Month (Dt)                            No                No                  No               No                      No                 No                Yes

         Obs.                                    924              924                 924               924                   1,428               1,428             1,428
         Clusters                                  22               22                  22                22                     34                  34                34
         Adj. R-squared                          0.05             0.06                0.05              0.06                   0.81                0.81              0.83




                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                        TABLE V
            CHOICE OF LENDER (EUROZONE VS. U.S.) FOR DOLLAR-DENOMINATED LOANS
Each observation used for the analysis reported in this table is a separate loan (l). The dependent variable is EUROBANK
SHAREl, a variable between 0 and 1 equal to fraction of lead banks on the loan headquartered in the Eurozone. The benchmark
specification—columns (1) and (3)—corresponds to:

                         EUROBANK SHAREl = Dj + Dt + DOLLAR LOANl + β DOLLAR LOANl*POST,

where Dj is borrower fixed effects and Dt is month fixed effects. DOLLAR LOANl is a dummy for the loan being denominated in
U.S. dollars. POST is a dummy variable equal to 1 for May, 2011-December, 2011 period and 0 otherwise. Specifications (3) and
(4) control for the loan size, because number of lead lenders depends on the loan size. The coefficient of interest, β, is identified
off the repeated loans by the same borrower. We use loans issued over 2000-2011 period to assure that there are enough repeated
loans in our sample. Standard errors, reported in brackets, are clustered by borrower interacted with pre and post period; there are
twice as many clusters as there are borrowers in the sample. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

              Market:                              Europe and U.S.                                Europe
                                              (1)                (2)                    (3)                 (4)
                                                        *                  *
            DOLLAR LOAN                      -0.0581            -0.0548                -0.0166             -0.0236
                                             [0.031]            [0.030]                [0.033]             [0.031]
                                                        ***                ***                    **                 **
            DOLLAR LOAN*POST                 -0.0655            -0.0651                -0.0956             -0.1055
                                             [0.018]            [0.018]                [0.047]             [0.048]
                                                                                                                     ***
            Ln(Loan amount)                        --           -0.0043                      --            -0.0484
                                                                [0.003]                                    [0.009]
            Fixed effects:
              Borrower(Dj)                       Yes                Yes                    Yes                Yes
              Month (Dt)                         Yes                Yes                    Yes                Yes

            Obs.                              34,107             34,088                  5,859              5,842
            Clusters                          13,728             13,719                  2,916              2,908
            Adj. R-squared                      0.84               0.84                   0.78               0.79




                                                                                                                                 41
                                                                            TABLE VI
                                                                    EXAMPLES OF LOANS
This table illustrates who are the U.S. clients of European banks (Panel A) and the Eurozone clients of U.S. banks (Panel B). The table shows twenty random
loans, sorted alphabetically, issued in 2006. For each of these loans, the lending bank received Thompson Reuters league-table credit as lead arranger or lead
agent. The only other filter on the sample is the borrower’s country (as identified in DealScan). There is no filter on the currency; also, firms are not consolidated
by parent. If there are any significant misclassifications, they should show up in this sample. Headquarters location, business description and public/private
status are from Capital IQ.
                                                         Panel A: U.S. loans issues by Eurozone banks




                                                                                                                                                                  42
Panel B: Eurozone loans issued by U.S. banks




                                               43
                                                                      TABLE VII
                                                   COMPARISON OF LENDING BY EUROZONE AND U.S. BANKS
This table compares loan issued by U.S. and Eurozone banks during the pre-shock period January, 2005 to April, 2011. Loans are sorted using Thompson Reuters’ DealScan
categorizations. “Middle market” is a category specific to the U.S. lending market and refers to loans issued to firms with revenues below $1 billion. “Investment grade” refers to
loans rated by S&P BBB or above. It also includes loans that are considered to be low risk, as determined by DealScan. “Leveraged” refers to loans taken by firms that have
leverage above a threshold determined by DealScan. Loan amount is prorated based on the number of lead banks in the syndicate. The column labeled Diff takes the difference
between the value for Eurozone and U.S. banks. *** indicates statistical significance of the difference with a p-value <0.01.

                                           Distribution of deals by credit quality                     Average loan size                       Average maturity
                                        Equally weighted            Value weighted                      (million USD)           Diff.              (years)          Diff.

                                     Eurozone        U.S.       Eurozone         U.S.                Eurozone       U.S.                      Eurozone     U.S.
                                      banks         banks        banks          banks                 banks        banks                       banks      banks
        Market: U.S.
          Middle market              29.57%       39.49%        9.14%         13.49%    Mean        197.37       124.69      72.68***         4.59        4.17     0.42***
                                                                                                                                     ***
                                                                                        Median      155.00       86.00       69.00            5.00        4.99     0.01
                                                                                        Std. Dev.   158.25       123.04                       2.01        1.87
          Investment grade           46.46%       41.58%        61.38%        57.52%    Mean        843.73       505.01      338.73***        4.18        3.50     0.68***
                                                                                                                                      ***
                                                                                        Median      500.00       220.50      279.50           4.78        3.00     1.78***
                                                                                        Std. Dev.   875.35       724.41                       2.74        11.76
          Leveraged                  23.96%       18.93%        29.49%        28.99%    Mean        786.01       559.13      226.87***        5.04        4.61     0.44***
                                                                                                                                      ***
                                                                                        Median      555.00       302.00      253.00           5.00        5.00     0.00
                                                                                        Std. Dev.   816.40       680.74                       1.92        2.22
        Market: Europe
          Investment grade           65.26%       72.95%        65.40%        75.21%    Mean        728.54       1,529.64    -801.10***       6.73        4.58     2.15***
                                                                                                                                        ***
                                                                                        Median      360.97       1,266.70    -905.73          5.00        5.00     0.00
                                                                                        Std. Dev.   908.03       1,190.99                     5.97        2.58
          Leveraged                  34.74%       27.05%        34.60%        24.79%    Mean        723.97       1,359.55    -635.58***       6.64        6.67     -0.03
                                                                                        Median      357.37       981.39      -624.02***       7.00        7.00     0.00
                                                                                        Std. Dev.   932.48       1214.39                      2.92        2.92




                                                                                                                                                                               44
                                          TABLE VIII
                     SHARE OF DOLLAR LENDING: MONEY-MARKET-FUND RELIANCE
As in Table IV, the dependent variable is the fraction of loans originated by bank i in month t that is denominated in dollars (Sit).
We count all loans originated between 2005 and 2011that are denominated in dollars or euros. All specifications look at
Eurozone banks only. Specification (1) looks at Eurozone banks’ U.S. and European lending; specification (2) looks at European
lending only. POST is a dummy variable equal to one for the May 2011-December 2011 period, and zero otherwise. The focus is
on the interaction term between MMF, a continuous variable measuring bank i’s reliance on the U.S. money-market funds as a
fraction of total short term funding (deposits plus short-term debt), and POST. The exact specification is:

                                                 Sit = Di + Dt + β MMFi*POST,
                                                                 .
where Di are bank fixed effects and Dt are month fixed effects. Standard errors, reported in brackets, are clustered by bank
interacted with pre and post period; there are twice as many clusters as there are banks in the sample. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.10.


                                      Banks:                        Eurozone banks
                                       Market:        Europe and U.S.               Europe
                                                            (1)                       (2)

                                                                           **                   **
                                 MMF*POST                       -0.0105               -0.0101
                                                               [0.0039]              [0.0039]
                                 Fixed effects:
                                   Bank (Di)                        Yes                  Yes
                                   Month (Dt)                       Yes                  Yes

                                 Obs.                              924                   924
                                 Clusters                            22                    22
                                 Adj. R-squared                    0.15                  0.15




                                                                                                                                 45
