NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL CONTROLS:
GATES VERSUS WALLS
Michael W. Klein
Working Paper 18526
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18526

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

Support from the Brookings Institution is gratefully acknowledged. I thank Charles Collyns, Kristin
Forbes, Jeff Frieden, Maury Obstfeld, Jonathan Ostry, David Romer, Iván Werning and Justin Wolfers
for comments on an earlier draft, and to Dennis Quinn for making his most recent data set available.
A special thanks to Patrick O’Halloran who provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Michael W. Klein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Capital Controls: Gates versus Walls
Michael W. Klein
NBER Working Paper No. 18526
November 2012
JEL No. F3,F33,F36
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the pattern of controls on capital inflows, and the association of these controls
on financial variables, GDP, and exchange rates. A key point of the paper is the distinction between
long-standing controls on a broad range of assets (walls) and episodic controls that are imposed and
removed, and tend to be on a narrower set of assets (gates). The paper presents a new data set that
differentiates between controls on different categories of assets for a set of 44 advanced and emerging
market economies over the 1995 to 2010 period. The imposition of episodic controls is found to not
follow the prescriptions of theories that suggest first imposing controls on international asset inflows
that are most likely to contribute to financial vulnerability. Estimates show significant differences
in the partial correlations of long-standing and episodic controls with the growth of financial variables
and with GDP growth, but these differences seem to arise because countries with long-standing controls
are poorer than the other countries in the sample. With a few exceptions, there is little evidence of
the efficacy of capital controls on the growth of financial variables, the real exchange rate, or GDP
growth at an annual frequency. These preliminary results raise doubts about assumptions behind recent
calls for a greater use of episodic controls on capital inflows.

Michael W. Klein
Fletcher School
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
michael.klein@tufts.edu

I.

Introduction
Before 2008, the prevailing (albeit not universal) view was that a country generally
benefitted from allowing the free flow of assets across its borders.1 This was thought to be
especially true of middle-income emerging market nations. These countries tended to have an
abundance of funding opportunities relative to domestically-generated savings. International
asset diversification could benefit people in these countries, where there was a relatively limited
range of domestic productive activities. Capital flows to emerging markets were also considered
a means for the transfer of financial know-how that could spur development in countries hobbled
by rudimentary financial markets. Theoretical and empirical research supported these views, and
they were also reflected in practice; a wave of countries dismantled controls on capital flows in
the 1980s and 1990s, and few re-imposed controls by the turn of the century.
This decades-long trend has shifted. Some countries that had liberalized their capital
accounts began to re-introduce controls in the early 2000s. This retrenchment increased after the
onset of the Great Recession, when new controls on capital inflows were imposed by both
emerging market and advanced countries, including Brazil, Iceland, Ireland, Peru and Turkey.
These measures were put in place to address concerns about inflow-fueled exchange rate
appreciations, and potentially destabilizing asset price booms.
These shifts in practices have been accompanied by shifts in opinions. As early as 2002,
the IMF had begun to soften its preference for unfettered international asset movements. In that
year, Kenneth Rogoff, then serving as Chief Economist and Director of Research of the IMF,
wrote in the December issue of the IMF’s publication Finance and Development “These days,
everyone agrees that a more eclectic approach to capital account liberalization is required.”
1

For example, see Sachs and Warner (1995), Dornbusch (1998), Summers (2000) and Fischer (2003). Around that
time, others voiced concerns about international capital flows and doubts about the positive effects of capital
account liberalization, including Bhagwati (1998), Rodrik (1998) and Stiglitz (2002).

1

More recently, the IMF staff published position papers that accept a role for capital controls. 2
While the current IMF position is that capital controls become an option only after other policy
choices have been exhausted, Jeanne, Subramanian and Williamson (2012) argue that they
should not be a last resort, rather “…properly designed they might even be a regular instrument
of economic policy.” (p. 95) This argument is bolstered by recent theory that highlights the
prudential role of capital controls whereby temporary, pro-cyclical, well-targeted controls
contribute to financial stability.3
Evolving practices and prescriptions make this an opportune time to reconsider the role
of capital controls. This paper analyzes experience with controls on capital inflows for 44
countries over the period 1995 – 2010. The analysis uses a new data set that, unlike earlier
cross-country capital control data, differentiates between controls on inflows and outflows. This
distinction is of obvious importance when considering the association between capital controls
and exchange rate appreciations or asset price booms. This data set also includes separate
measures of inflow controls on six categories of assets, which is especially important for
considering the prudential role of capital controls because of differences in the perceived
vulnerabilities from inflows of different types of assets (e.g. short-maturity debt as compared to
long-term direct investment).
A central theme of this paper is the distinction between the effects of long-standing and
episodic controls on capital flows. This distinction may have been less apparent fifteen years
ago than today because, in general, there were few instances of the re-imposition of controls up
through the mid-1990s. Currently some countries, such as China, continue to have long-standing
capital controls, but other countries have re-introduced controls when events seem to warrant
2

See Ostry, Ghosh, Habermeier, Chamon, Qureshi and Reinhardt (2010), Ostry, Ghosh, Habermeier, Laeven,
Chamon, Qureshi, and Kokenyne (2011), and IMF Strategy, Policy and Review Department (2011).
3
For example, see Korinek (2010), Jeanne and Korinek (2010), Bianchi and Mendoza (2011) and Jeanne (2012).

2

their use. For example, the Brazilian government imposed a 2 percent tax on investment in
existing Brazilian equities on October 20, 2009 (the Imposto sobre Operações Financeiras,
known by its acronym IOF), which was then raised to 4 percent on October 5, 2010, and to 6
percent less than two weeks later. This is a particularly prominent example since it was
immediately preceded by a declaration of a “currency war” in September 2009 by the Brazilian
finance minister, Guido Mantegna, in response to a 30 percent appreciation of the real against
the dollar from the beginning of that year that, he claimed, was a direct result of United States
monetary policy.
Long-standing capital controls are like walls that attempt to protect against the
vicissitudes of international capital markets. As will be shown below, the walls of long-standing
controls tend to be wide as well as high, limiting all manner of capital flows, including those that
could provide cheap capital, financial development, and opportunities to diversify risk. In
contrast, episodic capital controls open like gates during tranquil times, to enable an economy to
benefit from international capital, but swing shut in the face of capital inflows that threaten to
cause an unwanted appreciation or a destabilizing asset market boom. These episodic controls,
transitory and targeted towards particular categories of assets, make them less distortionary and
inefficient than broad, long-standing controls.
But one problem with gates is that they might not latch shut tightly. Episodic controls are
likely to be less efficacious than long-standing controls because evasion is easier in a country
that already has experience in international capital markets than in a country that does not have
this experience. Governments in countries with long-standing controls are likely to have
incurred the sunk costs required to establish an infrastructure of surveillance, reporting and
enforcement that makes those controls more effective. Furthermore, people in countries with

3

pervasive capital controls also tend to have fewer options for evasion because they have less
developed financial markets and also impose controls on a wider set of assets than countries with
episodic controls. Another problem with gates is that they may shut too late. It may be difficult
to gauge the appropriate moment to implement episodic capital controls, and implementation
itself may take some time. Finally, there may be political reasons that make it difficult to shut
gates on capital flows. As with monetary policy, the role of prudential controls on capital
inflows is to take away the punch bowl just as the party gets going, but revelers may not want
their drinks confiscated.4
Statistics presented in this paper show that countries closed to capital inflows do have
lower annual rates of growth of financial variables associated with booms and higher rates of
growth of GDP. Regression results also show that, in partial correlations, there is a statistically
significant lower rate of the growth of these aggregate economic variables between countries
with long-standing controls and countries that have episodically imposed controls. But countries
with long-standing controls on capital inflows differ in important ways from the other countries
in the sample, most notably they have much lower levels of GDP per capita. When controlling
for this, the partial correlations suggest that neither long-standing nor episodic controls are
associated with lower annual rates of growth of financial variables or GDP growth, nor with
lower rates of exchange rate appreciation.
The next section of this paper begins with a brief discussion of the role of capital flows in
international macroeconomics and an overview of the theory of the effects of capital controls.
This section also includes a brief discussion of the long history of capital controls, and introduces
the capital controls data set used in the subsequent analysis. The 44 countries in the data set are

4

The punch bowl analogy for monetary policy is from William McChesney Martin, Chairman of the Federal
Reserve from 1951 to 1970.

4

divided into the three categories, those persistently open to inflows, those persistently closed to
inflows, and those with episodically imposed controls on inflows. Section II closes with a
discussion of the pattern of inflow controls across categories of assets. Section III presents
empirical results that show the association of both long-standing and episodic capital controls
with financial variables that could presage a boom-bust cycle, GDP growth, and the real
exchange rate. The final section offers some concluding remarks.

II.

Capital Controls in Theory and Practice
Capital controls are rules, taxes or fees associated with financial transactions that

discriminate between domestic residents and those outside the country (OECD 2009). Capital
controls can be administrative or market-based measures. Administrative controls include
outright prohibitions on foreign borrowing or lending, quantitative limits on these transactions,
and the requirement that international capital transactions first receive government approval.
Market-based measures include taxes on cross-border capital transactions, differential bank
reserve requirements for resident and non-resident accounts, and the requirement that some
proportion of capital inflows be deposited in a non-interest bearing account at a central bank (an
unremunerated reserve requirement) which effectively serves as a tax on inflows. Unlike tariffs
on goods and services, which are subject to the multilateral General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT), countries are generally free to remove or impose capital controls without
reference to international agreements.5

5

An exception is that some countries face restrictions on imposing capital controls because of Bilateral Investment
Treaties (BITs) with the United States. Spillover effects, which arise when one country’s imposition of capital
controls affect another country, perhaps by diverting funds to that economy, are one reason for international
cooperation on capital controls. Jeanne, Subramanian and Williamson (2012) argue for international cooperation on
capital controls. Forbes, Fratzscher, Kostka and Straub (2012) present evidence that Brazilian capital controls
altered investors’ portfolio allocations.

5

This section provides a context for the consideration of capital controls by first describing the
ways that, in theory, capital flows affect an economy, and the corresponding implications
regarding the effects of capital controls. The discussion then turns to the history of capital
controls. This is followed by the introduction of the data set used in the analysis in this paper.
The first use of this data set is in the concluding part of this section that discusses whether the
pattern of the imposition of controls on capital inflows follows the prescriptions of the theory of
the prudential role of capital controls.

Capital Controls in Theory
Long-term international borrowing and lending offers several distinct economic benefits.6
Foreign investment, through international equity or debt sales, can both increase the amount of
productive capital in the host country and raise returns earned by investors in the source country.
These international transactions also afford diversification opportunities to domestic savers, and
this could have potentially large effects on welfare by allowing for a smoother path of
consumption as well as by raising the willingness of domestic producers to undertake risky
projects (Obstfeld 1994). Foreign direct investment, like the building of factories or the
establishment of foreign financial subsidiaries, may also foster technology transfer and promote
financial development. The converse of these arguments is that long-lasting capital controls
hamper growth, development, and economic welfare.
Shorter-run capital flows are at the heart of the analysis of business cycles in international
macroeconomics. The equalization of expected returns to bonds denominated in different
currencies (uncovered interest parity) is central to the policy trilemma, whereby economic policy
makers can choose two of the following three; monetary policy independence, exchange rate
6

Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996).

6

management, and international capital mobility.7 Unfettered capital mobility presents monetary
authorities with the choice of targeting either the interest rate or the exchange rate, with a freely
floating exchange rate and a fixed exchange rate representing the two polar cases. Capital
controls, however, could provide scope for policy to independently achieve both monetary and
exchange rate targets by preventing capital flows that respond to domestic interest rates and
influence the value of the exchange rate. This would enable monetary authorities to address
“internal” goals, such as low unemployment and low and stable inflation, while at the same time
addressing the “external” goal of a sustainable current account. In theory, long-standing capital
account restrictions could a country help achieve this external goal by enabling its government to
manage its real exchange rate (Jeanne 2011). Episodic controls on capital inflows could,
theoretically, enable monetary authorities to fight inflation by raising interest rates without
simultaneously facing the exchange rate appreciation that would occur with unrestricted capital
flows.
Episodic capital controls could also confer benefits through another means, by promoting
financial stability. The recent crisis began in financial markets, and financial markets were a key
vector through which economic distress spread from one country to another. This experience
has highlighted general questions about financial market policies, including the potential role for
prudential capital controls. Capital controls may be a viable alternative to other prudential
policies, such as bank regulation and supervision, in an economy that lacks resources to
undertake these policies (but, presumably, could enforce capital controls). Also, capital controls
are more broad-based than bank regulation, which is important in economies in which capital

7

A risk premium could drive a wedge between expected returns, and, in theory, the equalization of expected returns
could be achieved through incipient capital flows rather than actual capital flows. Shambaugh (2004) provides
evidence supporting the empirical relevance of the policy trilemma.

7

flows in through channels other than regulated financial institutions (Ostry, Ghosh, Chamon and
Qureshi, 2011). 8
Recent theoretical research has considered the manner in which episodic capital controls
could contribute to financial stability and prevent boom-bust cycles.9 The starting point for this
work is the recognition that the response to inherent characteristics of financial markets, such as
asymmetric information, is the introduction of constraints, such as collateral requirements, that
limit borrowing. Asset price booms and exchange rate appreciations can relax these constraints
and contribute to increased borrowing. For example, an asset price boom or a currency
appreciation can raise the value of assets used as collateral. A subsequent collapse in asset
prices, or a currency depreciation, then has cascading effects as the negative feedback loop of a
decline in collateral value, a reduction in loans, a decrease in aggregate demand, and a further
decline in asset prices and the value of collateral, plays out. Korinek (2011) discusses how
increased borrowing by individuals raises asset values and loosens collateral constraints, thereby
collectively contributing to financial fragility, and compares this to the familiar externality that
arises when drivers do not consider their contribution to air pollution.10 Just as a tax on gasoline
could force drivers to internalize the pollution externality, a tax on capital inflows could be
employed to limit foreign borrowing and make the financial system more resilient.

8

There is overlap between policies that could be construed as capital controls, and those that may be considered
macropruential regulations, as discussed in detail in Ostry, Ghosh, Habermeier, Laeven, Chamon, Qureshi and
Kokenyne (2011). For example, higher bank reserve requirements for accounts held by non-residents than those
held by residents is both a capital control (because it treats residents and non-residents differently) and a
macroprudential policy (because it represents an effort to foster financial stability through regulating the banking
sector). This policy is more finely gauged than a general reserve requirement and may accurately reflect the greater
predilection for non-residents to engage in a bank run. In practice, there could be political reasons for distinguishing
between macroprudential policies, which could be justified for promoting financial stability, and capital controls,
which may be decried as interfering in the operation of international asset markets.
9
Korinek (2011) surveys this theoretical work.
10
The market failure in this case arises because of imperfections in financial markets due to features such as
asymmetric information.

8

This theoretical work emphasizes that optimal controls on capital inflows would be episodic,
and more precisely, procyclical, strengthening as capital flows increased. Optimal capital
controls would not be broad based, but would target inflows that present particular concerns
about financial vulnerability, for example foreign-currency denominated debt as opposed to
direct investment. 11 But the size of the optimal tax suggested by model calibrations is typically
quite small. Korinek (2010) uses data from Indonesia and calculates an optimal tax of 0.44
percent on Rupiah debt and 1.54 percent on dollar debt. Bianchi and Mendoza (2011) calibrate a
model using United States data and find an optimal prudential tax on debt of 1 percent. Bianchi
(2011), using Argentine data in his calibration, calculates an average optimal state-contingent tax
of debt of 5 percent, and, alternatively, an optimal fixed tax on debt of 3.6 percent.12 The size of
these taxes might be considered inconsequential by investors at a time of a rapid appreciation or
a vibrant boom that substantially raises returns in affected markets.

Capital Controls in Practice: A Brief History
Interest in imposing capital controls tends to emerge, naturally enough, when events call
into question the desirability of unfettered capital movements. Capital moved freely across
national borders during the pre-World War I gold standard period, a time when, according to
John Maynard Keynes, “The inhabitant of London could order by telephone, sipping his morning
tea in bed, the various products of the whole earth ... he could at the same moment and by the
same means adventure his wealth in the natural resources and new enterprises of any quarter of
11

The consideration of relative riskiness of assets gives rise to a “pecking order” of capital controls (Ostry, Ghosh,
Habermeier, Chamon, Qureshi, and Reinhardt 2010). Below we consider whether controls were imposed in a
manner consistent with this pecking order.
12
In these models, the welfare implications of the imposition of an optimal tax on capital inflows are quite small.
For example, Bianchi (2011) finds the welfare gains from correcting the externality associated with overborrowing
of 0.135 percent of permanent consumption. This parallels the tiny welfare gains found in models that attempt to
assess the costs of business cycles.

9

the world.” (Keynes 1920, pp. 11 – 12) But, about a dozen years after he penned these words,
during the depths of the Great Depression, Keynes’ focus turned towards the instability arising
from volatile capital flows. In a 1933 speech in Dublin, he stated “I sympathize … with those
who would minimize rather than those who would maximize economic entanglements among
nations. Ideas, knowledge, art, hospitality, travel – these are things which should of their nature
be international. But let goods be home-spun whenever it is reasonable and conveniently possible
and, above all, let finance be national.”13 These suspicions of international capital movements
contributed to the prevalence of administrative capital controls during the post-World War II
Bretton Woods international monetary system.
The Bretton Woods system broke apart in the early 1970s, replaced by a “non-system” of
generalized floating exchange rates. Administrative capital controls in richer countries began to
be relaxed around that time as well. The prospect of international capital movements leading to
wild swings in currency values led James Tobin to propose, in 1972, a market-based capital
control – a small tax on transactions in foreign exchange to “throw some sand in the wheels of
our excessively efficient international money markets.”14 While never enacted, the Tobin Tax
on currency transactions remains a touchstone for those who advocate limiting capital flows, and
discussion about it reemerges at times of concern about international capital movements.
These concerns were, for the most part, relatively dormant during the first half of the
1990s. At that time of widespread economic prosperity, there was an emphasis on the role of
financial markets in fostering development and growth, and a view that capital inflows could
promote financial development. The newly coined term “emerging markets” reflected the
promise of that era. Emerging market nations tended to liberalize restrictions on their capital

13
14

Quoted in Skidelsky (1992), p. 477
This proposal was published in Tobin (1978).

10

inflows. A notable exception was the Chilean encaje, a policy enacted in May 1992 that required
anyone borrowing from abroad to deposit between 20 percent and 30 percent of the loan at the
central bank in a non-interest-bearing account (an unremunerated reserve requirement).15 But
the encaje was removed in May 1998 and, by the end of the century, there was a prevailing
optimism about inflows to emerging market countries.16
This sanguine view about capital flows began to shift in the early years of the 2000s,
partly prompted by appreciations of emerging market currencies. These concerns intensified
with the advent of the crisis, and the subsequent “currency war” as monetary policy in advanced
economies eased to combat the Great Recession. For example, a wave of capital controls were
tightened or introduced in 2010 when, besides the intensification of the Brazilian IOF discussed
previously, South Korea tightening limits on foreign banks' holdings of currency derivatives in
June, Peru increasing banks’ reserve requirements for foreign borrowing in August, and Thailand
reintroducing a 15% withholding tax on interest payments and capital gains on bonds held by
foreign investors in October.
This short narrative of the history of capital controls over the past forty years is reflected
in the data presented in Figure 1. The data in this figure are based on the indicators of capital
controls (both inflows and outflows) first developed by Quinn (1997) and recently updated to
include data through 2007 by Quinn, Schindler and Toyoda (2011). The original Quinn (1997)
series used the broad on/off control information in the summary tables in the pre-1996 volumes
of the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER),
supplemented by descriptions of controls for individual countries in an effort to capture the

15

This policy also included a 3 percent penalty for early withdrawal.
Another notable experience with capital controls in the 1990s was the imposition of controls on outflows by
Malaysia in September 1998, at the time of the Asian financial crisis, that effectively outlawed the transfer of ringgit
abroad.
16

11

intensity of restrictions. This series does not distinguish between controls on inflows and
outflows. The indicator is the sum of two categories of controls on capital transactions, those by
residents and those by non-residents, each of which range from 0 to 2, to get an overall indicator
that ranges from 0 to 4, with larger values indicating a lower level of restrictions.17 The updated
Quinn, Schindler and Toyoda (2011) series conforms to this template. The series in Figure 1
flips the series such a value of 0 represents no restrictions and a value of 4 represents the most
stringent restrictions.
Figure 1 presents the average of this inverse Quinn Index for 23 advanced-economy
countries, and also for 21 emerging market nations, for the period 1970 to 2007. 18 These series
show that, on average, Advanced Economies had a steady reduction of capital controls from the
mid-1970s through the turn of the century, and controls stayed at that relatively low level
through 2007. In contrast, the 21 emerging market economies, on average, did not see a marked
reduction of capital controls until the late 1980s, and the trend towards capital account
liberalization stalled in the late 1990s. By this indicator, the capital accounts of these 21
countries were about as open in 2007 as they were a decade earlier.19

17

The original Quinn scoring method is as follows, for both of the two categories, transactions by residents and
transactions by non-residents: 0 means payments are forbidden, 0.5 means that there are quantitative or other
regulatory restrictions, 1 means that transactions are subject to heavy taxes, 1.5 means that there are less severe
taxes, and 2 means that transactions are free of restrictions or taxes.
18
The advanced economy countries include Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. The emerging market countries include
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia,
Mexico, Morocco, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey.
19
The figure shows the trend towards liberalization until the mid-1990s that tended to focus empirical research
using the pre-1996 AREAER classification on the effects of capital account liberalization.

12

Figure 1: Broad Capital Control Index

0

1

2

3

1970 to 2007

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990
year

Average for 23 Adv. Economies

1995

2000

2007

Average for 21 EMEs

Controls on Capital Inflows by Categories of Assets, 1995 - 2010
While the data used to construct the capital account restriction indicators presented in Figure
1 give a sense of the overall stance of policy, they do not distinguish between inflows versus
outflows, nor do they offer information on restrictions on separate categories of assets.
Beginning in 1996 (which reports on conditions in 1995), the annual issues of the Annual Report
on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions provided much greater detail than in
earlier issues, with indicators distinguishing between inflows and outflows, and across categories
of assets. Schindler (2009) developed a method for using the new AREAER format, and presents
data on controls on inflows and outflows of six categories of assets for the period 1995 to 2005.
This is not an exhaustive list of assets, but covers the “lion’s share of global cross-asset holdings;
…that broadly reflects the structure of global de facto financial integration.” (Schindler 2009, p.

13

226). In this paper we adopt Schindler’s method and update his data set to also include the
period 2006 to 2010. For each of the inflow categories, for each year, the indicator takes a value
of 0 if there are no controls in place and 1 if there is a restriction on transactions.20
The six categories, along with their abbreviations and descriptions, are presented in Table 1.
The first two categories, Money Market and Bonds, refer to controls on debt instruments, with
the former representing assets with an original maturity of one year or less and the latter
representing controls on longer maturity. 21 The Financial Credits category includes controls on
banks. The next two categories represent controls on shares, either for individual companies
(Equities) or in the form of mutual funds or other investment trusts (Collective Investment). The
sixth category, direct investment, refers to controls on investments that involve the participation
in the management of the acquired entities. Figure 2 is a histogram showing the proportion of
observations with capital controls across these six categories of assets. There is a marked
similarity in the incidence of these controls, with the range of observations with restrictions in
place between 30 percent (for Financial Credits and Collective Investments) and 37 percent (for
Money Market instruments).

20

Schindler distinguishes between cases when there are controls on either non-residents or residents but not both,
and when there are controls on transactions by both non-residents and residents. For more details, see Schindler
(2009) page 228, and also footnote 10 in that article.
21
Information on the category Bonds (BO) is only available from 1997 – 2010.

14

Table 1: Asset Categories for Capital Controls
Money Market (mm): Refers to securities with an original maturity of one year or less and
includes short-term instruments, such as certificates of deposit and bills of exchange. The
category also includes treasury bills and other short-term government paper, bankers'
acceptances, commercial papers, interbank deposits, and repurchase agreements.

Bonds (bo): Refers to bonds and other securities with an original maturity of more than one
year. The term "other securities" includes notes and debentures.

Financial Credits (fc): Includes credits other than commercial credits granted by all residents,
including banks, to nonresidents, or vice versa.

Equities (eq): Includes transactions involving shares and other securities of a participating
nature if they are not effected for the purpose of acquiring a lasting economic interest in the
management of the enterprise concerned. Investments for the purpose of acquiring a lasting
economic interest are addressed under foreign direct investments.

Collective Investments (ci): Includes share certificates and registry entries or other evidence of
investor interest in an institution for collective investment, such as mutual funds, and unit and
investment trusts.

Direct Investment (di): Refers to investments for the purpose of establishing lasting economic
relations both abroad by residents and domestically by nonresidents. These investments are
essentially for the purpose of producing goods and services, and, in particular investments that
allow investor participation in the management of the enterprise. The category includes the
creation or extension of a wholly owned enterprise, subsidiary, or branch and the acquisition of
full or partial ownership of a new or existing enterprise that results in effective influence over the
operations of the enterprise.
Categories based on Schindler (2009) cataloguing of information in IMF’s AREAER.

15

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

.3

.35

.4

Figure 2: Incidence of Controls by Asset Categories

MM

BO

FC

EQ

CI

DI

Asset Category

This histogram masks variation in the prevalence of controls across groups of countries and
across the 1995 – 2010 period. Figures 3a and 3b present data on the averages of the control
indicators for three categories of assets (“MM, BO” = money market and bonds; “EQ, FC, CI” =
equities, financial credits, and collective investments; and “DI” = direct investments) for the 23
Advanced countries (Figure 3a) and the 21 Emerging Market Economies (Figure 3b). The first
thing to note is a cross-sectional difference. The range of averages for the Advanced Economies
is from 1 percent to 26 percent, with a relatively small range for the categories MM,BO (money
market and bonds), and EQ, FC, CI (equities, financial credits and collective investments) of 1
percent to 7 percent, and a larger range for direct investment of 13 percent to 26 percent. In
contrast, the range of averages for the Emerging Market Economies is from 38 percent to 62
percent, and the averages for direct investment are not outliers for this group of countries as they
are for the Advanced Economies.

16

There is notable times series variation in the averages across both sets of countries. The
advanced countries, as a group, saw a reduction in the controls on money markets and bonds
from an annual average of 6.5 percent in 1997 to 1.1 percent in 1999, but then an increase
beginning in 2003 that reached 5.4 percent in 2008. The annual average for the Direct
Investment category also began to rise in 2003, from 13 percent, its value since 1999, to 26
percent in 2006 – 2010. Emerging market economies, like advanced countries, saw a decrease in
the annual average for controls on the categories of money market securities and bonds in the
first part of the sample period, from 55 percent in 1996 to 38 percent in 2002, and a subsequent
increase to 48 percent in 2009 and 2010. Averages for both the direct investment and financial
credits category and the equities and collective investments category decreased in the mid-1990s
to their lowest values in 2003 and 2004, and, subsequently, annual averages for these two
categories stayed within a relatively narrow range.
Data on the experiences of each country with controls on inflows for five of the
categories (all but Direct Investment) enable us to divide the 44 countries into three groups; 16
countries that were almost always persistently open to inflows of all five categories of assets, 10
countries that were almost always persistently closed to inflows of four or five of the five
categories of assets, and 18 other countries that had some experience with capital controls but
were not persistently closed to inflows across a wide range of categories of assets. 22 Among
these 18 countries, the 12 that imposed controls at some point between 1995 and 2010 are
denoted with an asterisk in Table 2 while the other 6 began with some controls in place at the
beginning of the period but removed some or all of them during the sample period. There are 23

22

We do not consider controls on direct investment inflows in the subsequent analysis because these controls are
typically imposed for reasons such as national security rather than, as with the other categories of controls, achieving
short-run macroeconomic targets or promoting financial stability. Table A in the appendix presents a
comprehensive listing of the experience with the controls on capital inflows, across the six categories of assets.

17

Figure 3a: Inflow Controls, 23 Advanced Countries

19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

Average of Countries' Indicators, by Categories

Money Market, Bonds
Fin. Credits, Equities, Collective Inv.

Direct Inv.

Figure 3b: Inflow Controls, 21 Emerging Market Countries

19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10

.4

.45

.5

.55

.6

Averages of Countries' Indicators, by Categories

Money Market, Bonds
Fin. Credits, Equities, Collective Inv.

18

Direct Inv.

country-year observations in which controls were imposed, among these 12 countries and the
number of years in which countries imposed new controls is presented in the table.
The first row of statistics at the bottom of Table 2 shows that the annual geometric
average of income per capita (in PPP constant 2005 US dollars) for the countries in the
persistently closed group is 18 percent of that of the persistently open countries, and 28 percent
of that of the episodic group – note that the all the countries in the persistently closed group are
emerging market nations, and the preponderance of countries in the persistently open group are
advanced economies.23 Further distinctions across these three groups, with respect to the
incidence of their use of capital controls, are presented in the final rows of Table 2. The statistics
in these rows show that there are no instances of controls on any of the five categories of assets
for any of the countries in the persistently open category, while 55 percent (157 of 288) of the
observations in the episodic category had restrictions on at least one category of assets and, as
would be expected, every observation for all countries in the closed category had restrictions on
at least one category of assets in each year. The statistics in the next row further demonstrate the
distinction between the incidence of controls for countries in the episodic and closed categories.
There were controls on all five categories of assets for 69 percent of the observations for the 10
countries in the closed category but only for 9 percent of the observations for the 18 countries in
the episodic category. This difference is even more marked when considering the number of
observations in which there were controls on at least 4 categories of assets; this condition was
met by 15 percent of the observations for countries in the episodic category but by 93 percent of
the observations for countries in the closed category. Thus, walls to capital inflows for this latter
group were both persistent and wide.

23

This fact will be important when we consider, in the next section, the partial correlations of capital controls with
aggregate economic variables.

19

Table 2: Inflow Control Categories for 1995-2010
Persistently Open (16)

Persistently closed (10)

Episodic controls (18)

Austria (ADV)

China (EME)

Argentina*(3) (EME)

Belgium (ADV)

Colombia (EME)

Australia*(1) (ADV)

Canada (ADV)

India (EME)

Brazil*(3) (EME)

Denmark (ADV)

Indonesia (EME)

Chile (EME)

Egypt (EME)

Malaysia (EME)

Czech Republic*(2) (EME)

Finland (ADV)

Morocco (EME)

France (ADV)

Greece (ADV)

Philippines (EME)

Germany (ADV)

Italy (ADV)

Russia (EME)

Hungary (EME)

Japan (ADV)

South Africa (EME)

Iceland*(4) (ADV)

Netherlands (ADV)

Thailand (EME)

Ireland*(1) (ADV)

New Zealand (ADV)

Israel (ADV)

Norway (ADV)

Korea (EME)

Spain (ADV)

Mexico*(2) (EME)

Switzerland (ADV)

Peru*(1) (EME)

United Kingdom (ADV)

Poland*(1) (EME)

United States (ADV)

Portugal*(2) (ADV)
Sweden*(1) (ADV)
Turkey*(2) (EME)

*(n) = Imposed controls in n different years between 1995 and 2010. Other countries in Episodic
group only removed existing controls but did not impose new controls during sample period.
Geometric Average of GDP Per Capita, 1995 – 2010 (in PPP-adjusted 2005 US Dollars)
$27,054

$4,902

$17,387

Number of Country-Year Observations with Controls on Any Categories of Assets (DI Excluded)
0 out of 256

160 out of 160

157 out of 288 (55%)

Number of Country-Year Observations with Controls on All Categories of Assets (DI Excluded)
0 out of 256

111 out of 160 (69%)

26 out of 288 (9%)

Number of Country-Year Observations with Controls on 4 or 5 Categories of Assets (DI Excluded)
0 out of 256

149 out of 160 (93%)
20

44 out of 288 (15%)

The Pecking Order of the Imposition of Controls on Capital Inflows
We close this section with a consideration of the pattern of imposition of controls across
categories of assets. The theory of the prudential role of capital controls described above
prescribes a “pecking order,” with controls first imposed on those assets most likely to contribute
to financial instability. A practical application of this principle is found in Ostry et al. (2010) in
which the proposed pecking order is that controls are imposed first on foreign currency debt,
then on CPI-Indexed local currency debt, then on local currency debt, then on portfolio
investment, and, finally, on direct investment. The categories in the AREAER do not allow for as
finely grained an analysis as this, but it is still possible to analyze whether the pattern of the
imposition of controls is consistent with financial stability considerations.
The categories of assets in Table 1 are ordered to reflect a decreasing contribution to the
risk of financial instability; short-maturity bonds are more risky than longer-maturity bonds,
bonds are more risky than bank lending, bank lending is more risky than equity flows and
collective investments, and direct investment is considered the least risky type of international
capital flow. This ordering suggests a pattern of the imposition of controls consistent with the
pecking order; that controls on either short-maturity bonds or longer-maturity bonds preceded the
imposition of the other three categories of assets (and there were no controls already in place on
any of these three categories), or that a simultaneous imposition of controls on bank lending and
either short-maturity or longer-maturity bonds preceded the imposition of controls on equity
flows or collective investments (and there were no already standing controls on these latter two
categories of assets). These are relatively weak pecking order conditions, and tilt towards the
finding of a pecking order.24

24

There are five ways in which these conditions make it more likely to find a pattern of the imposition of controls
consistent with the pecking order: (i) There is no requirement that controls on shorter-maturity bonds precede those

21

Even under these relatively weak conditions, however, there is little evidence that capital
controls were imposed in a manner consistent with this pecking order. As shown in Table 2,
there are 23 episodes of newly imposed controls for the subset of 12 countries that imposed
controls episodically. Seven of these 23 episodes represented the imposition of controls on
either short-maturity or longer maturity bonds (or both), but in only four of these cases were
these controls imposed when there were no controls on financial credits, equities, or collective
investments. Three of these four cases, Turkey in 2007, and Ireland and Peru in 2008,
represented the imposition of controls on shorter-maturity money market instruments, but not on
bonds with maturity of at least one year. The fourth case would not meet a stronger form of the
pecking order since Iceland imposed controls on bonds with maturity of at least one year in
2005, but not on shorter-maturity money market instruments. The fifth case consistent with the
pecking order is the imposition of controls on money market instruments, bonds with maturity of
at least one year, and financial credits in Argentina in 2003.

Thus, with only 5 of the 23 cases

of the imposition of controls on capital inflows consistent with these weak pecking order
conditions, there is little evidence that governments have systematically acted in a manner
consistent with the prescriptions of prudential capital control theory.
There are, of course, reasons for imposing capital controls other than to promote financial
stability. In particular, governments may be concerned about the competitiveness effects of an
appreciation. In this case, the pattern of imposition could reflect an effort to use episodic
controls that are the most efficacious and least likely to be subject to evasion. But whether or not
capital controls achieve their desired results is an open question. In the next section we consider
on longer-maturity bonds; (ii) Controls on both types of bonds are treated interchangeably; (iii) Controls are
required on only one of the two categories of bonds; (iv) There can be a simultaneous impositions of controls (or,
more precisely, impositions occurring within a single calendar year) on at least one bond category and the Financial
Credits category; (v) Direct investment is not considered since the imposition of controls on this category of assets
before the imposition on any other category would lead to a finding that the pecking order was not met.

22

the correlation of exchange rates, as well as other aggregate variables, with both episodic and
long-standing capital controls.

III.

Capital Controls and Economic Outcomes
Interest in the use of capital controls has grown in the wake of the Great Recession due to

the perception that countries that blocked capital inflows performed better than those that did
not. 25

The theory discussed in Section II provides a rationale for this view, and it is also

supported by statistics showing countries with capital controls had higher rates of GDP growth
and lower rates of growth of financial variables associated with asset price booms. In a similar
fashion, the value of capital controls is supported by the view that countries with long-standing
controls, like China, can successfully stem appreciation pressures.
The empirical results presented in this section provide a preliminary investigation of the
correlations between controls on capital inflows and variables associated with financial
vulnerabilities, GDP growth and the real exchange rate. We present unconditional statistics, as
well as partial correlations drawn from the annual panel data set of 44 countries over the 1995 to
2010 period. These estimates are based on estimates using annual data although, at the end of
this section, we also consider the association of capital controls and exchange rates at a monthly
frequency.26

25

Some argue that countries like China and India, which had long-standing controls in place, were spared the
financial upheavals that roiled more open economies, as mentioned in Ostry, et al. (2010). In constrast, Kose,
Prasad, Rogoff and Wei (2009) write “Capital account liberalization is believed to have played an important role in
fomenting financial crises and has been indicted by some observers as the proximate cause for the crises experienced
by emerging markets in recent decades. But there is little empirical evidence to support the view that capital
account liberalization by itself increases vulnerabilities to crises.” (p. 27)
26

While an analysis at an annual frequency may be less likely to discern significant associations between capital
inflows and aggregate economic variables than a study using monthly data, it might have more relevance for
macroeconomic and financial policy than higher frequency results.

23

A key point in this analysis is distinguishing the effects of long-standing capital controls
from those of episodic controls on different categories of assets. The panel analysis
distinguishes between long-standing and episodic capital controls with the use of three separate
dummy variables; CL, which equals 1 for all years for the 10 countries with persistent controls
on inflows, BOMMt-1, which equals 1 if there are controls on either money market instruments or
bonds in the previous year, and FECt-1, which equals 1 if there are controls on financial credits,
equities, or collective investments in the previous year. 27
The identification of the effects of controls on capital inflows is challenging. Capital
controls are typically not imposed in isolation from other policies and, to the extent that these
policies are aimed towards the same objective, partial correlations from regression analysis
would overstate the association between capital controls and economic outcomes because of
omitted variables.28 On the other hand, episodic capital controls may be systematically imposed
in response to movements in exchange rates, GDP, or financial variables, and, if this were the
case, partial correlations would understate the effect of capital controls on these variables
because of endogeneity. For this reason, the two dummy variables BOMMt-1, and FECt-1, are
lagged one year in an effort to avoid capturing reverse causality, for example, if a real exchange
rate appreciation prompts the imposition of controls. Regressions were also run in which the
episodic control variables represent the contemporaneous probability of the imposition of
controls derived from a probit regressions that use only lagged variables. The results from

27

The fact that CL equals 1 in all years for the 10 countries with persistent controls on inflows means that it is not
possible to control for country fixed effects in the panel estimates. Year fixed effects are included.
28
Habermeier, Kokenyne and Baba (2011) argue that controls on inflows are almost always imposed at the same
time as other prudential policies.

24

estimates using this two-stage procedure were almost identical to those using lagged dummy
variables in terms of the pattern of the significance of results.29
Statistics presented below show that countries with persistent controls on capital inflows
had higher rates of GDP growth and lower rates of growth of financial variables than the other
countries in the sample. Regressions controlling for other variables show that these statistics
should not be used as a guide for the efficacy of episodic controls, however, because, with a few
exceptions, there is not a comparable significant partial correlation between episodic controls
and economic aggregates, and, in many cases, there is a significant difference between the partial
correlations for long-standing and episodic controls. Countries with long-standing controls differ
from other countries in a number of ways including, as shown in Table 2, having lower income
per capita. The significant association between long-standing controls and annual growth in
aggregate economic variables disappears once partial correlations control for income per capita,
while the inclusion of this variable does not shift the estimates towards finding a statistically
significant effect of episodic controls.
These results are important from a practical perspective. Policy discussion on the
desirability of capital controls is about episodic controls because these can be imposed and
removed as conditions change. The motivation for imposing episodic controls, however, is often
drawn from the experience of countries with long-standing controls. Analyses that do not
distinguish between episodic and long-standing controls may not provide accurate guidance for
decisions about policy on controls on capital inflows. Furthermore, the significant estimated link
29

The estimated contemporaneous probability of the presence of controls from these first stage estimates,
and
, are from probit regressions run for the subset of 18 countries that had experience with episodic inflow
controls. The regressors include a dummy variable indicating whether controls were in place the previous year as
well as lagged values of GDP growth, bilateral real appreciation against the United States dollar, lagged growth in
credit to GDP and in debt share, and lagged GDP per capita. The first stage progit regressions have pseudo-R²s of
0.59 for BOMM and 0.65 for FEC. The estimates
and
, along with CL, were used in regressions that
were otherwise identical to the OLS estimates presented in Tables 3, 4, and 5 below.

25

between long-standing controls and aggregate variables does not survive the inclusion of income
per capita in regressions. Finally, while the estimates presented below show a significant
depreciation of China’s bilateral real dollar exchange rate as compared to countries with open
capital accounts, conditional on other factors, this is not the case for the other countries with
long-standing capital controls.

Capital Controls and Financial Vulnerabilities
Events of the past few years have highlighted the role financial vulnerabilities can play in
contributing to economic distress. As discussed above, theory suggests that appropriately
imposed episodic capital controls can temper a boom-bust cycle. In this section we present a
panel analysis of the association between both long-standing and episodic controls on the change
in the levels of these variables, as well as on surges of capital inflows. 30
The results presented in this section are related to those presented by Ostry, Ghosh,
Chamon and Qureshi (2012). That paper includes both panel and cross-section analysis of the
effects of capital controls on the share of debt liabilities to total liabilities, the change in the
private credit relative to GDP, the share of foreign exchange-denominated credit to total credit,
and the differences in GDP growth rates before and after the crisis, and their sample includes 51
emerging market nations over the period 1995 to 2008. Estimates in that paper also control for
the presence of domestic prudential regulation. The analysis here is also related to that of Forbes
and Warnock (2012) who find that controls on inflows do not significantly affect surges of gross

30

It is worth noting that one person’s prudential policy may be another’s financial repression, that is, government
interference in financial markets in order to direct savings towards politically preferred projects. One argument for
capital account liberalization is that it promotes financial development (Klein and Olivei 2008). In turbulent times,
however, financial development may go hand-in-hand with a boom-bust cycle.

26

capital inflows. But neither of these two papers distinguishes between episodic and longstanding capital controls.
The three financial variables studied in this section are the changes in private credit
relative to GDP, the percentage of domestic credit provided by the banking sector and the share
of debt liabilities in total liabilities.31 Positive growth in these variables indicate greater potential
for asset market booms. There is also a panel estimate of the partial correlation between capital
controls and a qualitative indicator of whether a country had a surge of capital inflows (this
series is from Ghosh, Kim, Qureshi and Zalduendo, 2012).
Table 3 presents statistics on these variables, as well as the annual panel estimates of the
partial correlation between each of them and both long-standing and episodic controls on capital
inflows. The statistics in the bottom rows of the table show that countries closed to capital
inflows had lower growth rates of credit to GDP, bank credit, and debt liabilities relative to total
liabilities than the other countries in the sample. These ten countries also had less than half the
percentage of observations with a capital inflow surge than the other 34 countries.
The regressions estimates in the columns 1, 3 and 5 show that countries with longstanding controls on capital inflows had a statistically significant lower growth rate of the three
financial variables, and a statistically lower association with capital inflow surges, than countries
with open capital accounts. The same is not true when episodic controls were imposed in the
previous period, but for the lower likelihood of a surge of inflows when controls were imposed
on bonds. The partial correlations of episodic controls with the three financial variables is
estimated imprecisely (standard errors almost always exceed estimated coefficients), and there
are only two instances of a significantly lower association of long-standing than of episodic
controls. But the significant partial correlation of these three financial variables with long31

These data are from the World Bank. See http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/.

27

standing controls disappears when lagged GDP per capita is included as a regressor, as shown in
columns 2, 4 and 6. The estimates in these columns also show that the coefficient on GDP per
capita consistently enters with a positive and significant coefficient. It is reasonable to interpret
the results in columns 1 through 6 as showing that the significant effect of long-standing controls
arises because it serves as a proxy for income per capita.
This is not the case with the estimates of the partial correlation of surges with longstanding and episodic controls (columns 7 and 8).32 Countries with long-standing capital
controls had a lower likelihood of a surge, even when controlling for whether there was a surge
in the previous period, lagged real GDP growth, whether the country had a pegged exchange rate
in the previous period, and year dummy variables. Similarly, the estimates in these columns
show a significant negative coefficient on the dummy variable for the presence of financial
credits, equities or collective investments in the previous period. There is a statistically
significant difference in the estimated coefficient on long-standing controls and the coefficient
on bonds, and a positive and significant partial correlation between controls on bonds and a
surge.33
Notwithstanding the significant effects for surges, the results in Tables 3 call into
question the prudential effects of capital controls. Ultimately, however, we are interested in the
relationship between capital controls and these variables because of the potential effect on GDP,
a topic that we turn to next.34

32

Note that, because of data limitations, the surge regressions in columns 7 and 8 include only Emerging Market
countries and cover the period 2001 to 2010.
33
These results also hold for the two-stage estimates described above (see footnote 29) which employ the
instrumented values of BOMMt and FECt.
34
Nevertheless, it is important to consider the effect of capital controls on variables that could potentially affect
GDP through a boom-bust cycle, and not just the effects on GDP, because a sample may be too short to include the
bust part of the cycle.

28

Table 3: Capital Controls and Financial Vulnerabilities
Annual Panel Estimates, 1995 - 2010
1
Dep. Var.
CL
(s.e.)
BOMMt-1
(s.e.)
FECt-1
(s.e.)
Levelt-1
(s.e.)
Pegt-1
(s.e.)
Δln(GDPt-1)
(s.e.)
ln(GDPPCt-1)
(s.e.)
R²
No. Obs.
CL – BOMM
(s.e.)
CL – FEC
(s.e.)

2
Δ(Credit/GDP)
-0.043** 0.030
(0.018)
(0.019)
-0.022
-0.016
(0.024)
(0.022)
0.003
0.007
(0.017)
(0.014)
-0.0002 -.0006**
(0.0013) (.00016)
0.029** 0.027**
(0.013)
(0.013)
1.125** 1.238**
(0.353)
(0.329)
0.053**
(0.013)
0.12
0.16
636
636
-0.021
0.046
(0.027)
(0.031)
-0.046* 0.023
(0.024)
(0.023)

3

4
ΔBank Credit
-0.026**
0.003
(0.009)
(0.014)
-0.028
-0.026
(0.021)
(0.019)
0.008
0.010
(0.015)
(0.013)
-0.00015** -.00025**
(0.00006) (.0001)
0.026**
0.025**
(0.010)
(0.010)
0.316**
0.361**
(0.157)
(0.157)
0.021**
(0.009)
0.07
0.08
635
635
0.002
0.030
(0.020)
(0.024)
-0.033
-0.006
(0.017)
(0.017)

5

6
ΔDebt Share
-0.032**
-0.011
(0.008)
(0.013)
-0.004
-0.003
(0.015)
(0.014)
-0.010
-0.007
(0.015)
(0.012)
-0.0005*
-0.0005**
(0.00026)
(0.00025)
0.015**
0.013**
(0.006)
(0.006)
-0.247
-0.174
(0.170)
(0.183)
0.015**
(0.0075)
0.21
0.22
571
571
-0.028*
-0.008
(0.016)
(0.016)
-0.022
-0.004
(0.017)
(0.018)

7

8
Surge†
-0.579*
-0.574**
(0.248)
(0.287)
0.892**
0.891**
(0.367)
(0.376)
-0.874** -0.874**
(0.308)
(0.308)
1.057**
1.057**
(0.189)
(0.190)
-0.393*
-0.391*
(0.225)
(0.229)
3.995**
4.008**
(1.865)
(1.927)
0.006
(0.204)
0.25
0.25
305
305
-1.471** -1.465**
(0.421)
(0.485)
0.295
0.300
(0.367)
(0.388)

Full Sample
Mean (s.d.)

0.031 (0.129)

Mean (s.d.)

0.018 (0.133)

0.026 (0.109)

-0.025 (0.090)

Surge = 19% obs.

Countries Persistently Closed to Inflows
0.013 (0.102)

-0.053 (0.108)

Surge = 12% obs.

Countries Not Persistently Closed to Inflows
Mean (s.d.)

0.035 (0.128)

0.030 (0.110)

-0.018 (0.084)

Surge = 26% obs.

ΔCredit / GDP = Percentage change in private credit relative to GDP
ΔBank Credit = Percentage change in domestic credit provided by the banking sector
ΔDebt Share = Percentage change in share of debt liabilities in total liabilities
Surge = 1 if surge inflows in year, else 0 (Probit regression).
†
Sample is 2000 – 2010 for Surge, and only EME countries
CL = Persistently Closed to Capital Inflows
BOMMt-1 = 1 if episodic controls on either money market instruments or bonds in t-1, else 0
FECt-1 = 1 if episodic controls on financial credits, equities, or collective investments in in t-1, else 0
Levelt-1 = lag level of respective dependent variables (e.g. (C/A)t-1). For Surge, Surge in t-1.
Δln(GDPt-1)= lag change in real GDP
Pegt-1 = 1 if pegged exchange rate in t-1, else 0
Year dummy variables in all regressions.
Standard errors clustered at country level
** = significant at the 95 percent level of confidence or higher
* = significant at the 90 to 95 percent level of confidence

29

Capital Controls and GDP Growth
The average growth rate of real GDP in the ten countries in our data set with longstanding controls on capital inflows was notably higher than that of the other 34 countries over
the period 1995 to 2010; 4.6 percent per annum as opposed to 2.7 percent per annum. This
difference was even larger during the 2008 to 2010 Great Recession period, when the average
growth rate of the countries with long-standing controls was 4.1 percent per annum as opposed to
0.5 percent for the other 34 countries. But, of course, these ten countries differed from the other
34 in many ways other than their stances on capital controls. In this section, we present evidence
on the partial correlations between both long-standing and episodic capital controls and annual
GDP growth to examine whether controls on capital inflows were associated with faster GDP
growth when controlling for other factors.
The extensive literature on capital account policies and economic growth has focused on
the effects of capital account liberalization. The typical approach is to augment a standard
empirical growth model with an indicator of capital controls. Given the available data, these
studies did not distinguish between controls on inflows and controls on outflows, or across
controls on different types of assets.35 In a survey of this literature, Kose, Prasad, Rogoff and
Wei (2009) write “…our reading of this large literature based on aggregate data is that it remains
difficult to find robust evidence that financial integration systematically increases growth once
other determinants of growth are controlled for. Nevertheless, the weight of the evidence seems
to be gradually shifting towards finding positive marginal effects…” (p. 27).
Table 4 includes growth statistics and panel estimates of annual GDP growth for three
time periods; 1995 to 2010 (Columns 1 and 2), 2002 to 2010 (Columns 3 and 4), and 2008 to

35

Edison, Klein, Ricci and Sløk (2004) discuss the different types of capital account liberalization indicators
employed in their synthesis of the effects of capital account liberalization on economic growth.

30

2010 (Columns 5 and 6). The statistics in the bottom rows of the table show that large
differences between the growth rates of the ten countries with long-standing controls on capital
inflows and the other countries in the sample mentioned in the first paragraph of this section.
But these rows also show that there were large standard deviations of the countries’ average
growth rates.
Columns 1, 3 and 5 in Table 4 present estimates, for each of the time periods, of the
partial correlations of GDP growth and the three indicators of controls on capital inflows,
controlling for lagged GDP growth and year fixed effects. These columns demonstrate a
significant positive partial correlation between long-standing controls on capital inflows and
economic growth. The size of the relationship is notable as well, ranging from 1.4 percent per
year to 1.9 percent per year. There is also a statistically significant difference in the partial
correlation of growth between long-standing and episodic capital controls in most cases. But
these results are overturned when lagged income per capita is also included in the regression.
There are no instances of significant partial correlations of any of the control on capital inflow
dummy variables in the even-numbered columns. This is even true for the estimates exclusively
focusing on the Great Recession period 2008 to 2010, a time when the difference in
unconditional growth rates between countries with long-standing controls and the other countries
is largest, and a time when capital controls were touted as insulating economies from the
economic distress spreading around the world.

31

CL
(s.e.)
BOMMt-1
(s.e.)
FECt-1
(s.e.)
Δln(GDPt-1)
(s.e.)
ln(GDP/cap)t-1
(s.e.)
R²
No. Obs.

Table 4:
Capital Controls and Growth in Real GDP
Annual Panel Estimates
1
2
3
4
5
6
1995 - 2010
2002 – 2010
2008 – 2010
0.014**
0.00005
0.016**
-0.0001
0.019**
-0.008
(0.004)
(0.0032)
(0.003)
(0.0040)
(0.007)
(0.007)
0.001
0.0002
-0.0003
-0.0003
-0.001
-0.004
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.0043)
(0.0046)
(0.005)
(0.007)
0.0055**
0.0029
0.0058**
0.0021
0.009
0.005
(0.0026)
(0.0037)
(0.0026)
(0.0033)
(0.007)
(0.009)
0.377**
0.340**
0.533**
0.448**
0.529**
0.322**
(0.092)
(0.088)
(0.076)
(0.073)
(0.097)
(0.103)
-0.009**
-0.012**
-0.024**
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.004)
0.43
0.45
0.63
0.67
0.62
0.69
664
664
396
396
132
132

CL – BOMM
(s.e.)
CL – FEC
(s.e.)

0.013**
(0.006)
0.009**
(0.004)

Column No.

-0.0001
(0.0054)
-0.0028
(0.0049)

0.016**
0.0002
0.020**
-0.004
(0.005)
(0.0054)
(0.008)
(0.008)
0.010**
-0.0022
0.010
-0.013
(0.003)
(0.0049)
(0.007)
(0.010)
Full Sample
Mean (s.d.)
0.032 (0.033)
0.031 (0.33)
0.014 (0.042)
Countries Persistently Closed to Inflows
Mean (s.d.)
0.046 (0.040)
0.054 (0.030)
0.041 (0.039)
Countries Not Persistently Closed to Inflows
Mean (s.d.)
0.027 (0.029)
0.024 (0.032)
0.005 (0.039)
Dependent variable is annual change in real GDP
CL = Persistently Closed to Capital Inflows
BOMMt-1 = 1 if controls on either money market instruments or bonds in t-1, else 0
FECt-1 = 1 if controls on financial credits, equities, or collective investments in in t-1, else 0
ln(GDP/cap)t-1 = lag real GDP per capita
Δln(GDPt-1)= lag change in real GDP
Year dummy variables in all regressions.
Standard errors clustered at country level
** = significant at the 95 percent level of confidence or higher
* = significant at the 90 to 95 percent level of confidence

32

Capital Controls and the Exchange Rate
The appreciation of emerging market currencies in the wake of expansionary monetary
policy in advanced economies during the Great Recession prompted declarations of “currency
wars” and the imposition of controls on capital inflows. Were these controls effective in
mitigating appreciations? 36 Did long-standing controls on capital inflows contribute to
depreciations, or lower rates of appreciation, than would have otherwise occurred?
We make an effort to address these questions by considering the partial correlations of
controls on capital inflows and the bilateral real dollar exchange rate of each country. Table 5
presents these estimates in an annual panel for each of the same three time periods used in Table
4; 1995 to 2010, 2002 to 2010, and 2008 to 2010. The dependent variable is the real bilateral
exchange rate with the United States, with a positive value indicating a real appreciation against
the dollar. The regressors include, besides the variables representing controls on capital inflows,
the lagged appreciation of the real bilateral dollar exchange rate, lagged real GDP growth,
whether the country had a pegged exchange rate, the logarithm of GDP per capita, and year fixed
effects. The estimates in the odd-numbered columns include the same three capital inflow
control dummy variables used in Tables 3 and 4. The estimates in the even-numbered columns
separate the long-standing capital control variable into a China dummy variable and
CLnotChina, a dummy variable that equals 1 for observations in which the country is one of the
other nine with long-standing controls on capital inflows. This allows an examination of
whether the experience with respect to the bilateral real dollar exchange rate was different from
that of the other countries with “walls.”

36

Some research on the experience of Chile has shown that its unremunerated reserve requirement (encajé) did not
significantly affect the real exchange rate, but had some influence on the composition of inflows, tilting them
towards longer maturities. See DeGregorio, Edwards and Valdes (2000).

33

Table 5: Capital Controls and Real Bilateral US Dollar Exchange Rate
Annual Panel Estimates
Column No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
1995 – 2010
2002 – 2010
2008 - 2010
CL
-0.018
0.007
-0.030
(s.e.)
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.022)
CLnotChina
-0.018
0.010
-0.029
(s.e.)
(0.018)
(0.017)
(0.023)
China
-0.026
-0.047**
-0.041
(s.e.)
(0.017)
(0.013)
(0.026)
BOMMt-1
-0.016
-0.016
-0.026
-0.027
-0.034**
-0.034**
(s.e.)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.014)
FECt-1
0.002
0.002
0.012
0.012
-0.011
-0.011
(s.e.)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.017)
Δln(RERt-1)
0.056
0.054
0.120
0.102
0.039
0.037
(s.e.)
(0.067)
(0.068)
(0.122)
(0.126)
(0.094)
(0.094)
Δln(GDPt-1)
0.256
0.269
0.619**
0.766**
0.413*
0.446
(s.e.)
(0.229)
(0.248)
(0.299)
(0.317)
(0.244)
(0.298)
Pegt-1
-0.003
-0.002
-0.012
-0.006
-0.007
-0.006
(s.e.)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.010)
ln(GDP/cap)t-1
-0.004
-0.004
0.013
0.013
-0.027*
-0.027*
(s.e.)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.016)
(0.016)
R²
0.28
0.28
0.32
0.32
0.50
0.50
No. Obs.
633
633
391
391
129
129
CL – BOMM
0.002
-0.001
0.033
0.037
0.004
0.005
(s.e.)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.020)
(0.021)
CL – FEC
-0.020
-0.020
-0.005
-0.003
-0.019
-0.018
(s.e.)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.020)
(0.020)
Full Sample

Mean (s.d.)

0.032 (0.113)

0.061 (0.098)
0.027 (0.095)
Countries Persistently Closed to Inflows
Mean (s.d.)
0.028 (0.117)
0.069 (0.079)
0.058 (0.079)
Countries Not Persistently Closed to Inflows
Mean (s.d.)
0.034 (0.111)
0.058 (0.102)
0.019 (0.097)
Dependent variable: annual %Δ real bilateral US dollar exchange rate (increase = appreciation)
CL = Persistently Closed to Capital Inflows
CLnotChina = Persistently Closed to Capital Inflows, not including China
China = 1 if China, else 0
BOMMt-1 = 1 if controls on either money market instruments or bonds in t-1, else 0
FECt-1 = 1 if controls on financial credits, equities, or collective investments in in t-1, else 0
ln(GDP/cap)t-1 = lag real GDP per capita, Δln(GDPt-1)= lag change in real GDP
Year dummy variables in all regressions, Standard errors clustered at country level
** = significant at the 95 percent level of confidence or higher
* = significant at the 90 to 95 percent level of confidence

34

The estimates in columns 1 and 3 show no significant effects of either long-standing or
episodic capital controls. During the crisis period, however, there is evidence that controls on
bond inflows were associated with a depreciation of 3.4 percent per annum, conditional on the
other variables included in the regression. This represents about one-third of the standard
deviation of the change in the exchange rate during this period. The two-stage procedure
described above also has a significant coefficient on controls on bonds for this period, with a
value of 0.039, about 15 percent larger (in absolute value) than the OLS estimator. There are no
other significant coefficients on episodic controls using the two stage procedure, consistent with
the OLS estimates in Table 5. In addition, the estimates in column 4 show a significant real
depreciation for the dollar / renminbi exchange rate in the 2002 to 2010 period, conditional on
the other variables included in the model The coefficient on the China dummy variable is not
significant in the other two periods, however.
One concern about these results is that the annual frequency may mask shorter-run
exchange rate responses to the imposition of controls on capital inflows. Another means to
consider the effect of episodic controls on the exchange rate is to focus on the period around the
QE2. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke announced QE2 at the Jackson Hole meeting in
August 2010, and more aggressive monetary easing began that fall. In the wake of the August
announcement, some emerging market currencies began to appreciate against the dollar. In
response, Brazil and South Korea undertook actions to stem the appreciation of their currencies
in the fall of 2010 and through the summer of 2011.
Figure 4 presents a monthly index of the nominal dollar exchange rate for 5 countries,
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Korea, and Peru, between July 2009 and October 2011. The August

35

2010 QE2 announcement date is represented by the thick vertical dashed line in this figure.
Thinner dashed vertical lines show the dates of the imposition of controls on capital inflows.

Fig. 6: Inflow controls and Exchange Rates Around QE2
3 4

5

6

7 8 9 10

11

12

13

1

1.05
.95
20
.9
09
m
7
20
09
m
10
20
10
m
1
20
10
m
4
20
10
m
7
20
10
m
10
20
11
m
1
20
11
m
4
20
11
m
7
20
11
m
10

erindex

1.1

1.15

1 2

Time
Argentina
Chile
Peru

Brazil
Korea

Argentina - 13; Brazil - 1,2,7,10,11; Korea - 2,8,9,10,12; Peru - 3,4,5; QE2 (US) - 6
erindex = $/national currency indexed to 1 at Aug 2010

The figure shows that the currencies of Brazil, Chile and Korea, which had begun
appreciating earlier in the summer of 2010, continued to appreciate, after the Bernanke
announcement, through the autumn as QE2 was implemented. The appreciation of the won and
the real did not show evidence of abating as controls were imposed by the Brazilian and Korean
governments through the autumn of 2010 and through the first half of 2011. The Chilean peso
also followed the appreciation of the won and the real, while the Argentine peso depreciated and
the Peruvian Nuevo Sol maintened a relatively constant level. In July 2011, after the Korean
authorities raised controls on inflows for the fourth time since the QE2 announcement, the
36

currencies of Korea, Brazil and Chile began to depreciate. But earlier impositions of controls
were not effective, and it is difficult, from the evidence presented in this figure to assert that
episodic capital controls systematically affected currency values during this period.

IV.

Conclusions

The exchange rate appreciations, asset price booms and busts, and general economic
volatility of the past few years has prompted a search for a better way to manage economies.
Controls on capital inflows have been receiving increasing support in policy circles, among
researchers, and in the general economic debate. Theoretical research provides rationales for the
imposition of episodic controls at the time of surging capital inflows, or at a time when the
economy is booming. There is little or no theoretical support for long-standing capital controls.
But much of the policy debate does not distinguish between the effects of long-standing controls
and episodic controls, although implicitly the debate is about the imposition of episodic controls,
not about permanently removing a country from engaging with the world capital market.
Part of the reason for this lack of distinction between long-standing and episodic controls on
inflows in the policy debate is the lack of study of the possible differences in these two
categories of capital controls. This paper is an effort to fill that gap. The analysis in this paper
demonstrates some distinction in the effects of long-standing and episodic capital controls, but
for the most part these differences disappear, and neither type of capital control is found to be
significantly associated with aggregate economic variables, once one accounts for the fact that
countries with long-standing controls on capital inflows are poorer than the other countries in the
study.

37

Appendix
Each cell of Table A reports the years in which there a country had controls in place for the
category of assets, with “Open” signifying no controls during the entire 1995 – 2010 period and
“Closed” signifying controls in place in each of the 1995 – 2010 period (1997 – 2010 for Bonds
since data on this category was not available in 1995 or 1996).
Table A:
Years With Controls on Capital Inflows, By Category of Asset
MM
BO
FC
EQ
CI
DI
Countries with Persistent Controls on Capital Inflows
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
’95-’99,
’99-‘10
’02-‘10
India
Closed
’02-‘10
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
Indonesia
Closed
Closed
’95-‘02
Closed
Closed
Closed
Malaysia
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
Morocco
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
Open
Philippines
’95-’97,
Closed
Closed
Closed
’95-’97,
‘03
’03-‘10
’03-‘10
Russia
Closed
Closed
’95-’00,
Closed
Closed
Closed
’02-’03,
’05-‘07
South Africa Closed
Closed
Closed
Closed
‘06-‘10
Closed
Thailand
Closed
Closed
’01-’03,
Closed
’95-‘09
’95-‘07
’05-‘10
Countries with Episodic Controls on Capital Inflows
Argentina
’03-‘10
’03-‘10
’03-‘10
’06-‘10
’04-‘10
’98-‘05
Australia
Open
Open
Open
’96-‘10
Open
’95-‘10
Brazil
’98-’01,
’97-’01,
’95-’01,
Closed
’95-’02,
’95-’01,
’09-‘10
’09-‘10
’09-‘10
‘10
’06-‘10
Chile
’95 – ‘01
’97 – ‘01
’95 – ‘04
’95 – ‘02
’95 – ‘03
’95 – ‘01
Czech Rep.
’98 – ‘00
’97 – ‘00
Open
’96 – ‘97
’98-‘99
Open
France
’95-‘00
Open
Open
’95-‘97
Open
Open
Germany
’95-‘97
‘97
Open
’95-‘96
Open
Open
Hungary
’95-‘00
’97-‘00
’95-‘00
Open
’95-‘00
‘10
Iceland
’08-‘10
’05-‘10
’08-‘10
’95-’04,
‘08
’95,
’06-‘10
’04-‘10
Ireland
’08-‘10
Open
Open
Open
Open
’06-‘10
Israel
’95-‘97
‘97
Open
’95-‘97
’95-‘97
Open
Korea
’95-‘04
‘97
’95-‘04
’95-‘97
’95-‘03
’95-‘96
Mexico
’95-‘97
Open
’95-’97,
‘95
’95,
’95-’99,
’01-‘10
’98-‘10
’05-‘10
Peru
’08-‘09
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Portugal
Open
’01-‘10
Open
’01-‘10
’04-‘05
Open
Poland
Closed
’99-‘10
’95-‘06
Closed
’95-‘01
Closed
Sweden
’03-‘10
Open
Open
’03-‘04
Open
Open
Turkey
’07-‘10
Open
’09-‘10
Open
Open
’95-‘02
Open All: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland , UK, US
Only DI closed (years) : Canada (’95-’10), Egypt (’95), Finland (’05-’10), Japan (’98), New Zealand
(’95-’10), Spain (’95-’98).
China
Colombia

Closed
Closed

38

Bibliography
Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1998. “The Capital Myth: The Difference Between Trade in Widgets and
Trade in Dollars.” Foreign Affairs 77: 7–12.
Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique Mendoza. 2010. “Overborrowing, Financial Crises and ‘MacroPrudential’ Taxes.” NBER Working Paper no. 16091.
De Gregorio, José, Sebastian Edwards and Rodrigo Valdés. 2000. “Controls on Capital Inflows:
Do They Work?” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 69, pp. 59 – 83.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1998. “Capital Controls: An Idea Whose Time is Gone.” Mimeo.
Edison, Hali, Michael Klein, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk. 2004. “Capital Account
Liberalization and Economic Performance: Survey and Synthesis.” IMF Staff Papers 51,
no. 2 (August): 220 - 256.
Fischer, Stanley. 2003. “Globalization and Its Challenges.” American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings (May): 1 – 30.
Forbes, Kristin, Marcel Fratzscher, Thomas Kostka and Roland Straub. 2012. “Bubble Thy
Neighbor: Direct and Spillover Effects of Capital Controls.” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper no. 18052. May.
Forbes, Kristin, and Francis Warnock. 2012. “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight and
Retrenchment.” Journal of International Economics (forthcoming).
Ghosh, Atish R., Jun Kim, Mahvash Qureshi and Juan Zalduendo. 2012. “Surges.” IMF
Working Paper WP/12/22. January.
Habermeier, Karl, Annamaria Kokenyne, and Chikako Baba. 2011. “The Effectiveness of
Capital Controls and Prudential Policies in Managing Large Inflows.” IMF Staff
Discussion Note SDN/11/14, International Monetary Fund.
IMF Strategy, Policy and Review Department. 2011. “Recent Experiences in Managing Capital
Inflows – Cross-Cutting Themes and Possible Policy Framework.” International
Monetary Fund.
Jeanne, Olivier. 2011. “Capital Account Policies and the Real Exchange Rate.” mimeo, Johns
Hopkins University. February.
____________. 2012. “Capital Flow Management.” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings. May
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek. 2010. “Managing Capital Flows: A Pigouvian Taxation
Approach.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings (May): 403 – 407.

39

Jeanne, Olivier, Arvind Subramanian, and John Williamson. 2012. Who Needs to Open the
Capital Account. Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Keynes, John Maynard. The Economic Consequences of the Peace. 1920. Harcourt, Brace and
Howe, New York.
Klein, Michael W., and Giovanni Olivei. 2008. “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial
Deepness and Economic Growth.” Journal of International Money and Finance 27, no.
6: 861 – 875.
Korinek, Anton. 2010. “Regulating Capital Controls to Emerging Markets: An Externality
View.” mimeo, U. Maryland, December 2010.
_____________. 2011. “The New Economics of Prudential Capital Controls: A Research
Agenda.” IMF Economic Review, vol. 59, no. 3, August.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2009. “Financial
Globalization, A Reappraisal.” IMF Staff Papers 56, no. 1 (April): 8-62.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 1994. "Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth." American
Economic Review.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1996. Fundamentals of International Economics. The
MIT Press.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 2009, Code of
Liberalization of Capital Movements, Paris.
Ostry, Jonathan, Atish Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and
Dennis B.S. Reinhardt. 2010. “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls.” IMF Staff
Position Note, SPN/10/04.
Ostry, Jonathan, Atish Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Luc Laeven, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S.
Qureshi, and Annamaria Kokenyne. 2011. “Managing Capital Inflows: What Tools to
Use?” IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/11/06.
Ostry, Jonathan, Atish Ghosh, Marcos Chamon, and Mahvash S. Qureshi. 2011. “Capital
Controls: When and Why.” IMF Economic Review 59, no. 3.
________________. 2012. “Tools for Managing Financial-Stability Risks from Capital Inflows.”
Journal of International Economics.
Quinn, Dennis. 1997. “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation.”
American Political Science Review 91, no. 3 (September): 531–51.

40

Quinn, Dennis, Martin Schindler and A. Maria Toyoda. 2011. “Assessing Measures of Financial
Openness and Integration.” IMF Economic Review 59, no. 3.
Rodrik, Dani. 1998. “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” in Stanley Fischer, et al.,
Should the IMF Pursue Capital Account Convertibility? Essays in International Finance,
No. 207, International Finance Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University,
Princeton, N.J..
Rogoff, Kenneth S. 2002. “Rethinking Capital Controls: When should we keep an open mind?”
Finance and Development (December): 55 – 56.
Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1: 1–118.
Schindler, Martin. 2009. “Measuring Financial Integration: A New Data Set.” IMF Staff Papers
56, no 1: 222 – 238.
Shambaugh, Jay, C., (2004) “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119 no.1, p. 301-352.
Skidelsky, Robert. John Maynard Keynes: The Economist as Saviour, 1920 – 1937. Macmillan,
London, c. 1992.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 2002. Globalization and Its Discontents. W.W. Norton Co., New York.
Summers, Lawrence. 2000. “International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and Cures.”
American Economic Review 90, no. 2 (May): 1–16.
Tobin, James. 1978. “A Proposal for International Monetary Reform.” Eastern Economic
Journal, (July/October): 153–159.

41

