                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  EFFECTS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
                  PRICES AND LEGAL DRINKING AGES
                       ON YOUTH ALCOHOL USE




                          Douglas Coate

                         Michael Grossman




                      Working Paper No. 1852




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             March 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Health Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1852
                                               March 1986




       Effects of Alcoholic Beverage Prices and Legal Drinking Ages
                           on Youth Alcohol Use


                                 ABSTRACT

    Based on an analysis of the second National Health and Nutrition

Examination Survey, conducted between 1976 and 1980, we find that the fre-

quency of the consumption of beer, the most popular alcoholic beverage

among youths, is inversely related to the real price of beer and to the

minimum legal age for its purchase and consumption. The negative price and

legal drinking age effects are by no means limited to reductions In the

fraction of youths who consume beer infrequently (less than once a week).

Instead, the fractions of youths who consume beer fairly frequently (1—3

times a week) and frequently (4—7 times a week) fall more in absolute or

percentage terms than the fraction of infrequent drinkers when price or the

drinking age rises. These are striking findings because frequent and

fairly frequent drinkers are likely to be responsible for a large percen-

tage of youth motor vehicle accidents and deaths. Simulations suggest

that, if reductions In youth alcohol use and abuse are desired, both a uni-

form drinking age of 21 and an increase in the Federal excise tax rate on

beer are effective policies to accomplish this goal. They also suggest

that the tax policy may be more potent than the drinking age policy.


Douglas Coate                                 Michael Grossman
Department of Economics                       Department of Economics
Rutgers University                            City University of New York
Newark, New Jersey 07102                        Graduate School
(201) 648—5259                                33 W. 42nd Street
                                              New York, New York 10036
                                              (212) 790—4411
                 EFFECTS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRICES AND
                 LEGAL DRINKING AGES ON YOUTH ALCOHOL USE


                    Douglas Coate and Michael Grossman*



                       I. Introduction and Background

    Since the mid 197Os, the Federal government of the United States and

various state and local governments have been involved in a campaign to

reduce deaths from motor vehicle accidents by discouraging alcohol abuse.

One major element of this campaign has been the upward trend in state mini—

mum legal ages for the purchase and consumption of alcoholic beverages that

began with the increase in the legal drinking age in Minnesota from 18 to

19 years of age in 1976. An additional 27 states had increased legal

drinking ages by the time of the Federal Uniform Drinking Act of July 1984.

This legislation allows the Federal government, through its control of

Federal highway funds, to intercede in a legislative area traditionally

reserved for states. Five percent of a statets Federal highway construc—

tion fund allocation for the fiscal year 1987 will be withheld if the mini—

mum legal drinking age is below 21 years on October 1, 1986, and 10 percent

will be withheld from the 1988 fiscal year allocation if its drinking age

is below 21 on October 1, 1987. To date, 14 states have passed laws

complying with the act, and a total of 37 states now have a minimum

drinking age of 21.1 A second major element of the antidrinking campaign

is reflected by more severe penalties for conviction of drunken driving,

the allocation of additional resources to apprehend drunk drivers, and an

easing in the standards required for conviction.
                                    —2--

    One policy that has been virtually ignored by the Federal and state

governments in the antidrinking campaign is increased taxation of alcoholic

beverages which, by raising prices, would lower alcoholic beverage

consumption. Instead, the Federal excise tax rates on liquor (distilled

spirits), beer, and wine remained constant in nominal terms between

November 1, 1951 and the end of fiscal 1985. During this period the

Federal government taxed liquor at the rate of $10.50 per proof gallon (one

gallon of 100 proof liquor, which is the equivalent of 50 percent alcohol

by volume), beer at the rate of $.29 per gallon (approximately 4.5 percent

alcohol by volume), and wine at the rate of $.17 per gallon (between 11.6

percent and 21 percent alcohol by volume).2

    Partly as a result of the stability of the Federal excise taxes and the

modest increases In state and local excise taxes, the real price of alcoho-

lic beverages (the nominal price divided by the Consumer Price Index) has

declined substantially over time. Between 1960 and 1980, the real price of

liquor fell by 48 percent; the real price of beer fell by 27 percent; and

the real price of wine fell by 20 percent (Cook 1981). While 29 states

raised the legal drinking age from 1976 through 1984, real alcoholic

beverage prices continued to fall: 27 percent for liquor, 12 percent for

beer, and 19 percent for wine (Bureau of Labor Statistics various years).

Thus, as argued by Cook and Tauchen (1982), If alcohol abuse is sensitive

to price, a government policy of declining real excise tax levels actually

may be exacerbating this problem.

   A primary purpose of this paper is to investigate the sensitivity of

alcoholic beverage consumption, particularly excessive consumption, to

price among 16 through 21 year olds in the U.S. Thus, we provide evidence
                                   —3—

for this important age group on the extent to which declining real alcoho—

lic beverage excise taxes have contributed to increases In youth drinking

and on the extent to which increases in real alcoholic beverage excise

taxes can serve as a potent instrument In the antidrinking campaign. We

also examine the effect of an increase In the legal drinking age on youth

alcohol use. Our empirical research Is based on the second National Health

and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES II), conducted by the National

Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) between February 1976 and February

1980. It capitalizes on substantial differences in legal drinking ages

among states in the period of NHANES II and on substantial differences in

the prices of alcoholic beverages among states due primarily to differences

In state excise tax rates on these beverages.

     We focus on teenagers and young adults in the context of the

antidrinking campaign because motor vehicle accident mortality is the

leading cause of death of persons under the age of 35, and the National

Highway Traffic Safety Administration (1983) estimates that alcohol is

Involved In over half of these fatal accidents. In 1979 persons under the

age of 25 accounted for 22 percent of all licensed drivers but 38 percent

of all drivers involved in fatal accidents (National Highway Traffic Safety

Administration 1983). These figures are even more dramatic than they

appear because members of the young driver group do not drive nearly as

much as older drivers (Voas and Moulden 1980). We also focus on youths

because alcohol abuse in adolescence appears to be associated with alcohol

abuse in adult life (for example, Blane and Hewitt 1977; Rachal et al.

1980). Thus, policies to prevent the onset of this behavior by adolescents
                                       —4—

 might be the most effective means to reduce it in all segments of the popu-

 lation.

    Research on the responsiveness of youth alcohol use to alcoholic

beverage prices is particularly timely in light of proposals to correct the

erosion in the real value of the Federal excise tax rates on all forms of

alcoholic beverages since 1951 and to prevent future erosion by indexing

tax rates to the rate of inflation or by converting to an ad valorem alco-

holic beverage excise tax system (for example, Moore and Gerstein 1981;

Luks 1983; Cook 1984; Harris 1984; Becker 1985; Jacobson and Albion
         3
1985).       Moreover, although beer is the drink of choice among youths who

drink alcoholic beverages (see Section II), the alcohol in liquor is taxed

three times as heavily as the alcohol in beer. This has led to suggestions

to equalize the tax rates on the alcohol in all forms of alcoholic bevera-

ges by raising the tax on beer (for example, Harris 1984; Jacobson and

Albion 1985). Research on the sensitivity of youth alcohol use to legal

drinking ages is also valuable given the adverse reaction to Federal uni-

form drinking legislation,5 its scheduled expiration at the end of fiscal

1988, and volatility in state minimum drinking ages in the 1970s and 1980s.

    Aside from our study with Arluck (Grossman, Coate, and Arluck forth-

coming) described below, there Is no research on the price sensitivity of

youth alcohol use and no investigations of the long—run impacts of dif-

ferences in legal drinking ages in recent nationally representative

samples. Statistically significant short—run increases in alcohol consump-

tion by youths have been reported in selected states or provinces of Canada

that lowered their legal drinking age in the early 1970s, and significant

short—run reductions in consumption have been reported in selected states
                                   —5--

 that raised their legal drinking age in the late 1970s or early 1980s (for

 example, Smart and Goodstadt 1977; Wagenaar 1983; Williams and Lillis

 1985).6 Grossman, Coate, and Arluck (forthcoming) find that the incidence

of heavy drinking and frequent drinking by youths falls as alcoholic

beverage prices or legal drinking ages rise. These results are based on

the first National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES I), con-

ducted by NCHS between May 1971 and June 1974, and pertain to youths ages

16 through 21 who reside in large metropolitan areas.

    Studies that use time series or state cross sections to estimate price

elasticities of alcoholic beverages (for example Ornstein 1980; Ornstein

and Hanssens 1985) employ per capita consumption by all age groups as the

dependent variable. Therefore, the estimated price elasticities primarily

reflect adult drinking behavior and cannot be used to predict how youths

would respond to excise tax and price changes. As pointed Out above,

however, it is especially important to focus on youths in the context of

the antidrinking campaign.

    It should be noted that, even if adult price elasticities are relati-

vely small (inelastic) in absolute value, this need not be the case for

youth price elasticities. Given the habitual nature of alcohol abuse,

adult users, who almost always will have been users for longer periods of

time than youths, may be much less sensitive to price than youths. In

addition, the fraction of his disposable income that a youthful drinker

spends on alcohol probably exceeds the corresponding fraction of an adult

drinker. It is well known that the uncompensated (money income—constant)

price elasticity of a good rises as the fraction of income spent on that

good rises. Finally, bandwagon or peer effects are much more important in
                                    —6—

 the case of youth drinking than in the case of adult drinking. That is,

youths are more likely to drink if their peers also drink (for example

Blane and Hewitt 1977; Rachal et al. 1980). As shown by Leibenstein (1950)

and by Lewit, Coate, and Grossman (1981), the presence of bandwagon or peer

effects increases the price elasticity of demand.7


                              II. Methodology

A. Data and Subsample Selection

    To examine the effects of alcohol prices and legal drinking ages on

youth alcohol use, we use the second National Health and Nutrition

Examination Survey (NHANES II) to estimate demand functions for alcohol

consumption by youths. NHANES II Is a national probability sample of the

civilian, noninstitutionalized population of the U.S., with some over—

sampling of low—income persons, preschool children, and the elderly. The

survey was conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS)

between February 1976 and February 1980 and contains approximately 21,000

persons between the ages of 6 months and 74 years. These persons were

selected from 64 primary sampling units, which consist of one or more coun-

ties. Each person In the survey was given a detailed physical examination.

A variety of information on medical and health histories, family socioeco-

nomic characteristics, and diet patterns also was obtained. Data on alco-

hol use for the past three months were collected for persons ages 12

through 74. These data were acquired on the date on which the physical

examination was given as one component of a food frequency interview.8

   We have limited our demand function estimates to 16 through 21 year olds

because of our Interest In the sensitivity of alcohol consumption of older
                                     —7—

youth to price and to legal drinking age. Youths below the age of 16 are

excluded from the demand functions because they cannot drive legally in

most states. Youths ages 16 and 17 are illegal drinkers in all states, but

they are included in the demand functions because it is likely to be easier

(less costly) for them to obtain alcoholic beverages in a state with a

legal drinking age of 18 than in one with a higher legal drinking age (Cook

and Tauchen 1984). Twenty—one year olds are legal drinkers in all states,

but they are not excluded from the demand functions because 21 year olds in

states with a legal drinking age of 18 will have been legal drinkers for a

longer period of time than similar youths in states with a legal drinking

age of 19, 20, or 21. This may have an impact on their consumption of

alcoholic beverages. Although the 16 through 21 age range is somewhat

arbitrary, demand functions estimated with youths of slightly different

ages (15 through 20 or 16 through 20) yield results that are very similar

to those presented in Section III.

    Alcoholic beverages prices and legal drinking ages have been added to

the NHANES II survey based on a given youth's place of residence (primary

sampling unit) from sources indicated in Section II.C. Since beer prices

for the state of Hawaii were not available and since beer is the drink of

choice among youths who consume alcoholic beverages (see Section Il.B),

youths residing in Honolulu, Hawaii were excluded. After deleting obser-

vations with missing data, we obtained a final sample of 1,761 youths ages

16 through 21 living in 63 of the 64 NHANES II primary sampling units.9


B. Measurement of Alcohol Use

   NHANES II alcohol use measures for the final sample of 1,761 youths are
                                   —8--


summarized by the percentage distributions of beverage—specific drinking

frequencies in the past three months in Panel A of Table 1. These measures

pertain to the number of drinking occasions per week in the past three

months; information on the number of drinks consumed in total or on a typi-

cal drinking occasion was not obtained. The figures in Table 1 highlight

the popularity of beer among teenagers and young adults. Approximately 57

percent of all youths drank beer in the past three months, while only 39

percent drank liquor and only 32 percent drank wine. Moreover, 11 percent

of youths drank beer 4—7 times a week, while less than 1 percent drank

liquor or wine that often.

    The beverage—specific number of drinking occasions in the past three

months is a categorical variable in NHANES II, and the four categories

shown in Table 1 (4—7 times a week, 1—3 times a week, less than once a

week, and never) are employed as outcome measures In demand functions esti-

mated by multivariate techniques described in Section II.D.'° Here it is

important to note that the use of a categorical variable allows us to exa-

mine the determinants of beverage—specific drinking participation and

infrequent, fairly frequent, and frequent participation simultaneously. It

also permits the impacts of prices and legal drinking ages on these out-

comes to differ. In addition, if more alcohol is consumed per drinking

occasion as the number of occasions rises, true consumption would not be

linearly related to a continuous drinking frequency measure. To take

account of this nonlinearity, a categorical variable would be preferable to

a continuous one even if the latter were available.

   The number of drinking occasions per week is closely related to, and in

a majority of cases probably coincides with, the number of drinking days
                                        —9—

                                        Table 1




                        Variables Employed in Empirical Analysis



  Panel A: Percentage Distributions of Beverage-Specific Drinking Frequencies
                              in Past Three Months8



                                          Outcome Category
                                                             lees than
                            4-7 times       1—3 time.           once
      Beverage                a week          a week           a week    never


      Beer                   L1.07           27.43            18.57       42.93

      Liquor                   .85           13.57           24.48        61.10
     Wine                      .85            9.20           22.37        67.58




 Panel B: Definitions1 Means, and Standard Deviations of Independent Variablesb




 Variable Name                                       Definition


 Real price of beer                   Price of a package of six—12 ounce cane of
  (1967 dollars)                      a leading brand of beer divided by Consumer
                                      Price Index, 1967—1 (mean—1.027, s.d.—.116)
 Real price of liquor                 Price of Seagram's 7—Crown, 80 proof (40
  (1967 dollars)                      percent alcohol), fifth size bottle (four—
                                      fifths of a quart), divided by Consumer
                                      Price Index, 1967—1 (mean—2.941, s.d..309)

Beer legal drinking age              Minimum legal age for purchase and con—
 (months)                            Cumption of beer, alcoholic Content 3.2
                                     percent or less (mean—228.572, s.d...16.092)

Liquor legal drinking age            Minimum legal age for purchase and con—
 (months)                            eumption of liquor (mean—234.835, e.d.'17.651)
Border age                           Dichotomous variable that equals one if
                                     youth livee within 20 miles of a state with
                                     a lower legal drinking age than his state of
                                     residence, computed separately for beer and
                                     liquor but assumed the same value for each
                                     beverage (mean.197, s.d.—.398)
Mormon                               Percentage of population who are Mormons
                                     in youth's primary sampling unit (mean—1.585,
                                     s.d.—8.323)

Southern Baptiat                     Percentage of population who are Southern
                                     Baptists in youth's primary sampling unit
                                     (mean7.955, s.d.'.13.179)

Catholic                             Percentage of population who are Catholics
                                     in youth's primary sampling unit
                                     (mean19.161, s.d.—L5.708)
Protestant                           Percentage of population who are
                                     Protestants in youth's primary sampling
                                     unit, excludes Southern Baptiste and
                                     Mormons (mean2O.465, s.d.—8.389)


  5Sample size 1e 1,761. For each beverage, the four cell entries
give the percentage of all youths in each outcome category.


 ba denotes standard deviation.
                                     — 10 —


per week. Under this interpretation, the most frequent drinking category
Identifies youths who consumed alcohol at least every other day in the past

three months. Given the age cohort studied here, this is a very reasonable

indicator of frequent consumption.

    Information on alcohol consumption was obtained directly from youths In

NHANES   II.   Parents were not present during the Interviews with the youths

and were not informed about the alcohol responses of their children.

Nevertheless there is a possibility that youths may report their alcohol

use with error. If any such response error Is uncorrelated with the inde-

pendent variables in the demand function for alcohol, coefficients will be

unbiased, although their standard errors will be inflated. In this case

the existence of response error essentially presents no problem for the

statistical analysis. Response error only becomes a problem if it is

systematic or correlated with some or all of the variables In the demand

functions.

    The validity of the NHANES II alcohol measures is underscored by

referring to the related problem of the measurement of cigarette smoking by

adolescents. Williams and Giles (1984) have reviewed the literature on

self—reported smoking behavior of adolescents and have concluded "...that

teenagers probably do report 'truthfully' about their smoking behavior when

anonymous questionnaires are used (p.297).     An additional consideration is

that the drinking questions were included as a small part of a much larger

survey that was focused on very different issues. Gordon and Kannel (1983)

argue that this improves the quality of reports of alcohol consumption.

   To be sure, it Is possible that heavy consumers of alcoholic beverages

are more likely to underreport their consumption than other persons
                                   — 11 —


(Midanik 1982; Pouch 1982). If heavy users are more likely to be found
in areas with low prices or low legal drinking ages, estimates of the

demand parameters of these variables are biased toward zero. This is

another reason for the use of a categorical rather than a continuous

drinking measure. In particular, the former does not assume a linear rela—

tionship between true and reported consumption. Moreover, youths are unli-

kely to be found in one of the four outcome categories used here rather

than another due to reporting error.


C. Measurement of Independent Variables

    Panel B of Table 1 contains definitions, means, and standard deviations

of the key independent variables in the demand functions. In addition to

the variables listed in Panel B, all demand functions include as regressors

the youth's age in months on the date of his or her NHANES II examination,

a dichotomous variable that identifies blacks, a dichotomous variable that

identifies females, and real family Income (money family income divided by

the Consumer Price Index). We do not present or discuss the effects of

these variables on alcohol use in Section III. But It should be realized

that all estimated price and legal drinking age effects control for (hold

constant) the effects of these variables. We use a relatively sparse set

of Independent variables because Arluck (in progress) finds that the coef-

ficients of interest in NUANES I demand functions are not sensitive to the

inclusion of additional family background and youth characteristics. They

also do not change much when state—specific measures of the availability

and regulation of alcohol are added to the set of independent variables.U

   The minimum legal ages in months for the purchase of beer (alcoholic
                                     — 12 —


 content   3.2 percent or less by weight) and liquor were taken from

Wagenaar's (1981/82) extremely painstaking and definitive compilation of

these ages for every state for the years 1970 through 1981.12 Each NHANES

II youth is assigned beverage—specific legal drinking ages in his state of

residence as of the mid—month of the three—month period culminating on the

date of his examination. In principle this algorithm takes account of the

upward trend in state legal drinking ages during the period of the NUANES

II examinations. In fact only two NHANES      II   primary sampling units ——

Dakota, Minnesota and Hennepin, Minnesota —— are in a state that raised Its

legal drinking age during a three—month period culminating on the date of

the examination or before that period. All other states that raised their

legal drinking age did so after the NHANES II examinations in those states

were completed.'3

    Youths who reside In a state with a high legal drinking age may be able

to purchase alcohol in a border state with a lower legal drinking age.

To deal with this phenomenon, we created a dichotomous variable that equals

one for youths who live within 20 miles of a state with a lower legal

drinking age than the one in their state of residence. With the own—state

legal drinking age held constant, the coefficient of the border age

variable in the demand functions should be positive.'4

    The beer price variable pertains to the transactions price of a single

leading brand of medium prIced, nationally sold beer. The specific brand

is confidential. Prices are reported in two unidentified major markets In

each state (one In the cases of Rhode Island and the District of Columbia)

in January and July of 1976, 1977, and 1978 and in January of 1979. The

data were obtained by Stanley Ornsteln (see Ornsteln and Hanssens 1985) and
                                   — 13 —


kindly   made available to us.

    Monthly prices for each state from January 1976 through January 1979

were obtained by linear interpolation of state—specific price series com-

puted by averaging the two prices for each state at a moment in time.

Monthly prices for the period February 1979 through January 1980 were pre-

dicted from a regression of the state price on the state excise tax rate,

time (a continuous variable), and dichotomous variables for all contiguous

states except one.'5 The beer price of the mid—month in the three month

period for which alcoholic beverage consumption was reported was then

assigned to each subject.'6 To take account of trends in the prices of

other goods during the four—year period of NHANES II, the monthly beer

price is divided by the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI, 1967=1) to obtain

the real or relative price of beer.'7

    The real price of liquor is given by the price of Seagram's 7—Crown (a

blended whiskey) divided by the CPI. This price is selected because

Seagram's 7—Crown was the leading brand of liquor in the U.S. during the

period of NHANES II, and its price commonly is used as a standard in the

liquor industry. It was obtained from the annual survey of the retail pri-

ces of eight leading brands of distilled spirits in each state conducted by

the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States (DISCUS various years)
                                                    18
and kindly made available to us by Gary Marshall.

    There were no data available on wine prices by state for the period of

NHANES II. As a result wine demand functions are not presented in the

following section.

    To take account of the potential role of "drinking sentiment" in the

endogenous determination of alcoholic beverage prices, legal drinking ages,
                                      — 14 —


and alcohol consumption, the percentages of the population in a youth's

primary sampling unit who are Mormons, Southern Baptists, Catholics, and

Protestants (excluding Southern Baptists and Mormons) are included in some

specifications of the demand functions. Drinking sentiment refers to

cultural and taste variables that may either encourage or discourage alco-

hol consumption. For example, antidrinking sentiment should be relatively

widespread   in states where religious groups that oppose the use of alco-
hol, such as   Mormons   and Southern Baptists, are prevalent. These states
may enact high alcoholic beverage excise tax rates as part of the political

process. In this situation, the price coefficients that emerge from demand

functions that omit drinking sentiment overstate in absolute value the true

parameters. On the other hand, states in which prodrinking sentiment is

prevalent (antidrinking sentiment is weak) and alcohol consumption is large

may enact high excise tax rates because the taxation of alcoholic beverages

is an attractive source of revenue. In this case, the price effects are

understated if drinking sentiment is excluded from the demand functions.'9

    The preceding issue is Illuminated with reference to an econometric

model of the determinants of beer consumption both at the aggregate (state

or county) level and at the individual level (available upon request). The

price of beer, the legal drinking age, drinking sentiment, and beer con-

sumption are treated as endogenous. The model is recursive rather than

simultaneous, but the disturbance terms in the price and demand equations,

for example, are correlated. This is because drinking sentiment Is not

observed. Instead, it must be replace by a vector of observable variables,

whose elements In the state model include the state—specific equivalents of

the religion measures in Table 2 and a disturbance term.
                                   — 15 —


    Biases arise if the demand function is estimated by ordinary least

squares because the disturbance terms in that equation and the price

equation share a common element: the unobserved component of drinking sen—

timent. It is shown, however, that the importance of omitted variables

bias is greatly reduced when individual demand functions are estimated with

drinking sentiment omitted. This is because an individual consumer's beer

consumption depends on his drinking sentiment, while the tax on beer or its

price depends on the average value of drinking sentiment in the relevant

market area. Therefore, the correlation between price (a state or county

variable) and drinking sentiment is much weaker in micro data than in

aggregate data.

    The above conclusion is important because no measures of an

individual's religious preference are available in N}IANES II, and two—stage

least squares estimation of demand functions with price treated as endoge—

nous is not feasible. Some demand functions are obtained with the four

primary sample—specific religion variables listed in Table 2. These

results should, however, be interpreted with caution because the price of

beer or liquor is specific to the state rather than to the primary sampling

unit. Given errors of measurement in price and correlations between true

price and the religion variables, price coefficients are biased toward zero

and religion coefficients are biased away from zero. Therefore, we wish to

reemphasize that price effects are not necessarily overstated in absolute

value when drinking sentiment is excluded from the demand functions.

    The religion variables pertain to 1980 and were taken from a survey

conducted by the National Council of the Churches of Christ and the

Glenmary Research Center (see Quinn et al. 1982). Jews are included with
                                     — 16 —


non—church members in the omitted category because the size of the Jewish

population was significantly underestimated in the survey. The religion

measures pertain to the youth's primary sampling unit of residence rather

than to his state of residence because the former are better predictors of

the youth's actual religion.

   Although youths are more likely to drink If their peers also drink, it

is Inappropriate to include peers' consumption of alcohol in the demand

functions. This is because peer behavior Is an endogenous rather than an

exogenous variable in a more broadly defined model of drinking. That Is,

this behavior is determined by such a model rather than outside it. For

instance, suppose that one is evaluating a policy to curtail youth drinking

by raising the Federal excise tax rate on beer. An increase in the tax

would raise the price of beer paid by youths and their peers, which would

discourage consumption by both groups. Therefore, in evaluating the Impact

of such a policy, peers' beer consumption should not be held constant

(Included in the demand equation).


D. Estimation Techniques

   The beverage—specific frequency of drinking in the past three months

consists of four outcome categories (see Table 1). Therefore, multinomial

logit equations are fitted by the method of maxImum likelihood. In the

case of beer, let w1, I2' 11j3, and if14 be the probabilities that the

1th youth consumes beer 4—7 times a week, 1—3 times a week, less than once

a week and never, respectively. The probability of the kth outcome

     k =   1,2,3)   is


        ik = W14 exp(ak + tikt x1),                           (1)
                                         — 17 —


where x   is the value of the tth independent variable for the 1th youth.

The logarithm of the odds of category k relative to category 4 Is

          ln(jk/j4) = ak + ktXit                              (2)


The logit coefficient kt shows the percentage change in the odds

of category I relative to no beer participation for a one unit change

in xj. The marginal effect of x1            Wik is



          (iktxkt) =   ikkt — ik 1ikkt                        (3)


    Multinomial logit estimation methods are discussed in detail by Maddala

(1983). Here it is important to emphasize several features of our estima-

tes. The measures of drinking frequency are ordered categorical variables,

but we do not use the ordered logit model (for example, Maddala 1983).

This is because that model does not allow for nonlinear and possibly non—

monotonic effects of the independent variables on the outcomes at issue.

    Since the beer frequency equation, for example, contains non—beer

drinkers (the omitted category), it gives an estimate of the effect of each

independent variable on the probability of no beer participation.20 We do

not model beer consumption as a two—stage process In which youths first

determine whether they will drink beer and then determine the frequency of

beer consumption given participation. In the two—stage model non—beer par-

ticipants would be excluded from the equation for frequency. We do not use

this model because it is appropriate only when the determinants of par-

ticipation differ from those of frequency (McFadden 1973). This condition
                                    21
is not satisfied in our research.


                               III. Results

    Table 2 contains maximum likelihood estimates of multinomial logit beer
                                          — 18 —


                                          Table   2


                         Maximum Likelihood Estimates of
                   Multinomial Logit Beer Frequency Equationsa

                                                               Outcome Category
                                                                                  less than
     Independent                              4—7 times            1—3 times         once
       Variable                                a week               a week          a week


                     Panel   A:   Religion Variables Excluded

Real price of beer                                 —1.790            —1.209          —.587
                                                  (—2.12)           (—2.19)        (—1.01)
Beer legal drinking age                             —.024             —.015          —.008
                                                  (—3.69)           (—3.24)        (—1.62)
Border age                                              .196           .366           .279
                                      •
                                                       (.74)         (2.01)         (1.43)

Chi—square                                        383.77

                     Panel   B:   Religion Variables Included

Real price of beer                                 —1.028            —.987          —.714
                                                  (—1.12)          (—1.57)        (—1.07)
Beer legal drinking age                             —.019            —.008          —.001
            .
                                                  (—2.63)          (—1.68)         (—.28)
Border age                                          —.079             .994           .008
                                                      (—.27)         (.51)          (.04)
Mormon                                              —.026            —.010          —.019
                                                  (—1.38)          (—1.16)        (—1.58)
Southern Baptist                                    —.031            —.021          —.014
                                                  (—3.09)          (—3.23)        (—1.98)
Catholic                                             .013             .015           .012
                                                   (1.48)           (2.47)         (1.79)
Protestant                                           .028             .035           .039
                                                   (1.91)           (3.44)         (3.62)

Chi—square                                        464.18


     aLogit coefficients and asymptotic t—ratios in parentheses are shown.
The critical asymptotic t—ratios at the 5 percent level are 1.64 for a one—
tailed test and 1.96 for a two—tailed test. The chi—square associated with
each equation is significant at the 1 percent level. Each equation inclu-
des three intercepts and the following additional independent variables:
age of youth in months, race of youth, sex of youth, and real family income.
                                     — 19 —


frequency equations. Logit coefficients and their asymptotic t—ratios are
shown.22 An equation that excludes the four religion measures is presented

in Panel A of the table, while an equation that includes them is presented

in Panel B. In the discussion of these results, youths who drink beer 4—7

times a week are termed frequent drinkers; those who drink 1—3 times a week

are termed fairly frequent drinkers; and those who drink less than once a

week   are termed infrequent drinkers.
    In the beer frequency equation in Panel A, the logit coefficients of
the real price of beer and the legal drinking age all are negative and are
statistically significant at the 5 percent    level of   significance or better

except in the infrequent drinking category.23 The border legal age coef-

ficients have the appropriate positive signs, but only the coefficient per-

taining to fairly frequent drinking is significant.

    There is a perfect rank correlation between the absolute values of the

price and legal drinking age coefficients and the number of drinking occa-

sions represented by each outcome category. That is, the logit coefficient

of price in the frequent drinking category exceeds the corresponding coef-

ficient in the fairly frequent category. In turn the latter exceeds the

logit coefficient of price in the infrequent category. In general this

guarantees that an increase in price lowers the probabilities of frequent

and fairly frequent drinking. Indeed the price elasticities of the proba-

bilities of frequent and fairly frequent beer consumption are substantial:

—1.18 and —.59, respectively. The price elasticity of the probability of

infrequent drinking is positive and very small (.05), which indicates that

the probability of infrequent drinking rises (but by a smaller percentage

than that of nonparticipation) as the real price of beer rises. The posi—
                                     — 20 —


tive   price elasticity of the probability of nonparticipation of .65 is

relatively large.24

    The price and legal drinking age effects retain their negative signs

and relative rankings when the religion variables are Included as

regressors (see Panel B of Table 2), but the significant coefficients in

the equation in Panel A are reduced in absolute value. In percentage terms

these reductions range from 47 percent for the legal drinking age coef-

ficient associated with the fairly frequent outcome category to 18 percent

for the price coefficient in the same category. The two significant legal

drinking age coefficients in Panel A retain their significance In Panel B.

The price coefficients, however, lose their significance at the 5 percent

level, although the t—ratio associated with each coefficient exceeds one In

absolute value. The price elasticities are still relatively large: —.53

for the probability of frequent drinking, —.48 for the probability of

fairly frequent drinking, —.20 for the probability of Infrequent drinking,

and .53 for the probability of no drinking. For all practical purposes,

there are no border age effects when the religion variables are held

constant. The frequency of beer consumption is negatively related to the

percentage of Mormons or Southern Baptists in the primary sampling unit,

while it is positively related to the percentage of Catholics or

Protestants.

    Recall from Section III.C that the price and legal drinking age coef-

ficients are likely to be conservative lower—bound estimates of the true

parameters with the religion variables Included In the demand equations.

Also, the corresponding coefficients obtained without controlling for reli-

gion are not necessarily upper—bound estimates of the true parameters. In
                                     — 21 —


light   of these considerations, the findings that the real beer price coef-

ficients retain their signs and relative rankings and the beer legal

drinking age coefficients retain their signs, rankings, and statistical

significance are impressive and important.

    Fewer negative and significant price and legal drinking age effects

emerge from the demand functions for liquor (not shown) than from the

demand functions for beer. Moreover, the negative liquor price elastici-

ties are smaller in absolute value than the corresponding beer price

elasticities. For these reasons and because beer is the most popular alco-

holic beverage among youths, we focus on the frequency of beer consumption

in the remainder of this paper.

    In logit equations not shown, the real price of liquor was included in

the demand functions for beer. No evidence of substitution between beer and

liquor was revealed by these equations. In most cases the cross price

effect was negative (suggesting complementarity) but not significant. This

finding is probably not an artifact of multicollinearity; the simple corre-

lation coefficient between the price of beer and liquor is positive but not

substantial (r.19).

    To evaluate the potential impacts of the Federal excise tax and legal

drinking age policy initiatives discussed in Section I, we simulate their

effects on the frequency of beer consumption by youths. Specifically,

first we compute the "actual" percentage distribution of the frequency of

beer consumption (4—7 times a week, 1—3 times a week, less than once a

week, and never) by predicting the four outcome probabilities         for

each youth based on the logit coefficients and the actual value of each

independent variable (xit) for that youth [see equation (1) and the second
                                   — 22 —



equation in note 20]. Then we average each of the four outcome probabili-
ties over all youths. Next we vary one or more of the independent

variables by a certain amount, recompute each ik' and average a given pro-

bability over all youths. This gives a "new" percentage distribution.

    The legal drinking age policy pertains to a uniform minimum age for the

purchase of beer of 21 in all states. This policy is simulated by setting

the beer legal drinking age equal to 21 for each youth in our NHANES II

sample and by setting the border age variable equal to zero. The resulting

distribution shows the percentage distribution of the frequency of beer

consumption that would have been observed if the legal drinking age had

been 21 throughout the period of the NHANES IlL survey (February 1976 —

February 1980). Since the mean legal drinking age was 19, the simulation
gives the impact of a 10 percent increase on average in the drinking age.

    Three Federal excise tax policies are considered. The first indexes

the Federal excise tax on a six—pack of beer, which has been fixed at $.16

in nominal terms since 1951, to the rate of inflation since 1951. It is

termed the inflation tax policy. Under it the real price of beer in 1967

dollars faced by an NHANES II youth examine in year t becomes


                  — $.16 +
                             ($.l6)(c5i)]/(c67),                (4)


where Pt is the actual money price faced by the youth, c5i is the CPI in

year t relative to 1951, and cô7 is the CPI in year t relative to 1967.

The second tax policy raises the excise tax on a six pack of beer from $.16

to $.52 to equalize the rates at which the alcohol in beer and liquor are

taxed (see note 3). It is termed the alcohol tax equalization policy. In

this simulation the real beer price is given by
                                      — 23 —


            =     — $.16 +
                              $.S2)/(c67)                        (5)


    The third tax policy combines the first two and is termed the combined

tax policy. The real beer price is given by

            =     — $.16 +
                               ($.S2)(c,5i)]/(ct,67)   .        (6)
The resulting simulation contains the percentage distribution of beer con—

suniption that would have prevailed if the excise tax had been indexed to

the rate of inflation since 1951 during the period of NUANES II and if the

alcohol in beer had been taxed as heavily as the alcohol In liquor.

    Each tax policy simulation assumes that a tax increase is fully passed

on to consumers or that the beer Industry is competitive and has an infini-

tely elastic supply curve. The Inflation excise tax policy causes the

price of beer to rise by approximately 12 percent in the sample period.

This percentage increase in price is almost the same as the percentage

increase in the legal drinking age that results when it is raised from 19

to 21. The alcohol tax equalization policy involves an 18 percent increase

In price. Both policies combined amount to a substantial rise in the price
                         25
of beer of 57 percent.        Although the price of beer rises relative to the

price of liquor, our demand function estimates suggest that youths would

not substitute liquor for beer. Thus, cross price effects are assumed to

be zero in the simulations.

    Table 3 contains the results of the simulations. Two simulations of

each policy are presented. The first is based on the beer demand function

that excludes the religion variables, while the second is based on the beer

demand function that includes the religion variables.

    According to Panels A and B of Table 3, the number of youths who drink
                                        — 24 —

                                          Table   3


         Predicted Effect, of Imposition of a Uniform Legal Drinking Age
         of 21 or Increase in Federal Excise Tax on Beer on Frequency of
                                Beer Consumption




                                                                     Percentage
                                                                      Change in
                                  Actual                  New         Number of
        Outcome                 Percentage             Percentage     Youth. in
       Category                Diatribution           Distribution   Each Categorya


    Panel A: Uniform Legal Drinking Age of 21, Religion Variable. Excluded

  4—7 time, a week                10.99                   7.64         —28.66
  1—3 timea a week                27.74                  23.48         —15.36
  lea, than once a week           18.78                  18.21          —3.04
  never                           42.49                  50.47         +18.78


    Panel B: Uniform Legal Drinking Age of 21, Religion Variable. Included

  4—7 time, a week                11.43                   8.40         —26.51
  1—3 time, a waek                27.27                  25.24          —7.44
  lea. than once a week           18.51                  19.96          +7.83
  never                           42.78                  46.40          +8.46


   Panel C: Inflation Tax Policy, Religion Variable. Excluded

 4—7 time. a week                 10.99                   9.83         —10.56
 1—3 time, a week -              27.74                   26.15          —5.73
 lea. than once a week           18.78                   18.81           +.16
 never                           42.49                   45.21          +6.40

   Panel 0: Inflation Tax Policy, Religion Variable. Included

 4—7 timea a week                11.43                  10.97          —4.02
 1—3 times a week                27.27                  26.00          —4.66
 lea, than once a week           18.51                  18.06          —2.43
 never                           42.78                  44.97          +5.12



   Panel E: Alcohol Tax Equalization Policy, Religion Variable. Excluded

4—7 time, a week                10.99                    9.21         —16.20
1—3 time, a week                27.74                   25.27          —8.90
lea, than once a week           18.78                   18.80           +.11
never                           42.49                   46.72          +9.96

  Panel F: Alcohol Tax Equalization Policy. Religion Variable. Included

4—7 time, a week                11.43                  10.70          —6.39
1—3 time, a week                27.27                  25.29          —7.26
lea. than once a week           18.51                  17.80          —3.84
never                           42.78                  46.21          +8.02


  Panel C: Combined Tax Policy,Religion Variable. Excluded

4—7 time, a week                10.99                   6.15         —44.04
1—3 time, a week                27.74                  20.13         —27.43
lea, than once a week           18.76                  18.29          —2.61
never                           42.49                  53.43         +30.45

  Panel if: Combined Tax Policy, Religion Variable, Included

4—7 time, a week                11.43                   9.19         —19.60
1—3 Lime, a week                27.27                  21.25          22.08
le,. than once a week           18.51                  16.11         —12.97
never                           42.78                  53.45         +24.94



aColumu 1 minus   column 2 divided by column 1 and multiplied by 100.
                                   — 25 —


beer frequently (11 percent of all youths based on actual values of all

independent variables) or fairly frequently (28 percent of all youths,

which is an average of the actual percentages in Panels A and B) falls

substantially in response to the enactment of a uniform legal drinking age

of 21 in all states. To be precise, the number of frequent beer drinkers

falls by 29 percent in Panel A and by 27 percent in Panel B. At the same

time the number of fairly frequent beer drinkers falls by 15 percent in the

former panel and by 7 percent in the latter panel. These declines imply

increases in the number of youths who do not drink beer (43 percent of all

youths) that range from 8 percent to 19 percent. If averages of the

figures in the last columns of Panels A and B are taken as "best

estimates," then the drinking age policy causes the number of youths who

drink beer 4—7 times a week to fall by 28 percent and the number who drink

beer 1—3 times a week to fall by 11 percent. Simultaneously, the number of

infrequent beer drinkers rises by 2 percent and the number of nonpar—

ticipants rises by 14 percent.

    Either of the two excise tax policies taken alone produces smaller

declines in the number of frequent or fairly frequent beer drinkers than

the drinking age policy. Based on the best estimates (averages of the

figures in the last columns of Panels C and D), the inflation tax policy

causes the number of youths in the former category to decline by 8 percent

and the number of youths in the latter category to fall by 6 percent. The

corresponding reductions under the alcohol tax equalization policy are 11

percent and 8 percent (see Panels E and F). These results suggest that a

10 percent increase in the drinking age has a larger impact on the fre-

quency of beer consumption by youths than a 12 or 18 percent Increase in
                                   — 26 —


the real price of beer.
    Under the combined tax policy, the incidence of excessive drinking

falls dramatically (see Panels G and H). To be specific, the number of

youths who drink beer 4—7 times a week, 1—3 times a week, and less than

once a week fall by 32 percent, 24 percent, and 8 percent, respectively.26

Simultaneously, the number of youths who do not drink beer rises by 28

percent.

    Although the combined tax policy has somewhat larger effects on the

rates of frequent and fairly frequent beer consumption than the drinking

age policy, it probably is more notable that both policies have sizable

negative impacts on these measures of beer consumption. Put differently,

the negative responses are not limited to the probability of infrequent

drinking. Indeed, that probability rises under the drinking age policy.

It falls under the tax policy but by a smaller percentage amount than the

other two probabilities. Even the absolute reduction in the infrequent

drinking rate (1 percentage point on average) is smaller than the absolute

reductions in the fairly frequent and frequent rates (7 percentage points

and 4 percentage points, respectively).

    To summarize, our results suggest that the frequency of the consumption

of beer, the most popular alcoholic beverage among youths, is inversely

related to the real price of beer and to the minimum legal age for its

purchase and consumption. The negative price and legal drinking age

effects are by no means limited to reductions in the fraction of youths who

consume beer infrequently (less than once a week). Instead, the fractions

of youths who consume beer fairly frequently (1—3 times a week) and fre-

quently (4—7 times a week) fall more in absolute or percentage terms than
                                     — 27 —


the   fraction of infrequent drinkers when price or the drinking age rises.

These are striking findings because frequent and fairly frequent drinkers

are likely to be responsible for a large percentage of youth motor vehicle

accidents and deaths.

      With regard to the magnitudes of the effects at issue, a Federal policy

that simultaneously taxes the alcohol in beer and liquor at the same rates

and offsets the erosion in the real beer tax since 1951 would have reduced

the number of youths who drink beer frequently (approximately 11 percent of

all youths) by 32 percent during the period of NHANES II and would have

reduced the number of fairly frequent beer drinkers (approximately 28 per-

cent of all youths) by 24 percent. The enactment of a minimum uniform

drinking age of 21 in all states would have reduced the number of frequent

drinkers by 28 percent and the number of fairly frequent drinkers by 11

percent. These figures suggest that, if reductions in youth alcohol use

and abuse are desired, both a uniform drinking age of 21 and an increase in

the Federal excise tax rate on beer are effective policies to accomplish

this goal.27 They also suggest that the tax policy may be more potent than

the drinking age policy.

      It does not follow that we have provided enough evidence to justify the

approximately eight fold (thirteen fold based on the 1984 CPI) increase in

the Federal excise tax on beer that serves as the basis of the above com-

putations. Excise tax hikes impose welfare costs on all segments of the

population, while a drinking age policy is targeted at the group in the

population that accounts for a disproportionate share of motor vehicle

accidents and deaths. On the other hand, the enforcement and administra-

tive costs associated with a uniform minimum drinking age of 21 may exceed
                                   — 28 —


those associated with the tax policy. Moreover, an excise tax increase may

reduce excessive alcohol consumption by adults as well as by youths.

    Finally, Becker (1968) has shown that the optimal way for a society to

deter offenses is via a system of monetary fines. Of course, youthful

drunken drivers may respond to an increase in the fine for this offense

only if the probabilities of apprehension and conviction are nontrivial.

If substantial resources must be allocated to raising these probabilities,

the excise tax policy may be preferable to or complementary with a system

of large fines. In conclusion more research is required to formulate the

best mix of policies to deal with youth alcohol abuse. Our study repre—

sents a useful first step in this process.
                                   F—i

                                 FOOTNOTES



    *Research for this paper was supported by Grant Number 5 ROl AA05849

from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism to the National

Bureau of Economic Research. We are indebted to Gary Marshall for pro-

viding us with data on the price of Seagram's 7—Crown and to Stanley

Ornsteln for providing us with data on the price of a leading brand of

beer. We wish to thank Gary Becker, Philip Cook, Michael Jacobson, Patrick

King, Kevin Murphy, and Stanley Ornstein for helpful comments. We also

wish to thank Frank Chaloupka and Emil Berendt for research assistance.

This paper has not undergone the review accorded official NBER

publications; in particular, it has not been submitted for approval by the

Board of Directors.

    'The increases in the legal drinking age documented above represent a

dramatic reversal of the downward trend between 1970 and 1975. In that

period, 29 states lowered their drinking age to conform with a Federal

shift in the voting age from 21 to 18 in 1970.

    2The Federal excise tax rate on distilled spirits was raised from

$10.50 per proof gallon to $12.50 effective October 1, 1985, as part of the

Deficit Reduction Act of 1984.

    3Under an ad valorem alcoholic beverage excise tax system, the tax rate

would be set at a fixed proportion of wholesale price.

    4Under the Federal excise tax on liquor of $10.50 per gallon of liquor

(50 percent alcohol by volume) in effect prior to October 1, 1985, one

gallon of alcohol in liquor was taxed at a rate of $21. Since the Federal

excise tax on beer is $.29 per gallon and since one gallon of beer contains
                                      F —2


 4.5 percent alcohol by volume, the tax rate on one gallon of alcohol in

 beer is $6.44. The alcohol on liquor is taxed fifteen times as heavily as

 the alcohol in wine, and the proposals mentioned above also contain provi-

sions to correct this distortion.

    5At least two states —— Texas and Kansas —— have adopted laws that will

revoke the 21 drinking age as soon as the legislation expires (Insurance

Institute for Highway Safety 1985).

    6Maisto and Rachal (1980) have studied the effects of differences in

legal drinking ages among states on teenage alcohol use in a 1978 national

drinking survey. Their research is limited to youths who are almost all

below the lowest legal drinking age of 18 and is conducted in a univariate

context.

    71n a penetrating economic analysis of rational addiction over the life

cycle, Becker and Murphy (1985) show that the impact of habit formation or

peer pressure on price responsiveness depends upon whether the price

variation is permanent or temporary, whether the magnitude of the effect is

measured by the slope or the elasticity, and whether the outcome pertains

to the probability of consuming the addictive good or to consumption given

participation. In certain cases adults can be more responsive to price

than youths in their model, while in other cases the reverse holds.

            II is described in detail by NCHS (1981).

    90f the variables employed in the demand functions, the only ones with

missing values are alcohol use and family Income. In each case the number

of observations with missing values is very small.

   10The actual beverage—specific frequency measure in NHANES   II   has more
                                    F —3


 categories than those given in Table 1. The complete set of outcomes is

 never, less than once a week, 1—6 times a week (each of the 6 outcomes can

 be reported), and 1—24 times a day (each of the 24 outcomes can be

 reported). We collapse these 32 outcomes into 4 because, as Indicated in

 the text, the number of drinks consumed per drinking occasion Is likely to

 rise as the number of occasions rises and because very frequent consumers

are likely to underreport. In addition, It is possible that respondents In

the 1—24 times a day categories drink every day and are indIcatIng the

number of drinks consumed per day or on a typical drinking day. For these

reasons, we do not form a separate category of 7 or more times a week. We

have experimented with several alternative categorical variables and have

found that the demand function estimates are similar to those presented in

Section III.

   "These measures Include the per capita number of establishments that

are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, a dichotomous variable that indi-

cates whether off—premise alcoholic beverage stores are state owned and

operated, a dichotomous variable that indicates whether drug and grocery

stores can sell alcoholic beverages, and a dichotomous variable that indi-

cates whether billboard advertising of alcoholic beverages is allowed. All

of them pertain to the state in which a given youth resides. Arluck's

results are based on ordinary least squares regressions. It is beneficial

for us to limit the set of Independent variables because the estimation

techniques that we employ (see Section III.D) are computer intensive.

   121n the case of beer, a few states have two legal drinking ages. One

age is for beer that contains 3.2 percent or less alcohol by weight, and
                                       F —4


the second and higher age is for beer that contains more than 3.2 percent

alcohol by weight. We use the former variable, but it is very highly

correlated with the latter. The beer and liquor legal drinking ages also

are highly correlated (the latter always Is greater than or equal to the

former) and cannot be included in the same demand equation. If beer and

liquor were substitutes, an increase In the liquor legal drinking age

should Increase the demand for beer. Studies summarized by Ornsteln

(1980), however, find almost no substitution among alcoholic beverages.

Additional evidence on this lack of substitution is reported in Section

III.


   '3This statement also pertains to the border legal drinking age variable

described below. Minnesota raised its legal drinking age from 18 to 19

effective September 1, 1976. The legislation contained a grandfather

clause that exempted youths who were 18 years of age as of August 31, 1976

from the new act. This clause is taken into account in our legal drinking

age variables for Minnesota youths.

   '4Since the youth's age is included as an independent variable, the spe-

cification employed here is equivalent to one in which alcohol use (y)

depends on the youth's age (a), the difference between the legal drinking

age and age (x1 = d —   a),   and a vector of additional variables (x2)

               a0 ÷ a1a + a2x1 + a3x2.
           =


Substitute the definition of x1 Into the above equation to obtain

         y = a0 + (a1 — a2)a + a2d ÷ a3x2.

Note that the coefficient of x1 in the first equation is Identical to the

coefficient of d in the second equation.
                                    F—5


    '5Specifically, let t be a time counter that starts at 0 in January 1979

 and ends at 12 in January 1980, and let p be the price of beer in the

 jth state in month t. Then

          jt =        +   bt,
                 p0
 where b is the monthly time trend from the regression. The regression

 employs annual price data, with the price in 1976, for example, defined as

an average of the prices in January 1976, July 1976, and January 1977.

Annual data are used because state excise tax rates on beer are very stable

over time. Moreover, when a state raises its tax rate, beer prices may

rise gradually rather than instantaneously. Indeed, the increase may

begin before the actual date on which the tax rate is scheduled to rise.

The regression is estimated for a cross section of the contiguous states of

the U.S. for the years 1976, 1977, and 1978. Each observation is weighted

by the square root of the population of the state in a given year. The

annual trend obtained from the regression Is converted to a monthly trend

by dividing it by 12.

   '6The earliest NHANES II examination was conducted on February 20, 1976

and the latest was conducted on February 27, 1980. Therefore the mid—month

dates are January 1976 through January 1980.

   '7Although we have specified real income—real price demand functions,

we interpret the estimated price effects as uncompensated (money income—

constant) rather than compensated (utility—constant) substitution effects.

One consideration is that family income may be a very Imperfect measure of

a youth's command of real resources. A second consideration is that the

CPI measures the cost of living of a 4—persoa family.   Expenditure patterns
                                   F —6


and thus the cost—of—living index of that unit are likely to be very dif-

ferent from those of a youth between the ages of 16 and 21. For the same

reason, seasonal patterns in a youth's cost—of—living index may be very

different from seasonal patterns in the CPI. Consequently, we do not

deflate the monthly beer price by the monthly CPI. In preliminary research

we estimated demand functions with money family income, the money price of

beer, and a monthly time trend (a proxy for the youth's CPI) as regressors.

The price effects in this specification were very similar to those reported

in Section III).

   '8The seven additional brands are Old Crow (bourbon), Old Grand—Dad

(bonded whiskey), Dewar's (scotch), Smirnoff (vodka), Bacardi (rum),

Canadian Club (whiskey), and Beefeater (gin). The prices of the eight

brands all are highly correlated in a positive direction. In a time series

of state cross sections for the period of NHANES II, the lowest pairwise

correlation coefficient is .73. The correlation coefficient between the

price of Seagram's 7—Crown and an unweighted average of the prices of the

eight brands is .94. Recently, sales of Bacardi and Smirnoff have over-

taken sales of Seagram's 7—Crown. In this context note that the correla-

tion coefficients between the price of Seagram's 7—Crown and the prices of

Bacardi and Smirnoff are .92 and .93, respectively.

   '9Slmllar comments can be made with respect to drinking age effects that

do not control for drinking sentiment. Although it might appear as if the

drinking age effect is overstated, this need not be the case. For example,

the high youth motor vehicle accident mortality rate in a state where

prodrinking sentiment is widespread may   result   in the enactment of a high
                                           F—7

legal drinking age.
              4
      20Since E ik = 1,
             k= 1


                              3
                                                       —1
             11j4
                    = [1   + E exp(ctk +
                                             ktxitfl
                            k=1        t=1
and

             (x4 /                =
                                      k=l    /
                                                 exit).

   21An estimation issue in addition to those discussed above arises

because NHANES II is a stratified cluster sample rather than a simple random

sample. Consider an ordinary least squares regression in this context. If

the regression is fit under the assumption of simple random sampling,

regression coefficients are unbiased, but their t—ratios are overstated

(Holt 1977). A computer program called SURREGR, described by Holt (1977),

estimates unbiased t—ratios for ordinary least squares regressions ——

ratios   that account for sample design effects. There is, however, no

SURREGR equivalent of a logit model. This suggests that the asymptotic t—

ratios (the ratios of logit coefficients to their standard errors) shown in

Section III may be biased upward. There is, however, a factor that goes in

the opposite direction. We employ a relatively sparse set of regressors;

standard errors would fall if this set were expanded. Recall that Arluck

(in progress) finds that the coefficients of interest in the demand func-

tions are not sensitive to the inclusion of additional independent

variables.

   22The ratios of logit coefficients to their standard errors do not have

Student's t distribution. These ratios do, however, have an asymptotic
                                               F —8


 normal distribution. Therefore, the t test is an asymptotic one.

    23Statements concerning statistical significance in the text are based

 on one—tailed tests except when the direction of the effect is unclear on a

priori grounds or when the estimated effect has the "wrong sign." In the

 latter cases two—tailed tests are used. In particular, the own price and

legal drinking effects are expected to be negative, and the border legal

age effects are expected to be positive. When no significance level is

Indicated, it Is assumed to be 5 percent for a one—tailed test.

   24Based on equation (13),the elasticity of Ik with respect to x1



                         Cikt =   kt k=lktit
                                           —



This elasticity Is computed for each youth in the sample by first pre-

dicting ik from equation (1) and the second equation in note 20. The

resulting figures are averaged over all youths to obtain the elasticity

reported in the text. Note that, since each of the three logit coefficients

of price is negative, the marginal price effect [see equation (3)] and the

elasticity will be negative if



                              I   kt   I
                                           >
                                               I

                                                   k=lkt   I




Clearly,   the above Inequality must hold with respect to the largest
                                                                        kt•
Given the range of the estimated ik and the values of 8kt in our sample,

the inequality also is satisfied with respect to the second—largest logit

coefficient of price in a majority of cases.

   25The percentage increases in price pertain to the actual mean price of

beer in the NHANES II sample ($1.03 per six—pack in 1967 dollars) compared
                                   F —9


to the new mean price under each of the three tax policies. Since the

excise tax and legal drinking age increases are non marginal and the logit

functions are nonlinear, the simulations are employed to evaluate their

effects. This is preferable to computing marginal price or legal drinking

age effects at the point of means or for each individual and then

multiplying by the change in the policy variable at issue. Note that the

actual percentage distribution of the frequency beer consumption in Table 3

differs from the corresponding "observed" distribution in Table 1. The

latter contains, for example, the mean of a dichotomous variable that

equals one if a youth is a frequent beer drinker. These differences emerge

because a multinomial logit equation, unlike a multiple regression, does

not necessarily pass through the point of means of the sample. But they

are very small. In particular, the difference between an outcome probabi-

lity in Table 1 and the corresponding probability in Table 3 is always less

than 1 percentage point in absolute value.

   26Although the elasticity of the probability of infrequent beer con-

sumption with respect to the real price of beer is positive, the probabi-

lity of infrequent beer drinking falls as the excise tax rises. This is

because the probability of infrequent drinking is not a monotonically

increasing function of price [see equation (3)].

   27Some caution should be exercised in applying the results of the

drinking age simulation to the Federal Uniform Drinking Age Act because the

mean legal drinking age was closer to 20 in July 1984 than to the NHANES II

mean of 19. On the other hand, as pointed out in Section I, a long—term

prohibition of purchases of alcoholic beverages by persons below the age of
                                   F — 10



21 is not a fait accompli because the penalties Imposed on states that do

not raise their drinking age to 21 by the Federal Uniform Drinking Age Act

expire at the end of fiscal 1988. Therefore, the figures given above

probably are reasonable to use in a long—term evaluation of the drinking

age policy.
                                    R- 1

                                 REFERENCES

Arluck,   G. M. •Economic and Other Factors In Youth Alcohol Use." Ph.D.

    dissertation, City University of New York Graduate School. In progress.

Becker, C. S. "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach." Journal of

    Political Economy, 76, No. 2 (March/April 1968).

Becker, C. S. "Don't Raise the Drinking Age, Raise Taxes." Business Week,

    November 25, 1985.

Becker, C. S., and Murphy, K. M. "A Theory of Rational Addiction."

    Working Paper, Department of Economics, University of Chicago, April

    1985.

Blane, H. T., and Hewitt, L. E. "Alcohol and Youth: An Analysis of the

    Literature, 1960—1975." Prepared for the National Institute on

    Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Springfield, Virginia: U.S. National

    Technical Information Service, 1977.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. Monthly Labor

    Review, various issues.

Cook, P. J. "The Effect of Liquor Taxes on Drinking, Cirrhosis, and Auto

    Fatalities." In Alcohol and Public Policy: Beyond the Shadow of

    Prohibition, edited by M. H. Moore and D. R. Gerstein. Washington,

    D.C.: National Academy Press, 1981.

Cook, P. J. "Increasing the Federal Alcohol Excise Tax." In Toward the

    Prevention of Alcohol Problems: Government, Business, and Community

    Action, edited by D. R. Cerstein. Washington, D.C.: National

   Academy Press, 1984.

Cook, P. J., and Tauchen, C. "The Effect of Liquor Taxes on Heavy

   Drinking." Bell Journal of Economics, 13, No. 2 (Autumn 1982).
                                   R- 2

Cook, P. J., and Tauchen, G. "The Effects of Minimum Drinking Age Legis—

    slation on Youthful Auto Fatalities, 1970—1977." Journal of Legal

    Studies, 13, No. 1 (January 1984).

Distilled Spirits Council of the United States. "Price per Fifth for

    Selected Types and Brands of Liquor in Control and License States."

    Various years.

Gordon, T., and Kannel, W. B. "Drinking and Its Relation to Smoking, BP,

    Blood Lipids, and Uric Acid." Archives of Internal Medicine, 143

    (1983).

Grossman, M.; Coate, D.; and Arluck, G. M. "Price Sensitivity of Alcoholic

    Beverages in the United States." In Control Issues in Alcohol Abuse

    Prevention: Strategies for Communities, edited by H. D. Holder.

    Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press, Inc., forthcoming.

Harris, J. E. "More Data on Tax Policy." In Toward the Prevention of

    Alcohol Problems: Government, Business, and Community Action,

    edited by D. R. Gerstein. Washington, D. C.: National Academy Press,

    1984.

Holt, M. M. "SURREGR: Standard Errors of Regression Coefficients from

    Sample Survey Data." Raleigh, North Carolina: Research Triangle

    Institute, 1977.

Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. The Highway Loss Reduction Status

    Report, 20, No. 9 (August 10, 1985).

Jacobson, M., and Albion, M. "Raising Alcohol Taxes Is the Way to Cut

    Drinking and the Debt." Washington Post, August 11, 1985.

Leibenstein, H. "Bandwagon, Snob, and Veblen Effects in the Theory of

    Consumer Demand." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 64, No. 1 (May

    1950).
                                     R—3

 Lewit, E. M.; Coate, D.; and Grossman, M. •The Effects of Government

     Regulation on Teenage Smoking." Journal of Law and Economics, 24,

     No. 3 (December 1981).

 Luks, A. Will America Sober Up? Boston: Beacon Press, 1983.

 Maddala, C. S. Limited—Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.

     Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1983.

Maisto, S. A., and Rachal, J. V. "Indications of the Relationship among

    Adolescent Drinking Practices, Related Behaviors, and Drinking—Age

    Laws." In Minimum—Drinking—Age Laws: An Evaluation, edited by

    H. Wechsler. Lexington, Massachusetts: D.C. Heath and Company, 1980.

McFadden, D.    "Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior."

    In Frontiers of Econometrics, edited by P. Zarembka. New York:

    Academic Press, 1973.

Midanik, L.    "The Validity of Self—Reported Alcohol Consumption and Alcohol

    Problems: A Literature Review." British Journal of Addiction, 77

    (1982).

Moore, M. H., and Gerstein, D. R., editors. Alcohol and Public Policy:

    Beyond the Shadow of Prohibition. Washington, D. C.: National Academy

    Press, 1981.

National Center for Health Statistics. Plan and Operation of the Second

     Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1976—1980. U.S. Department

     of Health and Human Services, Vital and Health Statistics, DHHS

     Publication No. (PHS) 81—1317, Series 1, No. 15, 1981.

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, U.S. Department of

     Transportation. Fatal Accident Reporting System 1981. DOT HS 806 251,

    January 1983.

Ornstein, S. I. "Control of Alcohol Consumption Through Price Increases."

   Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 41, No. 9 (1980).
                                     R—4

Ornstein, S. I., and Hanssens, D. M. "Alcohol Control Laws and the

    Consumption of Distilled Spirits and Beer." Journal of Consumer

    Research, 12 (September 1985).

Pouch, J. M. "The Validity of Self—Reports in Alcoholism Research."

    Addictive Behaviors, 7 (1982).

Quinn, B., et al. Churches and Church Membership in the United States,

    1980. Atlanta, Georgia: Glenmary Research Center, 1982.

Rachal, J. V., et al. "The Extent and Nature of Adolescent Alcohol and

    Drug Use: The 1974 and 1978 National Sample Survey." Prepared for

    National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Springfield,

    Virginia: U.S. National Technical Information Service, 1980.

Smart, R. G., and Goodstadt, M. S. "Effects of Reducing the Legal

    Alcohol—Purchasing Age on Drinking and Drinking Problems: A Review

    of Empirical Studies." Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 38, No. 7

    (1977).

Voas, R. B., and Moulden, J. "Historical Trends in Alcohol Use and Driving

    by Young Americans." In Minimum—Drinking—Age Laws: An Evaluation,

    edited by H. Wechsler. Lexington, Massachusetts: D.C. Heath and

    Company, 1980.

Wagenaar, A. C. Alcohol, Young Drivers, and Traffic Accidents. Lexington,

   Massachusetts: Lexington Books, 1983.

Wagenaar, A. C. "Legal Minimum Drinking Age Changes in the United States:

    1970—1981." Alcohol Health and Research World (Winter 1981/82).

Williams, R., and Gillies, P. "Do We Need Objective Measures to Validate

   Self—reported Smoking?" Public Health London, 98 (1984).
                                  R— 5

Williams, T. P., and Lulls, R. P. "Changes in Alcohol Consumption by

   Eighteen Year Olds Following an Increase in New York State's Purchasing

   Age to Nineteen." Presented at the National Council on Alcoholism,

   National Alcoholism Forum, Washington, D. C., April 1985.
