NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT AND THE HISTORY OF CRISES IN OPEN
ECONOMIES
Joshua Aizenman
Ilan Noy
Working Paper 18527
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18527
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

We thank Amy Wood and Zack Dorner for excellent research assistance. We also thank audiences
at Victoria University and the JIMF 30th Anniversary conference, Fordham University, NY, especially
Harris Dellas, Michael King, Jim Lothian and Michael Melvin. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Joshua Aizenman and Ilan Noy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Macroeconomic Adjustment and the History of Crises in Open Economies
Joshua Aizenman and Ilan Noy
NBER Working Paper No. 18527
November 2012, Revised January 2013
JEL No. E2,E4,F3,F36,F41
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the impact of the history of crises on macroeconomic performance. We first
study the impact of past banking crises on the probability of a future banking crisis. Applying data
for 19802010 for all countries for which the required information is available, controlling for conventional
macro variables and the history of banking crises occurring after 1970, we do not detect a learning
process from past banking crises. Countries that have already experienced one banking crisis generally
have a higher likelihood of experiencing another crisis; and the depth of the present crisis does not
appear to be affected by the previous historical experience with crisis events. Evidence also suggests
that, in middle-income countries, higher de jure capital account openness is associated with lower
likelihood of a banking crisis, a lower ratio of nonperforming loans during the crisis, and higher levels
of forgone output in the crisis’ aftermath.
In contrast, we find that past crisis experience has a significant impact on savings. When facing considerable
political risk, the past does seem to matter – countries with more people who were exposed, over their
lifetime, to larger disasters will tend to save more. This association, however, does not hold for countries
with more stable political systems. We interpret these results as consistent with a differential sectoral
adjustment to a crisis hypothesis. The private sector, by virtue of its harder budget constraints, adjusts
faster, whereas the government adjusts at a slower pace following a crisis. The financial sector may
find itself in between the two. The “too big to fail” doctrine associated with large banks provides them
with a softer budget constraint, delaying the day of adjustment; for some, delaying bankruptcy. Occasionally,
the separation between banks and the public sector is murky, further delaying necessary adjustments
of the financial sector.
Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu
Ilan Noy
Saunders Hall 542
2424 Maile Way
University of Hawaii, Manoa
Honolulu, HI 96822
noy@hawaii.edu

1. Introduction
The global crisis of 2008‐9 and the ongoing Euro crisis raise intriguing questions regarding
the long‐term response to crises. Sectors and agents with no access to alternatives respond
and adjust faster than parties that have the ability to delay their adjustment. Household
that loose access to credit, for example, are forced to adjust, and transition to zero, or
positive saving. In contrast, agents that retain greater access to the capital markets may
choose to delay their adjustment. Postponed adjustment may be facilitated by access to
funding supported by state guarantee, or by fiat (say printing money). Delayed adjustment
may be preferable as it entails the option value of good news (“gambling for resurrection”),1
and smoother adjustment may be less costly. Furthermore, delayed adjustment may help in
negotiations regarding who will adjust more.2 In these circumstances, a party that has
better access to the capital market may end up with greater leverage in the bargaining
game, shifting the burden of adjustment to other parties.3 A different set of questions
revolves around the long‐term memory this adjustment process generates. How long will
actors persist in their new behavior or alternatively if and when do they revert back to a
previous mindset.
The recent patterns of adjustment observed in the US and the Euro zone countries
suggest that the household adjusted faster than the public sector and the regulators. The
growing financial segmentation induced by the crises has been manifested in disappearing
credit, pushing a growing share of households into ‘deleveraging’. In contrast, the federal
government in the US increased its borrowing, mitigating partially the recessionary impact
of private deleveraging. In the Euro zone, even governments confronting rapidly increasing
sovereign spreads opted for delayed adjustment. This delay was supported by the ECB
(where public debt held by private banks was taken as a collateral), and by the national
banking systems, facilitating ‘banking’ local governments. These patterns are consistent
with the conjecture of differential sectoral adjustment: the private sector, by virtue of its
harder budget constraints, adjusts faster, whereas the government adjusts at a slower pace

1

See Hellmann, Murdock and Stiglitz (2000) for the economics of gambling for resurrection.
When a fundamental crisis occurs, key stakeholders are locked in a war of attrition, attempting to
minimize their adjustment burden. Who will adjust, and by how much? Creditors, debtors, or
taxpayers? See Alesina and Drazen (1991).
3
See Perotti and Spier (1993) and Mitra (1999) for the impact of access the capital market and
liquidity on bargaining clout.
2

2

in the aftermath of the crisis. The financial sector may find itself in between the two. The
“too big to fail” doctrine associated with large banks provides them with softer budget
constraint, delaying the day of adjustment (for example, delaying bankruptcy). Occasionally,
the separation between banks and the public sector is murky, further delaying the painful
adjustment of the financial sector.
The differential adjustment hypothesis raises intriguing questions about the burden of
history, and its impact on macroeconomic dynamics following crises. An example of such
history dependent dynamics and its importance for public policy include a traumatic
adjustment of the private sector that may affect the future private saving rates of
household impacted adversely by a ‘cold turkey’ switch from borrowers to savers, and
bankruptcy. In contrast, postponing the adjustment by the public sector puts the country in
the peril of fiscal myopia, of adjust tomorrow, ‘but tomorrow never comes.’ The clash
between these two modes of adjustment may induce the syndrome of lost decades of
growth (e.g., the 1980s in Latin America). The delayed adjustment of the public sector,
manifested in terms of postponing cleaning the balance sheets and tightening financial
regulations, may increase the susceptibility of the economy to future crises.
The impact of crises on households’ adjustment may be greater in middle income
countries, and in countries with a larger middle class. In these countries, the share of
households losing access to credit markets at times of peril is greater. This is the case if the
shallow financial intermediation and costly enforcement of contracts in poor countries
implies that most households are credit constrained even in normal times. In contrast, in
richer countries and with greater income equality, a larger segment of the population is less
reliant on external borrowing to finance its consumption and investment.
The purpose of our paper is to explore the degree to which the differential adjustment
hypothesis is consistent with the experience of most countries in recent decades. As testing
all the implications of this hypothesis is beyond the scope of a single paper, our study
focuses on two narrower questions:
The first is the degree to which past banking crises affect the probability of future crises.
Delayed adjustment of the public and the financial sectors, ‘kicking the can,’ implies that
past crises may not affect, or even increase the probability of future crises. In contrast,
efficient and fast adjustment the public and the financial sectors may reduce the probability
of future banking crises.
3

Secondly, we study the degree to which past crises increase the saving rates of the
affected households, as will be the case if painful past adjustment increases the demand for
precautionary saving, and the proliferation of ‘neither a borrower nor a lender be’ attitude
among the middle class.
Overall, our results are consistent with history dependent dynamics, and a differential
adjustment process between the private and public sectors. Specifically, we find evidence
that the experience of past crises in middle income countries with considerable political risk
tend to increase savings. Intriguingly, we failed to find learning from past banking crises ‐‐
banking crises seem not to elicit learning, and past occurrence may even increase the
probability of future crises. Sections 2 and 3 detail the previous literature and our research
on the adjustment of the financial and public sector to the occurrence of banking crises,
respectively, while section 4 focuses on the question of saving and households exposure to
past income catastrophes. We close with a discussion of limitations and policy ramifications
of our results, and outline open questions deserving further investigation.

2.

Literature on the Determinants of Banking Crisis

The empirical literature on the determinants of banking crises is quite voluminous. The
theoretical literature is far too extensive to be covered here, and since our contribution is
empirical in nature, we focus herein only on empirical investigations of banking crises.
Generally, one can distinguish two different strands in this empirical banking crises
literature. A first strand investigates the process that leads to the occurrence of banking
crises, the second focuses on the depth of the financial crisis, once it occurs, and examines
its characteristics. We focus on these aspects, occurrence and magnitude, in our own
investigation of the adjustment to past events.

2.1

Occurrence
Arteta and Eichengreen (2002) provide a decade‐old extensive survey of empirical

macroeconomic research on banking crises that uses mostly cross‐country panel
frameworks to assess the likelihood for the occurrence of banking crises; either as an
exercise whose aim is to develop early‐warning‐systems or to assist in developing
preventive measures that may inhibit the occurrence of these crises. They identify a list of

4

macroeconomic and financial variables that are found to be significant in the determination
of banking crises.4
A number of papers have taken a different approach to the research on the causes of
banking distress and have utilized firm‐level data sets on financial institutions’ balance
sheets. Bongini et al. (2001) examine the evolution of the East Asian crisis, which was
accompanied by large‐scale banking problems as do Levy‐Yeyati and Micco (2007) for Latin
American banks. They find that, for example, foreign‐owned banks were less likely to get
into a liquidity crisis in the first case and that foreign penetration lowered financial fragility
more generally in the latter case. These empirical models that rely on micro‐data are more
detailed, can assess the importance of the banks’ balance sheets, and can differentiate
between banking performance within a single country (as the banking sector crisis does not
imply a universal failure of all banks). However, these micro‐results are probably less
generalizable and are also less relevant for work that is focussed on the general vulnerability
of an economy to a systemic banking crisis rather than of individual banks. As such, we focus
on the cross‐country panel framework rather than attempt to test any of our hypotheses
within a micro‐level balance‐sheet dataset for individual banks.

2.2

Depth
Most of this work focuses on measuring the depth of the post‐crisis economic downturn,

typically measured as GDP deviation from a calculated trend that results from a banking
crisis (e.g., Hutchison and Noy, 2005). There is significantly less work on the determinants of
these output collapses, however. Recently, Berkman et al. (2012) estimated the depth of the
downturn following the global financial crisis, assuming that the crisis hit all high‐ and
middle‐income countries. They find that countries with more leveraged domestic financial
systems, stronger credit growth, and more short‐term debt experienced larger declines in
economic activity.5

4

Earlier papers that also developed cross‐country panel models predicting the likelihood of banking
crises are Demirgüç‐Kunt and Detragiache (1998), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), and Glick and
Hutchison (2001); while there are also many later papers using similar frameworks (e.g., Schaeck et
al., 2009 ).
5
In Berkman et al. (2012), the depth is measured not as GDP deviations from trend but rather as the
actual post‐crisis GDP growth experience relative to the pre‐crisis forecast.
5

Serwa (2010) on the other hand, focuses on the interaction between the size of the crisis
(measured using several monetary aggregates) and the GDP declines that follow it, and
maybe not surprisingly, observes a positive correlation between the two variables.6
Cecchetti et al. (2012) also pursue a similar line of research and examine whether pre‐crisis
conditions mattered for the depth of the downturn following the 2007‐2009 global financial
crisis. We are not aware of any work that attempts to examine the determinants of the
depth of a banking crisis (proxied either by banking sector aggregates or the crisis
consequences) in general, nor, of course, with any specific focus on the question of
adjustment and the learning from past experience done by the regulators, policy makers
and banking institutions.

3. Data, Models, and Results – History and Banking Crises

3.1

Model I – panel of country‐year observations
We estimate the probability of occurrence of a banking crisis using a panel cross‐

country dataset for banking crises based on the newly updated banking crises database of
Laeven and Valencia (2012). Older versions of this data are the most widely used in projects
that identify the occurrence of banking crises; the year in which they started, their duration,
and their depth (using several measures – more on that in section 3.4). We use data for
1980‐2010 for all countries for which the required data is available.7 We estimate a
multivariate probit specification of the likely occurrence of a banking crisis (BKC). We
postulate a probit model of the form:

 prob( BKC

it

 1)  F ( i   X it 1   BKCitHIST   CCitHIST )

6

(1)

In practical terms, Serwa (2012) examines the correlation between these monetary aggregates and
the real economy, rather than have a specific focus on banking crises (although the paper uses only
data from banking crisis episodes).
7
We are interested in the importance of banking crises history; the Laeven and Valencia (2012)
dataset details banking crises occurring after 1970, so we begin our sample a decade later.
6

where BKC is a binary variable denoting onset of a banking crisis (the year the crisis
started – as defined by Laeven and Valencia, 2012),  i is the country‐fixed‐effect, X is a
vector of macroeconomic and financial independent variables, and BKCitHIST and CCitHIST are
binary measures denoting whether a previous banking or currency crisis occurred in country
i during the previous decade (respectively). We estimate the model using LIMDEP’s routine
for estimation of probit models with and without fixed effects (for all details, see Greene,
2012, ch. E27).
We distinguish between high‐ and middle‐income countries.8 For control ( X it 1 ) variables,
we rely on previous recent research; in particular on Noy (2004), Demirgüç‐Kunt and
Detragiache (2005), von Hagen and Ho (2007), Joyce (2011), and Duttagupta and Cashin
(2011). The list of independent variables we use is: per capita GDP, real GDP growth rate, a
binary variable denoting hyperinflation (annual CPI>40), the de facto flexibility of the
exchange rate regime, a measure of bank liquidity (deposit money bank assets as % of GDP),
credit expansion (growth rate of deposit money bank assets), and the degree of openness of
the capital account (the Chinn‐Ito de jure index).9 Because the occurrence of the crisis will
affect all of these variables, they are included in the specification with a one‐year lag.
In addition to these variables, we add two others: the history of banking crises for each
country (a binary indicator whether a banking crisis occurred in the previous decade), and a
similar measure of the history of currency crises.10 None of the papers previously mentioned
(nor any others as far as we know) uses the new data that includes the global financial crisis
of 2008‐2010 (GFC henceforth), and none attempted to use the historical exposure variables
that we include.
We estimate the model with and without country fixed effects; the fixed effects control
for time‐invariant differences across countries, and also remove a lot of the institutional,
political, and supervisory variance in the data given the infrequent occurrence of banking
8

High income countries are defined as countries whose GDP per capita is bigger than 11,000 (in
2000US$) while middle income countries are those whose GDP per capita is bigger than 1,000 but
lower than 11,000 (in 2000US$).
9
Two other control variables were considered as they were included in some of the papers cited
above, but both variables are not included in the specifications we present as they were never
statistically significant: the real interest rate (nominal interest rate minus CPI) and the foreign
exchange open position (foreign reserves /M2).
10
Since the two types of financial crises frequently occur together; this was dubbed ‘twin’ crisis by
Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999).
7

crises. When including fixed effects, we also add a heteroskedacticity correction, but this
does not change our results in any material way.

3.2

Results for model I

We investigate separately the incidence of banking crises in high‐ and middle‐income
countries for 1981‐2010; and as part of our investigation, we also separate a sample from
the most recent financial crisis of 2008‐2010. We start by describing our data separately for
these three sub‐samples (see table 1). One noteworthy observation is that once we include
the data from the most recent years, the frequency of banking crises is not any different
between high‐ and middle‐income countries. Historically, though, the middle‐income
countries were more exposed to banking crises (29% of the middle income sample are of
observations that followed a banking crisis within a decade, while the figure for the high
income sample is 16%). The other differences between the sub‐samples are to be expected;
real GDP growth rate is lower, on average, in high income countries, while their capital
account is significantly more open, M2 is higher, as is our measure of credit.
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ INSERT TABLE 1 ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
For our regressions, we start our discussion with the results for high income countries. In
table 2 column 1, we include the full high‐income sample (597 observations, 28 countries)
without country‐effects. The model appears to be moderately useful in predicting banking
crises, with a pseudo R2 of 0.29. We find that the banking‐history variable enters with a
positive coefficient, i.e., a previous experience with banking crises increases the likelihood
of another one occurring. The coefficient for per capita GDP is negative, and so is the
coefficient for the per capita GDP growth rate; both these findings align well with previous
results. The other variables that are typically included do not seem to have any statistically
observable impact on the occurrence of banking crises in the high‐income sample.
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ INSERT TABLE 2 ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
When examining the estimation of the same model with fixed effects, table 2 column 2,
none of the variables has a statically significant coefficient associated with it. This non‐result
is less surprising than may be expected since this is a first attempt to estimate a similar
model for high‐income countries separately – as for high income countries almost all of the
banking crises are from the most recent global financial crisis (and this is a first attempt to
use this most recent data). As there is little variability in the high‐income country sample,
8

we are unable to include variables measuring the history of currency crises and the de facto
exchange rate regime.
For the middle‐income country sample (1274 observations and 74 countries), the model
without country‐effects, table 2 column 3, obtained more statistically significant results,
though the predictive power of the model appears to be very limited with a very low
pseudo R2. All the variables we include in our benchmark specification, based on previous
research, are statistically different from zero, except for the Chinn‐Ito capital account
openness index. As was the case for the high‐income country sample, the banking history
coefficient is positive and significant (though about half the size as for the high‐income
sample).11 In the middle‐income sample, we are also able to include a history‐of‐currency‐
crises variable, and it is also statistically significant (and half as large as the banking crisis
coefficient). The GDP variables (in levels and growth rates) are similarly significant, while the
coefficient for the GDP growth variable is smaller. As expected, the hyperinflation binary
indicator is positive and significant. The banking liquidity and credit growth variables are
both statistically significant – with higher banking liquidity decreasing the likelihood of a
banking crisis while a pre‐crisis credit expansion increasing it.12
When we add fixed‐country‐effects to this specification, table 2 column 4, the variables
that are significantly less time varying (banking history, the exchange rate regime, the
hyperinflation indicator) all lose their statistical significance, as does the GDP growth rate
variable. The per capita GDP coefficient retains its size and statistical significance.
Interestingly, the Chinn‐Ito measure is now negative and statistically significant – offering
some evidence that, in middle‐income countries, increasing capital account openness
decreases the likelihood of a banking crisis.13 More difficult to interpret are the results for
bank liquidity. The coefficient is now positive and significant (opposite sign than when no
fixed‐effects are included). Since this variable is less time‐variant, it is unclear how we
should interpret this result. The credit expansion coefficient retains its sign and significance.

11

We are aware, of course, of the conventional wisdom that suggests that there may be cases of
countries where it is widely believed that a deep crisis caused changes that reduced exposure to
future crises; Chile and Israel in the 1980s or Sweden in the 1990s are all frequently mentioned. Our
empirical results imply that these cases appear to be the exception, and not the rule.
12
The banking asset variables have the same sign as in the high income sample.
13
Glick et al. (2006) find similar evidence for the occurrence of currency crises.
9

Since one of the contributions of this paper is to include the most recent data from the
post‐2008 Global Financial Crisis (henceforth GFC), we are interested in examining whether
this most recent wave of crises is different from the previous 30 years of crisis history. We
estimate the full country sample only for the most recent years of the global crisis, 2008‐
2010 (table 2 column 5); the model appears to provide strong predictive power, with a
pseudo R2 of 0.72. The banking‐history variable is positive and significant, as with the longer
time period sample, but with a larger coefficient. Same is true for the de facto exchange rate
regime index, and our measure of credit expansion. Other coefficients are no longer
statistically significant.

3.3

Robustness for model I

The 1980s were characterized by banking crises in the debt‐ridden countries of Latin
America, but since the 1990s (and thereafter) we have been observing a different type of
banking crises that are not necessarily connected to sovereign debt crises. In order to
examine this 1980s‐uniqueness hypothesis, we re‐estimate our models using only the 1991‐
2010 data; but find that results are virtually identical.14
We also examined whether the (robust) negative effect of credit expansions may also be
related to the degree of liquidity in the banking system, by including the interaction of the
two variables in our benchmark specifications. The product of the two variables is in almost
all cases insignificant and the coefficients on the credit expansions and the banking liquidity
variables do not change substantially.

3.4

Model II – cross section of banking crises observations

The second part of our examination of banking crises is an investigation of the
determinants of their magnitude. Unlike the first part, in which we use a binary measure of
occurrence, an investigation into the depth of banking crises first has to determine how to
measure the severity of a banking crisis.15 In the newest version of the banking crisis dataset
(Laeven and Valencia, 2012), the authors also include three variables which may be
14

We lose about 300 observations from our sample, but, qualitatively and quantitatively, the results
are very similar.
15
Most research on banking crises focuses on event indicators, either taken from earlier versions of
the Laeven and Valencia dataset we use or its earlier incarnations collected at the International
Monetary Fund.
10

interpreted as alternative measures of the depth of the crisis. These are: the output loss –
measured as deviations of GDP from a calculated trend; the fiscal costs (measured as % of
GDP); and the peak non‐performing loan (NPL) level reached (measured as % of total loans).
We thus estimate the following model:

DEPTH it     X it 1   BKCitHIST   CCitHIST

(2)

Composing an output loss measure for banking crises (the first proxy for DEPTH) involves
deciding on what constitutes the trend (the counterfactual) and determining the end of the
crisis.16 We use the Laeven and Valencia data for this measure since they employ the
standard IMF approach to this measurement (see appendix). The fiscal costs (the second
proxy) are the bank restructuring costs defined as gross fiscal expenditures directed to the
restructuring of the financial sector (e.g., recapitalization costs). The dataset includes both
the gross fiscal costs and the net costs (costs minus whatever the government managed to
‘claw’ back in the five years following the onset of the crisis). We are interested in the depth
of the crisis at the time it happens, and we consequently focus on the gross fiscal costs
instead of net costs; net costs are also greatly affected by further development and the
government’s policy choices in the crisis aftermath. The NPL measure (the third proxy for
DEPTH) includes the peak measure of NPLs during the five years since the crisis onset; in
cases where less than five years of post‐onset data is available, the observed peak is
recorded.
The average fiscal costs of the crises in our sample is 12.2 (% of GDP) while the costliest
crisis by this measure costs the government 56.8 (% of GDP) – this was Indonesia during the
1997‐8 Asian Crisis. The average peak amount of non‐performing loans is 28.6 (% of loans in
banking sector balance sheets) while the crisis with the highest NPL was estimated at 90% ‐
São Tomé & Príncipe in 1992. The variance of the output loss measure is significantly higher,
with the average loss estimated to be 30.1% of GDP; but in some instances no output loss is
recorded and in others the loss is much higher. The country experiencing the costliest crisis,
in terms of the downturn in economic activity, is Kuwait in 1982, but several other crises
have an output loss that surpasses 100% of GDP – most notably Thailand during the Asian
crisis of 1997‐8 and Ireland during the recent global financial crisis.
16

For discussion of various alternative measures of output loss associated in the context of financial
crises see Hutchison et al. (2010).
11

Surprisingly, the correlation between these measures of the magnitude of the banking
crises is low (see table 3). The fiscal measure is positively correlated with the two other
measures (NPL and output loss), albeit moderately at 0.33‐0.38. The NPL measure, however,
has no statistically observable correlation with the output loss measure. It appears that all
three measures are recording a different aspect of the depth of the crisis, and are not very
closely related to each other.
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ INSERT TABLE 3 ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
For our control variables X it 1 , we rely on Hutchison et al. (2010) that investigated the
depth of other types of financial crises (in particular sudden stops in capital inflows), and
Angkinand (2009) that focused on banking distress. Since the number of observations is
limited to those banking crises for which data is available, we only include variables for
which we could find sufficient coverage. In particular, for the full set of 138 banking crisis
episodes described in the dataset, we only include those variables for which we have data
for at least 100 observations. These variables include: monetary expansion during the crisis
episode17, IMF program intervention during the crisis, pre‐crisis credit boom, average pre‐
crisis GDP growth rate, pre‐crisis exchange rate regime (de facto), pre‐crisis current account
balance, pre‐crisis inflation, and the pre‐crisis degree of capital account openness (Chinn‐Ito
index).
Table 4 includes descriptive statistics for the independent variables in our cross‐
sectional model. Most important is the observation that about 20% of the banking crises in
our dataset are following a crisis that occurred in the decade preceding it. 35% of the
banking crises were preceded by a credit boom, and 38% ended up participating in an IMF
program (typically short‐term bailout programs). The average pre crisis current account
deficit was quite large (3.7% of GDP) while the average pre crisis GDP growth was low
(0.2%). Since this is a cross‐sectional model, rather than a panel like the model of sections
3.1‐3.3, we estimate the model with a standard ordinary least squares routine.
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ INSERT TABLE 4 ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
3.5 Results and robustness for model II

17

Monetary expansion is computed as the change in the monetary base between its peak during the
crisis and its level one year prior to the crisis (measured in percent of GDP).
12

We estimate the model using the three alternative proxies for the severity of the crisis
(NPL, output loss, and fiscal cost). Table 5 includes our regression results for the cross‐
sectional model; columns 1‐3 includes the full sample of banking crises (1980‐2010) while
columns 4‐6 only include the banking crises associated with the GFC years (2008‐2010).
Table 5 column 1 estimates the determinants of the severity of the crises measured by the
amount of non‐performing loans in the banking system at the height of the crisis. We find
that IMF intervention is associated with deeper crises (but of course IMF program
intervention is not exogenous to the depth of the crisis). Higher GDP growth before the
crisis is associated with fewer non‐performing loans and capital account openness appears
to reduce the amount of NPLs accumulating in the banking system. When estimating the
depth of the crisis using the other two alternative definitions (table 5 columns 2‐3), the
results are broadly similar, with significant coefficients retaining their sign. The IMF variable
loses its statistical significance when the output loss proxy is used, while the GDP growth
measure loses its significance when the fiscal costs are used as a measure for the depth of
the crisis. Given the small sample (55‐70 observations); it may be less surprising that many
of the included variables are statistically insignificant, though the explanatory power of the
model (the R2 is between 0.22 to 0.40) is not insubstantial.
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ INSERT TABLE 5 ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
We then progress to examine only the most recent banking systemic failures that are
associated with the GFC. We find, in table 5 columns 4‐6, that the broad outline of our
results is maintained. The model is still only moderately successful. For NPLs, the results
regarding the capital account openness are similar, while the results for the same variable,
but for the output loss depth indicator on the LHS, are the opposite (and significant). It
seems that higher capital account openness (de jure) is associated with lower levels of NPLs
and higher levels of economic disruptions, as measured by forgone output. For the fiscal
cost proxy of the crisis, the only significant (and positive) coefficient is the IMF indicator.
We also attempted to examine whether the history of previous exposure of the banking
sector to systemic crisis episodes seem to matter for the depth of the experienced crisis. We
find no evidence to that effect; i.e., an indicator variable that denotes the occurrence of
previous crises is always statistically insignificant (and negative). An accounting of the exact
nature in which previous events cast a shadow into the future in financial markets remains,
apparently, an open question in this case.
13

4. Data, Models, and Results – History and Saving Behaviour
Our focus in this paper is the hypothesis that the burden of history matters for the
macro‐economy through the changed incentives at all levels of decision‐making. We started
with the intuition that countries that experienced previous banking crises will tend to be
more cautious and experience fewer crises thereafter. We found the opposite: countries
that have already experienced one banking crisis generally have a higher likelihood of
experiencing another one; while the depth of the crisis does not appear to be affected by
the previous historical experience with such events.
We next ask whether the same incentives are observable at the household level.
Specifically, we ask whether the history of past economic contractions affects aggregate
saving behaviour. Does income history matter?
The theory on the ways households deal with adverse income shocks does not lead to
clear‐cut predictions. Clearly, the main issue is whether previous income shocks had any
impact on the households’ perceptions of future uncertainty; an income shock that occurred
a few decades ago is only important in that it might affect both the degree of risk
averseness and decision maker’s awareness of the possibility of future shocks. The literature
on uncertainty and saving behavior is extensive, with early contributions by, for example,
Levhari and Srinivasan (1969) and Sandmo (1970) – this, however, remains an empirically
open question, and our contribution is purely empirical.18
Previous empirical research on the determinants of saving behavior focuses almost
exclusively on country‐specific data at the household level.19 Given our interest in the
importance of aggregate country‐level historical experiences and the way market
participants adjust to them, our investigation has to be pursued using country‐wide data.
Recent papers most similar to ours in their empirical approach and specifications are Loayza
et al. (2000) and Kinugasa and Mason (2007), though the latter’s interest is mostly the
demographic determinants of national saving. Loayza et al. (2000) use a panel dataset of

18

See Browning and Lusardi (1996) for overview of the mirco theories and empirical regularities of
household savings.
19
The literature on the determinants of saving behaviour for households is much too extensive for
us to discuss herein. Some projects examine aggregate macro‐economic data at the local level within
a country (e.g., Horioka and Wan, 2007, for an investigation of Chinese saving rates at the provincial
level).
14

saving rates for 1965‐1994 and a very large sample of countries to estimate their
determinants. Like our work, they pursue a reduced‐form approach that attempts to
identify broad regularities in the data rather than is wedded to a specific structural theory of
saving. The theoretical literature, as well as the micro‐empirical literature, is not cohesive
enough to suggest a specific structural specification that would be empirically preferable.
We hypothesize that past large and adverse income shocks are empirically important in
determining current saving behaviour. We examine this by constructing an index that
measures the past exposure to ‘income catastrophes’ across the generations and examine
whether this index is correlated with domestic saving.20 21 We use data on income
catastrophes going back to 1900 and saving and demographic details for the set of high‐ and
middle‐income countries for which this data is available.

4.1

The Data
In order to examine the possibility that the historical experience of income shocks

affect present behaviour we need to construct an ‘exposure to income catastrophes’ index
(henceforth EIC index) for every country and time observation in our dataset. The EIC index
is essentially constructed from country‐wide demographic data on the size of each cohort
and the history of each cohort’s exposure to catastrophic recessions since birth. Since the
EIC index does not change much every year (neither demographics nor the historical record
changes that rapidly), we construct our dataset in 5 year gaps: since saving data is typically
available reliably only from the 1980s, we calculate the index for 5 observations per country
(for the years 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005). We construct five alternatives of our EIC index.
For demographic cohort‐size data we use the World Bank’s World Development Indicators

20

We are not aware of any investigation of this question. Two papers have investigated the long‐
term impact of shocks on household behaviour using microeconomic datasets. Malmendier and
Nagel (2011) examined the impact of exposure to stock‐market return history on household
investment risk‐taking in the U.S., while Malmendier et al. (2011) investigated the impact of the
Great Depression on the behaviour of company CEOs who grew up during that period.
21
Schrooten and Stephan (2005) observe that saving rates increased significantly in the 1990s in the
transition countries, following a few years of dramatic economic decline (and declining saving rates).
While they examine different reasons for that, our hypothesis seems consistent with this
observation. Households increased their saving after they were exposed to significant negative
economic shocks. Similarly, Mody et al. (2012) observation of a large increase in saving following the
2008 global financial crisis, and their examination of its dependence on labour market uncertainty, is
also consistent with our premise.
15

while for data on catastrophic income shocks since 1900 we use the data from Barro and
Ursua (2011).

4.1.1 The 4 alternative EIC indices
In order to examine the robustness of our results, and since there is no precedent to this
measure, we use four different ways to construct our EIC index: For the benchmark index,
the percent of population for each cohort is multiplied by the average of the past magnitude
of catastrophic recessions weighted linearly according to how long ago they occurred. As an
example, the equation below describes how we calculate the index for a country for the
year 2005 using demographic cohort size as share of the national population ( ), the size of
the reduction in per capita income for each catastrophic income shock in the historical
record ( ), and the weights (

) associated with each historical exposure. These weights

are calculated according to the age of each cohort so that the weights are declining linearly
and the weight at birth is zero.22 This index, as are the alternatives described below, is
therefore higher as more of the population was exposed to larger or more recent crises.
1 2005

0.2

In a second version of this index, the benchmark index undergoes a log transformation.
2 2005

2

log

0.2

In the third alternative, we calculate the EIC Index by using only the cohorts aged 40‐65
since these are the prime ‘saving’ cohorts.
3 2005

2

log

0.2

22

Our choice to use linearly declining weights with zero weight at birth is based on the findings from
Malmendier and Nagel (2011).
16

Finally, our fourth alternative EIC index is calculated by assuming a non‐linearity of the
income catastrophe’s impact (i.e., we use convex and concave functions of the measured
per capita income decline during the recession).23
4 2005

5 2005

2

2

/

0.2

log

0.2

log

We have data for 40 countries: the only binding constraint on data availability is
information about past recessions going back to 1900 – we use all the data available in the
Barro‐Ursua dataset). Given a few missing observations, we end up with about 90
observations each for the high‐ and middle‐income samples. The indices 2‐4 are highly
correlated between them (0.93‐0.97) while index1 is only slightly less correlated with the
rest (0.81‐0.88); the regression results described below are virtually identical for all four
alternative indices.

4.1.2 Other Data
In the regressions described below, we estimate the determinants of saving rates
across countries.

SAVit   it   X it 1   EICnit

(3)

As our dependent variable, we have the national saving rate. Our main independent
variable of interest is the EIC described in the previous section. Kinugasa and Mason (2007)
also estimated the determinants of saving rates across countries, and we use their list of
controls ( X it 1 ) in determining the appropriate RHS variables in our regression
specifications. We use: average GDP growth in previous five years period; the real interest
rate (average for previous five years); labour participation rate (average for previous five

23

Index 4 and 5 are concave and convex transformations of the crisis depth measure. For the
concave transformation, we are hypothesizing that the measurable depth of the downturn is less
important than the actual event occurring, and with the convex transformation we are examining
whether especially catastrophic collapses in incomes have a more pronounced effect on saving
behavior.
17

years); and a proxy for institutional strength (we use the International Country Risk Guides
political risk measure24).

4.2 Descriptive Statistics and Regression Results

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ INSERT FIGURE 1 ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
We start by examining the EIC index for high‐income countries; in figure 1 we present
the EIC index (#1) for the year 2005. Germany has the highest index as a result of its aging
population and the very dramatic output contractions experienced in the 1920s and the
1940s. Singapore, the country with the second highest index, has a historical record of very
large fluctuations of incomes throughout the 20th century. Singapore is also a clear outlier in
terms of its saving rates (see figure 2) with saving rates ranging between 41‐50% of GDP – a
much higher rate than for any other developed country in our sample (whose range is 11‐
34).
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ INSERT FIGURE 2 ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
We hypothesized that countries with a higher EIC index will, ceteris paribus, save more;
and indeed when we examine the statistical relationship between these two variables for
the high‐income sample we consistently find a positive relationship in both bi‐variate and
multi‐variate specifications (e.g., table 6, column 1). However, these results are not robust
to the exclusion of the one obvious outlier, Singapore. Once we exclude Singapore from the
estimations, we find little robust evidence of connection between saving behavior and our
historical index (results not presented for brevity); neither does this result remain when we
include country‐fixed‐effects. We therefore focus only on middle‐income countries in the
discussion that follows and in the specifications we include (see Figures 3‐4, and columns 3‐
6 in table 6).
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ INSERT FIGURES 3 and 4 ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Middle‐income countries have a much higher EIC index than is typical for the high‐
income countries in our sample. In spite of their generally younger demographics, almost all
24

The ICRG political risk index ranges from 1‐100 with higher numbers signifying a less risky political
environment. To simplify the analysis, we change the sign so that higher numbers register more
political risk.
18

middle‐income countries have a higher EIC than Germany (which the highest in the high
income group) – see figure 3. It is also quite apparent that saving rates for middle‐income
countries are both higher and more varied than for the high‐income sample. In short, across
income levels the correlations between the EIC and saving rates are not immediately
obvious.
For middle‐income countries, we estimate domestic saving (% of GDP) on the LHS with
both pooled‐OLS and with fixed effects; results change as the EIC index does not vary much
over time, so that inserting country fixed effects removes much of the cross‐country
differences in the index. As in the high‐income sample, we prefer to be able to focus on the
cross‐country differences rather than only at the impact of the change in the index over
time in each country. We estimate the OLS specifications with a White‐heteroskedasticity‐
correction assuming clustered standard errors by country.
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ INSERT TABLE 6 ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Our original hypothesis was that the index should be positively correlated with the
saving rate, as a higher index signifies greater exposure to more significant adverse income
shocks. However, in the initial specification, presented in column 3, the coefficient of the EIC
index is statistically insignificant (indistinguishable from zero) but negative; it is negative and
significant when fixed‐effects are included (column 4). For the other independent variables
in our estimation: GDP growth is statistically significant and positive; real interest rate is
negative and statistically significant, labour participation and the institutional proxy are
positive and statistically significant. These results closely match our priors and previous
research (Kinugasa and Mason, 2007). The R2 for the empirical model is high; 0.52 for
control variables, 0.92 if adding fixed effects (0.49 and 0.90, respectively, when controlling
for the number of independent variables included in the model).
This result of a negative relationship between the exposure index and the saving rate is
counter‐intuitive, and suggests that, if it is indeed robust, originates from differences across
countries that make some countries more likely to experience income volatility and have
lower saving rates. We hypothesize that the difference lies in the institutional structure of
the economies compared. In countries with a high level of political risk people will worry
more about a repetition of the income catastrophes, while countries that end up enjoying
an improved institutional framework, with lower political risk, the impact of past events is
muter.
19

We find that in countries with much political risk the past experience does seem to
matter; so that countries with more people who were exposed to larger disasters more
recently will tend to save more. This is, however, not the case for countries with more stable
political systems.

5. Conclusions
We close the paper with a discussion of open issues needing further research, and
possible interpretations. Establishing the root causes of our failure to detect a learning
process from past banking crises is well beyond the scope of this paper, but is needed to
provide a proper interpretation. One possible explanation is that regulators and
policymakers are learning, but at a speed that does not catch up with the dynamic evolution
of modern banking. While it is easier to deal with deficiencies revealed by past crises, it may
be hard to identifying new vulnerabilities propagated by rapidly changing financial
technologies and instruments and the entry of new players. Consequently, the regulator
frequently is preparing to prevent the last crisis, and not the future one, as the contours of
the future vulnerabilities are fuzzy. In these circumstances, a possible remedy may call for
slowing down the diffusion of financial innovations, treating them as risky until proven
otherwise. Instead of presuming that ‘this time is different’, the regulator should presume
that the next crisis will come in a new shape and form. This cautious attitude may call for
much more stringent leverage and reserve ratios, and blocking the introduction of financial
innovations that may be ‘too clever by half’ for users and for regulators.
A more troublesome interpretation is the possibility that too much political clout
upheld by the financial system may cut the resources available to the regulator, and his
ability to impose policies that are deemed too costly for and by the financial system. This
concern arises especially in the context of the ‘too big to fail’ doctrine, where the private
rents associated with excessive risk taking by the banking systems require adversarial
relationships between the regulators and the private banking system. In these
circumstances, policies aiming at curtailing the political clout of big financial institutions may
help. Yet, these policies may be hard to implement in countries dominated by few large
financial players with cozy associations with the political process and with large
conglomerates. Chances are that countries differ in the relative importance of these

20

considerations. Identifying the weight of the causes accounting for the lack of learning from
banking crises remains an important research agenda.
Similarly, our mixed findings about the impact of history on savings suggest the need to
look more closely at the political economy and the functioning and credibility of institutions.
The Ricardian equivalence hypothesis suggests that the patterns of private savings are
impacted by the degree to which the public sector helps or hinders dealing with turbulent
income. One expects that in countries where the public sector has been providing effective
social safety net, and is not the root cause of instability, the impact of history on private
saving is muted. This is probably in line with our findings that only for middle income
countries with much political risk does past experience seem to matter; so that such
countries with more people who were exposed to larger disasters more recently will tend to
save more.
Better understanding of these forces may require better understanding of patterns of
public savings, and the expectations regarding the viability and credibility of public safety
nets. Our findings also raise important questions about the unintended consequences of
policies that aim to assist households in dealing with adverse macroeconomic environments.
For countries with higher degrees of political uncertainty, saving behavior may provide a
pro‐cyclical force that may create higher income volatility. All of these dynamics are bound
to play important roles in the coming decades given the unprecedented nature of the 2008‐
2010 GFC.

References
Alesina Alberto and Allan Drazen (1991) “Why are Stabilizations Delayed?” American
Economic Review 81, 5: 1170‐1188.
Angkinand, Apanard P., 2009. "Banking regulation and the output cost of banking
crises," Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 19(2), 240‐257.
Arteta, C., Eichengreen, B., 2002. Banking crises in emerging markets: presumptions and
evidence. In: Blejer, M., Skreb, M. (Eds.), Financial Policies in Emerging Markets. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Barro, Robert J., José F. Ursua, 2011. Rare Macroeconomic Disasters. NBER Working Paper
No. 17328.

21

Beck, Thortsen and Asli Demirgüç‐Kunt, 2009. Financial Institutions and Markets Across
Countries and over Time: Data and Analysis. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
4943. [update posted at worldbank.org].
Berkmen, S. Pelin, Gaston Gelos, Robert Rennhack, James P. Walsh, 2012. The global
financial crisis: Explaining cross‐country differences in the output impact. Journal of
International Money and Finance, 31, 1, 42–59.
Bongini, P., Claessens, S., Ferri, G., 2001. The political economy of distress in East Asian
financial institutions. Journal of Financial Services Research 19 (1), 5–25.
Browning M., A. Lusardi ,1996. Household Saving: Micro Theories and Micro Facts. Journal
of Economic Literature, 34(4), 1797‐1855.
Cecchetti, Stephen, Michael King and James Yetman, 2012. Weathering the financial crisis:
policy or luck? BIS working paper #351.
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito, 2006. What matters for financial development? Capital controls,
institutions, and interactions. Journal of Development Economics 82, 163‐192.
Demirgüç‐Kunt, A., Detragiache, E., 1998. The determinants of banking crises in developing
and developed countries. IMF Staff Papers 45, 81–109.
Demirgüç‐Kunt, A., Detragiache, E., 2005. "Cross‐Country Empirical Studies of Systemic Bank
Distress: A Survey. IMF Working Papers 05/96.
Duttagupta, Rupa and Cashin, Paul, (2011), Anatomy of banking crises in developing and
emerging market countries, Journal of International Money and Finance, 30(2), p. 354‐376.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1996. Why are Latin America’s savings rates so low? An international
comparative analysis. Journal of Development Economics, 51, 5‐44.
Glick, R., Hutchison, M., 2001. Banking and currency crises: how common are twins?. In:
Glick, R., Moreno, R., Spiegel, M. (Eds.), Financial Crises in Emerging Markets. Cambridge UP,
Cambridge, UK.
Glick, R., X. Guo and M. Hutchison, 2006. Currency Crises, Capital Account Liberalization, and
Selection Bias. Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4): 698‐714.
Greene, William, 2012. LIMDEP Version 10 Econometric Modeling Guide. Econometric
Software, Inc.
Hellmann, F. Thomas, Kevin C. Murdock and Joseph E. Stiglitz (2000) “Liberalization, Moral
Hazard in Banking, and Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?” American
Economic Review 90, 1: 147‐165.
Horioka, Charles Yuji, Junmin Wan, 2007. The Determinants of Household Saving in China: A
Dynamic Panel Analysis of Provincial Data. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39(8),
2077‐2096.
22

Hutchison, Michael, Noy, Ilan, 2005. How Bad Are Twins? Output Costs of Currency and
Banking Crises. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 37(4), 725‐752.
Hutchison, Michael, Noy, Ilan and Wang, Lidan, 2010. Fiscal and Monetary Policies and the
Cost of Sudden Stops. Journal of International Money and Finance, 29, 973‐987.
Iltzeki, Ethoan, Carmen, Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2011. The Country Chronologies and
Background Material to Exchange Rate Arrangements in the 21st Century: Which Anchor
Will Hold?, manuscript.
Joyce, Joseph, 2011. "Financial Globalization and Banking Crises in Emerging Markets", Open
Economies Review, vol. 22 no. 5.
Kaminsky, G., Reinhart, C., 1999. The twin crises: the causes of banking and balance‐of‐
payments problems. American Economic Review 89 (3), 473–500.
Laeven, Luc A. and Valencia, Fabian V., (2012). Systemic Banking Crises Database: An
Update. IMF working paper 12/163.
Levhari, D. and T. N. Srinivasan, 1969. Optimal Savings Under Uncertainty. Review of
Economic Studies 36(2), pp. 153‐163.
Loayza, Norman, Klaus Schmidt‐Hebbel, Luis Servén, 2000. What Drives Private Saving
Across the World? Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(2), 165‐181.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and S. Nagel, 2011. Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences
Affect Risk‐Taking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 373‐416.
Malmendier, Ulrike, G. Tate and J. Yan, 2011. Overconfidence and Early‐life Experiences: The
Effect of Managerial Traits on Corporate Financial Policies. Journal of Finance, 66(5).
Mason, Andrew, And Tomoko Kinugasa, 2007. Why Countries Become Wealthy: The Effects
of Adult Longevity on Saving. World Development 35(1), 1–23.
Masson, Paul R., Tamim Bayoumi and Hossein Samiei, 1998. International evidence on the
determinants of private saving. World Bank Economic Review, 12(3), 483‐501.
Mitra, Devashish (1999) “Endogenous Lobby Formation and Endogenous Protection: A Long‐
Run Model of Trade Policy Determination” American Economic Review. 89, 5: 1116‐1134.
Mody, Ashoka, Franziska Ohnsorge, Damiano Sandri, 2012. Precautionary Savings in the
Great Recession. IMF Economic Review 60(1), 114‐138.
Noy, I., 2004. Financial Liberalization, Prudential Supervision and the Onset of Banking Crises
‐ Empirical Findings.” Emerging Markets Review 5(3), 341‐359.
Perotti C. Enrico and Kathryn E. Spier (1993) “Capital Structure as a Bargaining Tool: The
Role of Leverage in Contract Renegotiation,” American Economic Review, 83, 5: 1131‐1141.
23

Sandmo, A., 1970. The Effect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions. Review of Economic
Studies, 37(3), 353‐360.
Serwa, Dobromił, 2010. Larger crises cost more: Impact of banking sector instability on
output growth. Journal of International Money and Finance, 29, 8, 1463–1481.
Schaeck, Klaus & Martin Cihak & Simon Wolfe, 2009. "Are Competitive Banking Systems
More Stable?" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 41(4), 711‐734.
Schrooten, Mechthild and Sabine Stephan, 2005. Private savings and transition: Dynamic
panel data evidence from accession Countries. Economics of Transition, 13 (2), 287–309.
von Hagen, Jürgen & Tai‐Kuang Ho, 2007. "Money Market Pressure and the Determinants of
Banking Crises," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39(5), 1037‐1066.
Yeyati, Eduardo Levy & Micco, Alejandro, 2007. "Concentration and foreign penetration in
Latin American banking sectors: Impact on competition and risk," Journal of Banking and
Finance, 31(6), 1633‐1647.

24

Figure 1 – EIC Index for High Income Countries (2005)
Germany
Singapore
France
Italy
Austria
Greece
Japan
Netherlands
Belgium
New Zealand
United States
Iceland
United Kingdom
Spain
Denmark
Norway
Australia
Switzerland
Portugal
Sweden
Canada
Finland
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

25

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

Figure 2 – Saving/EIC for High Income Countries
60
50

Saving Rate

40
30
20
10
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

EIC Index

26

2

2.5

3

Figure 3 – EIC Index for Middle Income Countries (2005)
Russian Federation
Venezuela, RB
Argentina
Uruguay
Peru
Chile
Indonesia
South Africa
Turkey
Philippines
China
Brazil
Mexico
Korea, Rep.
Malaysia
Sri Lanka
India
Egypt, Arab Rep.
0

0.5

1

1.5

27

2

2.5

3

Figure 4 – Saving/EIC for Middle Income Countries
50
45
40

Saving rate

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

EIC index

28

2

2.5

3

Table 1 – Descriptive Statistics for Panel Dataset
Explanatory Variables

GFC Sample

High Income

Middle Income

0.049
0.029
0.028
(0.217)
(0.167)
(0.166)
[486]
[806]
[1943]
0.296
0.156
0.200
(0.457)
(0.363)
Banking crises history
(0.4)
[1943]
[806]
[486]
0.124
0.035
0.041
(0.329)
(0.183)
Currency crises history
(0.199)
[1943]
[806]
[486]
0.150
0.092
0.086
Duration of banking crises
(0.358)
(0.289)
(0.281)
[486]
[806]
[1943]
0.582
0.883
0.346
Credit (share of GDP)
(0.515)
(0.429)
(0.232)
[252]
[700]
[1525]
3379.760
22924.200
7071.960
(2290.99)
(7941.38)
GDP per capita (in constant $)
(10682.5)
[1943]
[806]
[467]
2.269
1.753
1.488
(5.776)
(3.102)
Real GDP per capita growth rate
(4.463)
[1921]
[803]
[470]
0.492
1.816
‐0.093
Capital account openness
(1.644)
(1.046)
(1.462)
[467]
[714]
[1767]
1.994
2.184
2.360
Exchange rate regime (de facto)
(1.069)
(1.117)
(1.361)
[473]
[783]
[1769]
0.004
0.015
0.087
Hyperinflation (binary)
(0.064)
(0.121)
(0.282)
[486]
[806]
[1943]
0.441
1.037
0.664
(0.260)
(0.451)
Credit (share of GDP)
(0.530)
[1536]
[701]
[250]
Note: The table includes the means, the (standard deviations), and the [number of observations].
Banking crises onset

29

Table 2 – Banking crises, Regression Results for Panel Model
Explanatory Variables

Banking crises history

High Income
No Fixed
Fixed
Effects
Effects
2.909
279.77
(7.93)***
(0.01)

Currency crises history
Exchange rate regime (t‐1)

Middle Income
No Fixed
Fixed
Effects
Effects
1.053
12.432
(6.96)***
(0.00)

GFC
No Fixed
Effects
4.323
(5.87)***

0.499
(2.39)**

0.643
(1.69)*

‐0.537
(‐7.83)***

‐0.204
(‐1.43)

‐1.873
(‐4.71)***

GDP per capita (t‐1)

‐0.000
(‐5.79)***

0.001
(0.00)

‐0.000
(‐4.19)***

‐0.001
(‐3.05)***

0.000
(1.54)

GDP per c growth rate (t‐1)

‐0.260
(‐4.33)***

‐6.00
(0.00)

‐0.062
(‐3.83)***

0.022
(0.55)

‐0.068
(‐1.03)

0.721
(2.47)**

0.657
(1.23)

Hyperinflation (binary) (t‐1)
‐0.106
(‐0.40)

404.363
(0.01)

‐1.856
(‐5.57)***

8.825
(4.29)***

‐0.775
(‐0.79)

Credit growth (t‐1)

0.666
(0.42)

215.188
(0.00)

8.860
(4.55)***

20.904
(4.66)***

8.169
(1.67)*

Capital account openness (t‐1)

0.183
(1.36)

‐16.687
(0.00)

‐0.054
(‐0.96)

‐0.504
(‐3.25)***

‐0.003
(‐0.24)

Credit (t‐1)

Psuedo R2
0.41
0.29
0.71
Observations
597
597
1274
1274
224
Note: The dependent (LHS) variable is a binary indicator denoting the onset of a banking crisis (0=no
crisis). All columns were estimated with a Probit specification with the onset variable, country‐year
observations which were the continuation of an already noted crisis onset were excluded. Both
models, including and excluding the fixed effects, were estimated in LIMDEP. The t‐stats are denoted
in parentheses with the standard statistical significance indicated at the 10, 5, and 1% levels by *, **,
and ***, respectively.

30

Table 3 – Descriptive Statistics for Depth of Crisis Variables
Mean

Standard
Deviation

Cases

Fiscal cost (% of GDP)

12.222

13.255

85

Non‐performing loans (NPL)
(% of assets in banking sector)

28.629

21.497

104

GDP loss (relative to trend, in %)

30.113

33.709

124

Fiscal cost
1.000

NPL
0.333
1.000

GDP loss
0.379
‐0.066
1.000

Explanatory Variables

Correlations
Fiscal cost
NPL
GDP loss

31

Table 4 – Descriptive Statistics for Cross‐section Dataset
Explanatory Variables

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Cases

Banking crisis history

0.199

0.400

136

Monetary expansion

1.951

7.057

114

IMF program

0.382

0.488

136

Credit boom

0.350

0.479

120

GDP growth (t‐1)

0.247

5.236

108

Exchange rate regime (t‐1)

2.590

1.630

122

‐3.740

10.085

124

171.201

915.631

114

‐0.026

1.561

121

Current account balance (% of GDP) (t‐1)
Inflation rate (t‐1)
Capital account openness (t‐1)

32

Table 5 – Banking Crises depth, Regression Results for Cross‐section Model
Explanatory Variables

Full Sample

GFC Sample

18.324
(3.57)***
‐0.275
(‐0.50)
10.076
(2.47)***
0.859
(‐0.21)
‐1.436
(‐2.21)**
1.042
(0.61)

22.185
(2.46)**
0.502
(0.54)
5.103
(0.62)
0.760
(0.09)
‐4.160
(‐3.35)***
‐0.120
(‐0.04)

7.180
(1.45)
‐0.078
(‐0.19)
9.771
(2.55)**
3.376
(0.85)
‐0.557
(‐0.89)
0.268
(0.16)

32.791
(2.02)*
‐0.817
(‐0.74)
‐0.365
(‐0.05)
‐2.546
(‐0.42)
0.722
(0.23)
5.60
(1.18)

2.264
(0.07)
‐1.560
(‐0.66)
15.024
(1.09)
14.931
(1.18)
‐5.316
(‐0.82)
1.404
(0.14)

10.672
(0.64)
0.064
(0.05)
13.482
(1.92)*
8.416
(1.30)
‐3.038
(‐0.92)
1.803
(0.35)

Current account balance
(t‐1)

‐0.276
(‐0.91)

0.056
(0.09)

0.057
(0.22)

‐0.802
(‐1.69)

‐0.420
(‐0.45)

0.244
(0.52)

Inflation (t‐1)

‐0.001
(‐0.75)

0.005
(1.16)

‐0.004
(‐0.67)

‐1.373
(‐1.71)

‐0.140
(‐0.09)

‐1.045
(‐1.29)

‐3.958
(‐2.70)***

3.127
(1.18)

‐0.090
(‐0.07)

‐8.805
(‐2.47)**

13.660
(1.88)*

‐2.360
(‐0.64)

62
NPL
0.409
0.319

70
LOSS
0.196
0.091

55
FISGDP
0.221
0.086

20
NPL
0.685
0.456

21
LOSS
0.655
0.426

21
FISGDP
0.515
0.191

Constant
Monetary expansion
IMF
Credit boom (t‐1)
GDP growth (t‐1)
Exchange rate regime (t‐1)

Capital account openness
(t‐1)
Observations
Left hand side

*p<0.10, **<0.05, ***p<0.01
Note: The dependent (LHS) variable is banking crises depth: NPL ‐ columns (1) and (4); Output loss ‐
columns (2) and (5); Fiscal cost ‐ columns (3) and (6). Since the LHS variables are continuous, this cross‐
sectional model was estimated with a Least Squares specification. Columns (4)‐(6) include only the crises
of the Global Financial Crisis (post 2007), while columns (1)‐(3) include the complete sample including all
crises for which the required information was available. The t‐stats are denoted in parentheses with the
standard statistical significance indicated at the 10, 5, and 1% levels by *, **, and ***, respectively.

33

Table 6 – Regression Results for Saving Rates
Developed
Countries
FE

Constant

Developed
Countries
OLS
‐12.866
(‐1.57)

EIC index

3.438
(2.31)**

0.201
(0.27)

Explanatory
Variables

Developing Developing Developing Developing
Countries
Countries
Countries
Countries
OLS
FE
OLS
FE
‐17.273
‐42.836
(‐2.36)**
(‐3.12)***
‐0.591
(‐0.46)

‐5.522
(‐4.79)***

EIC index * Pol. risk
Real interest rate
GDP growth
Labor force part.
Political risk

12.806
(2.04)**

0.035
(0.01)

0.232
(‐2.17)**

0.097
(‐1.95)*

‐0.281
(‐1.60)

‐0.260
(‐4.52)***

‐0.215
(‐3.79)***

‐0.122
(‐5.37)***

‐0.205
(‐3.71)***

‐0.116
(‐5.18)***

1.865
(5.36)***

0.264
(1.58)

0.875
(2.69)***

0.069
(0.44)

0.868
(2.74)***

0.092
(0.59)

0.038
(0.40)

0.158
(1.33)

0.439
(3.55)***

1.006
(3.94)***

0.452
(3.76)***

1.123
(4.48)***

‐0.308
(3.49)***

0.002
(‐0.04)

‐0.232
(3.5)***

0.066
(‐1.89)*

‐0.667
(3.17)***

‐0.116
(1.19)

Observations
Left hand side

100
100
69
69
69
69
SAVDGDP
SAVDGDP SAVDGDP
SAVDGDP
SAVDGDP
SAVDGDP
0.385
0.938
0.528
0.926
0.561
0.930
0.352
0.917
0.490
0.893
0.519
0.896
*p<0.10, **<0.05, ***p<0.01
Note: The dependent (LHS) variable is the saving rate (% of GDP). Since the LHS variable is continuous,
this panel model was estimated with a least squares specification with or without fixed effects. Details on
the panel’s structure, and in particular on the construction of the independent variables, are available in
section 4. Columns (1)‐(2) include the high‐income country sample, while columns (3)‐(6) include all the
non‐high‐income countries for which the required data was available (the limited number of middle‐ and
low‐income countries is due to the scarcity of national income data going back to 1900). The t‐stats are
denoted in parentheses with the standard statistical significance indicated at the 10, 5, and 1% levels by
*, **, and ***, respectively.

34

Appendix of Data Sources
Explanatory Variables

Data Source

Banking crises onset
Banking crises history
Currency crises history
Duration of banking crises
Fiscal cost (% of GDP)
Non‐performing loans (NPL) (% of assets in banking sector)
GDP loss (relative to trend, in %)
Monetary expansion
Credit boom (t‐1)
IMF program
Credit (share of GDP)
GDP per capita (in constant $)
Real GDP per capita growth rate
Current account balance
Capital account openness
Exchange rate regime (de facto)
Hyperinflation (binary)
EIC index
Real interest rate
GDP growth
Labor force part.
Political risk

Laeven and Valencia (2012)
Laeven and Valencia (2012)
Laeven and Valencia (2012)
Laeven and Valencia (2012)
Laeven and Valencia (2012)
Laeven and Valencia (2012)
Laeven and Valencia (2012)
Laeven and Valencia (2012)
Laeven and Valencia (2012)
imf.org
Beck and Demirgüç‐Kunt (2009)
World Development Indicators
World Development Indicators
World Development Indicators
Chinn and Ito (2006)
Iltzeki et al. (2011)
World Development Indicators
Barro and Ursua (2011) and WDI
World Development Indicators
World Development Indicators
World Development Indicators
International Country Risk Guides

Definition of systemic banking crises (from Laeven and Valencia, 2012)
A banking crisis is defined as systemic if two conditions are met:
1) Significant signs of financial distress in the banking system (as indicated by significant
bank runs, losses in the banking system, and/or bank liquidations)
2) Significant banking policy intervention measures in response to significant losses in the
banking system.
Possible policy interventions in the banking sector:
1) extensive liquidity support
2) bank restructuring
3) significant bank nationalizations
4) significant guarantees put in place
5) significant asset purchases (at least 5 percent of GDP)
6) deposit freezes and/or bank holidays.
The first year that both criteria are met is defined to be the year when the systemic crisis
started. The observations for the following years in which the banking crisis is still
continuing (according to the Laeven and Valencia, 2012, dataset) are removed from the
panel sample. The end of a crisis is defined as “the year before both real GDP growth and
real credit growth are positive for at least two consecutive years.”

35

