                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WORKPLACE HETEROGENEITY AND THE RISE OF WEST GERMAN WAGE
                            INEQUALITY

                                             David Card
                                            Jörg Heining
                                            Patrick Kline

                                        Working Paper 18522
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18522


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




We are grateful to the IAB and to Stefan Bender for assistance in making this project possible, to Karl
Schmidt, Robert Jentsch, Cerstin Erler, and Ali Athmani for invaluable programming help, and to
the Berkeley Center for Equitable Growth for funding support. We also thank Christian Dustmann,
Bernd Fitzenberger, and seminar participants at EUI Florence, Yale, and the NBER Labor Studies
meetings for many helpful comments and suggestions. Robert Heimbach, Hedvig Horvath, and Michele
Weynandt provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by David Card, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West German Wage Inequality
David Card, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline
NBER Working Paper No. 18522
November 2012
JEL No. J01,J3,J4

                                             ABSTRACT

We study the role of establishment-specific wage premiums in generating recent increases in West
German wage inequality. Models with additive fixed effects for workers and establishments are fit
in four distinct time intervals spanning the period 1985-2009. Unlike standard wage models, specifications
with both worker and plant-level heterogeneity components can explain the vast majority of the rise
in wage inequality. Our estimates suggest that the increasing variability of West German wages results
from a combination of rising heterogeneity between workers, rising variability in the wage premiums
at different establishments, and increasing assortativeness in the matching of workers to plants. We
use the models to decompose changes in wage gaps between different education levels, occupations,
and industries, and in all three cases find a growing contribution of plant heterogeneity and rising
assortativeness between workers and establishments.


David Card                                          Patrick Kline
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880                               UC, Berkeley
University of California, Berkeley                  508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                             Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                            and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu                              pkline@econ.berkeley.edu

Jörg Heining
Institute for Employment Research (IAB)
Joerg.Heining@iab.de
1       Introduction
Many of the world’s developed economies have experienced dramatic increases in wage in-
equality in recent decades (see Katz and Autor, 1999; and Acemoglu and Autor, 2011 for
detailed reviews). While the timing varies from country to country, in each case there was
a widening of wage di¤erentials between observable skill groups (e.g., age and education
groups), coupled with a rise in within-group inequality. The standard framework for ana-
lyzing these changes focuses on shifts in supply and demand for di¤erent skill groups (e.g.,
Katz and Murphy, 1992; Bound and Johnson, 1992; Juhn, Murphy and Pierce, 1993; Goldin
and Katz, 2008), mediated by institutional factors like minimum wages and unions (e.g.,
DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 1996). Using a variety of data sources, researchers have
concluded that supply, demand, and institutions have all contributed to trends in wage in-
equality, albeit with di¤erent magnitudes in di¤erent countries and time periods (Freeman
and Katz, 1994; Katz and Autor, 1999).
    Although most studies focus on the causes of rising wage inequality between workers with
di¤erent skills, economists have long recognized that employer heterogeneity may generate
wage variation among workers with identical skills, even within narrowly de…ned economic
sectors (Slichter, 1950; Reynolds, 1951; Lester, 1967; Rees and Schultz, 1970). There are
large di¤erences in productivity across …rms and plants (Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, Kortum,
2003; Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007; Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson, 2008; Hseih and
Klenow, 2009). Modern search-theoretic models with realistic frictions suggest that such
di¤erences will lead to an employer-speci…c component of wage inequality among otherwise
identical workers (see e.g., Lentz and Mortensen, 2010). Likewise, an earlier generation
of studies argued that employers can o¤er e¢ ciency wages to reduce shirking and boost
morale (Akerlof, 1982; Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984; Krueger and Summers, 1988; Katz and
Summers, 1989). And, in a tradition dating back to Adam Smith, economists have argued
that workplace-speci…c disamenities like longer hours or more strenuous e¤ort will lead to
compensating wage di¤erences across jobs (e.g., Brown, 1980).
    The magnitude of this workplace component of wage inequality is explored in a number
of recent papers that utilize matched employer-employee datasets (Abowd, Kramarz, and
Margolis, 1999; Goux and Maurin, 1999; Abowd, Creecy, and Kramarz, 2002; Gruetter and
Lalive, 2009).1 Virtually all these studies …nd a signi…cant employer-speci…c wage compo-
nent. To date, however, little evidence exists on whether this component has become larger
over time, and if so whether such changes can explain some of the trend in cross-sectional
    1
    An earlier generation of studies (e.g., Davis and Haltiwanger, 1991; Groshen, 1991; Bernard and Jensen,
1995) documented substantial between-plant variation in wages but was unable to deal fully with nonrandom
assignment of workers to …rms.


                                                    2
wage inequality.2
    A priori, workplace heterogeneity could have become more or less important in recent
decades. On one hand, increases in product market competition, coupled with institutional
reforms, rising labor market intermediation (Autor, 2009) and reductions in the cost of in-
formation might be expected to reduce workplace-speci…c pay components and push labor
markets closer to obeying the law of one price. On the other hand, the rise of …rm-speci…c
policies like pay-for-performance (Lemieux, MacLeod, and Parent, 2009), outsourcing (Abra-
ham and Taylor, 1996; Dube and Kaplan, 2010), and the use of temporary workers (Segal
and Sullivan, 1997), as well as rising complementarities between highly skilled workers (Kre-
mer and Maskin, 1996) might lead to an increase in plant-level variation in wage outcomes.
In addition, uneven rates of adoption of the technological innovations that have driven shifts
in relative demand for di¤erent skill groups (e.g. Autor, Levy, and Murnane, 2002, 2003;
Acemoglu et al., 2007; Acemoglu and Autor, 2011), could also lead to a rise in the employer
component of wage inequality.
    We contribute to the literature by studying the changing role of workplace heterogeneity
in wage determination using detailed administrative data from West Germany over the period
from 1985 to 2009. Several factors make the West German case particularly informative.
First, as documented by Dustmann et al. (2009), West Germany experienced large increases
in wage inequality from the mid-1990s onward.3 Figure 1a shows the evolution of various
real wage percentiles for full time male workers, indexed to a base of 1996.4 In the 13-year
period from 1996 to 2009, the gap between the 20th and 80th percentiles of wages expanded
by approximately 20 log points. By comparison, as shown in Figure 1b, the burst of wage
inequality in the U.S. during the 1980s led to a 15 log point rise in the 80-20 gap in male
hourly wages.5 Interestingly, the recent rise in German inequality arose through a roughly
symmetric widening of the upper and lower tails of the wage distribution, whereas in the
U.S. the inequality growth was muted in the lower tail, perhaps re‡ecting the impact of the
minimum wage (Lee, 1999).
   2
     Barth et al. (2011) …nd that between plant inequality has grown over time in the U.S. but are unable
to fully account for changes in the pattern of sorting of workers to …rms due to limitations in their data.
Cardoso (1997, 1999) provides evidence that between plant wage variation grew in Portugal but is again
unable to fully account for selection of workers into …rms based upon unobservables. Skans et al. (2009)
provide similar between-plant evidence for Sweden.
   3
     Dustmann et al. (2009) also present data for earlier periods and show that, as suggested in Figure 1a,
there was a general trend to toward rising inequality even prior to the mid-1990s.
   4
     The data underlying this …gure are described in detail in Section 3, below.
   5
     The data in Figure 1b are based on real hourly wage percentiles for men compiled from the outgoing
rotation group …les of the Current Population Survey by the Economic Policy Institute (EPI, 2009). Other
wage series for the U.S., such as wages of full-time full-year male workers, show a somewhat larger rise in
U.S. male wage inequality in the 1980s: see Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008).



                                                    3
    A second key feature of the West German case is the availability of high quality adminis-
trative data derived from the German Social Security system. These data include spell-level
information on average daily wages, education, and occupation. Crucial for our purposes,
the data have been collected on a consistent basis for a relatively long period, including
several years prior to the most recent surge in inequality.6
    Third, Germany provides an interesting setting for analyzing the evolution of …rm-speci…c
heterogeneity and wage-setting more generally. In the past three decades Germany experi-
enced reuni…cation and the aftermath of the fall of communism, undertook multiple labor
market reforms, witnessed a sharp decline in collective bargaining coverage, and emerged
from a long period of under-performance (e.g., Siebert, 1997) to become one of the most
successful economies in the OECD.7 There is widespread interest in the source of this recent
success, and the lessons it may hold for other countries (e.g., Burda and Hunt, 2011).
    To study the changing role of workplace heterogeneity we divide our 25-year sample
period into four (overlapping) intervals: a period of relative stability from 1985 to 1991;
a transitional period following reuni…cation (1990-1996); a period spanning the wave of
reforms initiated in the mid-1990s (1996-2002); and a period covering the most recent decade
(2002-2009). In each interval, we …t linear wage models that include additive person and
establishment …xed e¤ects as in Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (AKM, 1999). We then
compare the estimates across intervals to assess changes in the structure of wages. By …tting
separate models in each relatively short interval we can allow for longer-run changes in the
earnings characteristics of individual workers and …rms caused by changes in technology,
innovations in workplace practices, or other factors.
    In an initial methodological contribution we present new diagnostic evidence on the
quality of the approximation to the wage structure provided by AKM’s additive worker and
…rm e¤ects model. We …nd that, in contrast to conventional wage models, the AKM model
explains roughly 90% of the rise in wage inequality over our sample period. We also …nd
that the separability assumptions of the AKM model are nearly (but not perfectly) met
in the data. For comparison we …t generalized models that include separate …xed e¤ects
for each job (i.e., worker-establishment match) and show that these models provide only a
small improvement in explanatory power relative to the AKM speci…cation. Moreover, the
di¤erence in residual variance between the match model and the AKM model increases only
slightly over time. Thus, a fully unrestricted match model provides almost no additional
explanatory power for understanding the rise in wage inequality. We also conduct a series of
   6
     By contrast, in the U.S., high quality employer-employee data is only available beginning in the 1990s,
the geographic coverage is incomplete, and administrative education records are not available.
   7
     For overviews of recent changes in the German labor market see Eichhorst and Marx (2009), Burda and
Hunt (2011), and Eichhorst (2012).


                                                     4
checks for patterns of endogenous mobility that could lead to systematic bias in the AKM
speci…cation and …nd little evidence of such biases.
    Our primary substantive contribution is a simple decomposition of the sources of rising
wage inequality in West Germany. We …nd that the increase is attributable to increases in
the variability of both the person-component of pay (capturing di¤erences in ability, training,
motivation, etc.) and the establishment-level component of pay, coupled with a rise in the
assortativeness of the job-matching process that magni…es their joint e¤ect.8 In the earliest
years of our sample the correlation between the worker- and establishment-level components
is close to zero. By the …nal years, however, the correlation is roughly 0.25, and is clearly
discernible in simple plots of their joint distribution. Overall, the rise in the variance of
the person component of pay constitutes about 40% of the rise in the variance of wages,
the rise in the establishment component constitutes around 25%, and their rising covariance
constitutes about a third.
    We go on to use our estimated models to decompose the changes in between-group in-
equality across di¤erent education, occupation, and industry groups. We …nd that nearly all
of the increase in the conventional return to schooling over our sample period is attributable
to changes in the association between education and establishment quality. Better-educated
workers in West Germany are increasingly concentrated at high-wage establishments, while
less-educated workers are increasingly concentrated at low-wage establishments. We …nd
that rising assortativeness between workers and establishments also explains an important
share (around 40%) of the growth in inequality across occupations and industries.
    Given the increasing variability in establishment-based pay premiums, we then brie‡y ex-
amine some of the proximate channels for this rising dispersion. Stratifying establishments
by their “birth”year, we …nd a trend toward increasing heterogeneity among establishments
entering after the mid-1990s, coupled with relatively small changes in the variability of the
premiums paid by continuing establishments. The trend in inequality among newer estab-
lishments is linked to collective bargaining status: an increasing share of new establishments
are outside the traditional sectoral contracting system, and pay relatively low wages. We also
examine the correlation between pay policies and establishment and job survival. We …nd
that establishments with higher wage premiums are more likely to survive than those with
lower wage premiums, consistent with a rent-based explanation for these premiums. Job sur-
vival rates are also higher at higher-paying establishments, ruling out a simple compensating
di¤erentials explanation for the wage premiums.
   8
    Recent contributions by Andersson et al. (2012) and Bagger, Sorensen, and Vejlin (2012) also document
increases in assortative matching between workers and employers. Those studies use related statistical
methods but assume that person and establishment e¤ects are stationary over the entire sample period.
They also study settings where the rise in cross sectional inequality is relatively modest.


                                                   5
    Our results suggest that a rising share of wage inequality is attributable to variation in
the job opportunities available to a given worker, and that both observed and unobserved
dimensions of worker skill are increasingly associated with establishment-speci…c pay premi-
ums. These …ndings raise a number of questions regarding the determinants of the aggregate
composition of o¤ered jobs and the process by which workers are matched with employers.
We conclude with a brief discussion of the implications of our …ndings for the wage inequality
literature and directions for future research.


2         Background - Macro Trends and Institutional Changes
Some of the key events that have a¤ected the West German labor market since the early
1980s are summarized in Figure 2, which also shows the evolution of the unemployment
rate. A decisive turning point was the reuni…cation of East and West Germany, which
culminated with economic integration in June 1990 and full political integration several
months later. Reuni…cation and the end of communism in eastern Europe a¤ected the West
German labor market in many ways. One channel was migration: approximately 1.7 million
former residents of East Germany (about 10 percent of the population) moved to the west
(see Burda, 1993 and Wol¤, 2009). An even larger in‡ow (approximately 2.8 million people)
of ethnic Germans arrived from Russia and other former East Bloc countries between 1988
and 2000.9 These new migrants –many of whom lacked modern training and language skills
–arguably contributed to the rise in unemployment in the 1990s (Glitz, 2012).
    More subtly, the decision to impose West German wage scales on the far less productive
east led to rising pressures on the sectoral bargaining system. Traditionally, most West
German …rms accepted the provisions of the major sectoral agreements negotiated between
employer associations and large unions. Unlike Italy or Spain, however, German law does
not require …rms to follow these centralized agreements (see Ochel, 2003 for an informative
overview). Instead, employers can leave the employer association (or refrain from joining in
the …rst place) and either negotiate a workplace-speci…c agreement or opt out of collective
bargaining altogether.
    As many observers have noted, the fraction of employees covered by sectoral agreements
has fallen since the early 1990s (e.g., Dustmann et al., 2009). The dashed line in Figure
2 shows the fraction of West German workers whose wages are set outside the sectoral
agreement system, estimated from information collected by the Institute for Employment
Research (IAB) from a large panel of establishments (Kohaut and Ellguth, 2008; Ellguth,
Gerner, and Stegmaier, 2012). This fraction has risen from 27% in 1995 (with 10% of
    9
        See Bauer and Zimmerman (1999).


                                              6
workers in enterprise-level agreements and 17% with no agreement) to 44% in 2007 (with
7% of workers in enterprise-level agreements and 37% with no agreement).10
    A second and related phenomenon is the adoption of “opt-out” or “opening” clauses by
…rms that have remained part of the sector-level agreement (e.g., Hassel and Rehder, 2001;
Heinbach, 2006). These clauses allow employers – or individual plants of a large …rm – to
depart from the agreement, typically in response to the threat of plant closure or job loss.11
A study by Hassel and Rehder (2001) suggests that about one-half of the top 120 …rms in
Germany had signed opening clauses by 2000, and that about 43% of their employees were
covered by these pacts.12
    By the mid-1990s the unemployment rate in Germany had risen to nearly 10 percent, and
intensifying pressure for labor market reform led to the passage of the Labor Law Act for
Promotion of Employment in October 1996. This law extended the maximum duration of
…xed-term contracts from 1 to 2 years, raised the establishment size threshold for dismissal
protection from 5 to 10 employees, and reduced the replacement rate for sick leave pay from
100% to 80%. The trend toward liberalization was partially reversed after the election of
1998. So-called “marginal jobs”(part-time jobs with low earnings) that had previously been
excluded from coverage by Social Security taxes were brought into the tax system in 1999.13
With the recession in 2001, however, pressures for reform returned, ultimately leading to
adoption of the Hartz reforms in 2003-2005. These included major revisions to the bene…t
program for those who have exhausted regular unemployment bene…ts (see e.g., Jacobi and
Kluve, 2006), including a subsidy for taking low-wage jobs. In addition, the employee share
of Social Security taxes for part-time jobs (so-called “mini-jobs”) was eliminated, providing
further impetus for the expansion of part-time/low wage jobs.
    A …nal institutional change documented in Figure 2 is the adoption of a minimum wage
for construction workers in November 1996. The impetus for this law – the …rst legally-
imposed minimum wage in Germany – was the rising presence of immigrant workers who
  10
     As discussed by Fitzenberger et al. (2012), not all workers in a given establishment necessarily have
the same contractual coverage status. For example, managers and temporary workers (who are included in
our data set) are exempt. The coverage rate shown in Figure 2 assigns a single establishment status to all
employees and should be interpreted carefully.
  11
     For example, the 1993 sectoral agreement in metal working provided for an opening clause (or hardship
clause) for plants in East Germany. As of the mid-1990s, the East German metalworking employer association
estimated that 60% of plants were making use of the clause (EIRO, 1997a). The 1997 sectoral agreement
in the chemical industry in West Germany allowed for plant-speci…c opening clauses cutting wages by up to
10% to save jobs (EIRO, 1997b).
  12
     Many …rms that recognize the sectoral contract also pay a wage premium above the sectoral minimum
(see Jung and Schnabel, 2009). We are not aware of any research that shows whether this so-called “wage
cushion” component has become more or less variable over time.
  13
     The …rm size threshold for dismissal protection was also raised back to 10 employees, and …xed term
contracts were limited to initial employment only (instead of being renewable).



                                                    7
were eligible to work in Germany but subject only to wage regulations of their home country
(see Bachman et al., 2012). The minimum was set at a relatively low level, however, and
research by Rattenhuber (2011) and Bachman et al. (2012) suggests it had little e¤ect in
West Germany (though a larger impact in the lower-wage East). More recently, minimum
wages have been introduced for employees in the cleaning industry and the temporary help
industry –see EIRO (2007, 2012).


3      Data
We use earnings information from the German Social Security system that has been assem-
bled by the Institute for Employment Research into the Integrated Employment Biographies
(IEB) data…le. Employers are required to submit a notice of employment to the Social Secu-
rity system for all employees in a calendar year, giving the starting and ending date of their
job, total earnings received (censored at the maximum taxable earnings level), the establish-
ment identi…cation number, and other data, including the employee’s education, occupation,
and trainee status, and whether the job was part-time or full time. Multiple records are
submitted for workers who change job status – e.g., from part-time to full time – or who
have interrupted employment spells during a year. Nearly all private sector employees in
Germany are subject to Social Security taxation and are included in the data base. The
major excluded groups are civil servants and the self-employed.
    We limit our attention to full-time jobs held by men age 20-60 during the period from 1985
to 2009.14 We also exclude marginal jobs (or “mini-jobs”) that are subject to reduced Social
Security contributions15 and jobs in which the employee is undergoing training. As explained
in more detail in the Data Appendix, we sum the earnings received by a given individual from
each establishment in each year and designate the one that paid the highest total amount as
the main job for that year. Most full time men work at only one establishment in any year
(the average is 1.1 per year) and there is no trend in the number of jobs held per year, so
the restriction to one job per year is unlikely to be important in explaining trends in wage
inequality. (See Appendix Table 1a). We calculate the average daily wage by dividing total
earnings by the duration of the job spell (including weekends and holidays). An individual
  14
      Our focus on full time jobs is driven by the absence of data on hours of work, although only a small
fraction of men (under 6% in most years of our sample) are employed in part time jobs. We exclude females
because a relatively high (and increasing) fraction work part-time. Anotnczyk, Fitzenberger, and Sommerfeld
(2010) show that the male-female wage gap in Germany was quite stable between 2001 and 2006, though
both groups were a¤ected by declining collective bargaining coverage and other factors. As discussed below,
inequality trends for full time female workers are not too di¤erent from those of men.
   15
      These jobs were not subject to Social Security taxation prior to 1999, so it is impossible to conduct an
analysis over our sample period that includes marginal jobs.


                                                      8
who has no full time job in a given calendar year is assigned a missing wage for that year.
    The use of administrative data allows us to sidestep the nonresponse problems that
increasingly plague survey data (Hirsch and Schumacher, 2004; Kline and Santos, 2012). It
is worth noting, however, that our sample restrictions probably lead to an understatement
of the overall level of wage inequality among West German male workers, and of the rise in
inequality for these workers.16 On the other hand, we cannot control for variation in hours of
work. Nevertheless, an analysis by Dustmann et al. (2009, Appendix Table 7) of data from
the German Socio-economic Panel (GSOEP) shows no change in the variance of hours of full
time male workers in West Germany after 1990, so we suspect that rising hours variation is
not a major source of the rise in wage inequality we document below.
    The establishment identi…cation numbers (EID’s) we use to identify workplaces are as-
signed by the Social Security system on the basis of ownership, industry, and municipality.
Two fast food outlets owned by the same company in the same city generally will be classi-
…ed as a single establishment, whereas a foundry and a fabrication plant owned by the same
company in the same municipality will be classi…ed as separate establishments. A new EID
is issued when a plant changes ownership, and can also be issued for other reasons. Thus,
the “death”of an establishment identi…er does not necessarily mean that a plant has closed,
nor does the “birth” of a new EID necessarily mean that a new plant has opened. Using
clusters of worker ‡ows between establishments, Schmeider and Hethey (2010) estimate that
only about one half of EID births and deaths in the IEB are true plant openings or closings.
    Since our primary interest is in wage determination, we believe it is appropriate to treat
an ownership change as a potential change in the workplace component of pay, even when
a plant remains open. Ownership changes may lead to new pay policies (e.g., adoption of
incentive pay) or changes in the organization of work (such as outsourcing of low-skilled
jobs) that we believe are properly interpreted as changes in the workplace component of pay.
In cases where a new EID is assigned without any change in ownership, there is no bias in
treating the “new”EID as a new establishment, only a potential loss in e¢ ciency, since the
old and new establishments can have the same impacts on wages.
    Appendix Table 1b shows some basic characteristics of our data set. We have 12-14
million workers with a wage in any year. Average real annual and daily earnings of the men
in our sample rise between 1985 and 1990, but are quite stable over the next 20 years. In
contrast, the dispersion in pay –measured by the standard deviation of daily wages –rises
dramatically.17 At the establishment level, there are about 800,000 EID’s in each year with
  16
      See below for an analysis of trends including part-time jobs. Eichhorst and Marx (2009) analyze data
from the German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP), and show that the incidence of marginal jobs rises from
about 2% of adults in the early 1990s to 5% by 2007.
   17
      Riphahn and Schnitzlein (2011) analyze data from the SIAB, a 2% sample of the IEB database, and


                                                    9
at least one full time male employee. The size distribution of establishments (measured by
the number of full time male employees) is highly skewed, but fairly stable over time, with
only a small decline in the share of large (over 350 workers) establishments. The median
establishment in any year of the sample has 2 workers, but on average a typical worker has
about 1,000 (full time male) co-workers. Appendix Figure 1 shows the size distributions in
1985, 1995, and 2008, illustrating both their extreme skew and their stability over time.
    An important limitation of our data set is the censoring of earnings at the annual Social
Security earnings maximum. Appendix Figure 2 shows the fraction of censored observations
in each year of the sample, which varies from 10 to 14 percent. To address the problem
of censoring, we follow Dustmann et al. (2009) and use a series of 500 Tobit models -
…t separately by year     education level (5 categories)    age range (4 10-year ranges) to
stochastically impute the missing upper tail of the wage distribution. Since our primary
wage determination models include person and establishment e¤ects, we impute a censored
value in a given year using information on the worker’s earnings in other years, and on his
co-workers’earnings in the same year. Speci…cally, the Tobit model for a given year includes
the worker’s earnings and censoring rate in all other years, as well as the mean earnings
and censoring rate of his co-workers in that year. (See the Data Appendix for more detail
and Appendix Table 2 for coe¢ cient estimates from several representative models). Using
the estimated parameters from these models, we replace each censored wage value with a
random draw from the upper tail of the appropriate conditional wage distribution.
    The impact of this imputation procedure is illustrated in Appendix Figure 2, which
shows the di¤erences in the estimated mean and standard deviation of log daily wages in
each year using the imputed values for the censored observations versus using the data with
no adjustment for censoring. On average the imputation raises the estimated mean log wage
by 2.7 percentage points and the estimated standard deviation by 4.5 percentage points,
with larger e¤ects in years with a higher censoring rate.
    Although we believe that this imputation procedure works reasonably well, a natural
concern is that our analysis would yield di¤erent results if we used a di¤erent technique.18
To address this concern, we present robustness checks based on the subset of workers with
apprenticeship training. This group, which includes about 60 percent of the German male
workforce, has relatively low censoring rates. Reassuringly, our main conclusions are very
similar when we use only the apprentice subsample.
reach a similar conclusion about the near constancy of mean or median real wages of full time workers (male
and female) in West Germany from 1993 onward.
   18
      Dustmann et al. (2009) present an extensive robustness analysis in which they evaluate several alterna-
tives to their basic Tobit imputation models, and conclude that they give similar results.




                                                     10
4     Overview of Trends in Wage Inequality
Figure 3a plots four measures of wage dispersion over time: the standard deviation of log
wages (including imputed wages for censored observations), the gap in log wages between
the 20th and 80th percentiles, the gap between the 50th and 80th percentiles, and the
gap between the 20th and 50th percentiles. We normalize the gap measures by dividing
by the corresponding percentile gaps for a standard normal variate.19 If log wages were
normally distributed, the three normalized gaps and the standard deviation would all be
equal. Inspection of the …gure suggests that log daily wages have fatter tails than a normal
distribution, but that the trends in the standard deviation and the normalized 80-20 gap are
very similar. In particular, the standard deviation rises by 0.15 from 1985 to 2009 whereas
the normalized 80-20 gap rises by 0.16. This similarity is reassuring because the 80-20 gap
is una¤ected by censoring. A second conclusion is that the rise in lower-tail inequality is
slightly bigger than the rise in upper-tail inequality: the normalized 80-50 gap rises by 0.15,
whereas the normalized 50-20 gap rises by 0.18. A third conclusion is that the rates of growth
in all four measures of inequality increased sometime in the mid-1990s. For example, the
standard deviation of log wages grew by 0.0023 per year from 1985 to 1996 and by 0.0096
per year from 1996 to 2009.
    While our focus throughout this paper is on full-time male workers, we have also con-
structed measures of wage inequality based on the 80-20 log wage gap for other samples of
West German workers.20 Appendix Figure 3 shows the trends in wage inequality over our
sample period for full time male workers, all male workers (except those in mini-jobs), full
time female workers, and all female workers (except those in mini jobs). Since only a small
fraction of male workers hold part time jobs (under 2% at the start of our sample, and under
7% at the end) the rise in inequality for all males is very similar to (but slightly larger than)
the rise for full time males. Wage inequality among full time female workers is higher than
among full time men and rises somewhat less over our sample period, though the general
patterns for the two groups are quite similar. The inequality in daily wages among all female
workers is even higher, re‡ecting a large and rising fraction of part time workers (23% of all
female workers in 1985, rising to 37% by 2008), but shows a smaller rise than for men (as is
  19                                          1         1
     For example, we divide the 80-20 gap by    (0:8)     (0:2) = 1:683; where (:) represents the standard
normal distribution function.
  20
     For this analysis we use the Sample of Integrated Labor Market Biographies (SIAB), a two-percent
public use sample that combines information from the IEB with other administrative data bases (Dorner
et al., 2011). We use the same procedures as for our IEB sample but do not impute wages for censored
observations. Riphahn and Schnitzlein (2011) use the SIAB data to document trends in inequality for men
and women together in West and East Germany. Their results for West Germany are very similar to ours.
They show that wage inequality in East Germany has risen somewhat faster than in the West.



                                                   11
also true in the U.S. –see Autor, Katz and Kearney, 2008).
    Starting with the seminal U.S. studies by Katz and Murphy (1992) and Bound and
Johnson (1992), analysts have noted that a large share of the recent rises in wage inequality
have occurred within conventional skill groups. This is also true in our data, as shown in
Figure 3b, which plots the same four measures used in Figure 3a, but applied to the residuals
from a standard human capital earnings function (with dummies for education levels and
a cubic experience term) …t separately by year. Residual inequality rises somewhat less
than overall wage inequality (e.g., the standard deviation of residual wages increases by
0.13 from 1985 to 2009, about 4=5ths of the rise in overall inequality), but exhibits the
same acceleration in trend in the mid-1990s. Interestingly, residual inequality is nearly
symmetric, suggesting that the increasing skew in overall wage inequality is largely explained
by increasing returns to education and experience.


Explaining the Rise in Residual Wage Inequality
Several recent studies have suggested that part of the rise in U.S. wage inequality is attribut-
able to a rise in the variation in wages across geographic areas (Moretti, 2012) occupations
(e.g., Autor, Levy and Murnane, 2003; Autor, Katz and Kearney, 2008) or industries (Autor,
Katz, and Krueger, 1998; Bernard and Jensen, 1995). Figure 4 summarizes the contributions
of these factors to the rise in West German wage inequality. The top line in the …gure shows
the trend in the standard deviation of residual wage inequality, adjusting for education and
experience as in Figure 3b. The other lines show the trends in residual standard deviation,
adding controls (with separate coe¢ cients in each year) for Federal State (10 dummies), in-
dustry ( 300 dummies), occupation ( 340 dummies), and industry occupation ( 28,000
dummies). While industry and occupation controls clearly add to the explanatory power of a
standard wage equation, they have only a modest impact on the trend in residual inequality.21
We return in Section 6, below, to examine in further detail the trends in between-occupation
and between-industry inequality in light of our econometric decomposition of wage inequality
into person and establishment e¤ects.
    In contrast to the limited e¤ect of industry and occupation controls, the bottom line in
Figure 4 shows that adding dummies for each establishment (with year-speci…c coe¢ cients)
has a sizeable impact on the trend in inequality. Within-plant inequality, as measured by the
root mean squared error (RMSE) of the regression model rises by only 0.05 between 1985
and 2009, compared to the 0.13 rise in the RMSE of the baseline model that controls for
  21
    A basic human capital model (dummies for education and cubic in experience) has an R2 coe¢ cient of
about 0.35. Adding industry or occupation controls raises the R2 to about 0.50. Adding the interaction of
occupation and industry raises it to about 0.60.


                                                   12
education and experience.
    Although this contrast suggests that workplace heterogeneity may play some role in
explaining the rise in German wage inequality, we emphasize that these wage models do not
control for unobserved worker abilities. The rise in the explanatory power of the workplace
e¤ects may simply capture the non-random sorting of workers to establishments. Speci…cally,
even if all workers receive the same wage regardless of where they work, one could still observe
signi…cant and increasingly important workplace e¤ects if workers at the same establishment
have similar unobserved abilities, and if the returns to these abilities are rising over time, or
if the degree of sorting across establishments is rising over time.


Measures of Labor Market Sorting
Figure 5 shows that two measures of workplace sorting are indeed rising over time in West
Germany. The …rst is an index of the degree of sorting of workers of di¤erent education
levels to individual workplaces. Following Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) we index
the assignment of workers to establishments via the function J (i; t) which yields the identity
of the establishment associated with worker i in year t. Our sorting measure consists of
the coe¢ cients bt from a series of regressions of the mean level of schooling at worker i0 s
establishment in year t (S J(i;t)t ) on his own schooling (Si ):

                                         S J(i;t)t = at + bt Si + eit :

As noted by Kremer and Maskin (1996), bt ; can range from 0 (no sorting) to 1 (perfect
sorting).22 Over our sample period the value of bt has increased by about 40 percent, from
0.34 to 0.47.
    Our second measure of sorting examines the degree of occupational segregation across
workplaces. Speci…cally, we divide occupations into 10 (approximately) equally sized groups,
based on mean wages of full time male workers in the occupation in 1985-1991.23 We then
compute Theil indices of segregation for the decile groups across establishments (Theil and
Finezza, 1971).24 The Theil index ranges from 0 (perfect integration) to 1 (perfect segrega-
  22
      It is straightforward to show that bt measures the fraction of the variation in schooling attainment that
occurs between establishments. We construct a linear measure of schooling by assigning 10.5 years to indi-
viduals with missing education, 11 years to those with lower secondary schooling and no vocational training,
13 years to those with lower secondary schooling and vocational training (i.e., conventional apprenticeship
completers), 15 years to those with an abitur (advanced high school degree) with or without further voca-
tional training, and 18 years to those with university degree. We also include in these regressions controls
for a quadratic in potential experience.
   23
      For example, occupation group 1 contains all three-digit occupations with mean wages in the bottom
decile of occupational wages.
   24
      The Theil index may be written:

                                                      13
tion) and can be interpreted as a rescaled likelihood ratio test for the null hypothesis that
every establishment employs the national occupation mix. Over our sample period the index
rises by roughly 15 percent from 0.46 to 0.53. Together, the results in Figure 5 suggest that
increased sorting could account for at least part of the rise in the importance of establishment
e¤ects in a wage model.


An Event Study Analysis
To investigate whether sorting is likely to explain the bulk of the workplace component
of wages, Figures 6a and 6b provide simple event-study analyses of the wage e¤ects of job
transitions in the …rst (1985-1991) and last (2002-2009) intervals in our sample. In both cases,
we examine wages in the two years before and two years after a job change for workers moving
between establishments with di¤erent mean pay levels. If between-plant wage variation is
primarily driven by variation in unobserved worker quality, transitions between high and low
wage plants should not be associated with major wage changes for a given worker.
     To avoid selecting on the job-changer’s own wage we classify jobs based on the mean wages
of co-workers, omitting the wage of the individual being studied (i.e., using the “leave-out
mean” wage).25 Speci…cally, we begin by calculating the distribution of mean co-worker
wages across all person-year observations in a given time interval. For each job changer, we
then classify the old job based on the quartile of its mean co-worker wage in the last year at
the job. We similarly classify the new job based on the quartile of its mean co-worker wage in
the …rst year on the job. We divide job changes into 16 cells based upon the co-worker wage
quartile of the origin and destination job. For each transition category we then calculate
mean worker wages in the years before and after the job change.26 For simplicity, the …gures
present wage pro…les for people leaving quartile 1 jobs (with the lowest co-worker wages) and
quartile 4 jobs (with the highest co-worker wages). Appendix Table 3 provides a complete
listing of mean wages before and after the job change for each of the 16 cells.
     Notice …rst that there is clear evidence of permanent heterogeneity between di¤erent

                                               P   Nj   P
                                                 j N         m   jm   log(   jm )
                                     H=1           P
                                                        m    m   log(   m)

where m is the employment share of occupation group m, jm is the employment share of occupation group
                   N
m at …rm j, and Nj is the employment share of …rm j.
  25
     In this exercise, we drop any observations at establishments with a single employee. Note that a job
changer could move directly from job to job, or have an intervening spell of non-employment (or part time
employment). We exclude job changes that span a full year with no full time job.
  26
     Note that we require each lost job to have been held for at least 2 years, and each new job to be held for
at least 2 years. Since the sample period includes 8 years, some people can appear in the event study more
than once.


                                                        14
mover groups: for example, the average wages of workers in quartile 4 jobs who move to
quartile 1 jobs are lower than those who move to quartile 2 jobs, with similar patterns for
the other mobility groups. However, the data also provide clear evidence that transitioning
between low and high wage establishments has important e¤ects on compensation. While
workers moving between quartile 1 jobs have relatively low but constant wages, quartile 1
workers who move to jobs with higher paid coworkers experience wage increases, with the
largest increases for those who move to quartile 4 jobs. Likewise, movers from quartile 4 jobs
experience little change (other than a modest upward trend a¤ecting all groups in 1985-1991)
if they move to another quartile 4 job, but otherwise su¤er wage losses with the largest losses
among those moving to quartile 1 jobs.
    Comparing Figures 6a and 6b, it is clear that the size of the wage gains and losses asso-
ciated with job transitions grew dramatically over the period of our study. This impression
is con…rmed by the estimates in Appendix Table 3. In the 1985-1991 interval, a transition
from the bottom to the top quartile was associated with a trend-adjusted wage increase of
roughly 23 log points, while in the 2002-2009 interval, the same transition was associated
with a 36 log point increase. Likewise, in the 1985-1991 interval, a transition from the top to
the bottom quartile was associated with a trend-adjusted wage drop of 22 log points, while
in the 2002-2009 interval, the same transition yielded a 48 log point drop. This striking
growth in the magnitude of the wage changes associated with job changes is a key …nding,
and underlies our results in Section 6 on the growing role of establishment heterogeneity in
wage inequality.
    Another remarkable feature of Figures 6a and 6b is the approximate symmetry of the wage
losses and gains for those who move between quartile 1 and quartile 4 establishments. This
symmetry suggests that a simple model with additive worker and establishment e¤ects may
provide a reasonable characterization of the mean wages resulting from di¤erent pairings of
workers to establishments.27 Though not shown in the Figures, the gains and losses for other
mover categories exhibit a similar degree of symmetry (see Appendix Table 3), particularly
after adjusting for trend growth in wages. Note as well that moving from a bottom quartile
to a top quartile …rm results in mean wages roughly equal to those of a worker at a top
quartile …rm prior to transitioning to a bottom quartile …rm. Thus, among workers in a
particular mobility class (e.g., those who worked at both a top and bottom quartile …rm),
the establishment e¤ect for the current job explains most of the wage di¤erences between
  27
    Notice that if the mean log wage paid to worker i at establishment j can be written as mij = i + j +zij ;
where zij is a random error, then the average wage gain for moving from establishment j to establishment
k is k      j ; while the average gain for moving from k to j is j     k ; i.e., the wage changes for movers in
the two directions are equal and opposite. If wages contain a common trend component, the trend-adjusted
wage changes will be symmetric.



                                                      15
top and bottom quartile workers.
    A …nal important feature of the wage pro…les in Figures 6a and 6b is the lack of an
Ashenfelter (1978) style dip in the average daily wages of workers who move from higher
quartile jobs to lower quartile jobs.28 Nor is there any indication of a positive transitory
“blip” in the year before a move from a lower quartile job to a higher quartile job. Taken
together with the approximate symmetry of the wage transitions noted above, these …ndings
provide suggestive evidence that the wages of movers may be well approximated by the com-
bination of a worker component, an establishment component, and a time varying residual
component that is uncorrelated with mobility.


5      Methods
With this background, we turn to a discussion of our econometric methods for disentangling
the workplace component of wages from the component associated with worker abilities. We
begin with some notation. In a given time interval, our data set consists of N person-year
observations on N workers and J establishments. Within each time interval, we model the
log daily wage yit of individual i in year t as the sum of a time-invariant worker component i ,
a time-invariant establishment component J(i;t) , a linear index of time-varying observable
characteristics x0it , a mean-zero random match component iJ(i;t) , a unit root component
of individual wages it , and a mean-zero transitory error "it :

                           yit =        i   +          + x0it + iJ(i;t) +
                                                  J(i;t)                       it   + "it              (1)
                                    |               {z       } |        {z             }
                                                …xed e¤ects            random e¤ects
                                                            0
                                =       i+        J(i;t) + xit + rit


The person e¤ect i captures the portion of an individual’s earnings power that is fully
portable across employers. Much of the variation in i presumably derives from worker pro-
ductivity, but it may also re‡ect heterogeneity in bargaining ability, labor market discrimi-
nation, or other factors. The establishment e¤ect j captures a proportional pay premium
(or discount) that is common to all employees at workplace j. This premium may re‡ect
  28
    Ashenfelter (1978) noted that participants in job training programs were likely to have experienced a
transitory dip in earnings in the year prior to entering the program. Our setting is somewhat di¤erent from
Ashenfelter’s not only because we are studying job transitions, but because we measure average daily wages,
rather than annual earnings, so changes in the number of days worked at a constant wage will not a¤ect
our estimates. And if job transitions are preceded by wage changes, we ought to have substantial power to
detect them because our average daily wage measure in the year prior to the transition contains only the
days over which the individual worked at the preceding job –which may be substantially less than the entire
year.



                                                              16
rent sharing, compensating di¤erentials, or other di¤erences across establishments in their
compensation policies. The vector of time-varying characteristics xit captures changes in the
portable component of an individual’s earnings power. We include in xit an unrestricted set
of year dummies and quadratic and cubic terms in age, all fully interacted with educational
attainment.29 Thus, x0it captures both lifecycle e¤ects and changes over time in the relative
pay of di¤erent age/education groups. Because our estimation samples consist of relatively
short intervals, the importance of these time varying factors is likely to be smaller than in
studies focusing on career development (e.g., Keane and Wolpin, 1997; Topel and Ward,
1992).
    The match e¤ect ij allows for a time-invariant wage premium (or discount) for individual
i at establishment j, relative to the baseline level i + j : We assume that ij has mean
zero for every person in every interval and for every establishment in every interval. One
source of match heterogeneity in wages is complementarity between the skills of the worker
and the needs of the …rm. To the extent that the worker has signi…cant bargaining power,
this complementarity will be rewarded in the form of higher wages. Other factors that a¤ect
an individual’s average pay while working for a given employer, such as initial placement in
the pay grid or other random factors, will also be included in ij .
    The unit root component it captures drift in the portable component of the individual’s
earnings power. Innovations to this component could re‡ect employer learning, human cap-
ital accumulation, health shocks, or the arrival of outside o¤ers which, in some models (e.g.,
Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2002), may bid up the o¤ered wage at the current job and other
potential jobs. By de…nition, it has mean zero for each person in each interval but contains
a unit root. The potential presence of such a component motivates in part our decision to
estimate worker-…rm models over relatively short time intervals, during which the variance
of it is limited. Finally, the transitory component "it represents any left-out mean reverting
factors.
    It will prove useful to consider the corresponding matrix formulation of this model as
it clari…es our discussion of identi…cation and estimation. Let y denote the stacked N       1
vector of wages sorted by person and year, D an N        N design matrix of worker indicators,
F an N J design matrix of …rm indicators, X an N K matrix of time varying covariates,
and r       + + "; an N      1 vector of composite errors. Our model in (1) can be written as:

                                        y = D +F            +X +r                              (2)
                                           = Z0 + r
 29
      We omit the linear term in age as it is not separately identi…ed from the year e¤ects.




                                                      17
                                             0
where Z [D; F; X] and      [ 0; 0; 0] .
   We estimate (2) by ordinary least squares (OLS). These estimates solve the normal
equations:
                                      Z 0Z = Z 0y                                (3)

A unique solution to these equations requires that the matrix Z 0 Z have full rank. This in
turn requires a linear restriction on the establishment e¤ects within each “connected set”
of establishments – that is, the set of establishments connected directly or indirectly via
worker mobility.30 To simplify estimation, we restrict our analysis to the largest connected
set of establishments in each time interval of interest, which turns out to include more
than 97% of workers and 90% of establishments (see below). Within this connected set we
omit the last establishment dummy, so that the establishment e¤ects are measured relative
to establishment J. The computational Appendix provides details of our procedure for
obtaining a solution to the normal equations. In brief, we use an iterative conjugate gradient
algorithm (as in Abowd, Creecy, and Kramarz, 2002) which solves for the vector of coe¢ cients
  without actually inverting the matrix Z 0 Z:


Threats to validity
For least squares estimates to identify the underlying parameters of interest, we need the
following orthogonality conditions to hold:

                                E [D0 r] = 0; E [F 0 r] = 0; E [X 0 r] = 0:                           (4)

The assumption of orthogonality between the composite error r and the time-varying co-
variates X is standard. Moreover, under our assumptions on the means of ij , it ; and
"it ; E [D0 r] = 0: Thus the key concern for identi…cation is whether the composite error is
orthogonal to the matrix of establishment identi…ers F: A su¢ cient condition is that job
mobility patterns are independent of ( ; ; ") –a so-called “exogenous mobility”assumption.
In this section we discuss the deviations from full independence suggested by di¤erent mod-
els of wage determination and mobility, and the likely impact of these deviations for OLS
estimates of (1).
      We consider three sources of mobility to be of particular interest, each corresponding
to one of the components of r. First, establishments may be subject to transitory demand
shocks that induce a group-level component in wages (i.e., "it in (1) contains an establish-
ment year component). If workers tend to transition between tightly connected networks
 30
      See Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) and Abowd, Creecy, and Kramarz (2002) for discussion.


                                                    18
of establishments, then a bad year for a particular establishment may predict ‡ows to a
particular set of destinations. If this is so, establishment e¤ects at those destinations will
be overstated relative to the establishment that experienced the negative shock.31 Note that
under such a sorting mechanism, we should expect mobility to be preceded by a drop in
wages. As noted in the discussion of Figures 6a/6b, however, such patterns do not seem to
be present in the data. We present additional evidence to this e¤ect later in the paper.
      A second source of bias could arise if workers systematically sort to …rms based on the
permanent match component of wages, ij . If workers tend to gravitate to jobs where their
idiosyncratic match is better, the average wage of the workers actually observed at estab-
lishment j will include a sorting bias component of the form that arises in a standard Roy
(1951) model.32 Substantial sorting based on the match e¤ects changes the interpretation of
the estimated establishment e¤ects, since the impact of transitioning between establishments
depends on the comparative advantage of the individuals making the transition.
      It is possible to test for such sorting in two ways. First, if workers tend to select jobs
based on the match component, then we should expect to see that the (trend adjusted) wage
gains for workers who move from one establishment to another are quite di¤erent from the
wage losses for those who move in the opposite direction. Ignoring any wage growth arising
from experience or year e¤ects, and the unit root and transitory components in the residual
rit ; the expected wage change for workers who move from establishment 1 to establishment
2 between period t 1 and t is:

       E [yit   yit 1 ji moves f rom 1 to 2] =      2     1   + E[   i2   i1 ji   moves f rom 1 to 2];

while the expected wage change for workers who move in the opposite direction is

       E [yit   yit 1 ji moves f rom 2 to 1] =      1     2   + E[   i1   i2 ji   moves f rom 2 to 1]:

By contrast, under our maintained assumptions, the expected wage changes are 2           1 and

  1   2 , respectively. As the importance of the match components increase, the sorting bias
terms E[ i2     i1 ji moves f rom 1 to 2] and E[ i1   i2 ji moves f rom 2 to 1]; both of which
are positive, will dominate, leading to wage gains in both directions. We have already seen
from the simple event studies in Figures 6a and 6b (and the mean wage changes in Appendix
Table 3) that the gains associated with transitioning from a low- to a high- co-worker-
wage establishment are roughly equal to the losses associated with moving in the opposite
  31
      Over a long enough horizon these good and bad shocks to …rms ought to average out to zero and the
importance of such biases will diminish.
   32
      See French and Taber (2011) for a detailed discussion of Roy-type models and references to the related
literature.

                                                    19
direction. Moreover, workers who move between establishments with similar co-worker wages
experience little or no average wage gain. We examine these issues in more detail below by
looking directly at wage changes for workers who move between establishments with di¤erent
estimated …xed e¤ects, and reach the same conclusions: wage gains and losses are (roughly)
symmetric for movers between higher- and lower-wage establishments. Moreover, there is no
mobility premium for moving between establishments with similar estimated …xed e¤ects.
    Second, if match e¤ects are important, a fully saturated match-e¤ects model that in-
cludes a separate dummy for each job ought to …t the data much better than our additively
separable baseline model. Speci…cally, the root mean squared error (RMSE) from the AKM
speci…cation should be much larger than the RMSE from a model with unrestricted job ef-
fects. As we show below, a job match model has a better …t statistically, but the reduction
in RMSE is small (11-15%), implying that the magnitude of the match component is small
(the implied standard deviation of ij is in the range 0.06-0.08).33 Likewise, any speci…cation
errors in the additively separable model in (1) – would be expected to become larger over
time if workers and establishments are becoming increasingly heterogeneous. In fact, we …nd
the gap in …t between the AKM model and an unrestricted match e¤ects model is relatively
stable over time, which is consistent with our characterization of the match component as
an uncorrelated random e¤ect.
    A third form of endogenous mobility could arise if drift in the expected wage a person can
earn at all jobs (i.e., the shocks to the unit root error component it ) predicts …rm-to-…rm
transitions. For example, in learning models with comparative advantage (e.g., Gibbons
et al., 2005) some components of worker ability are revealed slowly over time, and these
components are valued di¤erently at di¤erent establishments.34 Under such a scenario,
workers who turn out to be more productive than expected will experience rising wages at
their initial employer, and will also be more likely to move higher-wage establishments (i.e.,
…rms specializing in skilled workers). Likewise workers who turn out to be less productive
than expected will experience wage declines, and will be more likely to move to lower-
wage establishments. Such patterns will lead to an overstatement of the importance of
establishments in an AKM-style model, as the drift component it in wages is positively
correlated with the change in the establishment e¤ects. As noted in the discussion of Figures
6a and 6b, however, we do not see systematic wage trends in the years prior to a move for
  33
     Note that small match e¤ects in wages do not necessarily imply small match e¤ects in productivity as
workers may simply have low bargaining power in negotiating with their employers. Several recent studies
have found a low bargaining share for workers (Card, Devicienti, and Maida, 2010; Cahuc, Postel-Vinay and
Robin, 2006; Carlsson, Messina, and Skans, 2011).
  34
     Gibbons et al. (2005) consider the case where di¤erent sectors value skills di¤erently. Their model could
be extended to deal with di¤erences across employers within a sector.



                                                     20
workers who move to better or worse jobs, casting doubt on the importance of learning as a
major source of bias in our estimates.35
    The drift component it could also be correlated with mobility patterns if workers obtain
outside o¤ers which bid up their wages and also predict transitions to higher-wage estab-
lishments (as in Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2002). This “o¤er-shopping” mechanism implies
that OLS estimates of an AKM-style model may overstate the importance of establishment
e¤ects. Importantly, however, o¤er shopping cannot explain the patterns of wage losses
experienced by workers who move to lower-wage establishments.36 Nor can it explain the
symmetry in the wage gains and losses associated with transitions between high and low
paying establishments exhibited in Figures 6a and 6b.


6      Results
We begin our presentation of results with an overview of the samples in each of our four time
intervals. Columns 1-4 of Table 1 show the number of person-year observations, the number
of individuals, and the mean and standard deviation of log wages within each interval. In each
interval we have about 85-90 million person-year observations on wages for about 17 million
individual workers. As expected from the patterns in Figure 3a, the standard deviation of
wages rises substantially from 0.38 in interval 1 (1985-1991) to 0.51 in interval 4 (2002-2009).
Mean log wages rise about 5 percent from interval 1 to interval 2 and then are quite stable.
    Columns 5-8 present a parallel set of statistics for the largest connected set of workers in
each interval. Mobility rates between establishments are su¢ ciently high in West Germany
that 97% of person-year observations in each interval, and about 95% of all workers, are
included in the connected set. Mean wages for observations in the connected set are slightly
higher than in the overall population of full-time male workers, while the dispersion of
wages is slightly lower. Neither the relative size of the connected group, nor the relative
mean/standard deviation of wages in that group change across the four intervals, suggesting
that there is little or no loss in focusing attention on the largest connected group for the
remainder of the paper.
    Table 2 summarizes the estimation results for each of the four intervals in our analysis.
As shown in the top two rows of the Table, we estimate roughly 16-17 million person and 1.2-
  35
     Note that “lumpy”learning –in which workers are suddenly revealed to be more or less productive and
make a job transition – could generate spurious establishment e¤ects without detectable blips or dips in
wages prior to a job transition (Gibbons and Katz, 1992). While bias from such a process would be di¢ cult
to detect, existing estimates of the pace of employer learning suggest it usually occurs over a horizon of
several years (Lange, 2007).
  36
     Wage losses are possible in such models but should not easily be predicted by the average coworker wage
at the origin and destination establishment.


                                                    21
1.5 million establishment e¤ects in each interval. To summarize our …ndings, we report the
standard deviations of the estimated person and establishment e¤ects, the standard deviation
of the time-varying covariate index (x0it b); and the correlations between these components.37
We also report the root mean squared error (RMSE) from the model and the adjusted R2
statistic, both of which adjust for the relatively large number of parameters being estimated
in our models.
    The estimation results in Table 2 point to several interesting conclusions. First, the
person e¤ects and the establishment e¤ects both become more variable over time. Second,
the correlation between the person and establishment e¤ects rises substantially, from 0.03
in period 1 to 0.25 in period 4. Relative to these two main components, the covariate
index x0it b exhibits less dispersion, especially in the three later intervals, when aggregate
wage growth was negligible. A third observation is that the residual component of wages
is relatively small in magnitude and becomes only slightly more disperse over time. Of the
13 log point rise in the standard deviation of wages across the intervals, only 1.5 log points
remain unexplained. The relatively high explanatory power of the AKM model is re‡ected
in the adjusted R-squared statistics, which increase from 90% to 93% across the intervals.
    The explanatory power of the model is depicted graphically in Figure 7, which shows a
relatively stable RMSE for the AKM model over the four intervals. For comparison purposes
we also graph the RMSE from a model with unrestricted match e¤ects – that is, a model
where each person-establishment combination receives a separate dummy variable. As shown
in the last two rows of Table 2, this model …ts somewhat better than the baseline AKM model,
con…rming the presence of statistically signi…cant match e¤ects. Importantly, however, the
match e¤ects model explains little more of the rise in inequality than our baseline model,
suggesting that the rise in the residual variance in both models is due to a small increase in
the transitory component of earnings.
  37
     These moments are estimated across the person-year observations in the data set. For example, the
standard deviation of the estimated person e¤ects is calculated as:
                                         s
                                              1     XX
                                   Sb                       dit (b i b )2
                                            N    1 i t
                                                                                                P P
where dit is an indicator for individual i having a valid wage observation in year t and b N 1 1 i t dit b i .
Thus, our variability measure is weighted by the number of years each worker has a valid wage in the interval
(which averages about 5 years, but can range from 1 to 8). Likewise the standard deviation of the estimated
establishment e¤ects is:                   s
                                                1    XX
                                     Sb                      dit ( b J(i;t) b )2
                                             N      1 i t
                 P P
where b    N
             1
               1   i
                            b
                       t dit J(i;t) , which weights each establishment by the number of person-years of wage
data observed at that establishment.



                                                     22
    The gap in RMSEs between the baseline model and the match e¤ects model also rises
only slightly over time. Based on this gap, the implied standard deviation of the match
e¤ects rises from 0.060 to 0.075. This relative small change is consistent with the hypothesis
that the match e¤ects are truly (uncorrelated) random e¤ects as in (1). If instead they
were speci…cation errors generated by incorrectly imposing additivity of the person and
establishment e¤ects we would expect the …t of the match e¤ects model to improve relative
to the baseline model over time as the variance of the person and establishment e¤ects
increased.
    Additional insight into the nature of the match-speci…c error components comes from
examining the errors for di¤erent groups of workers at di¤erent establishments. If the match
e¤ects are truly random errors in the wage determination process, their mean should be zero
for all di¤erent types of matches. The …rst order conditions for the OLS estimator ensure
that the residuals for each worker and for each establishment have mean zero. However,
there is no such mechanical restriction on interactions between di¤erent groups of workers
and establishments, providing the basis for a test of the additivity assumptions in the AKM
model.
    To search for neglected interactions between worker and establishment characteristics,
we divide the estimated person and establishment e¤ects in each interval into deciles, and
compute the mean residual in each of the 100 crossed person          establishment decile cells.
Figures 8a and 8b show the mean residuals in each cell using data from intervals 1 and 4.
In all cases the mean residuals are very small, and uniformly less than 1% in magnitude.38
The largest deviations appear among the lowest-decile workers and the lowest-decile estab-
lishments: for these groups there appear to be small but systematic departures from the
additive separability assumptions of the AKM model. A complete investigation of these
nonseparabilities is clearly a topic for future research, but given the small magnitude of the
deviations we suspect that they have relatively little e¤ect on our basic conclusions.
    A second and related diagnostic focuses on the ability of our model to capture the wage
dynamics associated with job changes. If mobility is associated with important selection
on transitory wage components we ought to see a dip in wages prior to …rm transitions.
Figure 9a presents an event-study analysis for job transitions in the 2002-2009 period that
is similar to the one in Figure 6, but classi…es jobs based on the quartile of the estimated
establishment e¤ects for the origin and destination workplaces. As in Figure 6, there is little
evidence of transitorily low (or high) wages in the year just before a job change. Moreover,
the magnitude of the average wage gain for those who move from a quartile 1 to a quartile 4
  38
    We emphasize that there is no mechanical reason for the mean residuals in each cell to be close to zero.
Although there are 20 linear restrictions on the 100 cell means, there are 80 remaining degrees of freedom.



                                                    23
establishment is very similar to the magnitude of the average wage loss for those who move
in the opposite direction.
    The wage changes shown in Figure 9a for workers who move between quartile 4 and
quartile 1 establishments are large (40-45%). This re‡ects the rather large (0:23) estimated
standard deviation of establishment e¤ects in interval 4 of our sample. Moving from an
establishment that is one standard deviation above average in pay to one that is one standard
deviation below average generates an approximately 46 percentage point change in wages.
    Figure 9b plots the mean wage residuals from the AKM model for the same transitions
shown in Figure 9a (note the much narrower range of the y-axis). Examination of this …gure
shows that our model predicts the mean wage changes associated with quartile to quartile
…rm transitions relatively well, with prediction errors of less than 3%. We take this as
evidence that, at a minimum, our approach provides a good …rst approximation to the wage
determination process, consistent with the relatively high adjusted R-squared statistics for
the model. We have also looked at the average changes in the AKM residuals for workers who
change jobs and …nd that, in all our sample intervals, these average changes are very close
to 0. Thus, once we control for the establishment …xed e¤ects at the origin and destination,
there is no general mobility premium (or penalty) for job changers.


Decomposing changes in the structure of wages
We now turn to the implications of the estimated models in Table 2 for understanding the
rise in wage inequality over time. As noted, the estimated person and establishment e¤ects
both exhibit increasing variability over time. Perhaps even more striking is the rise in the
correlation between the these e¤ects.39 This increase suggests a fundamental change in the
way workers are sorted to workplaces.40 Figures 10a and 10b provide a graphical illustration
of this phenomenon by plotting the joint distributions of the person and establishment e¤ects
in intervals 1 and 4. (As in Figures 8a and 8b we divide the two sets of e¤ects into deciles).
In interval 1 there is only limited evidence of sorting, with the largest departure from ran-
domness for workers in the bottom decile of person e¤ects, who are disproportionately likely
to work at decile 1 establishments. By interval 4, however, the degree of assortative matching
  39
     As described in the Appendix, the estimated variance of the person and establishment components
will tend to be in‡ated by sampling error while the covariance between them will tend to be understated.
However, we suspect based upon the stable residual variation of our model that the trends in our estimates
are unlikely to be driven by this bias. In the next section we consider between-group measures of covariance
which avoid problems due to sampling error.
  40
     It is important to remember that these components only provide a description of the covariance structure
of wages. As pointed out by Lopes de Melo (2008), Lentz and Mortensen (2010), and Eeckhout and Kircher
(2011), the correlation between worker and establishment wage e¤ects need not correspond to the correlation
between worker and establishment productivity.


                                                     24
has increased dramatically, as evidenced by the relatively high concentrations of high-wage
workers at high-wage establishments, and of low-wage workers at low-wage establishments.
    To quantify the separate contributions of rising dispersion in person and establishment
e¤ects, and increases in assortative matching, we conduct a simple variance decomposition
of the form:

    V ar (yit ) = V ar ( i ) + V ar        J(i;t)   + V ar (x0it )
                                                                    0
                   +2Cov     i;   J(i;t)   + 2Cov         J(i;t) ; xit   + 2Cov ( i ; x0it ) + V ar (rit )

in each interval. Table 3 summarizes the results of this decomposition. Between intervals 1
and 4, the variance of the person e¤ects rose from 0.084 to 0.127, representing about 40% of
the overall increase in the variance of wages, while the variance of the establishment e¤ects
rose from 0.025 to 0.053, contributing another 25%. The covariance term also rose from 0.003
to 0.041, adding about 34% of the total rise in wage variance. Thus all three components
contributed to the rise in inequality. The trends in the various components are illustrated
in Figure 11, which gives a visual impression of the relative shares of each term.
    Table 3 also reports three simple counterfactual scenarios that help to illustrate the
relative importance of the various terms. Under the …rst counterfactual we hold constant
the correlation of worker and …rm e¤ects (i.e., no change in sorting) but allow the variances
of the person and establishment e¤ects to rise. Under this scenario, the variance of wages
would have risen by 0.077, or about 70% of the actual rise, suggesting that the increase in
sorting can account for about 30% of the rise in variance. In the second counterfactual we
hold constant the variance of establishment e¤ects but allow the variance of the person e¤ects
and the correlation between the person and establishment e¤ects to rise. Under this scenario
the variance of wages rises by 0.072, suggesting that the rise in dispersion of establishment
e¤ects accounts for about a third of the rise in the variance of wages. Finally, in the third
scenario we hold constant sorting and the rise in the variance of the establishment e¤ects,
leading to a counterfactual rise in the variance of wages of 0.047 (about 40% of the total
actual increase) attributable to the rise in the variability of the person e¤ects.


Robustness Check: Men with Apprenticeship Training Only
As discussed earlier, one concern with the German Social Security data is censoring, which
a¤ects 10-14 percent of men in any year of our sample. Censoring is particularly prevalent
among older, university-educated men, up to 60% of whom have earnings above the maximum
rate. To address this concern, we re-estimate our main models using only data for men
whose highest educational quali…cation is an apprenticeship. This relatively homogeneous

                                                     25
group represents about 60% of our overall sample and has a censoring rate of about 9% per
year. Over the 1985-2009 sample period wage inequality for apprentice-trained men rose
substantially, though not as much as over the labor force as a whole, re‡ecting a widening
of education-related wage gaps (see below). Speci…cally, between interval 1 and interval 4
the standard deviation of log wages for apprentice-trained men rose from 0.328 to 0.388 –
an 18% rise –versus the 35% increase for all full time men.
    Appendix Tables 4 and 5 summarize the estimation results for this subsample, using
the same format as Tables 2 and 3. In brief, the results are qualitatively very similar to
the results for the entire sample. Speci…cally, the rise in wage inequality is attributed to
a rise in the variability of the person-speci…c component of pay, a rise in the variability of
the establishment-level component, and a rise in their covariance. We infer that our main
conclusions are robust to our procedure for handling censoring in the Social Security earnings
data.


7    Decomposing Between-Group Wage Di¤erentials
Germany, like the U.S., has experienced substantial increases in the wage gaps between
groups of workers with di¤erent skill characteristics. The model in (1) allows a simple de-
composition of between-group wage gaps into a component attributable to the time invariant
characteristics of workers, a component attributable to the time invariant characteristics of
the establishments at which they work, and a component re‡ecting the mean values of the
time-varying observables. Consider a discretely valued time invariant worker characteristic
Gi . From (1) and (4), the mean wage for workers in group g can be written:

           E [yit jGi = g] = E [ i jGi = g] + E    J(i;t) jGi   = g + E [x0it jGi = g] :

Using this framework, the change in the mean wage di¤erence between any two groups g1
and g2 can be decomposed into a component due to di¤erential changes in the permanent
skill characteristics of workers in the two groups, a component due to di¤erential changes
in the average establishment wage premium earned by the two groups, and a component
due to di¤erent evolutions of their time varying characteristics. Such a decomposition is
particularly interesting in light of the evidence provided so far of increased assortativeness
in the matching of workers to workplaces, which may strongly in‡uence between group wage
gaps.




                                              26
Education
Table 4 conducts such a decomposition for changes in the relative mean wages of education
groups in West Germany between the …rst and fourth intervals. (We assign the modal value
of observed education to men in each interval). Column 1 of the table shows the change in
the relative wages of each group relative to men with apprenticeship training: note that the
less educated groups’relative wages have fallen, while the more educated groups’have risen.
Columns 2 and 3 show the relative changes in mean person and establishment e¤ects (again,
relative to apprentice-trained workers), while column 4 shows the remaining component. The
striking conclusion from this decomposition is that nearly all the rise in relative mean wages
of workers with university-level training is due to changes in their relative establishment
e¤ects. Put di¤erently, the increasing returns to di¤erent levels of education in Germany are
driven primarily by changes in the quality of the jobs di¤erent education groups can obtain,
rather than to changes in the value of skills that are fully portable across jobs.
    Figure 12 provides an alternative depiction of this decomposition. The horizontal axis
shows the mean person e¤ect in the education group in an interval relative to apprentices,
while the vertical axis shows the mean establishment e¤ect in the education group in an
interval relative to apprentices. We plot the data for interval one (squares) and interval four
(diamonds), along with OLS …ts summarizing the degree of sorting of higher education groups
to better-paying establishments in the two intervals. Notice …rst that the variation across
groups in mean person e¤ects is nearly constant across intervals, with only a slight increase
in the mean person e¤ect of university graduates. The variation in mean establishment
e¤ects, however, widens substantially between interval 1 and interval 4, implying a rise in
education-related wages gaps over time.
    An alternative decomposition, …rst proposed by Mundlak (1978), provides complementary
evidence on these patterns while avoiding the complexity of the AKM estimation methodol-
ogy. Speci…cally, consider a series of cross sectional regressions of earnings (yit ) on year of
years of schooling attainment (Si ) of the form:

                                     yit = ct + rt Si + uit ;                               (5)

where the error uit includes an establishment-level component:

                                      uit =   J(i;t)t   + vit :

The term J(i;t)t captures any general e¤ect of working at establishment j in period t that is
shared by all workers, regardless of education. Ignoring this group component in estimation


                                               27
of (5) will yield a population regression coe¢ cient:

                                           Cov (yit ; Si )
                                    rtM                    = rt +          t bt ;
                                            V ar (Si )

                     Cov (S J(i;t)t ;Si )
where bt                   V ar(Si )
                                          is the educational sorting index plotted in Figure 5, and t
Cov ( J(i;t)t ;S J(i;t)t )
   V ar(S J(i;t)t )
                            is the coe¢ cient from a regression of the establishment e¤ect on mean
schooling at the establishment. Thus, the standard (Mincerian) return to schooling in each
year rtM consists of three distinct components: the return to schooling conditional on job
quality (rt ) ; the return to mean establishment schooling ( t ), and the association between
worker and establishment schooling (bt ). Using the arguments in Mundlak (1978), we may
directly estimate each of these components by …tting regressions of the form:41

                                    yit = ct + rt Si +    t S J(i;t)t   + ! it :

    As shown in Figure 13 (and previously in Figure 5), the educational sorting index bt is
rising over time. Moreover, the return to mean establishment schooling t is also rising over
time, from a value of around 0.04 in the mid-1980s to a value of 0.11 in the late 2000s.42
In contrast, the return to individual schooling rt is actually decreasing slightly over time.
Thus, the 20% rise in the Mincerian return to schooling for West German men between 1985
and 2009 is driven by a combination of increasing returns to working with well-educated co-
workers, coupled with a rise in the segmentation of education groups across establishments.
Con…rmation of the …ndings in Table 4 with this simple alternative decomposition gives us
further con…dence that an important share of rising wage inequality in Germany is due to
increasing workplace heterogeneity in pay, coupled with rising assortativeness in the matching
of workers to establishments.


Occupation
Autor, Levy, and Murnane’s (2003) seminal study of technological change and task prices
has led to renewed interest in the study of the occupational wage structure.43 Figure 14a
shows the evolution of this structure in West Germany between the late 1980s (interval
  41
     It can be shown that the OLS estimator of rt in this speci…cation coincides numerically with that
resulting from estimation of (5) including establishment …xed e¤ects. Thus, our estimates of rt measure the
“within-establishment” returns to schooling.
  42
     We include a quadratic in potential experience in all the models, so the returns to education correspond
to the conventional Mincerian returns which hold constant labor market experience.
  43
     See Acemoglu and Autor (2011) for a review of the related literature.



                                                     28
1) and the mid/late 2000’s (interval 4).44 Overall there is a widening of wage di¤erences
across occupations, as re‡ected by the slope of the line relating mean wages in interval 4
to mean wages in interval 1, which is 1.14 (standard error = 0.03) from unweighted OLS,
and 1.27 (0.02) from a regression weighted by initial employment shares. Interestingly, the
relationship between wages in the two intervals is, if anything, slightly concave, re‡ecting
declines in real wages for the lowest-wage occupational groups.45
    Our models provide a new perspective on the changing occupational wage structure by
allowing us to decompose the changes in between-occupation wage variation into compo-
nents due to changes in the variability of workers’characteristics, changes in the variability
of establishment characteristics, changes in the sorting of occupation groups to workplaces,
and changes in the impacts of the time-varying characteristics. The results are summarized
in Panel A of Table 5 which reports the standard deviations across occupations of the var-
ious wage components, the correlation of average person and establishment e¤ects, and the
variance shares in each interval. In the last column of the table we also show the changes
in the variances between interval 1 and interval 4, and the shares of the overall change in
variance accounted for by each component.
    The estimates suggest that the largest share of the rise in between-occupation inequal-
ity (42%) is attributable to the rising correlation between person e¤ects and establishment
e¤ects.46 That is, higher-paid occupations are increasingly concentrated at high-wage es-
tablishments, while lower-paid occupations are increasingly concentrated at low-wage estab-
lishments. This result complements our earlier …nding in Figure 5 that occupational skill
groups are increasing segregated at particular establishments. As we discuss in more detail
in the next section, one partial explanation for this increasing segregation between high-wage
and low-wage occupations is outsourcing, which often involves …rms replacing in-house jobs
like janitorial services with outside contractors who are classi…ed as working at a separate
establishment. This increasing correlation is illustrated in Figure 14b, which plots the mean
establishment e¤ects in an occupation against the mean person e¤ect in our …rst and last
intervals.
  44
     The IEB …le includes a 3-digit occupation code with about 320 categories. In the analysis in this section
we assign each worker a single occupation code for each job in each interval, based on the highest code
observed in the job during the sample interval.
  45
     In an unweighted regression a quadratic term in initial-period wages is not signi…cant. In a weighted
model, however, the quadratic term is negative and signi…cant (t=4.7).
  46
     Because the correlations are calculated across averages of groups of workers in each occupation they do
not su¤er from the sampling error-induced biases that a¤ect the correlations at the individual level, discussed
in the Appendix.




                                                      29
Industry
The bottom panel of Table 5 provides a parallel decomposition of the variability in mean
wages across industries.47 A large literature (e.g., Krueger and Summers, 1988; Katz and
Summers, 1989) has examined the between-industry structure of pay di¤erences. A still-
unresolved issue is the extent to which industry-speci…c wage premia are attributable to
unobserved di¤erences in worker quality (Murphy and Topel, 1990; Gibbons and Katz, 1992;
Goux and Maurin, 1999; Gibbons et al., 2005) versus …rm-speci…c pay policies like e¢ ciency
wages. Our additive e¤ects framework suggests that both components are important. In
the 1985-91 interval, for example, variation in mean worker e¤ects explains about 35% of
between-industry wage variation, variation in establishment e¤ects explains a similar share,
and their covariance adds another 20%. As shown in column 5 of the table, rising dispersion
in worker quality explains a sizeable share (about 44%) of the rise in the variance of wages
across industries, while rising dispersion in establishment pay premiums contributes another
19%. As with the between-occupation wage structure, however, a relatively large share (42%)
is due to the increasing sorting of high-wage workers to high-wage plants.


8      Rising Establishment Heterogeneity: Cohort E¤ects
       and Collective Bargaining Status
The increasing variability in establishment-level pay premiums between the …rst and last
intervals of our sample raises the question of whether this rise was generated by a divergence
in the pay premiums o¤ered by continuing establishments, by a change in the policies of
newly created establishments, or by a combination of the two. To investigate this question,
we assigned each establishment a birth year based on the …rst year it appears in our sample.
We then calculated a variety of statistics for establishments in di¤erent birth cohorts. As
shown in Appendix Table 6, about 950,000 establishments are present in the …rst year of
our sample (1985), and another 100,000 or so are born each year. Mean wages of workers
at new establishments move in parallel to average wages for all workers from 1986 to 1996,
but exhibit a downward relative trend after 1996. The standard deviation of wages among
workers at new plants is also relatively stable until the late 1990s, then begins to rise.
    The fall in average wages at new establishments and the rise in wage dispersion among
employees at these plants are both suggestive of an important cohort pattern in the evolution
  47
    The IEB …le using a changing set of industry codes. We develop a crosswalk by comparing the industry
codes assigned to the same establishment in adjacent years under the di¤erent coding systems. To simplify
the crosswalk we use a 2-digit level of classi…cation, with 96 categories.



                                                   30
of establishment pay inequality. These simple comparisons, however, do not control for
potential changes in the characteristics of the workers at new establishments. To address
this concern we plot the standard deviations of the estimated establishment e¤ects by birth
cohort in Figure 15. Note that establishments born relatively early in our study period
are assigned up to four di¤erent establishment e¤ects, depending on how long they survive.
For example, establishments born in 1988 have a 0.26 standard deviation in their interval-1
e¤ects (estimated using data from 1985 to 1991), a 0.22 standard deviation in their interval-2
e¤ects (estimated using 1990-96 data), a 0.22 standard deviation in their interval-3 e¤ects
(estimated using 1996-2002 data), and a 0.24 standard deviation in their interval-4 e¤ects
(estimated using 2002-2009 data).
    Consideration of the standard deviations plotted in Figure 15 suggests three main conclu-
sions. First, there appears to be a systematic lifecycle pattern in the measured heterogeneity
of …rms. The distribution of establishment e¤ects is relatively wide for recently-born es-
tablishments but tends to narrow and then stabilize over time. This is particularly true
for plants born in the last year or two of an interval (e.g., plants born in 1990 and 1991
have relatively large dispersion in their interval-1 e¤ects). In part this may re‡ect additional
noise in the estimated establishment e¤ects for plants that are only observed in one or two
years. Second, among continuing establishments there is not much rise in the variability of
…rm e¤ects between interval 1 and interval 4. This is perhaps clearest for the (large) set
of establishments that are …rst observed in 1985. Among these establishments, the stan-
dard deviation of estimated e¤ects only rises from 0.15 in interval 1 to 0.17 in interval 4.
Finally, much of the rising heterogeneity in establishments appears to be due to “new” es-
tablishments, particularly those that …rst appear after 1996. Adjusting for lifecycle e¤ects,
establishments born in the late 2000s have about 25% higher standard deviations in their
establishment e¤ects than those born before 1996.
    What features of new establishments –particularly those formed after 1996 –account for
the extra variability in their wage premiums? One potential factor is collective bargaining
status. Wages set under collective bargaining are less disperse in Germany (e.g., Dustmann
et al, 2009; Antonczyk et al., 2010), although existing research has not addressed the extent
to which this association is driven by selection into coverage.48 To gather some evidence
on the impact of collective bargaining we use information on the (relatively small) panel of
establishments in the IAB’s Linked Employer Employee data (LIAB) that can be merged
to our analysis sample.49 Information is available in the LIAB since 1995 on whether an
  48
     Gürtzgen (2007) suggests that a substantial fraction of the observed di¤erences in mean wages between
workers in di¤erent collective bargaining arrangements is due to selectivity.
  49
     See Alda, Bender, and Gartner (2005) for a description of the LIAB data base. The LIAB has about
13,000-14,000 establishments in the years after 2000, and a smaller sample in earlier years.


                                                   31
establishment has signed on to the appropriate sector-level contract, has negotiated a plant-
speci…c collective bargaining agreement, or has chosen not to participate in any form of
collective bargaining. We use this information in two ways. First, we compare the distrib-
utions of establishment e¤ects for plants in each of the three possible collective bargaining
categories. Second, we form an estimate of the fraction of establishments from each birth
cohort in each category.
    Figure 16 shows the distribution of interval-3 establishment e¤ects for plants in the LIAB
that can be linked to our sample, classi…ed by their collective bargaining status in 2000. We
show the fractions of establishments with wage premiums in each of 10 decile groups.50
This simple …gure illustrates a very striking di¤erence between establishments with either
a sectoral or plant-speci…c agreement, and those without any form of collective bargaining
coverage. Whereas 22% of establishments with some form of coverage are in the …rst two
decile groups, 44% of uncovered establishments fall into this range. This relative left skew
is associated with a substantially lower (-10%) mean establishment e¤ect for plants in the
LIAB with no collective bargaining relative to plants with either form of bargaining.51 The
distributions of establishment e¤ects are similar for other years in which we can link our
estimated establishment e¤ects to coverage information from the LIAB. In all cases the
distributions of establishment e¤ects for uncovered establishments exhibit strong left skew
relative to covered establishments, and have a mean that is 8-10 percent lower.
    The fraction of West German workers whose wages are set by collective bargaining has
fallen sharply since the mid-1990s (see Dustmann et al, 2009, Table III). This decline is par-
ticularly pronounced for new establishments. The top line in Figure 15 shows the estimated
fraction of establishments from di¤erent birth cohorts with some form of collective bargain-
ing.52 This fraction has fallen from 50-55% for establishments born from 1986 to 1996, to
30% or less for establishments born after 2007. Interestingly, the trend in coverage seems
to exhibit a turning point at about the same time (circa 1996) as the trend in the standard
deviation of estimated establishment e¤ects. This coincident timing is consistent with the
implication from Figure 16 that a rise in the fraction of uncovered establishments would be
expected to lead to a rise in the overall dispersion of establishment e¤ects. Of course, it
  50
     The decile cuto¤s for the establishment e¤ects are formed so that 10 percent of person-year observations
in our third sample interval (1996-2002) fall into each decile. Establishments in the LIAB are relatively large
and on average have more positive establishment e¤ects than the population as a whole.
  51
     In a regression of the interval-3 establishment e¤ect on dummies for a sectoral or plant-speci…c agreement,
the coe¢ cients are 0.100 (standard error=0.05) for a sectoral agreement and 0.097 (standard error=0.01) for
a plant-speci…c agreement. The coe¢ cients are 0.080 and 0.085 respectively when dummies are added for
the birth cohort of the establishment.
  52
     We …rst estimate the coverage rate by birth year for establishments in our sample that can be merged to
the LIAB, using coverage data for each year from 1999-2008. We then take the average coverage rate across
years for each birth cohort.


                                                      32
is di¢ cult to assign a causal role to collective bargaining, since …rms endogenously choose
whether to adopt some form of collective bargaining, or not. At a minimum, however, the
evidence in Figures 15 and 16 suggests a proximate role for declining collective bargaining
coverage among establishments that have begun operation since the mid-1990s in the rise in
establishment-level heterogeneity.


9     Establishment E¤ects and the Survival of Establish-
      ments and Jobs
One possible source of the rising variability in establishment e¤ects is increasing variability in
rents that are partially shared by workers. Indeed, there is an extensive literature suggesting
that more pro…table …rms o¤er higher wages (e.g., van Reenan, 1996; Arai, 2003; Guiso
et al., 2005; Gürtzgen, 2010, Card et al., 2010). If rent sharing is the primary source of
establishment-level wage di¤erentials, we expect higher-wage establishments to be successful
and pro…table enterprises. An alternative explanation is that some (newer) …rms have been
able to break free from overly generous sectoral wage contracts. This hypothesis suggests
that lower-wage establishments are in fact more likely to be successful and earn higher pro…ts.
    We lack data on pro…tability, but an indirect test of these competing hypotheses is
provided by comparing the survival probabilities of high wage and low wage establishments.
Figure 17a shows empirical survivor functions by quartile of estimated establishment e¤ects
for the cohort of establishments that …rst appear in 1989. The data clearly indicate that
high wage establishments are more likely to survive than low wage establishments, suggesting
that some form of rent sharing may be going on. These patterns are con…rmed for a broader
set of cohorts in results from probit models for the likelihood of surviving for 5+ or 10+
years, and Tobit models for the duration of establishment life, presented in Appendix Table
7. We estimate the models separately for establishments born in di¤erent intervals, and
include the estimated establishment e¤ect, the mean person e¤ect for all employees at the
establishment, and controls for establishment size, average education of workers, and year of
“birth”. These models con…rm that establishments that o¤er higher wage premiums survive
longer, as do those that employ higher-wage workers.
    Additional insight is provided by looking at the survival of jobs at higher- versus lower-
wage establishments. If the wage premium paid by high-wage establishments is a rent,
we would expect employees at these plants to be less likely to quit, and for their jobs to
last longer. If, on the other hand, the wage premium is a compensating di¤erential for
longer hours or more intense work e¤ort, we would not expect much relationship between


                                               33
job duration and the size of the establishment e¤ects. Figure 17b shows estimated survivor
functions for jobs created in 1989 at establishments in each of the four quartiles of estimated
e¤ects. Again, it is clear that jobs at higher wage establishments are more likely to survive.53
This conclusion is con…rmed by a series of probit and Tobit models, presented in Appendix
Table 8. Controlling for an individual’s person e¤ect, his education, and the size of the
establishment, jobs at higher-wage establishments last much longer.
    Taken together, the patterns of establishment and job survival suggest that establish-
ments that o¤er higher average wages are more pro…table, and share some of these pro…ts
with workers. This is in keeping with the results of several studies of the French labor mar-
ket, which provide direct evidence that …rms with higher wage premiums in an AKM-based
analysis are also more pro…table (e.g. Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis, 1999; Goux and Mau-
rin, 1999; Abowd and Kramarz, 2005). Whether, in Germany, trends in these pro…ts are
driven by proprietary technological advantages, particular product niches, or other factors
is clearly an important topic for future research.


10       Conclusions
West Germany has experienced substantial changes in the structure of wages over the past
25 years. Observers have been divided over whether those changes are driven primarily
by technological changes or changes in labor market institutions (Dustmann et al., 2009;
Eichhorst, 2012). Our analysis approaches this question from a di¤erent perspective, asking
whether the proximate source of changes in the structure of wages involves the portable
component of wages, or the component associated with which particular employer a worker is
paired. The data reveal that both components are increasingly important –the gap between
consistently high and low wage workers has grown, as in traditional one-factor models of
skill pricing (Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce, 1993), but the gap between good and bad jobs has
also grown, suggesting that job search and matching is an increasingly high stakes process –
one that appears to be increasingly mediated through the education system.
    We …nd that the distribution of establishment e¤ects varies substantially by …rm cohort,
with newer …rms exhibiting greater variance, and being less likely to participate in collec-
tive bargaining. These patterns could be the result of di¤erences in technology choices or
management practices (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007) across cohorts of …rms, changes in
outsourcing behavior or institutional factors that limit the ability of older …rms to abandon
  53
     In our sample only about 20% of job endings occur because of establishment death. Thus, the …nding that
jobs last longer at higher-paying establishments is not simply a re‡ection of the fact that these establishments
live longer.



                                                      34
existing wage bargains. We also …nd that higher wage establishments are more likely to
survive and have lower separation rates suggesting that some form of rent sharing underlies
our results.
    These …ndings raise many questions regarding the nature of modern labor markets. Are
the patterns uncovered here present in other developed economies? Which factors drive the
matching of workers to …rms? Why are there large …rm cohort e¤ects in wages? How much
of the displacement e¤ects of job loss are due to establishment e¤ects? How do shocks to
the product market …lter into changes in person and …rm e¤ects? With the proliferation
of modern employer-employee datasets, we are hopeful that progress can be made on these
important questions.


Appendix
IEB Data


Our basic data source is the Integrated Employment Biography (IEB) database. The IEB consists of
information on employment spells at a given establishment (or …rm) within a calendar year, taken
from notices of employment …led by the employer. Each notice of employment has a beginning
date (e.g., January 1), an end date (e.g., December 31), the average daily wage earned by the
employee (censored at the Social Security maximum earnings level), indicators for the legal status
of the job (including whether the job is full time or part time and whether the job is a “marginal
job” subject to reduced Social Security taxes), as well as information on the gender, birth date,
educational quali…cation and occupation of the worker, and the industry and geographic location
of the establishment.
   We process the data in two steps. First, we collapse all spells at the same employer in a
given year into a single person-…rm-year record, summing total earnings at each employer. Row
1 of Appendix Table 1a shows the number of spell records in the IAB data …le for full-time male
employees age 20-60 working in non-marginal jobs in 1985 (the …rst year of our sample), 1997 (the
middle year of our sample) and 2009 (the last year). Row 2 shows the number of person-…rm-year
records: on average there are about 1.06 spells per person-…rm-year in the early years of our sample,
rising slightly to 1.11 spells per person-…rm-year in 2009 (see row 4).
   In the second step we select one observation per person per year by selecting the person-…rm
record with the highest total earnings in a given year (and excluding any observation with a daily
wage < 10 Euros). On average each person has about 1.1 di¤erent employers per year, with no
trend over our sample period (see row 5). Line 3 of Appendix Table 1a shows the number of
person-year observations in our …nal data set.


                                                 35
       Appendix Table 1b presents some summary statistics for our …nal sample, including the number
of person observations in each year (which ranges from 11.9 to 14 million), average real annual
earnings and real daily wage, and the mean and standard deviation of the log of daily wages. We
use the consumer price index with a 1995=100 base to de‡ate all nominal values.
       In the IEB data, education is coded into 6 categories, plus a missing or undetermined category.
We group these into 5 classes: (1) missing; (2) primary/lower secondary or intermediate school
leaving certi…cate, or equivalent, with no vocational quali…cation; (3) primary/lower secondary
or intermediate school leaving certi…cate, or equivalent, with a vocational quali…cation (4) upper
secondary school certi…cate (“Arbitur”) with or without a vocational certi…cate; (5) degree from
Fachhochschule or university. For simplicity we refer to the third category as “apprentices”and the
…fth category as “university graduates”. For an individual who is observed in multiple noti…cations
from the same employer in the same year we assign the highest education category for that person-
…rm-year observation. For our analysis based on the AKM speci…cation, we assign the modal
education category observed for an individual in the years he is at the same job.
       In the IEB data, each job noti…cation includes information on occupation and industry. For an
individual who is observed in multiple noti…cations from the same employer in the same year we
assign the highest occupation category and the highest industry category for that person-…rm-year
observation. For our analysis based on the AKM speci…cation, we assign the highest occupation
category observed for an individual in the years he is at the same job as occupation, and the highest
industry code observed for the establishment in the years the establishment is present in the data.


Tobit imputations

As shown in Appendix Figure 2, 9 to 14 percent of person-year observations in our data set have
average daily wages that are censored at the Social Security maximum. We follow Dustmann et al.
(2009) and …t a series of Tobit models to log daily wages. We then impute an uncensored value
for each censored observation using the estimated parameters of these models and a random draw
from the associated (left- censored) distribution.54
       Since we are …tting models that include both a person and year e¤ect, we want the imputation
model to re‡ect individual and job-speci…c components of the wage. We therefore construct, for
each individual in each year, the mean of his log wage in all other periods, and the fraction of other
years that the individual’s wage is censored. For individuals who are only observed in one year,
we set the mean log wage in other years to the sample mean, and the fraction of censored wages
in other years equal to the sample mean, and include a dummy in the model for those who are
  54
    Speci…cally, we impute an upper tail as follows. Suppose that the estimated Tobit model for y (the log
of wages) has y N (X 0 ; ), and consider a censored observation, such that y c, where c is the censoring
point. Let k = [(c X 0 )= ], where represents the standard normal density, and let u U [0; 1] represent
a uniform random variable. Then we impute an uncensored value for y as: y u = X 0 +     1
                                                                                          [k + u (1 k)].

                                                   36
observed only once. We also construct the mean log wage for the individual’s co-workers in the
current year (i.e., the “leave out mean”of log wages at his employer) and the fraction of co-workers
who are censored in the current year (the “leave out mean” of the censoring rate at his employer).
For individuals who work at an establishment with only 1 full time male employee we set the mean
log wage for co-workers equal to the sample mean, and the fraction of co-workers with censored
wages equal to the sample mean, and include a dummy in the model for employees of 1-worker
…rms.
       We then …t a series of 500 Tobit models separately by year, education (5 values: missing; no
quali…cation; apprenticeship; some post secondary; and university graduate), and 10 year age range
(20-29; 30-39; 40-49; 50-60), including the following variables: age; mean log wage in other years;
fraction of censored wages in other years; number of full time male employees at the current …rm
and its square, dummy for 11 or more employees, mean years of schooling and fraction of university
graduates at the current …rm, mean log wage of co-workers and fraction of co-workers with censored
wages, dummy for individuals observed only 1 year between 1985 and 2009; dummy for employees
of 1-worker …rm. Appendix Table 2 shows the coe¢ cient estimates for models for 40-49 year old
apprentices in 1985, 1997, and 2009.
       Appendix Figure 2 shows the gaps between the mean and standard deviation of log wages when
we use the imputed values for censored observations and when we do not. The use of imputed
values leads to a 0.02-0.04 higher value for the mean log wage, and a 0.03 to 0.06 higher value for
the standard deviation of log wages. The gaps are particularly notable in 1992 and 2002, when the
censoring rate was relatively high.


Computation

Because our dataset is very large and identi…cation of the establishment e¤ects derives entirely from
movers, we conducted estimation in two steps. First, in each interval, we extracted the sample of
workers who switched establishments over the relevant time period. We …t the model to this sample
of movers and recovered the estimated vector of establishment e¤ects b along with the coe¢ cients
b corresponding to the time varying covariates xit .55 Then, for each worker who stayed at the same
establishment over the sample interval, we computed an estimate of his person e¤ect as follows:

                                         1 X                b J(i;t)
                                  bi =        dit yit                  x0it b
                                         Ti t
  55
    This yields an ine¢ cient estimator of : However, in a sample of roughly 90 million observations, precision
is not a major concern. A separate issue is that our two step procedure only ensures orthogonality between
the AKM residuals rbit and xit in the sample of movers. In practice, the correlation in the sample of
establishment stayers between x0it b and the AKM residuals is very small in each interval, with the largest
correlation occuring in interval 3 and amounting to approximately :01.



                                                      37
                 P
where Ti             t   dit is the number of periods that individual i is observed in the sample interval.
Our root mean squared error calculations were conducted by reducing the degrees of freedom by
one for each connected stayer mean estimated.56
       Our estimation tasks were performed in Matlab. Code for our analysis is available online. We
used a variant of the depth …rst search algorithm implemented in the open source matlabBGL
package to …nd the largest connected set of establishments in each data interval. The design
matrices [D; F; X] were stored as sparse matrices. To compute the least squares solutions we
solved the normal equations in (3) using Matlab’s preconditioned conjugate gradient routine (see
Shewchuck (1994) for a lucid introduction). To speed the process we used an incomplete Cholesky
factorization of Z 0 Z as the preconditioner with threshold dropping tolerance of 0.01.


Bias in the estimated covariance matrix of person and establishment e¤ects

It is well known that sampling errors in the estimated person and establishment e¤ects may lead
to in‡ated estimates of the standard deviation of each component and negatively biased estimates
of the covariance between the person and establishment e¤ects. This has led some authors (e.g.,
Andrews et al., 2008) to propose parametric bias corrections to the estimated components. To
illustrate the logic of such an approach, and the di¢ culties involved, we denote the population
quantities of interest as:

             2                  1       0
             D                              D0 Q1 D (Variance of person e¤ects)
                            N       1
             2                  1       0
             F                              F 0 Q1 F    (Variance of establishment e¤ects)
                            N       1
                                1       0
          D ;F                              F 0 Q1 D (Covariance of person and establishment e¤ects)
                            N       1

where Q1         I 1 (10 1) 1 10 is a symmetric demeaning matrix.
       OLS estimation of (2) yields a coe¢ cient vector:

                                                       b = + (Z 0 Z)     1
                                                                             Z 0r
                                                         q
  56                                                         SSR
       That is we used the formula RM SE =                   dof   where SSR is the sum of squared residuals across all
person-year observations in the interval and dof = N     N (J 1) rank (X), where N is the number
of person year observations including the stayers, N is the number of connected individuals including the
stayers, and J is the number of connected establishments.




                                                                   38
                      1
with E (Z 0 Z)            Z 0 r = 0. The sampling variance of this vector can be written:

                                                                                      0
                                         Vb         E       b               b
                                                                1                         1
                                               = (Z 0 Z)            Z 0 Z (Z 0 Z)

where       E [rr0 ] is the N          N variance covariance matrix of the errors.
   The sample analogues to the population quantities can be expressed in terms of the following
quadratic forms:

                                                                    1       b0 AD b
                                              b2D
                                                            N           1
                                                                    1       b0 AF b
                                              b2F
                                                            N           1
                                                                    1       b0 AD         b
                                         bD    ;F                                    ;F
                                                            N           1
                  2             3                       2              3                 3    2
                    D0 Q1 D 0 0                           0     0    0    0 F 0 Q1 D 0
                  6             7                       6              7
                                                                       6                 7
where AD          4    0    0 0 5 , AF                  4 0 F 0 Q1 F 0 5, AD
                                                                 ;F    4 0       0     0 5.
                       0    0 0                           0     0    0    0      0     0
   Unbiasedness of OLS and standard results on quadratic forms imply that for any matrix A,
                                          h 0 i
                                         E b Ab = 0 A + tr AVb :

Therefore the bias in our estimates of the variance components corresponds to the trace term in
the above expression, which in turn depends critically upon Vb. Previous work has focused on
evaluating this bias expression under the assumption that the r are independent and identically
                                         2                              1
distributed in which case           =I        and Vb = (Z 0 Z)               2
                                                                                 .
   Unfortunately, the bulk of the literature on earnings dynamics (MaCurdy, 1982; Abowd and
Card, 1989; Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004) suggests a substantially more complicated error structure
of earnings with complex forms of temporal dependence and heteroscedasticity. Errors in modeling
the structure of           will induce errors in estimation of Vb which is why, at least since the work of
White (1980), economists have sought robust variance estimates that don’t rely upon estimation of
all elements of       . Unfortunately, robust variance estimation is not possible in our setting because
the estimates b, while unbiased, are not consistent.
   In unreported results we have attempted parametric corrections allowing for a match component
and a moving average component to the errors r. These corrections yielded small changes in
the estimated variance-covariance matrix Vbb and had trivial e¤ects on the trends of the various
components. In sampling experiments we found the corrections to provide a poor guide to the


                                                                39
degree of bias created by working with subsamples of the data. We suspect this is because our
model for the errors is insu¢ ciently rich – a problem we are unlikely to be able to solve in a
convincing way. For this reason, our estimates in section 7 are of particular interest because these
results are based upon group averages involving tens of thousands (or in some cases millions) of
observations, in which case biases due to sampling error become largely irrelevant.

                                           References

   1. Abowd, John and David Card. 1989. “On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours
      Changes.” Econometrica 57(2): 411-445.

   2. Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis. 1999. “High Wage Workers and High
      Wage Firms.” Econometrica 67(2): 251-333.

   3. Abowd, John, Robert Creecy, and Francis Kramarz. 2002. “Computing Person and Firm
      E¤ects Using Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data.” Working paper.

   4. Abowd, John and Francis Kramarz. 2005. “Human Capital and Worker Productivity: Direct
      Evidence from Linked Employer-Employee Data.”Annals of Economics and Statistics 79/80:
      323-338.

   5. Abraham, Katherine and Susan Taylor. 1996. “Firms’Use of Outside Contractors: Theory
      and Evidence.” Journal of Labor Economics 14(3): 394-424.

   6. Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Claire Lelarge, John Van Reenen, and Fabrizio Zilibotti.
      2007. “Technology, Information, and the Decentralization of the Firm.” Quarterly Journal
      of Economics 122(4): 1759-1799.

   7. Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks, and Technologies: Implications for
      Employment and Earnings” in Handbook of Labor Economics eds. Ashenfelter and Card,
      Vol. IV, Part B, 1043-1171.

   8. Akerlof, George. 1982. “Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange.” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 97(4): 543-569.

   9. Alda, Holger, Stefan Bender, and Hermann Gartner (2005). “The linked Employer-employee
      Dataset Created from the IAB Establishment Panel and the Process-Produced Data of the
      IAB (LIAB).” Schmollers Jahrbuch 125 (2): 327-336.

 10. Andersson, Fredrik, Elizabeth Davis, Julia Lane, Brian McCall, and Kristin Sandusky. 2012.
      “Decomposing the Sources of Earnings Inequality: Assessing the Role of Reallocation.” In-
      dustrial Relations, forthcoming.

                                                40
11. Andrews, M.J., L. Gill, T. Schank, and R. Upward. 2008. “High wage workers and low
    wage …rms: negative assortative matching or limited mobility bias?” Journal of the Royal
    Statistical Society 171(3): 673-679.

12. Antonczyk, Dirk, Bernd Fitzenberger, and Katrin Sommerfeld 2010. “Rising Wage Inequality,
    the Decline of Collective Bargaining, and the Gender Wage Gap.” Unpublished Working
    Paper, University of Freiburg, April 2010.

13. Arai, Mahmood. 2003. “Wages, Pro…tability and Capital Intensity: Evidence from Matched
    Worker-Firm Data.” Journal of Labor Economics 21 (3): 593-618.

14. Ashenfelter, Orley C. 1978. “Estimating the E¤ect of Training Programs on Earnings.”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 60(1): 47-57.

15. Autor, David H. 2009. “Introduction to Studies of Labor Market Intermediation.” In David
    H. Autor, editor, Studies in Labor Market Intermediation. Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press.

16. Autor, David H., Lawrence H. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage
    Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2): 300-323.

17. Autor, David H., Lawrence H. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger.1998. “Computing Inequality:
    Have Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 113(4):
    1169-1214.

18. Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2002. “Upstairs, Downstairs: Com-
    puters and Skills on Two Floors of a Large Bank,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
    LV: 432–447.

19. Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent
    Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,”Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118(4):
    1279-1334.

20. Bachmann, Ronald, Marion König, and Sandra Scha¤ner 2012. “Lost in Transition? Mini-
    mum Wage E¤ects on German Construction Workers.” Ruhr Economic Papers #358, July
    2012.

21. Bagger, Jesper, Kenneth Sorensen, and Rune Vejelin. 2012. “Wage Sorting Trends.”working
    paper..

22. Barth, Erling, Alex Bryson, James Davis, and Richard Freeman. 2011. “The Contribution
    of Dispersion across Plants to the Increase in US Earnings Dispersion.” Working paper.

                                             41
23. Bauer, Thomas and Klaus F. Zimmermann. 1999. “Occupational Mobility of Ethnic Mi-
    grants.” IZA Discussion Paper #58.

24. Bernard, Andrew and Bradford Jensen. 1995. “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in US Manufac-
    turing: 1976-87.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics. 67-112.

25. Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum. 2003. “Plants
    and Productivity in International Trade.” American Economic Review 93(4): 1268-1290.

26. Bound, John, and George Johnson. 1992. “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s:
    An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations,” American Economic Review 82(3):371–392.

27. Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen. 2007. “Measuring and Explaining Management
    Practices Across Firms and Countries.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(4): 1351-1408.

28. Brown, Charles. 1980. “Equalizing Di¤erences in the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 94(1): 113-134.

29. Burda, Michael. 1993. “The determinants of East-West German migration: Some …rst
    results.” European Economic Review 37(2-3): 452-461.

30. Burda, Michael and Jennifer Hunt. 2011. “What Explains the German Labor Market Miracle
    in the Great Recession?” Brookings Papers on Economics Activity 42(1): 273-335.

31. Cahuc, Pierre, Fabien Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2006. “Wage Bargaining with
    On the Job Search: Theory and Evidence.” Econometrica 74(2): 323-364.

32. Card, David, Thomas Lemieux, and Craig Riddell. 2004. “Unions and Wage Inequality.”
    Journal of Labor Economics 25(4): 519-562.

33. Card, David, Francesco Devicienti, and Agata Maida. 2010. “Rent-Sharing, Holdup, and
    Wages: Evidence from Matched Panel Data.” NBER Working Paper #16192.

34. Cardoso, Ana. 1997. “Workers or Employers: Who is Shaping Wage Inequality?” Oxford
    Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 59(4): 523-547.

35. Cardoso, Ana. 1999. “Firms’Wage Policies and the Rise in Labor Market Inequality: The
    Case of Portugal.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 53(1): 87-102.

36. Carlsson, Mikael, Julian Messina, and Oskar Nordström Skans. 2011. “Wage Adjustment
    and Productivity Shocks.” Sveriges Riksbank working paper #253.



                                             42
37. Davis, Steven and John Haltiwanger. 1991. “Wage Dispersion between and within U.S. Man-
    ufacturing Plants, 1963-86.” in Martin Baily and Cli¤ord Winston, eds. Brookings Papers
    on Economic Activity: Microeconomics pp.115-200.

38. Davis, Steven and Till Von Wachter. 2012. “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss.”Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity forthcoming.

39. Dinardo, John, Nicole Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and
    the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica. 64(5):
    1001-1044.

40. Dorner, Matthias, Marion König, and Stefan Seth. 2011. “Sample of Integrated Labour
    Market Biographies –Regional File 1975-2008.” IAB FDZ Datenreport 07/2011 EN.

41. Dube, Arindrajit and Ethan Kaplan. 2010. “Does Outsourcing Reduce Wages in the Low-
    Wage Service Occupations? Evidence from Janitors and Guards.” Industrial and Labor
    Relations Review 63(2):287-306.

42. Dustmann, Christian, Johannes Ludsteck, and Uta Schönberg. 2009. “Revisiting the German
    Wage Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2): 843-881.

43. Economic Policy Institute (EPI) 2009. The State of Working America. Washington DC:
    EPI.

44. Eeckhout, Jan and Philipp Kircher. 2011. “Identifying Sorting – In Theory.” Review of
    Economic Studies 78(3): 872-906.

45. Eichhorst, Werner and Paul Marx. 2009. “Reforming German Labor Market Institutions: A
    Dual Path to Flexibility.” IZA Discussion Paper #4100.

46. Eichhorst, Werner. 2012. “The Unexpected Appearance of a New German Model.” IZA
    Discussion Paper #6625.

47. Ellguth, Peter, Hans-Dieter Gerner, and Jens Stegmaier. 2012. “Wage bargaining in Ger-
    many: The role of works councils and opening clauses.” IAB Discussion Paper 5/2012.

48. European Industrial Relations Observatory (EIRO). 1997a. “The Use of Hardship Clauses
    in East German Metalworking Industry.”Available at: http://www.eurofound.europa.eu.
    eiro/1997/03/feature/de9703205f.htm




                                            43
49. European Industrial Relations Observatory (EIRO). 1997b. “A Copernican U-turn in Ger-
    man collective bargaining?” Available at: http://www.eurofound.europa.eu.eiro/1997/
    06/feature/de9706216f.htm

50. European Industrial Relations Observatory (EIRO). 2007. “Government Sets Minimum
    Wages for Cleaning Industry.”Available at: http://www.eurofound.europa.eu.eiro/2007/
    03/articles/de0703049i.htm

51. European Industrial Relations Observatory (EIRO). 2012. “Temporary Agencies Granted
    National Minimum Wage.” Available at: http://www.eurofound.europa.eu.eiro/2012/
    02/articles/de1202029i.htm

52. Fitzenberger, Bernd, Karsten Kohn, and Alexander C. Lembcke. 2012. “Union Density
    and Varieties of Coverage: The Anatoomy of Union Wage E¤ects in Germany.” Industrial
    Relations, forthcoming.

53. Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover,
    and E¢ ciency: Selection on Productivity or Pro…tability?” American Economic Review
    98(1): 394-425.

54. Freeman, Richard B. 1980. “Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages.” Industrial and Labor
    Relations Review 34(1): 3-23.

55. Freeman, Richard B. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1994. “Rising wage inequality: the United
    States vs. other advanced countries.” in: R. Freeman, ed., Working under di¤erent rules
    (Russell Sage Foundation, New York).

56. French, Eric and Christopher Taber. 2011. “Identi…cation of Models of the Labor Market.”
    in Handbook of Labor Economics eds. Ashenfelter and Card, Vol. IV, part A, 537-617.

57. Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Does Unmeasured Ability Explain Inter-
    industry Wage Di¤erentials?” Review of Economic Studies 59(3): 515-535.

58. Gibbons, Robert, Lawrence F. Katz, Thomas Lemieux, and Daniel Parent 2005. “Compara-
    tive Advantage, Learning, and Sectoral Wage Determination.” Journal of Labor Economics
    23(4): 681-723.

59. Glitz, Albrecht. 2012. “The Labor Market Impact of Immigration: A Quasi-Experiment
    Exploiting Immigrant Location Rules in Germany”Journal of Labor Economics, 30(1): 175-
    213.



                                           44
60. Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology.
    Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

61. Goux, Dominique and Eric Maurin. 1999. “Persistence of Interindustry Wage Di¤erentials:
    A Reexamination Using Matched Worker-Firm Panel Data” Journal of Labor Economics
    17(3): 492-533.

62. Groshen, Erica. 1991. “Sources of Intra-Industry Wage Dispersion: How Much Do Employers
    Matter?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(3): 869-884.

63. Gruetter, Max and Rachel Lalive. 2009. “The importance of …rms in wage determination.”
    Labour Economics 16(2): 149-160.

64. Guiso, Luigi, Luigi Pistaferri and Fabiano Schivardi. 2005. “Insurance within the Firm.”
    Journal of Political Economy 113 (5): 1054-1087.

65. Gürtzgen, Nicole. 2007. “The e¤ect of …rm and industry-level contracts on wages - evidence
    from longitudinal linked employer-employee data.” ZEW Discussion Paper #06-082.

66. Gürtzgen, Nicole. 2010. “Rent-Sharing and Collective Wage Contracts - Evidence from
    German Establishment-Level Data.” Applied Economics 42 (22): 2835- 2854.

67. Hassel, Anke. 1999. “The Erosion of the German System of Industrial Relations.” British
    Journal of Industrial Relations 37(3): 483-505.

68. Hassel, Anke and Britta Rehder. 2001. “Institutional Change in the German Wage Bargain-
    ing System –The Role of Big Companies.” MPIfG Working Paper 01/9.

69. Heinbach, Wolf Dieter. 2006. “Bargained Wages in Decentralized Wage-Setting Regimes”
    Institute for Applied Economic Research (IAW) Working Paper #276.

70. Hirsch, Barry and Edward Schumacher. 2004. “Match bias in wage gap estimates due to
    earnings imputation.” Journal of Labor Economics 22(3): 689-722.

71. Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
    China and India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124(4): 1403-1448.

72. Jacobi, Lena and Jochen Kluve. 2006. “Before and After the Hartz Reforms: The Perfor-
    mance of Active Labour Market Policy in Germany.” IZA Discussion Paper # 2100.

73. Jung, Sven and Claus Schnabel 2009. “Paying More than Necessary? The Wage Cushion in
    Germany.” IZA Discussion Paper #4278.


                                              45
74. Juhn, Chinui, Kevin Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1993. “Wage Inequality and the Rise in
    Returns to Skill.” Journal of Political Economy 101(3): 410-442.

75. Katz, Lawrence F. and David Autor. 1999. “Changes in the wage structure and earnings
    inequality.” in Handbook of Labor Economics eds. Ashenfelter and Card, Vol. III, part A,
    1463-1555.

76. Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963–87:
    Supply and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): 35–78.

77. Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence Summers. 1989. “Industry Rents: Evidence and Implica-
    tions.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics. pp. 209-290.

78. Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 1997. “The Career Decisions of Young Men.”
    Journal of Political Economy 105(3): 473-522.

79. Kline, Patrick and Andres Santos. 2012. “Sensitivity to Missing Data Assumptions: Theory
    and An Evaluation of the U.S. Wage Structure.” Quantitative Economics, forthcoming.

80. Kolhaut, Susanne und Peter Ellguth. 2008. “Neu gegründete Betriebe sind seltener tarifge-
    bunden.” IAB Kurzbericht #16/2008.

81. Kremer, Michael and Eric Maskin. 1996. “Wage Inequality and Segregation by Skill.”NBER
    Working paper #5718.

82. Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers. 1988. “E¢ ciency Wages and the Inter-Industry
    Wage Structure.” Econometrica 56(2): 259-293.

83. Kuhn, Peter and Fernando Lozano, 2008. “The Expanding Workweek? Understanding
    Trends in Long Work Hours Among U.S. Men, 1979-2006.” Journal of Labor Economics
    26(2): 311-343.

84. Lange, Fabian. 2007. “The Speed of Employer Learning.”Journal of Labor Economics 25(1):
    1-35.

85. Lee, David S. 1999. “Wage Inequality in the U.S. during the 1980s: Rising Dispersion or
    Falling Minimum Wage?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3): 977–1023.

86. Lemieux, Thomas, Bentley Macleod, and Daniel Parent. 2009. “Performance Pay and Wage
    Inequality” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1): 1-49.

87. Lentz, Rasmus and Dale Mortensen. 2010. “Labor Market Models of Worker and Firm
    Heterogeneity.” Annual Review of Economics 2: 577–602.

                                             46
 88. Lester, Richard. 1967. “Pay Di¤erentials by Size of Establishment.” Industrial Relations
     7(1): 57-67.

 89. Lopes de Melo, Rafael. 2008. “Sorting in the Labor Market: Theory and Measurement”,
     working paper.

 90. Machin, Stephen, and John Van Reenen. 1998. “Technology and Changes in Skill Structure:
     Evidence from Seven OECD Countries,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4): 1215–1244.

 91. Macurdy, Thomas. 1982. “The use of time series processes to model the error structure of
     earnings in a longitudinal data analysis.” Journal of Econometrics 18(1): 83-114.

 92. Meghir, Costas and Luigi Pistaferri. 2004. “Income Variance Dynamics and Heterogeneity.”
     Econometrica 72(1): 1-32.

 93. Moretti, Enrico. 2012. “Real Wage Inequality.” American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
     nomics, forthcoming.

 94. Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 1990. “E¢ ciency Wages Reconsidered: Theory
     and Evidence.” in Y. Weiss and R. Topel eds., Advances in the Theory and Measurement of
     Unemployment. New York: St. Martin’s Press, pp. 204-40.

 95. Mundlak, Yair. 1978. “On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section Data.”Econometrica
     46(1): 69-85.

 96. Ochel, Wolfgang. 2003. “Decentralising Wage Bargaining in Germany – A Way to Increase
     Employment?” CESIfo Working Paper #1069.

 97. Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Jean-Marc Robin. 2002. “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with
     Worker and Employer Heterogeneity.” Econometrica 70(6): 2295-2350.

 98. Rattenhuber, Pia. 2011. “Building the Minimum Wage: Germany’s First Sectoral Minimum
     Wage and its Impact on Wages in the Construction Industry.”DIW Berlin Discussion Paper
     #1111. March 2011.

 99. Rees, Albert and George Schultz. 1970. Workers in an urban labor market. University of
     Chicago Press. Chicago.

100. Reynolds, Lloyd G. 1951. The Structure of Labor Markets. New York: Harper & Brothers.

101. Riphahn, Regina T. and Daniel D. Schnitzlein. 2011. “Wage Mobility in East and West
     Germany.” IZA Working Paper No. 6246, December 2011.


                                              47
102. Roy, A.D. 1951. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.”Oxford Economic Papers
     Oxford Economic Papers 3(2): 135–146.

103. Segal, Lewis and Daniel Sullivan. 1997. “The Growth of Temporary Services Work.”Journal
     of Economic Perspectives 11(2): 117-136.

104. Schmieder, Johannes F. and Tanja Hethey. 2010. “Using worker ‡ows in the analysis of
     establishment turnover : evidence from German administrative data.”FDZ Methodenreport
     06/2010, Institute for Employment Research.

105. Siebert, Horst. 1997. “Labor Market Rigidities: At the Root of Unemployment in Europe.”
     Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(3): 37-54.

106. Skans, Oskar Nordström, Per-Anders Edin, and Bertil Holmlund. 2009. “Wage Dispersion
     between and within Plants: Sweden 1985–2000”in The Structure of Wages: An International
     Comparison eds Edward P. Lazear and Kathryn L. Shaw, University of Chicago Press.

107. Shapiro, Carl and Joseph Stiglitz. 1984. “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
     Device.” American Economic Review 74(3): 433-444.

108. Shewchuck, Jonathan Richard. 1994. “An Introduction to the Conjugate Gradient Method
     Without the Agonizing Pain: Edition 1 14 ” Working paper. School of Computer Science,
     Carnegie Mellon University.

109. Slichter, Sumner. 1950. “Notes on the Structure of Wages.” Review of Economics and
     Statistics 32(1): 80-91.

110. Theil, Henri and Anthony Finezza. 1971. “A Note on the Measurement of Racial Integration
     of Schools by Means of Informational Concepts.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1:187–
     94.

111. Topel, Robert H and Michael P. Ward. 1992. “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men.”
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2): 439-79.

112. Van Reenan, John. 1996. “The Creation and Capture of Rents: Wages and Innovation in a
     Panel of U.K. Companies.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1): 195-226.

113. White, Halbert. 1980. “A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix and a direct test
     for heteroskedasticity.” Econometrica 48(4): 817–838.

114. Wol¤, Sascha. 2009. “Determinants of East-West-migration in Germany: A macroecono-
     metric analysis.” Working paper, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen.


                                                48
                                                                               Figure 1a: Trends in Percentiles of Real Log Daily Wage
                                                                                      West German Men Relative to 1996 Base
                                                       15

                                                       10

                                                        5
Value of Wage Percentile ‐ Value in 1996




                                                        0

                                                       ‐5

                                                      ‐10

                                                                                            10th Percentile
                                                      ‐15
                                                                                            20th Percentile
                                                      ‐20                                   50th Percentile

                                                                                            80th Percentile
                                                      ‐25

                                                      ‐30
                                                        1985       1987      1989      1991       1993        1995     1997      1999       2001          2003      2005      2007     2009


                                                                                                                         Year
                                                      Note: figure shows percentiles of log real daily wage for full time male workers on their main job, deviated from value of same
                                                      percentile in 1996 and multiplied by 100.


                                                                                 Figure 1b: Trends in Percentiles of Real Log Hourly Wages
                                                                                              U.S. Men Relative to 1979 base
                                                       15


                                                       10
 Value of Wage Percentile Relative to Value in 1979




                                                        5


                                                        0


                                                       ‐5


                                                      ‐10


                                                      ‐15
                                                                               10th Percentile
                                                      ‐20                      20th Pecentile
                                                                               50th Percentile
                                                      ‐25                      80th Percentile

                                                      ‐30
                                                         1973      1975       1977       1979        1981       1983      1985       1987          1989          1991      1993      1995     1997
                                                                                                                          Year
             Note: figure shows percentiles of log real hourly wage for male workers, deviated from value of same percentile in 1996 and
             multiplied by 100. Wage data are from monthly Current Population Surveys, as tabulated in Economic Policy Institute (2009).
                                       Figure 2: Macroeconomic Trends and Policy Changes in Germany, 1979‐2011

                              20                                                                                            45
                                                                       Share of employees outside
                                                                       sectoral agreements (right scale)

                              16                                                                           Hartz Reforms:   40
                                                                            Oct. 1996                      I,II Jan. 2003
                                                        July 1, 1990        Labor Law Act                  III Jan. 2004
Unemployment Rate (Percent)




                                                                                                                                 Share of Employees (percent)
                                                        Economic            for Promotion                  IV Jan. 2005
                                                        unification         of Employment
                              12                                                                                            35


                                   Unemployment rate
                                   (left scale)
                               8                                                                                            30


                                                                                       Nov. 1996
                                                                                       Min. wage for
                               4                                                       construction                         25




                               0                                                                                            20
                               1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011

                                                                           Year
                                         Figure 3a: Trends in Wage Inequality

                         0.60


                         0.55                   Std. Dev. of Log Wages (with Imputations)

                                                Normalized 80‐50 Gap (Upper Tail)

                         0.50                   Normalized 80‐20 Gap

                                                Normalized 50‐20 Gap (Lower Tail)
Measures of Dispersion




                         0.45


                         0.40


                         0.35


                         0.30


                         0.25
                            1985        1987       1989      1991       1993        1995    1997      1999      2001      2003       2005      2007      2009
                                                                                            Year
                                  Notes: figure shows measures of dispersion in real daily wage for full time male workers. Normalized percentile gaps
                                  are differences in percentiles divided by corresponding differences in percentiles of standard normal variate.



                                           Figure 3b: Trends in Residual Wage Inequality

                         0.50


                                                    Std. Dev. of Residual Wages
                         0.45
                                                    Normalized 80‐50 Gap (Upper Tail)

                                                    Normalized 80‐20 Gap
                         0.40
                                                    Normalized 50‐20 Gap (Lower Tail)
Measures of Dispersion




                         0.35



                         0.30



                         0.25



                         0.20
                            1985        1987       1989      1991       1993        1995    1997      1999      2001      2003       2005      2007      2009
                                                                                             Year

                                Notes: see notes to Figure 3a. Figure shows measures of dispersion in residual real daily wage for full time male workers.
                                Residual wage is residual from linear regression model with dummies for education categories and cubic in experience
                                fit separately in each year.
                                                Figure 4: Residual Standard Deviations from Alternative Wage Models
                          0.45
                                                Mincer (Education dummies + cubic exp)
                                                Mincer + Fed. State (10 dummies)

                          0.40                  Mincer + 3‐digit SIC
                                                Mincer + 3‐digit Occupation
                                                Mincer + SIC x Occupation (25,000 codes)
                          0.35                  Mincer + Establishment Effects
  RMSE




                          0.30



                          0.25



                          0.20
                             1985        1987     1989        1991       1993      1995       1997       1999        2001       2003        2005    2007      2009
                                                                                               Year

                                 Notes: See note to Figure 3b. Figure shows measures of dispersion in residual real daily wage for full time male
                                 workers. Residual wage is residual from linear regression model. "Mincer" refers to model with dummies for education
                                 categories and cubic in experience, fit separately in each year. Other models add additional controls as indicated.




                                   Figure 5: Sorting Across Establishments of Workers in Different Education and
                                                                 Occupation Groups

                          0.50                                                                                                                             0.54
Education sorting index




                                                                                                                                                           0.52
                          0.46


                                                                                                                                                                  Occupational segregation Index
                                                                                                                                                           0.50
                          0.42

                                                                                                                                                           0.48

                          0.38
                                                                                                                                                           0.46
                                                                                   Education sorting (Kremer and Maskin index), left scale
                          0.34
                                                                                   Occupational sorting (Theil index), right scale                         0.44


                          0.30                                                                                                                             0.42
                             1985       1987     1989      1991        1993      1995     1997     1999       2001      2003         2005    2007   2009
                                                                                          Year
                                   Notes: figure shows two measures of sorting of full time male workers across establishments. See
                                   text for definitions of indices.
                                               Figure 6a: Mean Wages of Job Changers, Classified by Quartile
                                       of Mean Wage of Co‐Workers at Origin and Destination Establishment, Interval 1

                          5.2
                                                 4 to 4
                          5.0
                                                 4 to 3
                          4.8
                                                 4 to 2
                          4.6
Mean Log Wage of Movers




                                                 4 to 1
                          4.4
                                                 1 to 4
                          4.2
                                                 1 to 3
                          4.0
                                                 1 to 2
                          3.8
                                                 1 to 1
                          3.6
                                                                        ‐2                          ‐1                          0                           1
                                                                                  Time (0=first year on new job)
                           Notes: figure shows mean wages of male workers observed in 1985‐1991 who change jobs in 1987, 1988 or 1989, and held the preceding job for 2
                           or more years, and the new job for 2 or more years. "Job" refers to establishment with most earnings in year, excluding part time work. Each job
                           is classified into quartiles based on mean wage of co‐workers (quartiles are based on all full time workers in the same year).




                                                   Figure 6b: Mean Wages of Job Changers, Classified by Quartile
                                           of Mean Wage of Co‐Workers at Origin and Destination Establishment, Interval 4

                          5.2

                                                4 to 4
                          5.0
                                                4 to 3
                          4.8
                                                4 to 2
Mean Log Wage of Movers




                          4.6
                                                4 to 1
                          4.4
                                                1 to 4
                          4.2
                                                1 to 3
                          4.0
                                                1 to 2
                          3.8
                                                1 to 1
                          3.6
                                                                        ‐2                          ‐1                           0                              1
                                                                                   Time (0=first year on new job)

                            Notes: figure shows mean wages of male workers observed in 2002‐2009 who change jobs in 2004‐2007 and held the preceding job for 2 or more
                            years, and the new job for 2 or more years. "Job" refers to establishment with most earnings in year, excluding part time work. Each job is classified
                            into quartiles based on mean wage of co‐workers (quartiles are based on all full time workers in the same year).
                                   Figure 7: Relative Explanatory Power of AKM Model in Different Periods


                           0.5



                           0.4

                                                                                                      Standard deviation of log wages
Standard Deviation, RMSE




                           0.3
                                                                                                      RMSE, AKM Model


                           0.2                                                                        RMSE, Match Effects Model



                           0.1



                           0.0
                                       1985‐1991                      1990‐1996                      1996‐2002                          2002‐2009



                                 Notes: figure shows standard deviation of log real wages for full time male workers in indicated interval, along
                                 with root‐mean‐squared error (RMSE) from AKM specification and alternative model with unrestricted match
                                 effects. See notes to Table 3 for description of models.
               Figure 8a: Mean Residual by Person/Establishment Deciles,
                                      Interval 1


         0.02



         0.01
                                                                                                  10
                                                                                              7
          0.00                                                                        4
                      1       2   3                                                                     Person Effect
                                         4   5                                1
                                                  6   7    8    9       10                                 Decile
          ‐0.01


                                        Establishment Effect Decile
          ‐0.02




  Notes: figure shows mean residuals from estimated AKM model with cells defined by decile of estimated
  establishment effect, interacted with decile of estimated person effect. See Table 3 for summary of
  model parameters.




         Figure 8b: Mean Residual by Person/Establishment Deciles,
                                Interval 4


       0.02



        0.01
                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                  7
        0.00                                                                              4
                  1                                                                                         Person Effect
                          2       3                                               1
                                        4    5    6                                                            Decile
                                                       7    8       9
        ‐0.01                                                            10

                                      Establishment Effect Decile
        ‐0.02




Notes: figure shows mean residuals from estimated AKM model with cells defined by decile of estimated
establishment effect, interacted with decile of estimated person effect. See Table 3 for summary of
model parameters.
                                             Figure 9a: Mean Wages of Movers, Classified by Quartile of Establishment Effects
                                                              for Origin and Destination Firms, Interval 4
                                   5.2

                                                       4 to 4
                                   5.0
                                                       4 to 3
Mean Log Wage of Movers




                                   4.8
                                                       4 to 2
                                   4.6
                                                       4 to 1
                                   4.4
                                                       1 to 4
                                   4.2
                                                       1 to 3

                                   4.0                 1 to 2

                                   3.8                 1 to 1

                                   3.6
                                                                                  ‐2                           ‐1                          0                            1
                                                                                           Time (0=first year on new job)
                                    Notes: figure shows mean wages of male workers observed in 2002‐2009 who change jobs in 2004‐2007, and held the preceding job for 2 or more
                                    years, and the new job for 2 or more years. "Job" refers to main job in year, excluding part time jobs. Each job is classified into quartiles based on
                                    estimated establishment effect from AKM model presented in Table 3.




                                           Figure 9b: Mean AKM Residuals of Movers, Classified by Quartile of Establishment
                                                          Effects for Origin and Destination Firm, Interval 4

                                   0.12

                                                           4 to 4
Mean Log Wage Residual of Movers




                                   0.08
                                                           4 to 3
                                   0.04                    4 to 2

                                                           4 to 1
                                   0.00
                                                           1 to 4
                                   ‐0.04                   1 to 3

                                                           1 to 2
                                   ‐0.08
                                                           1 to 1
                                   ‐0.12
                                                                                    ‐2                      ‐1                                 0                            1
                                                                                            Time (0=first year on new job)

                                    Notes: figure shows mean wage residuals from estimated AKM model for male workers observed in 2002‐2009 who change jobs in 2004‐2007, and
                                    held the preceding job for 2 or more years, and the new job for 2 or more years. "Job" refers to main job in year, excluding part time jobs. Each
                                    job is classified into quartiles based on estimated establishment effect from AKM model presented in Table 3.
                 Figure 10a: Joint Distribution of Person and
                      Establishment Effects, Interval 1

         0.03


         0.02


         0.01                                                                                            10
                                                                                                     7
          0.00                                                                                   4        Person Effect
                  1    2       3                                                                             Decile
                                       4       5                                         1
                                                       6       7       8   9    10
                Establishment Effect Decile


Note: figure shows joint distribution of estimated person and establishment effects from AKM
model. See Table 3 for summary of model parameters.




                Figure 10b: Joint Distribution of Person and
                      Establishment Effects, Interval 4

        0.03


         0.02


         0.01                                                                                    10
                                                                                             7
          0.00                                                                           4       Person Effect
                  1   2                                                                             Decile
                           3       4       5                                         1
                                                   6       7       8   9   10
                  Establishment Effect Decile

Note: figure shows joint distribution of estimated person and establishment effects from AKM model. See
Table 3 for summary of model parameters.
                                               Figure 11: Decomposition of Variance of Log Wages
                      0.30

                                  Variance of Residual
                                  Covariance of Sum of Person & Establ. Effects with Covariate Index (Xb)
                      0.25
                                  Covariance of Person and Establishment Effects
                                  Variance of Covariate Index (Xb)
                                  Variance of Establishment Effects
                      0.20
                                  Variance of Person Effects
Variance Components




                      0.15



                      0.10



                      0.05



                      0.00
                      1985‐1991                                  1990‐1996                                   1996‐2002                                   2002‐2009
                             Notes: figure shows terms in decomposition of observed variance of log wages for full time male workers, based on estimated AKM
                             models shown in Table 3. See text for decomposition formula.
                                                                          Figure 12: Assignment of Workers to Establishments by Education Group:
                                                                                                    1985‐91 vs. 2002‐09
                                                           0.2
Mean Establishment Effect in Education Group




                                                                                                                           2002‐09 Assignment:
                                                                                                                           slope = 0.26
                                                           0.1          1985‐91 Assignment:
                                                                        slope = 0.06



                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                                                               University grads

                                                                                                                     Apprentices
                                                                                                                     (reference group)
                                                           ‐0.1


                                                                                                                   1985‐1991                      2002‐2009

                                                           ‐0.2
                                                                 ‐0.4                  ‐0.2                   0                  0.2                 0.4                                 0.6                       0.8
                                                                                              Mean Person Effect in Education Group (relative to apprentices)
                                         Notes: figure plots estimated mean establishment effects in 1985‐1991 (red diamonds) or 2002‐2009 (blue squares) for each of 4 major education
                                         groups against corresponding estimates of mean person effects in same years. Mean person and establishment effects for each time interval are
                                         deviated from mean for "apprentice" education group. Dashed line shows OLS regression of mean establishment effects against mean person effects in
                                         1985‐1991. Solid line shows similar regression in 2002‐2009. See Table 4 for list of education groups. Note that "missing or none" education group
                                         is not included in this Figure.




                                                                                   Figure 13: Mundlak Decomposition of Return to Education

                                                          0.14                                                                                                                                            1
                     Returns to Own/Co‐worker Schooling




                                                                         OLS return (left scale)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                Education Sorting Index
                                                          0.10


                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                   Within‐establishment return (left scale)

                                                          0.06      Return to coworker schooling
                                                                    (left scale)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                     Education sorting index (right scale)



                                                          0.02                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                             1985         1987     1989         1991      1993       1995      1997         1999       2001        2003       2005        2007       2009
                                                                                                                              Year
                                                           Note: figure shows components of decomposition of conventional (OLS) return to education in each year. The OLS return (plotted with red
                                                           squares) is the sum of the within‐establishment return (plotted with blue circles) and the product of the return to co‐worker schooling
                                                           (plotted with yellow triangles) and the education sorting index (plotted with pale green diamonds). See text for formula, first derived
                                                           by Mundlak (1978). OLS return is coefficient on years of schooling in regression model for log real daily wages that also controls for cubic
                                                           in experience.
                                                                                  Figure 14a: Between‐Occupation Wage Inequality: 2002‐09 vs. 1985‐91
                                                          5.2


                                                          5.0
                  Mean Log Wage in Occupation, 2002‐09




                                                          4.8

                                                                                                                                                                                     OLS regression line:
                                                          4.6
                                                                                                                                                                                     slope = 1.13

                                                          4.4


                                                          4.2


                                                          4.0


                                                          3.8


                                                          3.6
                                                                 3.6                3.8               4.0               4.2              4.4               4.6               4.8               5.0                5.2
                                                                                                                     Mean Log Wage in Occupation, 1985‐91

                                                                       Notes: figure plots mean log real wages of full time male workers in an occupation in 2002‐2009 against corresponding mean in 1985‐1991.
                                                                       There are 342 3‐digit occupations shown. Dashed line is OLS regression fit.




                                                                        Figure 14b: Rising Correlation Between Mean Worker and Establishment Effects
                                                                                                       Across Occupations
                                                         1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                        2002‐09
Mean Establishment Effect in Occupation




                                                         0.8                                                                                                                            slope=0.17


                                                         0.6




                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                       1985‐91
                                                                                                                                                                                       slope = 0.04

                                                         0.2


                                                                                                                                               1985‐1991                 2002‐2009
                                                         0.0
                                                               3.4                        3.6                  3.8                     4.0                     4.2                    4.4                     4.6
                                                                                                                     Mean Worker Effect in Occupation
                                                                     Note: figure plots estimated mean establishment effect in each of 342 occupations in 1985‐1991 (yellow diamonds) or 2002‐2009 (red
                                                                     squares) against corresponding estimated mean person effect in each occupation. Solid line shows estimated OLS regression relating the mean
                                                                     establishment effect in each occupation in 2002‐2009 to the corresponding mean person effect. Dashed line shows corresponding OLS regression
                                                                     for 1985‐1991 data.
                                                                Figure 15: Standard Deviation of Establishment Effects and Fraction Covered by
                                                                             Collective Agreements, by Birth Year of Establishment

                                                                                                                                                                                          Fraction Covered
                                                         0.70                                                                                                                             (1999‐2008 LIAB)
                     Standard Deviation, Coverage Rate




                                                         0.60                                                                                                                             Std. Dev. of
                                                                                                                                                                                          Establ. Effects in
                                                                                                                                                                                          1985‐91
                                                         0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                          Std. Dev. of
                                                                                                                                                                                          Establ. Effects in
                                                         0.40                                                                                                                             1990‐1996

                                                                                                                                                                                          Std. Dev. of
                                                         0.30                                                                                                                             Establ. Effects in
                                                                                                                                                                                          1996‐2002
                                                         0.20                                                                                                                             Std. Dev. of
                                                                                                                                                                                          Establ. Effects in
                                                                                                                                                                                          2002‐2009
                                                         0.10
                                                            1985             1989              1993               1997                2001                2005               2009
                                                                                                  First Year of Observation in IAB
                           Notes: figure shows standard deviation of estimated establishment effects in a given observation interval (1985‐ 1991,
                           1990‐1996, 1996‐2002, or 2002‐2009) for establishments that are present in that interval and first appeared with positive
                           full time male employment in the IEB data in the "birth year" indicated on the x‐axis. Figure also shows fraction of
                           establishments in a given birth year surveyed in the 1999‐2008 LIAB that are covered by collective agreements.



                                                                       Figure 16: Distribution of Establishment Effects by Collective Bargaining Status
                                                                       (Based on Establishment Effects for 1996‐2002, Bargaining Status in 2000 LIAB)
                                       0.30


                                       0.25
                                                                                                                                      In Sectoral Agreement
                                       0.20                                                                                           Firm‐specific Contract
Fraction in Decile




                                                                                                                                      No Collective Bargain
                                       0.15


                                       0.10


                                       0.05


                                       0.00
                                                                   1          2            3              4            5          6                   7              8              9             10
                                                                                                              Establishment Effect Decile

                                                Note: figure shows distribution of collective bargaining coverage status (no collective bargain, covered by firm‐specific agreement, or covered by sectoral
                                                agreement) for 7,080 establishments in 2000 Wave of LIAB that can be linked to IEB data, and for which estimated establishment effect from AKM model
                                                fit to 2002‐2009 IEB data is in decile shown on x‐axis.
                                  Figure 17a: Survivor Functions for Establishments First Observed in 1989
                                               By Quartile of Estimated Establishment Effect
                       100
                        90
                                                                                                                                           Quartile 4
                        80
                                                                                                                                           Quartile 3
                        70                                                                                                                 Quartile 2
Percent Still Active




                        60                                                                                                                 Quartile 1

                        50
                        40
                        30
                        20
                        10
                         0
                             0             2              4             6              8             10             12             14             16             18             20
                                                                                            Years Still Active


                         Notes: figure shows fraction of establishments that first appear in IEB data with positive full time male employment in 1989 that are still present
                         after number of years indicated by x‐axis. Establishments are divided into quartiles based on their estimated establishment effects from an AKM
                         model fit to data from 1985 to 1991. Quartile 1 refers to the lowest quartile of estimated establishment effects.




                                                  Figure 17b: Survivor Functions for Jobs Initiated in 1989
                                                       By Quartile of Estimated Establishment Effect
                       100

                        90

                        80
                                                                                                                                          Quartile 4
                        70                                                                                                                Quartile 3
Percent Still Active




                                                                                                                                          Quartile 2
                        60
                                                                                                                                          Quartile 1
                        50

                        40

                        30

                        20

                        10

                         0
                             0             2             4              6             8             10             12            14             16             18              20
                                                                                           Years Still Active

                       Notes: figure shows fraction of jobs held by full time male workers in IEB that were initiated in 1989 and are still present after number of years
                       indicated by x‐axis. Establishments are divided into quartiles based on their estimated establishment effects from an AKM model fit to data from
                       1985 to 1991. Quartile 1 refers to the lowest quartile of estimated establishment effects.
Table 1: Summary Statistics for Overall Sample and Individuals in Largest Connected Set

                                          All full time men, age 20-60                            Individuals in Largest Connected Set
                           Number              Number          Log Real Daily Wage         Number           Number          Log Real Daily Wage
Interval                person/yr. obs.       Individuals      Mean       Std. Dev.     person/yr. obs.    Individuals      Mean       Std. Dev.
                             (1)                  (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)               (6)            (7)          (8)
1985-1991                 86,230,097          17,021,779        4.344      0.379         84,185,730        16,295,106       4.351        0.370
largest connected/all                                                                       97.6              95.7          100.2        97.7


1990-1996                 90,742,309          17,885,361        4.391      0.392         88,662,398        17,223,290       4.398        0.384
largest connected/all                                                                       97.7              96.3          100.2        97.9


1996-2002                 85,853,626          17,094,254        4.397      0.439         83,699,582        16,384,815       4.405        0.432
largest connected/all                                                                       97.5              95.8          100.2        98.3


2002-2009                 93,037,963          16,553,835        4.387      0.505         90,615,841        15,834,602       4.397        0.499
largest connected/all                                                                       97.4              95.7          100.2        98.8


Change from first                                               0.043      0.126                                            0.045        0.128
 to last interval
Notes: Sample consists of full-time male workers ages 20-60 employed in non-marginal jobs and not currently in training. Daily wage is imputed for
censored observations (see Appendix for details). "Connected set" refers to group of firms connected by worker mobility over the sample interval
(for details, see Abowd, Creecy, and Kramarz, 2002).
Table 2: Estimation Results for AKM Model, Fit by Interval
                                               Interval 1        Interval 2         Interval 3         Interval 4
                                              1985-1991         1990-1996          1996-2002          2002-2009
                                                   (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)
Person and Establishment Parameters:
 Number person effects                       16,295,106         17,223,290         16,384,815         15,834,602
 Number establishment effects                 1,221,098          1,357,824          1,476,705         1,504,095
Summary of Parameter Estimates:
 Std. dev. of person effects                    0.289              0.304              0.327             0.357
 Std. dev. of establ. effects                   0.159              0.172              0.194             0.230
 Std. dev. of Xb                                0.121              0.088              0.093             0.084
  Correlation of person/establ. effects         0.034              0.097              0.169             0.249
  (across person-year obs.)
  Correlation of person effects/Xb              -0.051            -0.102             -0.063             0.029
  (across person-year obs.)
  Correlation of establ. effects/Xb             0.057              0.039              0.050             0.112
  (across person-year obs.)
  RMSE of AKM
  (degrees      residual
           of freedom)                          0.119
                                             66,669,487            0.121
                                                                70,081,245            0.130
                                                                                   65,838,023            0.135
                                                                                                      73,277,100
  Adjusted R-squared                            0.896              0.901              0.909             0.927
Comparison Match Model
  RMSE of Match model                           0.103              0.105              0.108             0.112
  Adjusted R-squared                            0.922              0.925              0.937             0.949
  Std. Dev. of Match Effect*                    0.060              0.060              0.072             0.075
Addendum
Std. Dev. Log Wages                             0.370              0.384              0.432             0.499
Sample size                                   84,185,730          88,662,398       83,699,582           90,615,841
Notes: Results from OLS estimation of equation (1) in text, see computational appendix for details. See notes to
Table 1 for sample composition. Xb includes year dummies interacted with education dummies, and quadratic and
cubic terms in age interacted with education dummies (total of 39 parameters in intervals 1-3, 44 in interval 4).
Match model includes Xb and separate dummy for each job (person-establishment pair).
*Standard deviation of match effect estimated as square root of difference in mean squared errors between AKM
model and match effect model.
Table 3: Decomposition of the Rise in Wage Inequality


                                                               Interval 1                              Interval 4                          Change in Variance
                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                    Var. Component     Share of Total       Var. Component     Share of Total           (percent of total change)
                                                           (1)              (2)                    (3)              (4)                            (5)

Total variance of log wages                                0.137              100.0                0.249               100.0                 0.112            100

Components of Variance:
Variance of person effect                                  0.084               61.3                0.127               51.2                  0.043            39
Variance of establ. effect                                 0.025               18.5                0.053               21.2                  0.027            25
Variance of Xb                                             0.015               10.7                0.007                2.8                 -0.008             -7
Variance of residual                                       0.011               8.2                 0.015                5.9                  0.003             3
2cov(person, establ.)                                      0.003               2.3                 0.041               16.4                  0.038            34
2cov(Xb, person+establ.)                                   -0.001              -1.0                0.006                2.4                  0.007             7
                                                            **
Counterfactuals for Variance of log wages in interval 4:
1. No rise in correl. of person/estab. effects             0.137                                   0.213                                     0.077            69
2. No rise in var. of estab. effect                        0.137                                   0.209                                     0.072            64
3. Both 1 and 2                                            0.137                                   0.184                                     0.047            42
Notes: See notes to Table 1 for sample composition. Calculations based on estimated AKM models summarized in Table 2.
*
 First entry is change in variance/variance component from interval 1 to interval 4. Second entry shows ratio of change in the variance component to the
total change in variance of wages in row 1 (as a percentage).
**
  Counterfactual 1 computes the counterfactual rise in variance assuming the correlation between the person and establishment effects remains at its
interval 1 value -- i.e. imposing the restriction that Cov4(person, establ.) = ρ1 Var4(person)1/2 x Var4(establ.)1/2 where the 4 subscript refers to the interval 4
value of the statistic and ρ1 is the correlation between the person and establishment effects in interval 1. Counterfactual 2 assumes that the variance of
establishment effects remains at its interval 1 level. Counterfactual 3 imposes both of these restrictions.
Table 4: Decomposition of Changes in Relative Wages by Education Level, 1985-1991 vs 2002-2009

                                                                        Change in
                                                                     Mean Log Wage                                  Change in Mean
                                                                        Relative to           Change in Mean         Establishment
                                                                  Relative to Apprentices      Person Effect             Effect              Remainder
                                                                            (1)                     (2)                   (3)                    (4)
Highest Education Qualification:

1. Missing/none                                                            -14.6                    1.8                  -12.2                  -4.2

2. Lower secondary school or less (no vocational training)                 -10.5                    -0.1                  -6.3                  -4.1

3. Apprentices (lower secondary school with vocational training             0.0                     0.0                   0.0                    0.0

4. Abitur with or without vocational training*                             10.1                     0.0                   2.6                    7.5

5. University or more                                                       5.7                     1.5                   3.9                    0.3

Notes: Wage changes are measured between intervals 1 (1985-1991) and 4 (2002-2009). Remainder (column 4) represents changing relative contribution of Xb
component.
*Abitur refers to "Allgemeine Hochshulreife", a certificate of completion of advanced level high school.
Table 5: Contribution of Person and Establishment Effects to Wage Variation Across Occupations and Industries
                                                                                                                         Change in
                                          Interval 1       Interval 2        Interval 3         Interval 4        Variance (Int. 1 to Int 4)*
                                         1985-1991        1990-1996         1996-2002          2002-2009             Change          Share
                                              (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)             (6)
Panel A: Between Occupations (342 3-digit occupations)

Std. dev. of mean log wages                0.217             0.221             0.246             0.279                0.031          100
Std. dev. of mean person effects           0.183             0.195             0.195             0.207                0.009          31
Std. dev. of mean estbl. effects           0.089             0.094             0.102             0.126                0.008          26
Correlation of mean person effects         0.082             0.111             0.284             0.296                0.013          42
  and establ. effects


Panel B: Between Industries (96 2-digit industries)

Std. dev. of mean log wages                0.173             0.184             0.203             0.224                0.020          100
Std. dev. of mean person effects           0.103             0.114             0.128             0.140                0.009          44
Std. dev. of mean estbl. effects           0.104             0.110             0.108             0.121                0.004          19
Correlation of mean person effects         0.242             0.301             0.422             0.403                0.008          42
  and establ. effects

Notes: decompositions based on estimated AKM models summarized in Table 2. Individuals are assigned one occupation per interval;
establishments are assigned one industry per interval (see Appendix).
*Entry in column 5 represents change in variance or covariance component. Entry in column 6 is the share of the total change in variance
explained. Shares do not add to 100% because Xb component and its covariances are omitted.
                                                             Appendix Figure 1: Establishment Size Distributions
                                                                        Panel A: Overall Distribution

                            70


                            60



                            50
Percent of Establishments




                            40
                                                          1985

                                                          1995
                            30
                                                          2008

                            20



                            10


                             0
                                     1‐3         4‐7        8‐14      15‐34        35‐74     75‐149      150‐349   350‐749   750‐2999      3000+
                                                                         Number of Employees (FT Men Only)


                            Notes: figure shows size distribution of establishments in years indicated. Employment counts include full time men only.


                                                                              Panel B: Upper Tail Only


                            0.80


                            0.70


                            0.60
                                                                        1985
Percent of Establishments




                            0.50
                                                                        1995

                            0.40                                        2008


                            0.30


                            0.20


                            0.10


                            0.00
                                            150‐349                      350‐749                      750‐2999                     3000+
                                                                           Number of Employees (FT Men Only)

                            Notes: figure shows conditional size distribution of establishments in years indicated, among establishments with 150 or
                            more full time male workers. Employment counts include full time men only.
                                                            Appendix Figure 2: Censoring of Wages and Gaps Between Imputed and Censored Series

                                              0.14
Fraction Censored, Gaps in Mean and Std Dev




                                              0.12


                                              0.10
                                                                            Fraction Censored

                                                                            Gap in Std Dev of Log Wages
                                              0.08
                                                                            Gap in Mean Log Wages

                                              0.06


                                              0.04


                                              0.02


                                              0.00
                                                  1985        1987         1989        1991        1993        1995        1997        1999        2001        2003         2005        2007        2009
                                                                                                                           Year

                                              Notes: figure shows fraction of wage observations censored in each year (plotted with yellow triangles) as well as the gap between the standard deviation
                                              (red squares) or mean of log real wages (blue circles) between samples in which censored upper tail of wages has been imputed using flexible Tobit
                                              models, and sample with no correction for censoring. Wages refer to mean daily wages for full time male workers on the main job in each calendar year.




                                                            Appendix Figure 3: Wage Inequality Trends for Males versus Female; Full Time
                                                                                        Workers versus All
                                               1.2

                                                                          All Female Workers

                                                                          Full Time Female Workers
Normalized 80‐20 Log Wage Gap




                                                                          All Male Workers

                                                                          Full Time Male Workers


                                               0.8




                                               0.4
                                                  1985         1987        1989         1991         1993        1995           1997       1999         2001        2003         2005            2007
                                                                                                                         Year

                                                     Notes: based on tabulations of SIAB . Measured wage is average daily wage in job with highest total earnings in the year. Wage gap is the
                                                     difference between the 80th percentile of log real wages and the 20th percentile, divided by 80‐20 gap for a standard normal variate.
Appendix Table 1a: Job Spells and Main Jobs in IEB Data Base

                                                     1985                    1997                   2009

1. Number of Full Time Job Spells                13,987,548              14,919,079              14,911,559
  (men age 20‐60, non‐marginal jobs)

2. Number of unique person‐firm‐                 13,181,917              13,968,286              13,456,305
   year observations

3. Number of person‐year observations            11,980,159              12,661,995              12,104,223
   (highest‐paying job only)

4. Average number of spells per                      1.06                    1.07                    1.11
  job in year

5. Average number of jobs per year                   1.10                    1.10                    1.11
Notes: each "job spell" represents a notification of employment in the IEB data base. The entry in row 1 is the
number of such notifications for full time, non‐marginal jobs held by men age 20‐60. Row 2 shows the number of
unique person‐firm‐year observations after collapsing multiple spells at the same employer in the same year.
Row 3 shows the number of person observations after selecting the person‐firm‐year observation with the
highest total earnings in the year as the "main job" in a given year. Row 4 gives the ratio of row 1 to row 2. Row 5
gives the ratio of row 2 to row 3.
Appendix Table 1b: Basic Summary Statistics for IAB Sample
                                  Annual Earnings     Daily Wage (real Euro/day)          Log Real Daily Wage
            Number Observations    (real Euros)          Mean           Std. Dev          Mean          Std. Dev
     1985       11,980,159             24,088              72.56          23.13            4.221           0.387
     1986       12,275,222             25,092              75.24          24.45            4.255           0.396
     1987       12,360,859             25,793              76.92          24.89            4.277           0.398
     1988       12,467,192             26,403              78.19          25.93            4.291           0.404
     1989       12,715,727             26,506              78.28          25.81            4.293           0.401
     1990       13,289,988             26,967              79.72          26.02            4.312           0.398
     1991       13,688,681             26,750              80.92          26.18            4.327           0.397
     1992       13,991,600             27,052              81.12          26.33            4.329           0.398
     1993       13,643,435             27,481              81.41          27.26            4.330           0.405
     1994       13,248,077             27,002              81.22          27.95            4.325           0.412
     1995       13,101,809             27,874              82.56          28.56            4.340           0.415
     1996       12,813,804             27,251              82.42          29.02            4.335           0.423
     1997       12,661,995             26,813              81.42          29.56            4.318           0.438
     1998       12,677,201             27,271              82.29          30.59            4.325           0.448
     1999       12,719,922             27,259              82.94          31.26            4.329           0.458
     2000       12,930,046             27,388              82.95          31.60            4.327           0.464
     2001       12,906,292             27,398              82.89          31.75            4.325           0.469
     2002       12,610,572             27,425              82.86          31.89            4.323           0.475
     2003       12,336,685             28,222              84.95          35.57            4.335           0.501
     2004       12,083,070             28,100              84.01          35.73            4.320           0.510
     2005       11,857,526             27,960              83.47          36.07            4.310           0.519
     2006       11,977,347             27,642              82.73          36.44            4.297           0.528
     2007       12,222,754             27,255              81.68          36.12            4.282           0.533
     2008       12,323,655             27,169              80.99          35.72            4.274           0.533
     2009       12,104,223             27,179              81.35          36.23            4.277           0.535
Notes: sample includes men in West Germany age 20‐60, working full time in non‐marginal jobs. Earnings data for
each person is based on earnings for the year at the employer who paid the most in that year. Individuals who
earned less than 10 euros per day are excluded. Daily wage is censored at Social Security maximum for the
corresponding year (total earnings are likewise censored).
Appendix Table 2: Tobit Models for Apprentices, Age 40‐49 in Selected Years

                                                       1985                1997               2009
Moments of Unadjusted Log Wage Data:
 Mean                                                  4.382              4.4612             4.434
    Std. Deviation                                    0.2677              0.3104             0.3563
    Fraction Censored                                  0.155               0.107             0.0726

Parameter Estimates from Tobit model:
 Intercept                                             0.539              ‐0.108             ‐0.194
                                                      (0.030)             (0.020)            (0.003)
    Age/10                                             0.026              ‐0.009             ‐0.103
                                                      (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.003)
    Fraction of person's other wage                    0.268               0.270              0.699
      observations censored                           (0.003)             (0.005)            (0.011)
    Mean of log wage for person                        0.693               0.909              0.819
     in other years                                   (0.003)             (0.003)            (0.004)
    Dummy for firm size > 10                           ‐0.006             ‐0.006              0.005
                                                      (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.002)
    Fraction of workers at firm with                   ‐0.045             ‐0.013              0.007
     university degree*                               (0.012)             (0.011)            (0.014)
    Mean years of schooling of workers                 ‐0.014             ‐0.010             ‐0.007
     at firm*                                         (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.002)
    Fraction of co‐workers with                        0.093               0.000              0.135
     censored wage**                                  (0.007)             (0.007)            (0.010)
    Mean log wage of co‐workers**                      0.187               0.163              0.374
                                                      (0.004)             (0.004)            (0.004)
    Dummy if person observed in                        ‐0.398             ‐0.935             ‐0.808
     only 1 year                                      (0.005)             (0.013)            (0.016)
    Dummy if firm has only 1                           ‐0.223             ‐0.178             ‐0.386
     worker                                           (0.005)             (0.005)            (0.006)
Estimated scale parameter                              0.147               0.135              0.195
                                                      (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.001)

Sample size                                           62,889              58,392             65,904
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. Table entries are coefficient estimates from Tobit models fit to
log real daily wages, with censoring at the Social Security maximum contribution rate. Models also
include firm size (number of current‐year full time male employees) and its square.
*
Characteristics of full‐time male (non‐marginal) employees at the same firm.

**Statistic is calculated for full‐time male employees at the same firm, excluding the individual of
interest. For employers with one firm, statistic is set to mean.
Appendix Table 3: Mean Log Wages Before and After Job Change, for Movers with Two
or More Years of Wage Data Before and After Job Change
                                               Mean Log Wages of Movers
                         Number of       2 years  1 year    1 year    2 years               4 Year Change
    Origin/destination    Changes:       before   before     after      after            Raw        Adjusted**
         quartile*          (1)            (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)               (6)          (7)
Interval 1: 1985‐1991
       1 to 1              333,648        4.003      4.025      4.085      4.113          0.110        0.000
       1 to 2              206,251        4.063      4.085      4.207      4.248          0.185        0.075
       1 to 3              136,119        4.064      4.087      4.271      4.323          0.260        0.150
       1 to 4               82,193        4.102      4.132      4.380      4.444          0.342        0.232

          2 to 1           125,376        4.160      4.178      4.144      4.175          0.015        ‐0.072
          2 to 2           204,787        4.229      4.251      4.286      4.316          0.087         0.000
          2 to 3           158,360        4.258      4.278      4.359      4.395          0.137         0.051
          2 to 4            86,038        4.298      4.324      4.474      4.529          0.231         0.144

          3 to 1            59,334        4.245      4.261      4.163      4.194         ‐0.051        ‐0.153
          3 to 2            91,474        4.315      4.337      4.333      4.371          0.056        ‐0.046
          3 to 3           173,160        4.384      4.409      4.452      4.486          0.102         0.000
          3 to 4           136,569        4.460      4.487      4.594      4.635          0.175         0.073

          4 to 1            30,110        4.373      4.396      4.252      4.284         ‐0.089        ‐0.220
          4 to 2            41,079        4.459      4.488      4.447      4.487          0.028        ‐0.103
          4 to 3            91,177        4.552      4.584      4.596      4.633          0.080        ‐0.051
          4 to 4           290,921        4.678      4.710      4.777      4.809          0.131         0.000

Interval 4: 2002‐2009
       1 to 1              541,307        3.880      3.873      3.867      3.875         ‐0.005        0.000
       1 to 2              197,982        4.018      4.017      4.165      4.182          0.164        0.054
       1 to 3               88,768        3.999      4.015      4.291      4.325          0.325        0.215
       1 to 4               49,167        4.056      4.083      4.468      4.521          0.465        0.355

          2 to 1           208,184        4.202      4.190      4.021      4.030         ‐0.171        ‐0.258
          2 to 2           333,219        4.315      4.309      4.305      4.309         ‐0.007         0.000
          2 to 3           137,528        4.381      4.377      4.437      4.456          0.075        ‐0.012
          2 to 4            59,080        4.473      4.479      4.625      4.673          0.200         0.114

          3 to 1            73,218        4.338      4.333      4.024      4.042         ‐0.296        ‐0.398
          3 to 2           133,606        4.456      4.458      4.390      4.401         ‐0.055        ‐0.157
          3 to 3           275,521        4.550      4.552      4.563      4.568          0.018         0.000
          3 to 4           150,989        4.678      4.690      4.768      4.805          0.127         0.025

          4 to 1            32,664        4.518      4.526      4.139      4.167         ‐0.351        ‐0.482
          4 to 2            47,193        4.655      4.671      4.534      4.560         ‐0.095        ‐0.226
          4 to 3           127,276        4.744      4.763      4.721      4.749          0.005        ‐0.126
          4 to 4           546,855        4.937      4.957      4.973      5.021          0.083         0.000
Notes: entries are mean log real daily wages for job changers who are observed with at least 2 years of data
prior to a job change, and two years after.
*
Quartiles are based on mean wages of co‐workers at old job in year prior to move, and in new job in year after
move.
**
 Four year wage change for origin‐destination group minus change for job changers who remain in same
quartile.
Appendix Table 4: Estimation Results for AKM Model, Fit by Interval for Apprentices Only
                                          Interval 1        Interval 2        Interval 3        Interval 4          Ratio:
                                         1985‐1991         1990‐1996         1996‐2002         2002‐2009         int. 4/int. 1
                                              (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
Person and Establishment Parameters:
 Number person effects               10,128,342            10,346,742         9,288,956         8,145,059
    Number establishment effects         1,008,959         1,078,911          1,093,438          990,608
Summary of Parameter Estimates:
 Std. dev. of person effects               0.241             0.249              0.271             0.285             1.19
    Std. dev. of establ. effects           0.152             0.159              0.170             0.202             1.33
    Std. dev. of Xb                        0.121             0.080              0.073             0.064             0.53
    Correlation of person/est effects      ‐0.035            0.008              0.048             0.098
    (across person‐year obs.)
    Correlation of person effects/Xb       0.050             0.075             ‐0.029             0.020
    (across person‐year obs.)
    Correlation of establ. effects/Xb      0.064             0.064              0.048             0.082
    (across person‐year obs.)
    RMSE of AKM residual                   0.110             0.109              0.110             0.110             1.00
    Adjusted R‐squared                     0.887             0.891              0.901             0.919
Comparison Match Model
  RMSE of Match model                      0.096             0.095              0.094             0.094             0.99

                            *
Std. Dev of Match Effect                   0.054             0.052              0.056             0.057             1.04

Std. Dev. Log Wages                        0.328             0.329              0.349             0.388             1.18
Sample size                            54,993,845        56,701,812        51,031,280       50,700,611
Notes: see notes to Table 2. Models reported here are estimated for subsample of workers with apprenticeship training
only. Xb includes year dummies and quadratic and cubic terms in age (total of 8 parameters in intervals 1‐3, 9 in interval 4).
Match model includes Xb and separate dummy for each job (person‐establishment pair).
*
 Standard deviation of match effect estimated as square root of difference in mean squared errors between AKM model
and match effect model.
Appendix Table 5: Decompositions of Rise in Wage Inequality for Apprentices
                                                              Interval 1                              Interval 4                       Change in Variance
                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                   Var. Component     Share of Total       Var. Component     Share of Total          (pct. of total change)
                                                          (1)              (2)                    (3)              (4)                           (5)

Total variance of log wages                               0.108              100.0                0.150               100.0              0.043         100

Components of Variance:
Variance of person effect                                 0.058               53.7                0.081               54.2               0.024          55
Variance of establ. effect                                0.023               21.3                0.041               27.1               0.018          42
Variance of Xb                                            0.015               13.6                0.004                2.7              ‐0.011         ‐25
Variance of residual                                      0.010                8.9                0.010                6.6               0.000          1
2cov(person, establ.)                                     ‐0.003              ‐2.4                0.011                7.5               0.014          32
2cov(Xb, person+establ.)                                  0.005                4.9                0.003                1.9              ‐0.002          ‐6

Counterfactuals for Variance of log wages in interval 4: **

1. No rise in correl. of person/estab. effects            0.108                                   0.143                                  0.035          82
2. No rise in var. of estab. effect                       0.108                                   0.131                                  0.023          55
3. Both 1 and 2                                           0.108                                   0.125                                  0.018          42
Notes: see notes to Table 3. Calculations based on estimated AKM models summarized in Appendix Table 4.
*
 First entry is change in variance/variance component from interval 1 to interval 4. Second entry shows ratio of change in the variance component to the
total change in variance of wages in row 1 (as a percent).
**
  Counterfactual 1 computes the counterfactual rise in variance assuming the correlation between the person and establishment effects remains at its
interval 1 value ‐‐ i.e. imposing the restriction that Cov4(person, establ.) = ρ1 Var4(person)1/2 x Var4(establ.)1/2 where subscript 4 refers to the interval 4
value of the statistic and and ρ1 is the correlation between the person and establishment effects in interval 1. Counterfactual 2 assumes that the variance
of establishment effects remains at its interval 1 level. Counterfactual 3 imposes both of these restrictions.
Appendix Table 6: Number and Chararacteristics of New Establishments

                                                       Pct. of Establishments:
 First Year                Employment (FT Men)           Always     Always            Log Real Wage             Residual Wage           Human Capital Index
  in IAB      Number         Mean       Std Dev        1 worker    >3 workers        Mean        Std Dev       Mean      Std Dev          Mean      Std Dev
   (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)           (11)        (12)
   1985        951,170        12.4       123.7            22.4         26.3           4.044       0.443         ‐0.224      0.373          1.010       0.222
   1986        122,770         3.3        11.7            43.7         7.4            3.848       0.539         ‐0.370      0.454          0.998       0.302
   1987        98,037          3.7        17.1            42.9         8.4            3.848       0.534         ‐0.376      0.457          0.999       0.293
   1988        95,999          3.9        20.5            42.1         9.0            3.862       0.531         ‐0.376      0.461          1.002       0.279
   1989        94,434          4.2        23.7            41.0         9.8            3.900       0.526         ‐0.355      0.456          1.007       0.271
   1990        103,813         4.2        18.9            40.5         10.1           3.910       0.519         ‐0.358      0.457          1.009       0.263
   1991        105,670         4.0        19.4            41.0         10.3           3.902       0.520         ‐0.369      0.468          1.010       0.259
   1992        117,003         5.0        26.2            38.3         12.8           3.917       0.500         ‐0.366      0.443          1.013       0.265
   1993        107,323         4.3        29.1            40.1         11.7           3.909       0.513         ‐0.353      0.451          1.008       0.261
   1994        107,704         4.4        20.4            40.3         12.1           3.905       0.514         ‐0.353      0.455          1.008       0.259
   1995        109,800         4.5        26.3            40.4         11.9           3.898       0.520         ‐0.359      0.462          1.008       0.259
   1996        107,663         5.1        22.2            39.1         13.1           3.891       0.519         ‐0.355      0.464          1.005       0.255
   1997        110,277         4.7        43.2            39.6         12.9           3.857       0.536         ‐0.375      0.481          1.003       0.260
   1998        116,886         4.7        26.6            40.1         12.7           3.868       0.538         ‐0.370      0.479          1.004       0.269
   1999        127,818         4.6        25.5            40.1         13.1           3.854       0.547         ‐0.371      0.491          1.002       0.273
   2000        122,357         4.6        20.7            40.7         13.7           3.861       0.562         ‐0.354      0.499          1.000       0.282
   2001        117,078         4.7        26.1            42.0         14.1           3.848       0.578         ‐0.363      0.510          0.999       0.288
   2002        110,888         4.6        32.5            43.5         13.9           3.818       0.580         ‐0.378      0.513          0.996       0.290
   2003        107,526         4.5        17.1            43.5         15.1           3.800       0.585         ‐0.381      0.514          0.994       0.296
   2004        107,681         4.4        22.8            44.7         14.9           3.762       0.588         ‐0.398      0.520          0.989       0.301
   2005        103,718         4.2        19.8            45.7         14.9           3.745       0.591         ‐0.404      0.524          0.987       0.310
   2006        103,802         4.1        19.4            47.4         15.1           3.734       0.591         ‐0.401      0.521          0.984       0.317
   2007        106,549         4.0        17.3            50.5         15.9           3.711       0.626         ‐0.416      0.553          0.982       0.326
   2008        98,890          3.6        20.5            55.0         17.1           3.730       0.620         ‐0.392      0.538          0.981       0.341
Notes: employment and wage data pertain to full time non‐marginal male workers only. Residual wage (columns 9‐10) is wage, deviated from prediction from a
standard Mincer‐type model fit separately by year. Human capital index (columns 11‐12) is predicted wage from a standard Mincer‐type model fit to all sample
years (index is normalized to have value of 1 across all years).
Appendix Table 7: Probit, OLS and Tobit Models for Establishment Survival

                            Probit:          Probit:            OLS              Tobit
                         Survive 5 yrs.   Survive 10 yrs.   Survival Time     Suvival Time
                              (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)
Panel A: Establishments First Observed 1985-1991 (n=1,221,098)
1. Establishment           0.256           0.265            1.782                  2.004
   Effect (interval 1)    (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.023)                (0.030)
  [coefficient/σ]                                                                 0.197

2. Mean Person               0.259            0.234             1.619              1.927
   Effect (interval 1)      (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.032)            (0.042)
  [coefficient/σ]                                                                 0.189
3. Standard deviation         --                --             7.996              10.182
   of latent time (σ)                                                             (0.008)

Mean of Dep. Var.           0.674             0.521                      12.475
Fraction Censored             --                --                        .250

Panel B: Establishments First Observed 1990-1996 (n=603,417)
1. Establishment             0.317            0.357             1.655              2.045
   Effect (interval 2)      (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.020)            (0.025)
   [coefficient/σ]                                                                 0.284

2. Mean Person               0.367            0.348             1.821              2.234
   Effect (interval 2)      (0.006)          (0.007)           (0.029)            (0.036)
  [coefficient/σ]                                                                 0.310
3. Standard deviation         --                --             5.878               7.212
   of latent time (σ)                                                             (0.008)
Mean of Dep. Var.           0.495             0.326                      7.630
Fraction Censored             --                --                       0.211

Panel C: Establishments First Observed 1996-2002 (n=646,729)
1. Establishment           0.279                           0.895                   1.245
   Effect (interval 3)    (0.004)                         (0.012)                 (0.017)
  [coefficient/σ]                                                                 0.243

2. Mean Person               0.338                              1.126              1.543
   Effect (interval 3)      (0.006)                            (0.017)            (0.023)
  [coefficient/σ]                                                                 0.302

3. Standard deviation         --                               3.849               5.115
   of latent time (σ)                                                             (0.006)

Mean of Dep. Var.           0.449                                        5.710
Fraction Censored             --                                         0.286
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. All models include additional controls for log of
number of employees, mean schooling of employees, and dummies for year first observed in
IAB. Sample includes establishments first observed in IEB data with positive male full time
employment in years indicated in panel heading. Outcome variable is dummy for surviving 5
or 10 years (columns 1-2), or survival time (columns 3-4). Note that sample in panel A
includes 748,192 establishments that were in operation in 1985, and whose duration is left
censored.
Appendix Table 8: Probit, OLS and Tobit Models for Job Survival (Fit to 5% Sample of Jobs)

                            Probit:            Probit:            OLS                  Tobit
                         Survive 3 yrs.     Survive 5 yrs.    Survival Time         Suvival Time
                              (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)
Panel A: Jobs First Observed 1985-1991 (n=1,264,498)
1. Establishment            0.488            0.444                 1.309               1.339
   Effect (interval 1)     (0.008)          (0.008)               (0.034)             (0.037)
  [coefficient/σ]                                                                      0.206

2. Person Effect             0.764              0.664              2.508               2.530
   (interval 1)             (0.005)            (0.005)            (0.024)             (0.024)
  [coefficient/σ]                                                                      0.389
3. Standard deviation          --                 --              6.148                6.504
   of latent time (σ)                                                                 (0.004)

Mean of Dep. Var.           0.505              0.389                        5.451
Fraction Censored             --                 --                         0.059

Panel B: Jobs First Observed 1990-1996 (n=854,522)
1. Establishment             0.700              0.712              1.938               2.039
   Effect (interval 2)      (0.008)            (0.009)            (0.026)             (0.028)
   [coefficient/σ]                                                                     0.411

2. Person Effect             0.816              0.713              2.286               2.360
   (interval 2)             (0.006)            (0.006)            (0.020)             (0.020)
  [coefficient/σ]                                                                      0.476
3. Standard deviation          --                 --              4.620                4.962
   of latent time (σ)                                                                 (0.004)
Mean of Dep. Var.           0.358              0.247                        3.372
Fraction Censored             --                 --                         0.074

Panel C: Establishments First Observed 1996-2002 (n=857,530)
1. Establishment            0.792            0.815            1.729                    1.952
   Effect (interval 3)     (0.007)          (0.008)          (0.017)                  (0.019)
  [coefficient/σ]                                                                      0.512

2. Person Effect             0.612              0.508              1.413               1.544
   (interval 2)             (0.005)            (0.006)            (0.013)             (0.015)
  [coefficient/σ]                                                                      0.405

3. Standard deviation          --                 --              3.327                3.810
   of latent time (σ)                                                                 (0.003)

Mean of Dep. Var.           0.344              0.241                        2.735
Fraction Censored             --                 --                         0.141
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. All models include additional controls for log of number of
employees, dummies for schooling levels of worker, and dummies for job start year. Sample
includes jobs first observed in IEB data in years indicated in panel heading. Outcome variable is
dummy for job surviving 3 or 5 years (columns 1-2), or survival time (columns 3-4). Note that
sample in panel A includes 583,456 jobs that were in progress in 1985, and whose duration is left
censored.
