NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL LABOR INCOME TAXATION
Thomas Piketty
Emmanuel Saez
Working Paper 18521
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18521
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

This paper is a chapter in preparation for the Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 5. We thank
Alan Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Peter Diamond, Laszlo Sandor, Joel Slemrod, Michael Stepner, Stefanie
Stantcheva, Floris Zoutman, and numerous conference participants for useful discussions and comments.
We acknowledge financial support from the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley, the MacArthur
foundation, and NSF Grant SES-1156240. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimal Labor Income Taxation
Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 18521
November 2012, Revised December 2012
JEL No. H21
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews recent developments in the theory of optimal labor income taxation. We emphasize
connections between theory and empirical work that were initially lacking from optimal income tax
theory. First, we provide historical and international background on labor income taxation and means-tested
transfers. Second, we present the simple model of optimal linear taxation. Third, we consider optimal
nonlinear income taxation with particular emphasis on the optimal top tax rate and the optimal profile
of means-tested transfers. Fourth, we consider various extensions of the standard model including
tax avoidance and income shifting, international migration, models with rent-seeking, relative income
concerns, the treatment of couples and children, and non-cash transfers. Finally, we discuss limitations
of the standard utilitarian approach and briefly review alternatives. In all cases, we use the simplest
possible models and show how optimal tax formulas can be derived and expressed in terms of sufficient
statistics that include social marginal welfare weights capturing society's value for redistribution, behavioral
elasticities capturing the efficiency costs of taxation, as well as parameters of the earnings distribution.
We also emphasize connections between actual practice and the predictions from theory, and in particular
the limitations of both theory and empirical work in settling the political debate on optimal labor income
taxation and transfers.
Thomas Piketty
Paris School of Economics
48 Boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris, France
piketty@ens.fr
Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu

Introduction
This handbook chapter considers optimal labor income taxation, that is, the fair and eﬃcient
distribution of the tax burden across individuals with diﬀerent earnings. A large academic
literature has developed models of optimal tax theory to cast light on this issue. Models in
optimal tax theory typically posit that the tax system should maximize a social welfare function
subject to a government budget constraint, taking into account how individuals respond to
taxes and transfers. Social welfare is larger when resources are more equally distributed, but
redistributive taxes and transfers can negatively aﬀect incentives to work and earn income in
the ﬁrst place. This creates the classical trade-oﬀ between equity and eﬃciency which is at the
core of the optimal labor income tax problem.
In this chapter, we present recent developments in the theory of optimal labor income taxation. We emphasize connections between theory and empirical work that were previously largely
absent from the optimal income tax literature. Therefore, throughout the chapter, we focus less
on formal modeling and rigorous derivations than was done in previous surveys on this topic
(Mirrlees 1976, 1986, Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1980, Stiglitz, 1987, Tuomala, 1990, Kaplow 2008)
and we try to systematically connect the theory to both real policy debates and empirical work
on behavioral responses to taxation.1 This chapter limits itself to the analysis of optimal labor
income taxation and related means-tested transfers.2
First, we provide historical and international background on labor income taxation and
transfers. In our view, knowing actual tax systems and understanding their history and the key
policy debates driving their evolution is critical to guide theoretical modeling and successfully
capture the ﬁrst order aspects of the optimal tax problem. We also brieﬂy review the history
of the ﬁeld of optimal labor income taxation to place our chapter its academic context.
Second, we review the theoretical underpinnings of the standard optimal income tax approach, such as the social welfare function, the fallacy of the second welfare theorem, and hence
the necessity of tackling the equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ. We also present the key parameters
capturing labor supply responses as they determine the eﬃciency costs of taxation and hence
play a crucial role in optimal tax formulas.
Third, we present the simple model of optimal linear taxation. Considering linear labor
income taxation simpliﬁes considerably the exposition but still captures the key equity-eﬃciency
trade-oﬀ. The derivation and the formula for the optimal linear tax rate are also closely related
1

Boadway (2012) also provides a recent, longer and broader survey that aims at connecting theory to practice.
The analysis of optimal capital income taxation naturally involves dynamic considerations and is covered in
the chapter by Kopczuk in this volume.
2

1

to the more complex nonlinear case, showing the tight connection between the two problems.
The linear tax model also allows us to consider extensions such as tax avoidance and income
shifting, random earnings, and median voter tax equilibria in a simpler way.
Fourth, we consider optimal nonlinear income taxation with particular emphasis on the
optimal top tax rate and the optimal proﬁle of means-tested transfers at the bottom. We
consider several extensions including extensive labor supply responses, international migration,
or rent-seeking models where pay diﬀers from productivity.
Fifth, we consider additional deeper extensions of the standard model including tagging
(i.e., conditioning taxes and transfers on characteristics correlated with ability to earn), the use
of diﬀerential commodity taxation to supplement the income tax, the use of in-kind transfers
(instead of cash transfers), the treatment of couples and children in tax and transfer systems, or
models with relative income concerns. Many of those extensions cannot be satisfactorily treated
within the standard utilitarian social welfare approach. Hence, in a number of cases, we present
the issues only heuristically and leave formal full-ﬂedged modeling to future research.
Sixth and ﬁnally, we come back to the limitations of the standard utilitarian approach that
have appeared throughout the chapter. We brieﬂy review the most promising alternatives.
While many recent contributions use general Pareto weights to avoid the strong assumptions of
the standard utilitarian approach, the Pareto weight approach is too general to deliver practical
policy prescriptions in most cases. Hence, it is important to make progress both on normative
theories of justice stating how social welfare weights should be set and on positive analysis of
how individual views and beliefs about redistribution are formed.
Methodologically, a central goal of optimal tax analysis should be to cast light on actual
tax policy issues and help design better tax systems. Theory and technical derivations are very
valuable to rigorously model the problem at hand. A key aim of this chapter is to show how to
make such theoretical ﬁndings applicable. As argued in Diamond and Saez (2011), theoretical
results in optimal tax analysis are most useful for policy recommendations when three conditions
are met. (1) Results should be based on economic mechanisms that are empirically relevant
and ﬁrst order to the problem at hand. (2) Results should be reasonably robust to modeling
assumptions and in particular to the presence of heterogeneity in individual preferences. (3)
The tax policy prescription needs to be implementable–that is, the tax policy needs to be
relatively easy to explain and discuss publicly and not too complex to administer relative to
actual practice.3 Those conditions lead us to adopt two methodological choices.
3

Naturally, the set of possible tax systems evolves over time with technological progress. If more complex
tax innovations become feasible and can realistically generate large welfare gains, they are certainly worth

2

First, we use the “suﬃcient statistics” approach whereby optimal tax formulas are derived
and expressed in terms of estimable statistics including social marginal welfare weights capturing
society’s value for redistribution and labor supply elasticities capturing the eﬃciency costs of
taxation (see Chetty, 2009a for a recent survey of the “suﬃcient statistics” approach in public
economics). This approach allows us to understand the key economic mechanisms behind the
formulas, helping meet condition (1). The “suﬃcient statistics” formulas are also often robust
to changing the primitives of the model, which satisﬁes condition (2).
Second, we tend to focus on simple tax structures–e.g., a linear income tax–without systematically trying to derive the most general tax system possible. This helps meet condition (3) as
the tax structures we obtain will by deﬁnition be within the realm of existing tax structures.4
This is in contrast to the “mechanism design” approach that derives the most general optimum
tax compatible with the informational structure. This “mechanism design” approach tends to
generate tax structures that are highly complex and results that are sensitive to the exact primitives of the model. The mechanism design approach has received renewed interest in the new
dynamic public ﬁnance literature that focuses primarily on dynamic aspects of taxation.5
The chapter is organized as follows. Section 1 provides historical and international background on labor income taxation and means-tested transfers, and a short review of the ﬁeld of
optimal labor income taxation. Section 2 presents the key concepts: the standard utilitarian
social welfare approach, the fallacy of the second welfare theorem, and the key labor supply
concepts. Section 3 discusses the optimal linear income tax problem. Section 4 presents the optimal nonlinear income taxation problem with particular emphasis on the optimal top tax rate
and the optimal proﬁle of means-tested transfers. Section 5 considers a number of extensions.
Section 6 discusses limits of the standard utilitarian approach.
considering.
4
The simple tax structure approach also helps with conditions (1) and (2) as the economic trade-oﬀs are simpler and more transparent, and the formulas for simple tax structures tend to easily generalize to heterogeneous
populations.
5
See Golosov, Tsyvinski, and Werning, 2006 and Kocherlakota, 2010 for recent surveys of the new dynamic
public ﬁnance literature. Piketty and Saez (2012a,b) analyze the problem optimal taxation of capital and
inheritances in a dynamic model but using a suﬃcient statistics approach and focusing on simple tax structures.

3

1

Background on Actual Tax Systems and Optimal Tax
Theory

1.1

Actual Tax Systems

Taxes. Most advanced economies in the OECD raise between 35% and 50% of national income
(GNP net of capital depreciation) in taxes. As a ﬁrst approximation, the share of total tax
burden falling on capital income roughly corresponds to the share of capital income in national
income (i.e. about 25%).6 The remaining 75% of taxes falls on labor income (OECD 2011a),7
which is the part we are concerned with in this chapter.
Historically, the overall tax to national income ratio has increased substantially during the
ﬁrst part of the 20th century in OECD countries from about 10% on average around 1900 to
around 40% by 1970 (see e.g. Flora, 1983 for long time series up to 1975 for a number of Western
European countries and OECD, Revenue Statistics, OECD, 2011a for statistics since 1965).
Since the late 1970s, the tax burden in OECD countries has been roughly stable. The share
of taxes falling on capital income has declined slightly in Europe and has been approximately
stable in the United States.8 Similar to the historical evolution, tax revenue to national income
ratios increase with GDP per capita when looking at the current cross-section of countries. Tax
to national income ratios are smaller in less developed and developing countries and higher on
average among the most advanced economies.
To a ﬁrst approximation, the tax burden is distributed proportionally to income. Indeed,
the historical rise in the tax burden has been made possible by the ability of the government
to monitor income ﬂows in the modern economy and hence impose payroll taxes, proﬁts taxes,
income taxes, and value-added-taxes, based on the corresponding income and consumption
ﬂows. Before the 20th century, the government was largely limited to property and presumptive
taxes, and taxes on a few speciﬁc goods for which transactions were observable. Such archaic
taxes severely limited the tax capacity of the government and tax to national income ratios were
low (see Ardant (1971) and Weber and Wildavsky (1986) for a detailed history of taxation).
6

This is deﬁning taxes on capital as the sum of property and wealth taxes, inheritance and gift taxes,
taxes of corporate and business proﬁts, individual income taxes on individual capital income, and the share of
consumption taxes falling on capital income. Naturally, there are important variations over time and across
countries in the relative importance of these various capital tax instruments. See e.g. Piketty and Saez (2012a).
7
Including payroll taxes, individual income tax on labor income, and the share of consumption taxes falling
on labor income.
8
Again, there are important variations in capital taxes which fall beyond the scope of this chapter. In particular, corporate tax rates have declined signiﬁcantly in Europe since the early 1990s (due to tax competition),
but tax revenues have dropped only slightly, due to a global rise in the capital share, the causes of which are
still debated. See e.g. Eurostat 2012.

4

The transition from archaic to broad based taxes involves complex political and administrative
processes and may occur at various speeds in diﬀerent countries.9
In general, actual tax systems achieve some tax progressivity, i.e., tax rates rising with
income, through the individual income tax. Most individual income tax systems have brackets
with increasing marginal tax rates. In contrast, payroll taxes or consumption taxes tend to
have ﬂat rates. Most OECD countries had very progressive individual income taxes in the
post-World War II decades with a large number of tax brackets and high top tax rates (see e.g.,
OECD, 1986). Figure 1 depicts top marginal income tax rate in the United States, the United
Kingdom, France, and Germany since 1900. When progressive income taxes were instituted
-around 1900-1920 in most developed countries-, top rates were very small - typically less than
10%. They rose very sharply in the 1920s-1940s, particularly in the US and in the UK. Since
the late 1970s, top tax rates on upper income earners have declined signiﬁcantly in many OECD
countries, again particularly in English speaking countries. For example, the US top marginal
federal individual tax rate stood at an astonishingly high 91% in the 1950s-1960s but is only
35% today (Figure 1). Progressivity at the very top is often counter-balanced by the fact that
a substantial fraction of capital income receives preferential tax treatment under most income
tax rules.10
As we shall see, optimal nonlinear labor income tax theory derives a simple formula for
the optimal tax rate at the top of the earnings distribution. We will not deal however with
the dynamic redistributive impact of tax progressivity through capital and wealth taxation,
which might well have been larger historically than its static impact, as suggested by the recent
literature on the long run evolution of top income shares.11
9

See e.g. Piketty and Qian (2009) for a contrast between China (where the income tax is about to become
a mass tax, like in developed countries) and India (where the income tax is still very much an elite tax raising
limited revenue). Cage and Gadenne (2012) provide a comprehensive empirical analysis of the extent to which
low- and middle-income countries were able to replace declining trade tax revenues by modern broad based
taxes since the 1970s. See Kleven, Kreiner and Saez (2009b) for a theoretical model of the ﬁscal modernization
process.
10
For example, Landais, Piketty, Saez, 2011 show that tax rates decline at the very top of the French income
distribution because of such preferential tax treatment and of various tax loopholes and ﬁscal optimization
strategies. In the United States as well, income tax rates decline at the very top due to the preferential treatment
of realized capital gains which constitute a large fraction of top incomes (US Treasury, 2012). See Piketty and
Saez (2007) for an analysis of progressivity of the federal tax system since 1960. Note that preferential treatment
for capital income did not exist when modern income taxes were created in 1900-1920. Preferential treatment
was developed mostly in the postwar period in order to favor savings and reconstruction, and then extended
since the 1980s-1990s in the context of ﬁnancial globalization and tax competition. For a detailed history in the
case of France, see Piketty (2001).
11
See Atkinson, Piketty and Saez (2011) for a recent survey. One of the main ﬁndings of this literature is that
the historical decline in top income shares that occurred in most countries during the ﬁrst half of the twentieth
century has little to do with a Kuznets-type process. It was largely due to the fall of top capital incomes, which

5

Transfers. The secular rise in taxes has been used primarily to fund growing public goods
and social transfers in four broad areas: education, health care, retirement and disability, and
income security (see Table 1). Indeed, aside from those four areas, government spending (as
a fraction of GDP) has not grown substantially since 1900. All advanced economies provide
free public education at the primary and secondary level, and heavily subsidized (and often
almost free) higher education.12 All advanced economies except the United States provide
universal public health care (the United States provides public health care to the old and the
poor through the Medicare and Medicaid programs respectively, which taken together happen
to be more expensive than most universal health care systems), as well as public retirement
and disability beneﬁts. Income security programs include unemployment beneﬁts, as well as an
array of means-tested transfers (both cash and in-kind). They are a relatively small fraction of
total transfers (typically less than 5% of GDP, out of a total around 25%-35% of GDP for social
spending as a whole; see Table 1).
Education, family beneﬁts, and health care government spending are approximately a demogrant, that is, a transfer of equal value for all individuals in expectation over a lifetime.13 In
contrast, retirement beneﬁts are approximately proportional to lifetime labor income in most
countries.14 Finally, income security programs are targeted to lower income individuals. This is
therefore the most redistributive component of the transfer system. Income security programs
often take the form of in-kind beneﬁts such as subsidized housing, subsidized food purchases
(e.g., food stamps and free lunches at school in the United States), or subsidized health care
(e.g., Medicaid in the United States). They are also often targeted to special groups such as the
unemployed (unemployment insurance), the elderly or disabled with no resources (for example
Supplemental Security Income in the United States). Means-tested cash transfer programs for
“able bodied” individuals are only a small fraction of total transfers. To a large extent, the rise
of the modern welfare state is the rise of universal access to “basic goods” (education, health,
apparently never fully recovered from the 1914–1945 shocks, possibly because of the rise of progressive income
and estate taxes and their dynamic impact of savings, capital accumulation and wealth concentration.
12
Family beneﬁts can also be considered as part of education spending. Note that the boundaries between the
various social spending categories reported on Table 1 are not entirely homogenous across OECD countries (e.g.
family beneﬁts are split between “Income support to the working age” and “Other social public spending”).
Also diﬀerences in tax treatment of transfers further complicate cross country comparisons. Here we simply care
about the broad orders of magnitude. For a detailed cross-country analysis, see Adema et al. (2011).
13
Naturally, higher income individuals are often better able to navigate the public education and health care
systems and hence tend to get a better value out of those beneﬁts than lower income individuals. However, the
value of those beneﬁts certainly grows less than proportionally to income.
14
In most countries, beneﬁts are proportional to payroll tax contributions. Some countries–such as the United
Kingdom–provide a minimum pension that is closer to a demogrant.

6

retirement and social insurance), and not the rise of cash transfers (see e.g., Lindert, 2004).15
In recent years, traditional means-tested cash welfare programs have been partly replaced
by in-work beneﬁts. The shift has been particularly large in the United States and the United
Kingdom. Traditional means-tested programs are L-shaped with income. They provide the
largest beneﬁts to those with no income and those beneﬁts are then phased-out at high rates
for those with low earnings. Such a structure concentrates beneﬁts among those who need
them most. At the same time and as we shall see, these phase-outs discourage work as they
create large implicit taxes for low earners. In contrast, in-work beneﬁts are inversely U-shaped,
ﬁrst rising and then declining with earnings. Beneﬁts are nil for those with no earnings and
concentrated among low earners before being phased-out. Such a structure encourages work
but fails to provide support to those with no earnings, arguably those most in need of support.
Overall, all transfers taken together are fairly close to a demogrant, i.e., are about constant
with income. Hence, the optimal linear tax model with a demogrant is a reasonable ﬁrst order
approximation of actual tax systems and is useful to understand how the level of taxes and
transfers should be set. At a ﬁner level, there is variation in the proﬁle of transfers. Such a
proﬁle can be analyzed using the more complex nonlinear optimal tax models.
Budget set. The budget set relating pre-tax and pre-transfers earnings to post-tax posttransfer disposable income summarizes the net impact of the tax and transfer system. The
slope of the budget set captures the marginal incentive to work. Figure 2 depicts the budget set
for a single parent with two children in France and the United States. The ﬁgure includes all
payroll taxes and the income tax, on the tax side. It includes means-tested transfer programs
(TANF and Food Stamps in the United States, and the minimum income–RSA for France) and
tax credits (the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Tax Credit in the United States,
in-work beneﬁt Prime pour l’Emploi and cash family beneﬁts in France). France oﬀers more
generous support to single parents with no earnings but the French tax and transfer system
imposes higher implicit taxes on work.16 As mentioned above, optimal nonlinear income tax
15

It should be noted that the motivation behind the historical rise of these public services has to do not only
with redistributive objectives, but also with the perceived failure of competitive markets in these areas (e.g.
regarding the provision of health insurance or education). We discuss issues of individual and market failures in
section 5 below.
16
Note that this graph ignores important elements. First, the health insurance Medicaid program in the
United States is means-tested and adds a signiﬁcant layer of implicit taxation on low income work. France oﬀers
universal health insurance which does not create any additional implicit tax on work. Second, the graph ignores
in-kind beneﬁts for children such as subsidized child care and free pre-school kindergarten in France that have
signiﬁcant value for working single parents. Such programs barely exist in the United States. Third, the graph
ignores housing beneﬁts, which are substantial in France. Fourth, the graph ignores temporary unemployment
insurance beneﬁts which depend on previous earnings for those who have become recently unemployed and which

7

theory precisely tries to assess what is the most desirable proﬁle for taxes and transfers.
Policy debate. At the center of the political debate on labor income taxation and transfers is
the equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ. The key argument in favor of redistribution through progressive
taxation and generous transfers is that social justice requires the most successful to contribute
to the economic well-being of the less fortunate. The reasons why society values such redistribution from high to low incomes are many. As we shall see, the standard utilitarian approach
posits that marginal utility of consumption decreases with income so that a more equal distribution generates higher social welfare. Another and perhaps more realistic reason is that
diﬀerences in earnings arise not only from diﬀerences in work behavior (over which individuals
have control) but also from diﬀerences in innate ability or family background or sheer luck (over
which individuals have little control). The key argument against redistribution through taxes
and transfers is eﬃciency. Taxing the rich to fund means-tested programs for the poor reduces
the incentives to work both among the rich and among transfer recipients. In the standard
optimal tax theory, such responses to taxes and transfers are costly solely because of their eﬀect
on government ﬁnances.
Do economists matter? The academic literature in economics does play a role, although
often an indirect one, in shaping the debate on tax and transfer policy. In the 1900s-1910s,
when modern progressive income taxes were created, economists appear to have played a role,
albeit a modest one. Utilitarian economists like Jevons, Edgeworth and Marshall had long
argued that the principles of marginal utility and equal sacriﬁce push in favor of progressive
tax rates (see e.g., Edgeworth 1897)–but such theoretical results had little impact on the public
debate. Applied economists like Seligman wrote widely translated and read books and reports
(see e.g. Seligman, 1911) arguing that progressive income taxation was not only fair but also
economically eﬃcient and administratively manageable.17 Such arguments expressed in terms
of practical economic and administrative rationality helped to convince reluctant mainstream
economists in many countries that progressive income taxation was worth considering.18
In the 1920s-1940s, the rise of top tax rates seems to have been the product of public debate
are signiﬁcantly more generous in France both in level and duration. Finally, this graph ignores consumption
taxes, implying that the cutoﬀ income level below which transfers exceed taxes is signiﬁcantly overestimated.
This cutoﬀ also greatly varies with the family structure (e.g. able bodied single individuals with no dependent
receive zero cash transfers in the US but signiﬁcant transfers in France).
17
See e.g., Mehrotra (2005) for a longer discussion of the role of Seligman on US tax policy at the beginning
of the 20th century.
18
This is particularly true in countries like France where mainstream laissez-faire economists had little sympathy for Anglo-Saxon utilitarian arguments, and were originally very hostile to tax progressivity, which they
associated with radical utopia and with the French Revolution. See e.g. Delalande (2011a; 2011b, pp.166-170).

8

and political conﬂict–in the context of chaotic political, ﬁnancial, and social situations–rather
than the outcome of academic arguments. It is worth noting, however, that a number of US
economists of the time, e.g. Irving Fisher, then president of the American Economic Association,
repeatedly argued that concentration of income and wealth was becoming as dangerously excessive in America as it had been for a long time in Europe, and called for steep tax progressivity
(see e.g. Fisher, 1919). It is equally diﬃcult to know whether economists had a major impact
on the great reversal in top tax rates that occurred in the 1970s-1980s during the Thatcher and
Reagan conservative revolutions in Anglo-Saxon countries. The inﬂuential literature showing
that top tax rate cuts can generate large responses of reported taxable income came after top
tax rate cuts (e.g., Feldstein, 1995).
Today, most governments also draw on the work of commissions, panels, or reviews to
justify tax and transfer reforms. Such reviews often play a big role in the public debate. They
are sometimes commissioned by the government itself (e.g., the President’s Advisory Panel on
Federal Tax Reform in the United States, US Treasury 2005), by independent policy research
institutes (e.g., the Mirrlees review on Reforming the Tax System for the 21st Century in the
United Kingdom, Mirrlees 2010, 2011), or proposed by independent academics (e.g., Landais,
Saez, and Piketty, 2011 for France). Such reviews always involve tax scholars who draw on the
academic economic literature to shape their recommendations.19 The press also consults tax
scholars to judge the merits of reforms proposed by politicians, and tax scholars naturally use
ﬁndings from the academic literature when voicing their views.

1.2

History of the Field of Optimal Income Taxation.

We oﬀer here only a brief overview covering solely optimal income taxation.20 The modern analysis of optimal income taxation started with Mirrlees (1971) who rigorously posed and solved
the problem. He considered the maximization of a social welfare function based on individual
utilities subject to a government budget constraint and incentive constraints arising from individuals’ labor supply responses to the tax system.21 Formally, in the Mirrlees model, people
diﬀer solely through their skill (i.e., their wage rate). The government wants to redistribute from
high skill to low skill individuals but can only observe earnings (and not skills). Hence, taxes
and transfers are based on earnings, leading to a non-degenerate equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ.
19

Boadway (2012), Chapter 1 provides a longer discussion of the role played by such reviews.
For a survey of historical ﬁscal doctrine in general see Musgrave (1986). For a more complete overview of
modern optimal tax history, see Boadway (2012), chapter 2.
21
Vickrey (1945) had proposed an earlier formalization of the problem but without solving explicitly for
optimal tax formulas.
20

9

Mirrlees (1971) had an enormous theoretical inﬂuence in the development of contract and
information theory, but little inﬂuence in actual policy making as the general lessons for optimal
tax policy were few. The most striking and discussed result was the famous zero marginal tax
rate at the top. This zero-top result was established by Sadka (1976) and Seade (1977). In
addition, if the minimum earnings level is positive with no bunching of individuals at the
bottom, the marginal tax rate is also zero at the bottom (Seade, 1977). A third result obtained
by Mirrlees (1971) and Seade (1982) was that the optimal marginal tax rate is never negative
if the government values redistribution from high to low earners.
Stiglitz (1982) developed the discrete version of the Mirrlees (1971) model with just two
skills. In this discrete case, the marginal tax rate on the top skill is zero making the zero-top
result loom even larger than in the continuous model of Mirrlees (1971). That likely contributed
to the saliency of the zero-top result. The discrete model is useful to understand the problem
of optimal taxation as an information problem generating an incentive compatibility constraint
for the government. Namely, the tax system must be set up so that the high-skill type does
not want to work less and mimic the low-skill type. This discrete model is also widely used in
contract theory and industrial organization. However, this discrete model has limited use for
actual tax policy recommendations because it is much harder to obtain formulas expressed in
terms of suﬃcient statistics or put realistic numbers in the discrete two-skill model than in the
continuous model.22
Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) derived the very important and inﬂuential result that under
separability and homogeneity assumptions on preferences, diﬀerentiated commodity taxation is
not useful when earnings can be taxed nonlinearly. This famous result was inﬂuential both for
shaping the ﬁeld of optimal tax theory and in tax policy debates. Theoretically, it contributed
greatly to shift the theoretical focus toward optimal nonlinear taxation and away from the
earlier Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) model of diﬀerentiated commodity taxation (itself based
on the original Ramsey 1927 contribution). Practically, it gave a strong rationale for eliminating
preferential taxation of necessities on redistributive grounds, and using instead a uniform valueadded-tax combined with income based transfers and progressive income taxation. Even more
importantly, the Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) result has been used to argue against the taxation
of capital income and in favor of taxing solely earnings or consumption.
22

Stiglitz (1987) handbook chapter on optimal taxation provides a comprehensive optimal tax survey using
the Stiglitz (1982) discrete model. In this chapter, we will not use the Stiglitz (1982) discrete model and present
instead an alternative discrete model, ﬁrst developed by Piketty (1997) which generates optimal tax formulas
very close to those of the continuous model, and much easier to calibrate meaningfully.

10

The optimal linear tax problem is technically simpler and it was known since at least Ramsey
(1927) that the optimum tax rate can be expressed in terms of elasticities. Sheshinski (1972) is
the ﬁrst modern treatment of the optimal linear income tax problem. It was recognized early that
labor supply elasticities play a key role in the optimal linear income tax rate. However, because
of the disconnect between the nonlinear income tax analysis and the linear tax analysis, no
systematic attempt was made to express nonlinear tax formulas in terms of estimable “suﬃcient
statistics” until relatively recently.
Atkinson (1995), Diamond (1998), Piketty (1997), and Saez (2001) showed that the optimal
nonlinear tax formulas can also be expressed relatively simply in terms of elasticities.23 This
made it possible to connect optimal income tax theory to the large empirical literature estimating
behavioral responses to taxation.
Diamond (1980) considered an optimal tax model with participation labor supply responses,
the so-called extensive margin (instead of the intensive margin of the Mirrlees, 1971). He showed
that the optimal marginal tax rate can actually be negative in that case. As we shall see, this
model with extensive margins has received renewed attention in the last decade. Saez (2002a)
developed simple elasticity based formulas showing that a negative marginal tax rate (i.e., a
subsidy for work) is optimal at the bottom in such an extensive labor supply model.
With hindsight, it may seem obvious that the quest for theoretical results in optimal income
tax theory with broad applicability was doomed to yield only limited results. We know that the
eﬃciency costs of taxation depend on the size of behavioral responses to taxes and hence that
optimal tax systems are going to be heavily dependent on the size of those empirical parameters.
In this handbook chapter, in addition to emphasizing connections between theory and practical recommendations, we also want to ﬂag clearly areas where we feel that the theory fails
to provide useful practical policy guidance. Those failures arise both because of limitations
of empirical work and limitations of the theoretical framework. We discuss limitations of the
standard utilitarian framework in Section 6. Another theoretical limitation arises because of
behavioral considerations, i.e., the fact that individuals do not behave according to the standard
utility maximization model, due to psychological eﬀects and cognitive limitations. Such behavioral eﬀects naturally aﬀect the analysis and have generated an active literature both theoretical
and empirical that we do not cover here (see e.g., Congdon, Mullainathan, and Schwartzstein,
2012 and the chapter by Chetty and Finkelstein in this volume for applications of behavioral
economics to public economics).
23

In the ﬁeld of nonlinear pricing in industrial organization, the use of elasticity based formulas came earlier
(see e.g., Wilson, 1993).

11

2
2.1

Conceptual Background
Utilitarian Social Welfare Objective

The dominant approach in normative public economics is to base social welfare on individual
utilities. The simplest objective is to maximize the sum of individual utilities, the so-called
utilitarian (or Benthamite) objective.24
Fixed earnings. To illustrate the key ideas, consider a simple economy with a population
normalized to one and an exogenous pre-tax earnings distribution with cumulative distribution
function H(z). I.e. H(z) is the fraction of the population with pre-tax earnings below z. Let
us assume that all individuals have the same utility function u(c) increasing and concave in
disposable income c (since there is only one period, disposable income is equal to consumption).
Disposable income is pre-tax earnings minus taxes on earnings so that c = z − T (z). The
government chooses the tax function T (z) to maximize the utilitarian social welfare function:
 ∞
 ∞
u(z − T (z))dH(z) subject :: to
T (z)dH(z) ≥ E (p),
SW F =
0

0

where E is an exogenous revenue requirement for the government and p is the Lagrange multiplier of the government budget constraint. As incomes z are ﬁxed, this is a point-wise maximization problem and the ﬁrst order condition in T (z) is simply:
u (z − T (z)) = p

⇒

c = z − T (z) = constant across z.

Hence, utilitarianism with ﬁxed earnings and concave utility implies full redistribution of incomes. The government conﬁscates 100% of earnings, funds its revenue requirement, and redistributes the remaining tax revenue equally across individuals. This result was ﬁrst established
by Edgeworth (1897). The intuition for this strong result is straightforward. With concave
utilities, marginal utility u (c) is decreasing with c. Hence, if c1 < c2 then u (c1 ) > u (c2 ) and it
is desirable to transfer resources from the person consuming c2 to the person consuming c1 .

Generalized social welfare functions of the form G(u(c))dH(z) where G(.) is increasing
and concave are also often considered. The limiting case where G(.) is inﬁnitely concave is the
Rawlsian (or maxi-min) criterion where the government’s objective is to maximize the utility
of the most disadvantaged person, i.e., maximize the minimum utility (maxi-min). In this
simple context with ﬁxed incomes, all those objectives also lead to 100% redistribution as in
the standard utilitarian case.
24

Utilitarianism as a social justice criterion was developed by the English philosopher Bentham in the late
18th century (Bentham, 1791).

12

Finally, with heterogeneous utility functions ui (c) across individuals, the utilitarian optimum
is such that ui (c) is constant over the population. Comparing the levels of marginal utility of
consumption conditional on disposable income z − T (z) across people with diﬀerent preferences
raises diﬃcult issues of inter-personal utility comparisons. There might be legitimate reasons,
such as required health expenses due to medical conditions, that make marginal utility of consumption higher for some people than for others even conditional on after tax income z − T (z).
Another legitimate reason would be the number of dependent children. Absent such need-based
legitimate reasons, it does not seem feasible nor reasonable for society to discriminate in favor
of those with high marginal utility of consumption (e.g., those who really enjoy consumption)
against those with low marginal utility of consumption (e.g., those less able to enjoy consumption). This is not feasible because marginal utility of consumption cannot be observed and
compared across individuals. Even if marginal utility were observable, it is unlikely that such
discrimination would be acceptable to society (see our discussion in Section 6).
Therefore, it seems fair for the government to consider social welfare functions such that
social marginal utility of consumption is the same across individuals conditional on disposable
income. In the ﬁxed earnings case, this means that the government can actually ignore individual utilities and use a “universal” social utility function u(c) to evaluate social welfare. The
concavity of u(c) then reﬂects society’s value for redistribution rather than directly individual
marginal utility of consumption.25 We will come back to this important point later on.
Endogenous earnings. Naturally, the result of complete redistribution with concave utility
depends strongly on the assumption of ﬁxed earnings. In the real world, complete redistribution
would certainly greatly diminish incentives to work and lead to a decrease in pre-tax earnings.
Indeed, the goal of optimal income tax theory has been precisely to extend the basic model
to the case with endogenous earnings (Vickrey, 1945 and Mirrlees 1971). Taxation then generates eﬃciency costs as it reduces earnings, and the optimal tax problem becomes a non-trivial
equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ. Hence, with utilitarianism, behavioral responses are the sole factor
preventing complete redistribution. In reality, society might also oppose complete redistribution
on fairness grounds even setting aside the issue of behavioral responses. We come back to this
limitation of utilitarianism in Section 6.
Let us therefore now assume that earnings are determined by labor supply and that individuals derive disutility from work. Individual i has utility ui (c, z) increasing in c but decreasing
25

Naturally, the two concepts are not independent. If individuals have very concave utilities, they will naturally
support more redistribution under the “veil of ignorance”, and the government choice for u(c) will reﬂect those
views.

13

with earnings z. In that world, 100% taxation would lead everybody to completely stop working,
and hence is not desirable.
Let us consider general social welfare functions of the type:

SW F = ωi G(ui (c, z))dν(i),
where ωi ≥ 0 are Pareto weights independent of individual choices (c, z) and G(.) an increasing
transformation of utilities, and dν(i) is the distribution of individuals. The combination of
arbitrary Pareto weights ωi and a social welfare function G(.) allows us to be fully general for
the moment. We denote by
gi =

ωi G (ui )uic
p

the social marginal welfare weight on individual i, with p the multiplier of the government
budget constraint.
Intuitively, gi measures the dollar value (in terms of public funds) of increasing consumption
of individual i by $1. With ﬁxed earnings, any discrepancy in the gi ’s across individuals calls
for redistribution as it increases social welfare to transfer resources from those with lower gi ’s
toward those with higher gi ’s. Hence, absent eﬃciency concerns, the government should equalize
all the gi ’s.26 With endogenous earnings, the gi ’s will no longer be equalized at the optimum.
As we shall see, social preferences for redistribution enter optimal tax formulas solely through
the gi weights.
Under the utilitarian objective, gi = uic /p is directly proportional to the marginal utility of
consumption. Under the Rawlsian criterion, all the gi are zero, except for the most disadvantaged.
In the simpler case with no income eﬀects on labor supply, i.e. where utility functions take the
quasi-linear form ui (c, z) = v i (c − hi (z)) with v i (.) increasing and concave and hi (z) increasing
and convex, the labor supply decision does not depend on non-labor income (see Section 2.3
below) and the average of gi across all individuals is equal to one. This can be seen as follows.
The government is indiﬀerent between one more dollar of tax revenue and redistributing $1 to
everybody (as giving one extra dollar lump sum does not generate any behavioral response).
The value of giving $1 extra to person i, in terms of public funds, is gi so that the value of

redistributing $1 to everybody is gi dν(i).
26

As we saw, under utilitarianism and concave and uniform utility functions across individuals, this implies
complete equalization of post-tax incomes.

14

2.2

Fallacy of the Second Welfare Theorem

The second welfare theorem seems to provide a strikingly simple theoretical solution to the
equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ. Under standard perfect market assumptions, the second welfare
theorem states that any Pareto eﬃcient outcome can be reached through a suitable set of lump
sum taxes that depend on exogenous characteristics of each individual (e.g., intrinsic abilities
or other endowments or random shocks) and the subsequent free functioning of markets with
no additional government interference. The logic is very simple. If some individuals have better
earnings ability than others and the government wants to equalize disposable income, it is most
eﬃcient to impose a tax (or a transfer) based on earnings ability and then let people keep 100%
of their actual earnings at the margin.27
In standard models, it is assumed that the government cannot observe earnings abilities
but only realized earnings. Hence, the government has to base taxes and transfers on actual
earnings only, which distort earnings and create eﬃciency costs. This generates an equityeﬃciency trade-oﬀ. This informational structure puts optimal tax analysis on sound theoretical
grounds and connects it to mechanism design. While this is a theoretically appealing reason
for the failure of the second welfare theorem, in our view, there must be a much deeper reason
for governments to systematically use actual earnings rather than proxies for ability in real tax
systems.
Indeed, standard welfare theory implies that taxes and transfers should depend on any
characteristic correlated with earnings ability in the optimal tax system. If the characteristic
is immutable, then average social marginal utilities across groups with diﬀerent characteristics
should be perfectly equalized. Even if the characteristic is manipulable, it should still be used
in the optimal system (see Section 5.1 below). In reality, actual income tax or transfer systems
depend on very few other characteristics than income. Those characteristics, essentially family
situation or disability status, seem limited to factors clearly related to need.28
The traditional way to resolve this puzzle has been to argue that there are additional horizontal equity concerns that prevent the government from using non-income characteristics for
tax purposes (see e.g., Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980) pp. 354-5). Recently, Mankiw and Weinzierl
(2010) argue that this represents a major failure of the standard social welfare approach. This
27

In the model above, the government would impose taxes Ti based on the intrinsic characteristics of individual
i but independent of the behavior of individual i so as to equalize all the gi ’s across individuals (in the equilibrium
where each individual chooses labor supply optimally given Ti ).
28
When incomes were not observable, archaic tax systems did rely on quasi-exogenous characteristics such as
nobility titles, or land taxes based on rarely updated cadasters (Ardant 1971). Ironically, when incomes become
observable, such quasi-ﬁrst best taxes were replaced by second-best income based taxes.

15

shows that informational concerns and observability is not the overwhelming reason for basing
taxes and transfers almost exclusively on income. This has two important consequences.
First, ﬁnding the most general mechanism compatible with the informational set of the
government–as advocated for example in the New Dynamic Public Finance literature (see
Kocherlakota, 2010 for a survey)–might not be very useful for understanding actual tax problems. Such an approach can provide valuable theoretical insights and results but is likely to
generate optimal tax systems that are so fundamentally diﬀerent from actual tax systems that
they are not implementable in practice. It seems more fruitful practically to assume instead
exogenously that the government can only use a limited set of tax tools, precisely those that
are used in practice, and consider the optimum within the set of real tax systems actually used.
In most of this chapter, we therefore pursue this “simple tax structure” approach.29
Second, it would certainly be useful to make progress on understanding what concepts of
justice or fairness could lead the government to use only a speciﬁc subset of taxes and deliberately
ignore other tools–such as taxes based on non-income characteristics correlated with ability–
that would be useful to maximize standard utilitarian social welfare functions. We will come
back to those important issues in Section 5.1 where we study tagging and in Section 6 where
we consider alternatives to utilitarianism.

2.3

Labor Supply Concepts

In this chapter, we always consider a population of measure one of individuals. In most sections,
individuals have heterogeneous preferences over consumption and earnings. Individual i utility
is denoted by ui (c, z) and is increasing in consumption c and decreasing in earnings z as earnings
require labor supply. Following Mirrlees (1971), in most models, heterogeneity in preferences
is due solely to diﬀerences in wage rates wi where utility functions take the form u(c, z/wi )
where l = z/wi is labor supply needed to earn z. Our formulation ui (c, z) is more general and
can capture both heterogeneity in ability as well as heterogeneity in preferences. As mentioned
earlier, we believe that heterogeneity is an important element of the real world and optimal tax
results should be reasonably robust to it.
To derive labor supply concepts, we consider a linear tax system with a tax rate τ combined
with a lump sum demogrant R so that the budget constraint of each individual is c = (1−τ )z+R.
Intensive margin. Let us focus ﬁrst on the intensive labor supply margin, that is on the choice
29

As mentioned above, the set of tools available changes over time. For example, individual incomes become
observable only in modern economies.

16

of how much to earn conditional on working. Individual i chooses z to maximize ui ((1−τ )z+R, z)
which leads to the ﬁrst order condition
(1 − τ )

∂ui ∂ui
+
= 0,
∂c
∂z

which deﬁnes implicitly the individual uncompensated (also called Marshallian) earnings supply
function zui (1 − τ, R).
The eﬀect of 1 − τ on z i deﬁnes the uncompensated elasticity eiu =

i
1−τ ∂zu
z i ∂(1−τ )

of earnings with
i

.
respect to the net-of-tax rate 1−τ . The eﬀect of R on zui deﬁnes the income eﬀect η i = (1−τ ) ∂z
∂R
If leisure is a normal good, an assumption we make from now on, then η i ≤ 0 as receiving extra
non-labor income induces the individual to consume both more goods and more leisure.
Finally, one can also deﬁne the compensated (also called Hicksian) earnings supply function
zci (1−τ, u) as the earnings level that minimizes the cost necessary to reach utility u.30 The eﬀect
of 1 − τ on z i keeping u constant deﬁnes the compensated elasticity eic =

1−τ ∂zci
z i ∂(1−τ )

of earnings

with respect to the net-of-tax rate 1 − τ . The compensated elasticity is always positive.
The Slutsky equation relates those parameters eic = eiu − η i . To summarize we have:
eiu =

1 − τ ∂zui
∂zui
1 − τ ∂zci
i
i

0,
η
≤
0,
e
> 0, and eic = eiu − η i (1)
=
(1
−
τ
)
=
c
zui ∂(1 − τ )
∂R
zci ∂(1 − τ )

In the long-run process of development over the last century in the richest countries, wage
rates have increased by a factor of ﬁve. Labor supply measured in hours of work has declined
only very slightly (Ramey and Francis 2009). If preferences for consumption and leisure have
not changed, this implies that the uncompensated elasticity is close to zero. This does not mean
however that taxes would have no eﬀect on labor supply as a large fraction of taxes are rebated
as transfers (see our discussion in Section 1). Therefore, on average, taxes are more similar to a
compensated wage rate decrease than an uncompensated wage rate decrease. If income eﬀects
are large, government taxes and transfers could still have a large impact on labor supply.
Importantly, although we have deﬁned those labor supply concepts for a linear tax system,
they continue to apply in the case of a nonlinear tax system by considering the linearized budget
at the utility maximizing point. In that case, we replace τ by the marginal tax rate T  (z) and
we replace R by virtual income deﬁned as the non-labor income that the individual would
get if her earnings were zero and she could stay on the virtual linearized budget. Formally
R = z − T (z) − (1 − T  (z)) · z.
Hence, the marginal tax rate T  (z) reduces the marginal beneﬁt of earning an extra dollar and
reduces labor supply through substitution eﬀects, conditional on the tax level T (z). The income
30

Formally zci (1 − τ, u) solves the problem minz c − (1 − τ )z subject to u(c, z) ≥ u.

17

tax level T (z) increases labor supply through income eﬀects. In net, taxes (with T  (z) > 0 and
T (z) > 0) hence have an ambiguous eﬀect on labor supply while transfers (with T  (z) > 0 and
T (z) < 0) have an unambiguously negative eﬀect on labor supply.
Extensive margin. In practice, there are ﬁxed costs of work (e.g., searching for a job, ﬁnding
alternative child care for parents, loss of home production, transportation costs, etc.). This can
be captured in the basic model by assuming that choosing z > 0 (as opposed to z = 0) involves
a discrete cost di .
It is possible to consider a pure extensive margin model by assuming that individual i can
either not work (and earn zero) or work and earn zi where zi is ﬁxed to individual i and reﬂects
her earning potential. Assume that utility is linear, i.e., ui = ci − di · li where ci is net-of-tax
income, di is the cost of work and li = 0, 1 is a work dummy. In that case, individual i works
if and only if zi − T (zi ) − di ≥ −T (0), i.e., if di ≤ zi − T (zi ) + T (0) = zi · (1 − τp ) where
τp = [T (zi ) − T (0)]/zi . τp is the participation tax rate, deﬁned as the fraction of earnings
taxed when the individual goes from not working and earning zero to working and earning zi .
Therefore, the decision to work depends on the net-of-tax participation tax rate 1 − τp .
To summarize, there are three key concepts for any tax and transfer system T (z). First,
the transfer beneﬁt with zero earnings −T (0), sometimes called demogrant or lump sum grant.
Second, the marginal tax rate (or phasing-out rate) T  (z): The individual keeps 1 − T  (z) for
an additional $1 of earnings. 1 − T  (z) is the key concept for the intensive labor supply choice.
Third, the participation tax rate τp = [T (z) − T (0)]/z: The individual keeps a fraction 1 − τp
of his earnings when going from zero earnings to earnings z. 1 − τp is the key concept for
the extensive labor supply choice. Finally, note that T (z) integrates both the means-tested
transfer program and the income tax that funds such transfers and other government spending.
In practice transfer programs and taxes are often administered separately. The break-even
earnings point z ∗ is the point at which T (z ∗ ) = 0. Above the break-even point, T (z) > 0 which
encourages labor supply through income eﬀects. Below the break-even point, T (z) < 0 which
discourages labor supply through income eﬀects.
Tax reform welfare eﬀects and envelope theorem. A key element of optimal tax analysis
is the evaluation of the welfare eﬀects of small tax reforms. Consider a nonlinear tax T (z).
Individual i chooses z to maximize ui (z − T (z), z), leading to the ﬁrst order condition uic · (1 −
T  (z)) + uiz = 0. Consider now a small reform dT (z) of the nonlinear tax schedule. The eﬀect

18

on individual utility ui is
dui = uic · [−dT (z)] + uic · [1 − T  (z)]dz + uiz · dz = uic · [−dT (z)],
where dz is the behavioral response of the individual to the tax reform and the second equality
is obtained because of the ﬁrst order condition uic · (1 − T  (z)) + uiz = 0. This is a standard
application of the envelope theorem. As z maximizes utility, any small change dz has no ﬁrst
order eﬀect on individual utility. As a result, behavioral responses can be ignored and the
change in individual welfare is simply given by the mechanical eﬀect of the tax reform on the
individual budget multiplied by the marginal utility of consumption.

3

Optimal Linear Taxation

3.1

Basic Model

Linear labor income taxation simpliﬁes considerably the exposition but captures the key equityeﬃciency trade-oﬀ. Sheshinski (1972) oﬀered the ﬁrst modern treatment of optimal linear income
taxation following the nonlinear income tax analysis of Mirrlees (1971). Both the derivation and
the optimal formulas are also closely related to the more complex nonlinear case. It is therefore
pedagogically useful to start with the linear case where the government uses a linear tax at rate
τ to fund a demogrant R (and additional non-transfer spending E taken as exogenous).31
Summing the Marshallian individual earnings functions zui (1 − τ, R), we obtain aggregate
earnings which depend upon 1 − τ and R and can be denoted by Zu (1 − τ, R). The government’s
budget constraint is R + E = τ Zu (1 − τ, R), which deﬁnes implicitly R as a function of τ only
(as we assume that E is ﬁxed exogenously). Hence, we can express aggregate earnings as a sole
function of 1 − τ : Z(1 − τ ) = Zu (1 − τ, R(τ )). The tax revenue function τ → τ Z(1 − τ ) has an
inverted U-shape. It is equal to zero both when τ = 0 (no taxation) and when τ = 1 (complete
taxation) as 100% taxation entirely discourages labor supply. This curve is popularly called the
Laﬀer curve although the concept of the revenue curve has been known since at least Dupuit
(1844). Let us denote by e =

1−τ dZ
Z d(1−τ )
∗

the elasticity of aggregate earnings with respect to the

dZ
= 0,
net-of-tax rate. The tax rate τ maximizing tax revenue is such that Z(1 − τ ) − τ d(1−τ
)
31

In terms of informational constraints, the government would be constrained to use linear taxation (instead
of the more general nonlinear taxation) if it can only observe the amount of each earnings transaction but cannot
observe the identity of individual earners. This could happen for example if the government can only observe the
total payroll paid by each employer but cannot observe individual earnings perhaps because there is no identity
number system for individuals.

19

i.e.,

τ
e
1−τ

= 1. Hence, we can express τ ∗ as a sole function of e:
Revenue maximizing linear tax rate:

1
τ∗
=
∗
1−τ
e

or τ ∗ =

1
.
1+e

(2)

Let us now consider the maximization of a general social welfare function. The demogrant
R evenly distributed to everybody is equal to τ Z(1 − τ ) − E and hence disposable income for
individual i is ci = (1 − τ )z i + τ Z(1 − τ ) − E (recall that population size is normalized to one).
Therefore, the government chooses τ to maximize

SW F = ω i G[ui ((1 − τ )z i + τ Z(1 − τ ) − E, z i )]dν(i).
i

Using the envelope theorem from the choice of z i in the utility maximization problem of individual i, the ﬁrst order condition for the government is simply



dZ
dSW F
i  i i
i
= ω G (u )uc · Z − z − τ
dν(i),
0=
dτ
d(1 − τ )
i
The ﬁrst term in the square brackets Z − z i reﬂects the mechanical eﬀect of increasing taxes
(and the demogrant) absent any behavioral response. This eﬀect is positive when individual
income z i is less than average income Z. The second term −τ dZ/d(1 − τ ) reﬂects the eﬃciency
cost of increasing taxes due to the aggregate behavioral response. This is an eﬃciency cost
because such behavioral responses have no ﬁrst order positive welfare eﬀect on individuals but
have a ﬁrst order negative eﬀect on tax revenue.
Introducing the aggregate elasticity e and the “normalized” social marginal welfare weight

g i = ω i G (ui )uic / ω j G (uj )ujc dν(j), we can rewrite the ﬁrst order condition as:

 
τ
Z · 1−
e = gi zi dν(i).
1−τ
i
Hence, we have the following optimal linear income tax formula
1 − ḡ
Optimal linear tax rate: τ =
1 − ḡ + e


with ḡ =

gi zi dν(i)
.
Z

(3)

ḡ is the average “normalized” social marginal welfare weight weighted by pre-tax incomes zi . ḡ
is also the ratio of the average income weighted by individual social welfare weights gi to the
actual average income Z. Hence, ḡ measures where social welfare weights are concentrated on
average over the distribution of earnings. An alternative form for formula (3) often presented
in the literature takes the form τ = −cov(gi , zi /Z)/[−cov(gi , zi /Z) + e] where cov(gi , zi /Z) is
the covariance between social marginal welfare weights gi and normalized earnings zi /Z. As
long as the correlation between gi and zi is negative, i.e., those with higher incomes have lower
20

social marginal welfare weights, the optimum τ is positive. Five points are worth noting about
formula (3).
First, the optimal tax rate decreases with the aggregate elasticity e. This elasticity is a mix
of substitution and income eﬀects as an increase in the tax rate τ is associated with an increase
in the demogrant R = τ Z(1 − τ ) − E. Formally, one can show that e = [ēu − η̄]/[1 − η̄τ /(1 − τ )]
where ēu =

1−τ ∂Zu
Zu ∂(1−τ )
i

is the average of the individual uncompensated elasticities eiu weighted

u
is the unweighted average of individual income eﬀects η i .32
by income z and η̄ = (1 − τ ) ∂Z
∂R

This allows us to rewrite the optimal tax formula (3) in a slightly more structural form as
τ = (1 − ḡ)/(1 − ḡ − ḡ · η̄ + ēu ).
When the tax rate maximizes tax revenue, we have τ = 1/(1 + e) and then e = ēu is a
pure uncompensated elasticity (as the tax rate does not raise any extra revenue at the margin).
When the tax rate is zero, e is conceptually close to a compensated elasticity as taxes raised
are fully rebated with no eﬃciency loss.33
Second, the optimal tax rate naturally decreases with ḡ which measures the redistributive
tastes of the government. In the extreme case where the government does not value redistribution at all, gi ≡ 1 and hence ḡ = 1 and τ = 0 is optimal.34 In the polar opposite case where
the government is Rawlsian and maximizes the lump sum demogrant (assuming the worst-oﬀ
individual has zero earnings), then ḡ = 0 and τ = 1/(1 + e), which is the revenue maximizing
tax rate from equation (2). As mentioned above, in that case e = ēu is an uncompensated
elasticity.
Third and related, for a given proﬁle of social welfare weights (or for a given degree of
concavity of the utility function in the homogeneous utilitarian case), the higher the pre-tax
inequality at a given τ , the lower ḡ, and hence the higher the optimal tax rate. If there is
no inequality, then ḡ = 1 and τ = 0 with a lump sum tax −R = E is optimal. If inequality
is maximal, i.e., nobody earns anything except for a single person who earns everything and
has a social marginal welfare weight of zero, then τ = 1/(1 + e), again equal to the revenue
maximizing tax rate.
Fourth, it is important to note that, as is usual in optimal tax theory, formula (3) is an
implicit formula for τ as both e and especially ḡ vary with τ . Under a standard utilitarian
32

∂Zu
∂Zu
∂Zu
dZ
To see this, recall that Z(1 − τ ) = Zu (1 − τ, τ Z(1 − τ ) − E) so that d(1−τ
) [1 − τ ∂R ] = ∂(1−τ ) − Z ∂R .
33
It is not exactly a compensated elasticity as ēu is income weighted while η̄ is not.
34
This assumes that a lump sum tax E is feasible to fund government spending. If lump sum taxes are not
feasible, for example because it is impossible to set taxes higher than earnings at the bottom, then the optimal
tax in that case is the smallest τ such that τ Z(1 − τ ) = E, i.e., the level of tax required to fund government
spending E.

21

social welfare criterion with concave utility of consumption, ḡ increases with τ as the need for
redistribution (i.e., the variation of the gi with zi ) decreases with the level of taxation τ . This
ensures that formula (3) generates a unique equilibrium for τ .
Fifth, formula (3) can also be used to assess tax reform. Starting from the current τ , the
current estimated elasticity e, and the current welfare weight parameter ḡ, if τ < (1−ḡ)/(1−ḡ+e)
then increasing τ increases social welfare (and conversely). The tax reform approach has the
advantage that it does not require knowing how e and ḡ change with τ , since it only considers
local variations.
Generality of the formula. The optimal linear tax formula is very general as it applies to
many alternative models for the income generating process. All that matters is the aggregate
elasticity e and how the government sets normalized marginal welfare weights g i . First, if the
population is discrete, the same derivation and formula obviously apply. Second, if labor supply
responses are (partly or fully) along the extensive margin, the same formula applies. Third, the
same formula also applies in the long-run when educational and human capital decisions are
potentially aﬀected by the tax rate as those responses are reﬂected in the long-run aggregate
elasticity e (see e.g., Best and Kleven, 2012).35
Random earnings. If earnings are generated by a partly random process involving luck in
addition to ability and eﬀort, as in Varian (1980) and Eaton and Rosen (1980), formula (3) still
applies as long as the social welfare objective is deﬁned over individual expected utilities.
To see this, suppose that pre-tax income for individual i is a random function of labor supply
li and an idiosyncratic luck shock ε (with distribution dF i ) with z i = li + ε for simplicity.
Individual i chooses li to maximize expected utility

i
EU = ui ((li + ε) · (1 − τ ) + R, li )dF i (ε),
so that li is function of 1 − τ and R. The government budget implies again that R = τ Z − E so
that Z is also a function of 1 − τ as in the standard model (recall that R = τ Z(1 − τ ) − E is an

implicit function of τ ). The government then chooses τ to maximize SW F = ω i G(EU i )dν(i).
This again leads to formula (3) with ḡ the “normalized” average of g i = ω i G (EU i )uic weighted
by incomes z i where now the average is taken as a double integral over both dF i (ε) and dν(i).
Therefore, the random earnings model generates both the same equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ
and the same type of optimal tax formula. This shows the robustness of the optimal linear tax
35

Naturally, such long-run responses are challenging to estimate empirically as short-term comparisons around
a tax reform cannot capture them.

22

approach. This robustness was not clearly apparent in the literature because of the focus on
the nonlinear income tax case where the two models no longer deliver identical formulas.36
Political economy and median voter. The most popular model for policy decisions among
economists is the median-voter model. As is well known, the median-voter theorem applies for
unidimensional policies and where individual preferences are single-peaked with respect to this
unidimensional policy. In our framework, the unidimensional policy is the tax rate τ (as the
demogrant R is a function of τ ). Each individual has single-peaked preferences about the tax
rate τ as τ → ui ((1 − τ )zi (1 − τ ) + τ Z(1 − τ ), zi (1 − τ )) is single-peaked with a peak such that
−zi + Z − τ dZ/d(1 − τ ) = 0, i.e., τi = (1 − zi /Z)/(1 − zi /Z + e). Hence, the median voter
is the voter with median income zm . Recall that with single-peaked preferences, the median
voter preferred tax rate is a Condorcet winner, i.e., wins in majority voting against any other
alternative tax rate.37 Therefore, the median-voter equilibrium has:
Median voter optimal tax rate: τm =

1 − zm /Z
.
1 − zm /Z + e

(4)

The formula implies that when the median zm is close to the average Z, the optimal tax rate
is low because a linear tax rate achieves little redistribution (towards the median) and hence
a lump sum tax is more eﬃcient.38 In contrast, when the median zm is small relative to the
average, the tax rate τm gets close to the revenue maximizing tax rate τ ∗ = 1/(1 + e) from
equation (2).
Formula (4) is a particular case of formula (3) where social welfare weights are concentrated
at the median so that ḡ = zm /Z. This shows that there is a tight connection between optimal
tax theory and political economy. Political economy uses social welfare weights coming out
of the political game process rather than derived from marginal utility of consumption as in
the standard utilitarian tax theory but the structure of resulting tax formulas is the same (see
Persson and Tabellini, 2002 for a comprehensive survey of political economy applied to public
ﬁnance). We come back to the determination of social welfare weights in Section 6.
Finally and as caveats, note that the median voter theory applies only to unidimensional
policies so that those results do not carry over to the nonlinear income tax case. The political
economy literature has also shown that real world outcomes diﬀer substantially from median
voter predictions.
36

Varian (1980) analyzes the optimal nonlinear tax with random earnings.
To see this, if the alternative is τ  < τm , everybody below and including the median prefers τm to τ  so that
τm wins. Conversely, if τ  > τm , everybody above and including the median prefers τm to τ  and τm still wins.
38
Formula (4) shows that if zm > Z, then a negative tax rate is actually optimal. Empirically however, it is
always the case that zm < Z.
37

23

3.2

Accounting for Actual Tax Rates

As we saw in Section 1, tax to GDP ratios in OECD countries are between 30 and 45% and
the more economically meaningful tax to national income ratios between 35% and 50%. Quantitatively, most estimates of aggregate elasticities of taxable income are between .1 and .4 with
.25 perhaps being a reasonable estimate (see Saez, Slemrod, Giertz, 2012 for a recent survey),
although there remains considerable uncertainty about these magnitudes.39
Table 2 proposes simple illustrative calculations using the optimal linear tax rate formula (3).
It reports combinations of τ and ḡ in various situations corresponding to diﬀerent elasticities
e (across columns) and diﬀerent social objectives (across rows). We consider three elasticity
scenarios. The ﬁrst one has e = .25 which is a realistic mid-range estimate (Saez, Slemrod,
Giertz, 2012, Chetty 2012). The second has e = .5, a high range elasticity scenario. We add a
third scenario with e = 1, an extreme case well above the current average empirical estimates.
Panel A considers the standard case where ḡ is pinned down by a given social objective
criterion and τ is then given by the optimal tax formula. The ﬁrst row is the Rawlsian criterion
(or revenue maximizing tax rate) with ḡ = 0. The second row is a utilitarian criterion with
coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion (CRRA) equal to one (social marginal welfare weights are
proportional to uc = 1/c where c = (1 − τ )z + R is disposable income).40 Chetty (2006) shows
that a CRRA equal to one is consistent with empirical labor supply behavior and hence a
reasonable benchmark. The third row is the median voter optimum with a median to average
earnings ratio of 70% (corresponding approximately to the current US distribution based on
individual adult earnings from the Current Population Survey in 2010). Panel B considers the
inverse problem of determining the social preference parameter ḡ for a given tax rate τ . The
ﬁrst row uses τ = 35%, corresponding to a low tax country such as the United States. The
second row uses τ = 50%, corresponding to a high tax country such as a typical country from
the European Union. Three points should be noted.
First, panel A shows that an empirically realistic elasticity e = .25 implies a revenue maximizing tax rate of 80% which is considerably higher than any actual average tax rate, even in
the countries with the highest tax to GDP ratios, around 50%. The optimal tax rate under
the utilitarian criterion with CRRA coeﬃcient equal to one is 61%. The optimal tax rate for
39

Note however that the tax base tends to be smaller than national income as some forms of income (or
consumption) are excluded from the tax base. Therefore, with existing tax bases, the tax rate needed to raise
say 40% of national income, will typically be somewhat higher, perhaps around 50%.
40
ḡ is endogenously determined using the actual US earnings distribution and assuming that government
required spending E (outside transfers) is 10% of total actual earnings. The distribution is for earnings of
individuals aged 25 to 64 from the 2011 Current Population Survey for 2010 earnings.

24

the median earner is τ = 55% which corresponds to average tax rates in high tax countries.
Correspondingly as shown in panel B, with e = .25, a tax rate of 35%, such as current US tax
rates, would be optimal in a situation where ḡ = 87%, i.e., with low redistributive tastes. A tax
rate of 50% (as in a high-tax country) would be optimal with ḡ = 75%.
Second, a fairly high elasticity estimate of e = .5 would still generate a revenue maximizing
tax rate of 67%, above current rates in any country. The median voter optimum tax rate of 38%
would actually be close to the current US tax rate in that situation. A high tax rate of 50%
would be rationalized by ḡ = .5, i.e., fairly strong redistributive tastes. The utilitarian criterion
also generates an optimal tax rate close to 50% in that elasticity scenario.
Third, in the unrealistically high elasticity scenario e = 1, the revenue maximizing rate is
50%, about the current tax rate in countries with the highest tax to GDP ratios. Hence, only
in that case would social preferences for redistribution be approaching the polar Rawlsian case.

3.3

Tax Avoidance

As shown by many empirical studies (see Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz, 2012 for a recent survey),
responses to tax rates can also take the form of tax avoidance. We can deﬁne tax avoidance as
changes in reported income due to changes in the form of compensation but not in the total
level of compensation. Tax avoidance opportunities typically arise when taxpayers can shift
part of their taxable income into another form of income or another time period that receives a
more favorable tax treatment.41
The key distinction between real and tax avoidance responses is that real responses reﬂect
underlying, deep individual preferences for work and consumption while tax avoidance responses
depend critically on the design of the tax system and the avoidance opportunities it oﬀers. While
the government cannot change underlying deep individual preferences and hence the size of the
real elasticity, it can change the tax system to reduce avoidance opportunities.
A number of papers incorporate avoidance eﬀects for optimal tax design. In this chapter,
we adapt the simple modeling of Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva (2011) to the linear tax case so
as to capture the key-tradeoﬀs as simply and transparently as possible.42
41

Examples of such avoidance/evasion are (a) reductions in current cash compensation for increased fringe
beneﬁts or deferred compensation such as stock-options or future pensions, (b) increased consumption within
the ﬁrm such as better oﬃces, vacation disguised as business travel, private use of corporate jets, etc, (c) recharacterization of ordinary income into tax favored capital income, (d) outright tax evasion such as using
oﬀ-shore accounts.
42
Slemrod and Kopczuk (2002) endogenize avoidance opportunities in a multi-good model where the government selects the tax base. Finally, a large literature (surveyed in Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2002)) analyzes optimal
policy design in the presence of tax evasion.

25

We can extend the original model as follows to incorporate tax avoidance. Let us denote by
y real income and by x sheltered income so that taxable income is z = y − x. Taxable income
z is taxed at linear tax rate τ , while sheltered income x is taxed at a constant and linear tax
rate t lower than τ . Individual i’s utility takes the form:
ui (c, y, x) = c − hi (y) − di (x),
where c = y − τ z − tx + R = (1 − τ )y + (τ − t)x + R is disposable after tax income. hi (y) is the
utility cost of earning real income y, and di (x) is the cost of sheltering an amount of income x.
We assume a quasi-linear utility to simplify the derivations and eliminate cross-elasticity eﬀects
in real labor supply and sheltering decisions. We assume that both hi (.) and di (.) are increasing
and convex, and normalized so that hi (0) = di (0) = 0. Individual utility maximization implies
that
hi (yi ) = 1 − τ

and di (xi ) = τ − t,

so that yi is an increasing function of 1 − τ and xi is an increasing function of the tax diﬀerential

τ − t. Aggregating over all individuals, we have Y = Y (1 − τ ) = yi (1 − τ )dν(i) with real

elasticity eY = [(1 − τ )/Y ]dY /d(1 − τ ) > 0 and X = X(τ − t) = xi (τ − t)dν(i) increasing in
τ − t. Note that X(τ − t = 0) = 0 as there is sheltering only when τ > t.
Hence aggregate taxable income Z = Z(1 − τ, t) = Y (1 − τ ) − X(τ − t) is increasing in 1 − τ
and t. We denote by e = [(1−τ )/Z]∂Z/∂(1−τ ) > 0 the total elasticity of taxable income Z with
respect to 1 − τ when keeping t constant. Note that e = (Y /Z)eY + ((1 − τ )/Z)dX/d(τ − t) >
(Y /Z)eY . We immediately obtain the following optimal formulas.
Partial optimum. For a given t, the tax rate τ maximizing tax revenue τ Z(1−τ, t)+tX(τ −t)
is
τ=

1 + t · (e − (Y /Z)eY )
.
1+e

(5)

General optimum. Absent any cost of enforcement, the optimal global tax policy (τ, t)
maximizing tax revenue τ [Y (1 − τ ) − X(τ − t)] + tX(τ − t) is
t=τ =

1
.
1 + eY

(6)

Four elements are worth noting about formulas (5) and (6).
First, if t = 0 then equation (5) becomes τ = 1/(1 + e) as in the standard model, equation
(2). In the narrow framework where the tax system is taken as given (i.e. there is nothing
the government can do about tax evasion and income shifting), and where sheltered income is
26

totally untaxed, it is irrelevant whether the elasticity e arises from real responses or avoidance
responses, a point made by Feldstein (1999).
Second however, if t > 0, then sheltering creates a “ﬁscal externality,” as the shifted income
generates tax revenue. In that case, equation (5) implies that τ is above the standard revenue
maximization rate 1/(1 + e). As discussed earlier and as shown in the empirical literature (Saez,
Slemrod, Giertz 2012), it is almost always the case that large short-term behavioral responses
generated by tax changes are due to some form of income shifting or income re-timing that
generates ﬁscal externalities.
Third and most important, the government can improve eﬃciency and its ability to tax by
closing tax avoidance opportunities (setting t = τ in our model), in which case the tax avoidance
response becomes irrelevant and the real elasticity eY is the only factor limiting tax revenue.43
This strong result is obtained under the assumption that the tax avoidance opportunity arises
solely from a poorly designed tax system that can be ﬁxed at no cost.
Fourth and related, actual tax avoidance opportunities come in two varieties. Some are indeed pure creations of the tax system–such as the exemption of fringe beneﬁts or tax exempt
local government bonds–and hence could be entirely eliminated by reforming the tax system. In
that case, t is a free parameter that the government can change at no cost as in our model. Yet
other tax avoidance opportunities reﬂect real enforcement constraints that are costly–sometimes
even impossible–for the government to eliminate. For example, it is very diﬃcult for the government to tax income from informal businesses using only cash transactions, monitor perfectly
consumption inside informal businesses, or ﬁght oﬀ-shore tax evasion.44 The important policy
question is then what fraction of the tax avoidance elasticity can be eliminated by tax redesign
and tax enforcement eﬀort.45

3.4

Income Shifting

The previous avoidance model assumed that shifting was entirely wasteful so that there was no
reason for the government to set t lower than τ to start with. In reality, there are sometimes
legitimate eﬃciency or distributional reasons why a government would want to tax diﬀerent
forms of income diﬀerently. On eﬃciency grounds, the classic Ramsey theory of optimal taxation
43

Kopczuk (2005) shows that the Tax Reform Act of 1986 in the United States, which broadened the tax base
and closed loopholes did reduce the elasticity of reported income with respect to the net-of-tax rate.
44
Oﬀ-shore tax evasion is very diﬃcult to ﬁght from a single country’s perspective but can be overcome
with international coordination. This shows again that whether a tax avoidance/evasion opportunity can be
eliminated depends on the institutional framework.
45
Slemrod and Kopczuk (2002) present a model with costs of enforcement, where the government can adopt
a broader tax base but where expanding the tax base is costly, to capture this trade-oﬀ theoretically.

27

indeed recommends lower tax rates on the most elastic goods or factors (Ramsey, 1927, and
Diamond and Mirrlees, 1971).
Let us therefore extend our previous model by considering that there are two sources of
income that we will call labor income and capital income for simplicity.46 We follow again the
simple modeling presented in Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva (2011). In this chapter, we focus
solely on the static equilibrium and abstract from explicit dynamic considerations.47 Labor
income and capital income may respond to taxes diﬀerently and individuals can at some cost
shift income from one form to the other. For example, small business owners can choose to pay
themselves in the form of salary or business proﬁts.
We assume that labor income zL is taxed linearly at rate τL , while capital income zK is taxed
linearly at rate τK . True labor (respectively, capital) income is denoted by yL , (respectively, yK )
while reported labor (respectively, capital) income is zL = yL − x (respectively, zK = yK + x)
where x represents the amount of income shifting between the tax bases. Individual i has utility
function:
ui (c, yL , yK , x) = c − hLi (yL ) − hKi (yK ) − di (x),
with c = R + (1 − τL )zL + (1 − τK )zK = R + (1 − τL )yL + (1 − τK )yK + (τL − τK )x,
where hLi (yL ) is the cost of producing labor income yL , hKi (yK ) is the cost of producing capital
income yK , and di (x) is the cost of shifting income from the labor to the capital base. We
assume that hLi , hKi , and di are all convex. Note that di (x) ≥ 0 is deﬁned for both positive and
negative x. We assume that di (0) = 0 and di (0) = 0 and that di (x) ≷ 0 if and only if x ≷ 0.48
Individual utility maximization implies that
hLi (yLi ) = 1 − τL ,

hKi (yKi ) = 1 − τK ,

and di (x) = τL − τK ,

so that yLi is an increasing function of 1 − τL , yKi is an increasing function of 1 − τK , and xi is
an increasing function of the tax diﬀerential τL − τK . Aggregating over all individuals, we have


YL (1 − τL ) = yLi dν(i) with real elasticity eL > 0, YK (1 − τK ) = yKi dν(i) with real elasticity

eK > 0, and X(τL − τK ) = xi dν(i) increasing in Δτ = τL − τK with X(0) = 0. We can derive
the revenue maximizing tax rates τL and τK in the following three cases:
No income shifting. If X ≡ 0, then τL = 1/(1 + eL ) and τK = 1/(1 + eK ).
46

Other examples could be individual income vs. corporate income, or realized capital gains vs. ordinary
income, or self-employment earnings vs. employee earnings.
47
Christiansen and Tuomala (2008) propose an optimal tax analysis with shifting between capital and labor
income in an OLG model.
48
This model nests the pure tax avoidance model of the previous section in the case where yK ≡ 0, i.e., there
is no intrinsic capital income.

28

Finite shifting elasticity. If eL < eK , we have: 1/(1 + eL ) ≥ τL > τK ≥ 1/(1 + eK ) (and
conversely if eL > eK ).
Inﬁnite shifting elasticity. In the limit where X  is very large and real responses have ﬁnite
elasticities eL and eK , then τL = τK = 1/(1 + ē) where ē = (YL eL + YK eK )/(YL + YK ) is the
average real elasticity (weighted by income).
Those results have four notable implications. First, absent any shifting elasticity, there is
no cross elasticity and we obtain the standard Ramsey inverse elasticity rule for each income
factor.49
Second, the presence of shifting opportunities brings the optimal tax rates τL and τK closer
together (relative to those arising under the inverse elasticity rule). When the shifting elasticity
is large, optimal tax rates τL and τK should be close–even if the real elasticities eL and eK are
quite diﬀerent. Importantly, the presence of shifting does not necessarily reduce the ability of
the government to tax but only alters the relative mix of tax rates. For example, in the case
with inﬁnite shifting, the optimum tax rates on labor and capital are equal and should be based
on the average of the real elasticities.
Third, in this simple model, deciding whether labor or capital income should be taxed
more requires comparing the elasticities eL and eK of real labor and capital income, and not
the elasticities of reported labor and capital income. Empirically, this would require changing
simultaneously and equally both τL and τK to determine which factor responds most keeping
the level of income shifting x(Δτ ) constant. Concretely, if shifting elasticities are large, a cut in
τK will produce a large response of reported capital income but at the expense of labor income.
It would be wrong to conclude that τK should be reduced. It should instead be brought closer
to τL .
Fourth, it is possible to consider a standard social welfare maximization objective. In that
case, optimal tax rates depend also on the distribution of each form of income. For example,
under a standard utilitarian criterion with concave social marginal utility of consumption, if
capital income is more concentrated than labor income, it should be taxed more (everything
else equal). Those distributive eﬀects in optimal tax formulas are well known from the theory
of optimal commodity taxation (Diamond and Mirrlees, 1971, Diamond 1975).50
49

As we have no income eﬀects, the elasticities are also compensated elasticities.
Note that there also exists dynamic reasons - e.g. the relative importance of inheritance and life-cycle saving
in aggregate wealth accumulation - explaining why one might want to tax capital income more than labor income.
See Piketty and Saez (2012a).
50

29

4

Optimal Nonlinear Taxation

Formally, the optimal nonlinear tax problem is easy to pose. It is the same as the linear tax
problem except that the government can now choose any nonlinear tax schedule T (z) instead
of a single linear tax rate τ with a demogrant R. Therefore, the government chooses T (z) to
maximize




ω G(u (z − T (z ), z ))dν(i) subject to
i

SW F =

i

i

i

T (z i )dν(i) ≥ E

i

i

(p),

i

and the fact that z i is chosen by individual i to maximize her utility ui (z i − T (z i ), z i ). Note
that transfers and taxes are fully integrated. Those with no earnings receive a transfer −T (0).
We start the analysis with the optimal top tax rate. Next, we derive the optimal marginal tax
rate at any income level z. Finally, we focus on the bottom of the income distribution to discuss
the optimal proﬁle of transfers.
In this chapter, we purposefully focus on intuitive derivations using small reforms around
the optimum. This allows us to understand the key economic mechanisms and obtain formulas directly expressed in terms of estimable “suﬃcient statistics” (Saez, 2001, Chetty, 2009a).
Hence, we will omit discussions of technical issues about regularity conditions needed for the
optimal tax formulas.51

4.1

Optimal Top Tax Rate

As discussed extensively in Section 1, the taxation of high income earners is a very important
aspect of the tax policy debate. Initial progressive income tax systems were typically limited
to the top of the distribution. Today, because of large increases in income concentration in a
number of countries and particularly the United States (Piketty and Saez, 2003), the level of
taxation of top incomes (e.g., the top 1%) matters not only for symbolic equity reasons but also
for quantitatively for revenue raising needs.
4.1.1

Standard Model

Let us assume that the top tax rate above a ﬁxed income level z ∗ is constant and equal to τ as
illustrated on Figure 3. Let us assume that a fraction q of individuals are in the top bracket.
To obtain the optimal τ , we consider a small variation dτ as depicted on Figure 3. Individual i
earning z i above z ∗ , mechanically pays [z i −z ∗ ]dτ extra in taxes. This extra tax payment creates
51

The optimal income tax theory following Mirrlees (1971) has devoted substantial eﬀort studying those issues
thoroughly (see e.g., Mirrlees 1976, 1986 for extensive surveys). The formal derivations are gathered in the
appendix.

30

a social welfare loss (expressed in terms of government public funds) equal to −g i · [z i − z ∗ ]dτ
where g i = ωi G (ui )uic /p is the social marginal welfare weight on individual i.52 Finally, the
tax change triggers a behavioral response dz i leading to an additional change in taxes τ dz i .
Using the elasticity of reported income z i with respect to the net-of-tax rate 1 − τ , we have
dz i = −ei z i dτ /(1 − τ ). Hence, the net eﬀect of the small reform on individual i is:


i
i
∗
i i τ
(1 − g )(z − z ) − e z
dτ
1−τ
To obtain the total eﬀect on social welfare, we simply aggregate the welfare eﬀects across all
top bracket taxpayers so that we have:

dSW F = (1 − g)(z − z ∗ ) − ez


τ
qdτ,
1−τ

where q is the fraction of individuals in the top bracket, z is average income in the top bracket,
g is the average social marginal welfare weight (weighted by income in the top bracket z i − z ∗ )
of top bracket individuals, and e is the average elasticity (weighted by income z i ) of top bracket
individuals. We can introduce the tail-parameter a = z/(z − z ∗ ) to rewrite dSW F as


τ
dSW F = 1 − g − a · e
(z − z ∗ )qdτ.
1−τ
At the optimum, dSW F = 0, leading to the following optimal top rate formula.
Optimal top tax rate: τ =

1−g
1−g+a·e

(7)

Formula (7) expresses the optimal top tax rate in terms of three parameters: a parameter g for
social preferences, a parameter e for behavioral responses to taxes, and a parameter a for the
shape of the income distribution.53 Five points are worth noting about formula (7).
First, the optimal tax rate decreases with g, the social marginal welfare weight on top bracket
earners. In the limit case where society does not put any value on the marginal consumption
of top earners, the formula simpliﬁes to τ = 1/(1 + a · e) which is the revenue maximizing top
tax rate. A utilitarian social welfare criterion with marginal utility of consumption declining
to zero, the most commonly used speciﬁcation in optimal tax models following Mirrlees (1971),
has the implication that g converges to zero when z ∗ grows to inﬁnity.
52

Because the individual chooses z i to maximize utility, the money-metric welfare eﬀect of the reform on
individual i is given by [z i − z ∗ ]dτ using the standard envelope theorem argument (see the end of Section 2.3).
53
Note that the derivation and formula are virtually the same as for the optimal linear rate by simply multiplying e by the factor a > 1. Indeed, when z ∗ = 0, a = z/(z − z ∗ ) = 1 and the problem boils down to the
optimal linear tax problem.

31

Second, the optimal tax rate decreases with the elasticity e as a higher elasticity leads to
larger eﬃciency costs. Note that this elasticity is a mixture of substitution and income eﬀects
as an increase in the top tax rate generates both substitution and income eﬀects.54 Importantly,
for a given compensated elasticity, the presence of income eﬀects increases the optimal top tax
rate as raising the tax rate reduces disposable income and hence increases labor supply.
Third, the optimal tax rate decreases with the parameter a ≥ 1 which measures the thinness
of the top tail of the income distribution. Empirically, a = z/(z − z ∗ ) is almost constant as
z ∗ varies in the top tail of the earnings distribution. Figure 4 depicts a (as a function of z ∗ )
for the case of the US pre-tax income distribution and shows that it is extremely stable above
z ∗ =$400,000, approximately the top 1% threshold.55 This is due to the well-known fact–since
at least Pareto (1896)–that the top tail is very closely approximated by a Pareto distribution.56
Fourth and related, the formula shows the limited relevance of the zero-top tax rate result.
Formally, z/z ∗ reaches 1 when z ∗ reaches the level of income of the single highest income earner,
in which case a = z/(z −z ∗ ) is inﬁnite and indeed τ = 0, which is the famous zero top-rate result
ﬁrst demonstrated by Sadka (1976) and Seade (1977). However, notice that this result applies
only to the very top income earner. Its lack of wider applicability can be veriﬁed empirically
using distributional income tax statistics as we did in Figure 4 (see Saez, 2001 for an extensive
analysis). Furthermore, under the reasonable assumption that the level of top earnings is not
known in advance and where potential earnings are drawn randomly from an underlying Pareto
distribution then, with the budget constraint satisﬁed in expectation, formula (7) remains the
natural optimum tax rate (Diamond and Saez 2011). This ﬁnding implies that the zero toprate result and its corollary that marginal tax rates should decline at the top have no policy
relevance.
Fifth, the optimal top tax rate formula is fairly general and applies equally to populations
with heterogeneous preferences, discrete populations, or continuous populations. Although the
optimal formula does not require the strong homogeneity assumptions of the Mirrlees (1971)
problem, it is also the asymptotic limit of the optimal marginal tax rate of the fully nonlinear
tax problem of Mirrlees (1971) as we shall see below.
54

Saez (2001) provides a decomposition and shows that e = ēu + η̄ · (a − 1)/a with ēu the average (income
weighted) uncompensated elasticity and η̄ the (unweighted) average income eﬀect.
55
This graph is taken from Diamond and Saez (2011) who use the 2005 distribution of total pre-tax family
income (including capital income and realized capital gains) based on tax return data.
56
A Pareto distribution with parameter a has a distribution of the form H(z) = 1 − k/z a and density h(z) =
ka/z 1+a (with k a constant parameter). For any z ∗ , the average income above z ∗ is equal to z ∗ · a/(a − 1).

32

4.1.2

Rent Seeking Eﬀects

Pay may not be equal to the marginal economic product for top income earners. In particular,
executives can be overpaid if they are entrenched and can use their power to inﬂuence compensation committees. Indeed, a large literature in corporate ﬁnance has made those points (see
for instance Bebchuk and Fried (2004) for an overview).57
There is relatively little work in optimal taxation that uses models where pay diﬀers from
marginal product.58 Here we adapt the very basic model of Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva
(2011) to illustrate the key issues created by rent seeking eﬀects. Rothschild and Scheuer
(2012) consider a more elaborate model with rent-seeking and earnings heterogeneity with two
sectors where rent-seeking activities prone to congestion are limited to a single sector.59
Let us assume that individual i receives a fraction η of her actual product y. Individual i
can exert productive eﬀort to increase y or bargaining eﬀort to increase η. Both types of eﬀort
are costly to the individual. Hence, individual i utility is given by
ui (c, η, y) = c − hi (y) − ki (η),
where c is disposable after-tax income, hi (y) is the cost of producing output y as in the standard
model, and ki (η) is the cost of bargaining to get a share η of the product. Both hi and ki are
increasing and convex.
Let b = (η − 1)y be bargained earnings deﬁned as the gap between received earnings ηy and
actual product y. Note that the model allows both overpay (when η > 1 and hence b > 0)
and underpay (when η < 1 and hence b < 0). Let us denote by E (b) the average bargained
earnings in the economy. In the aggregate, it must be the case that aggregate product must
be equal to aggregate compensation. Hence, if E(b) > 0, average overpay E (b) must come at
the expense of somebody. Symmetrically, if E (b) < 0, average underpay −E (b) must beneﬁt
somebody. For simplicity, we assume that any gain made through bargaining comes at the
57

In principle, executives could also be underpaid relative to their marginal product if there is social outrage
about high levels of compensation. In that case, a company might ﬁnd it more proﬁtable to under-pay its
executives than face the wrath of its other employees, customers, or the public in general.
58
A few studies have analyzed optimal taxation in models with labor market imperfections such as search
models, union models, eﬃciency wages models (see Sorensen, 1999 for a survey). Few papers have addressed
redistributive optimal tax policy in models with imperfect labor markets. Hungerbuhler et al. (2006) analyze a
search model with heterogeneous productivity, and Stantcheva (2011) considers contracting models where ﬁrms
cannot observe perfectly the productivity of their employees.
59
In their model (and in contrast to the simple model we use here), when rent-seekers “steal” only from other
rent-seekers, it is not optimal to impose high top tax rates because low top tax rates stimulate rent-seeking
eﬀorts, thereby congesting the rent-seeking sector and discouraging further entry.

33

expense of everybody else in the economy uniformly. Hence, individual incomes are all reduced
by the same amount E (b) (or increased by -E(b) if E(b) < 0).60
Because the government uses a nonlinear income tax schedule, it can adjust the demogrant
intercept −T (0) to fully oﬀset E (b). Eﬀectively, the government can always tax (or subsidize)
E (b) at 100% before applying its nonlinear income tax. Hence, we can assume without loss
of generality that the government absorbs one-for-one any change in E(b). Therefore, we can
simply deﬁne earnings as z = ηy = y + b and assume that those earnings are taxed nonlinearly.
Individual i chooses y and η to maximize:
ui (c, η, y) = η · y − T (η · y) − hi (y) − ki (η),
which leads to the ﬁrst order conditions
(1 − τ )η = hi (y) and (1 − τ )y = ki (η),
where τ = T  is the marginal tax rate. This naturally deﬁnes yi , ηi as increasing functions of
the net-of-tax rate 1 − τ . Hence zi = ηi · yi and bi = (ηi − 1) · yi are also functions of 1 − τ .
Let us consider as in the previous section the optimal top tax rate τ above income level z ∗ .
We assume again that there is a fraction q of top bracket taxpayers. Let us denote by z(1 − τ ),
y(1 − τ ), b(1 − τ ) average reported income, productive earnings, and bargained earnings across
all taxpayers in the top bracket. We can then deﬁne the real labor supply elasticity ey and the
total compensation elasticity e as:
ey =

dy
1−τ
dz
1−τ
≥ 0 and e =
≥0
y d(1 − τ )
z d(1 − τ )

We deﬁne s as the fraction of the marginal behavioral response due to bargaining and let eb = s·e
be the bargaining elasticity component:
s=

db/d(1 − τ )
db/d(1 − τ )
=
dz/d(1 − τ )
db/d(1 − τ ) + dy/d(1 − τ )

and eb = s · e =

db
1−τ
.
z d(1 − τ )

This deﬁnition immediately implies that (y/z)eb = (1 − s) · e. By construction, e = (y/z)ey + eb .
Importantly, s (and hence eb ) can be either positive or negative but it is always positive if
individuals are overpaid (i.e., if η > 1). If individuals are underpaid (i.e., η < 1) then s (and
hence eb ) may be negative.
For simplicity, let us assume that bargaining eﬀects are limited to individuals in the top
bracket. As there is a fraction q of top brackets individuals, we hence have E(b) = qb(1 − τ ).
60

Piketty, Saez, and Stancheva (2011) show that this assumption can be relaxed without aﬀecting the substance
of the results.

34

We assume that the government wants to maximize tax revenue collected from top bracket
earners, taking into account bargaining eﬀects:
T = τ [y(1 − τ ) + b(1 − τ ) − z ∗ ]q − E(b) = τ [y(1 − τ ) + b(1 − τ ) − z ∗ ]q − qb(1 − τ ).
The second term −E(b) arises because we assume that average underpay −E(b) due to rentseeking at the top is fully absorbed by the government budget as discussed above.
In this model, the top tax rate maximizing tax revenue satisﬁes the ﬁrst order condition
0=

db
db
dy
dT
= [y + b − z ∗ ]q − qτ
− qτ
+q
.
dτ
d(1 − τ )
d(1 − τ )
d(1 − τ )

The last term reﬂects the rent-seeking externality. Any decrease in top incomes due to a
reduction in b creates a positive externality on all individuals, which can be recouped by the
government by adjusting the demogrant. The optimal top tax rate can then be rewritten as
follows:
Optimal top tax rate with rent-seeking: τ ∗ =

a(y/z)ey
1 + a · eb
=1−
,
1+a·e
1+a·e

(8)

τ ∗ decreases with the total e (keeping the bargaining component eb constant) and increases
with eb (keeping e constant). It also decreases with the real elasticity ey (keeping e and y/z
constant) and increases with the level of overpayment η = z/y (keeping ey and e constant). If
ey = 0 then τ ∗ = 1. Two scenarios are theoretically possible.
Trickle-up. In the case where top earners are overpaid relative to their productivity (z > y),
then s > 0 and hence eb > 0 and the optimal top tax rate is higher than in the standard model
(i.e., τ ∗ > 1/(1 + a · e)). This corresponds to a “trickle-up” situation where a tax cut on upper
incomes shifts economic resources away from the bottom and toward the top. Those eﬀects
can have a large quantitative impact on optimal top tax rates. In the extreme case where all
behavioral responses at the top are due to rent-seeking eﬀects (eb = e and ey = 0) then τ ∗ = 1.
Trickle-down. In the case where top earners are underpaid relative to their productivity
(z < y) it is possible to have s < 0 and hence eb < 0, in which case the optimal top tax rate is
lower than in the standard model (i.e., τ ∗ < 1/(1 + a · e)). This corresponds to a “trickle-down”
situation where a tax cut on upper incomes also shifts economic resources toward the bottom,
as upper incomes are underpaid and hence work in part for the beneﬁt of lower incomes.
Implementing formula (8) requires knowing not only how compensation responds to tax
changes but also how real economic product responds to tax changes, which is considerably
35

more diﬃcult than estimating the standard taxable income elasticity e (see Piketty, Saez, and
Stantcheva, 2011 for such an attempt). The issue of whether top earners deserve their incomes or
are rent-seekers certainly looms large in the debate on top income taxation. Yet little empirical
evidence can bear on the issue. This illustrates the limits of the theory of optimal taxation.
Realistic departures from the standard economic model might be diﬃcult to measure and yet
can aﬀect optimal tax rates in substantial ways.61
Finally, note that the model with rent-seeking is also related to the derivation of the optimal
tax rates in the presence of externalities due to charitable giving responses (see e.g., Saez, 2004a)
or the presence of transfers across agents (Chetty 2009b).
4.1.3

International Migration

Taxes and transfers might aﬀect migration in or out of the country. For example, high top tax
rates might induce highly skilled workers to emigrate to low top tax rate countries.62
We consider a simpliﬁed version of the migration model of Mirrlees (1982) in order to obtain
a simple formula.63
Let us assume that the only behavioral response to taxes is migration so that individual
earnings z conditional on residence are ﬁxed. Let us denote by P (c|z) the number of resident
individuals earning z when disposable domestic income is c. With the income tax, we have
c = z − T (z). We assume that P (c|z) increases with c due to migration responses.
We can consider a small reform which increases taxes by dT for those earning z. The
mechanical eﬀect net of welfare is dM + dW = (1 − g(z))P (c|z)dT where g(z) is the social
marginal welfare weight on individuals with earnings z. The net ﬁscal cost of somebody earning
z emigrating is T (z). We can deﬁne an elasticity of migration with respect to disposable income
ηm = [(z − T (z))/P (c|z)] · ∂P/∂c. Hence the ﬁscal cost is dB = −T (z) · P (c|z) · ηm /(z − T (z)).
Marginal emigrants are indiﬀerent between emigrating or staying and hence the welfare cost is
second order in this case as well. At the optimum, we have dM + dW + dB = 0, which implies:
Optimal tax with migration only:
61

1
T (z)
=
· (1 − g(z)).
z − T (z)
ηm

(9)

The same issue arises with optimal Ramsey taxation in the presence of imperfect competition, which has
been explored in depth in the traditional optimal tax literature (see e.g., Auerbach and Hines (2002), section 6
for a survey).
62
The government can use other tools, such as immigration policy, to aﬀect migration. Those other tools
are taken here as given. Note that democracies typically do not control emigration but can control to some
extent immigration. In the European Union context, emigration and immigration across EU countries is almost
completely deregulated and hence our analysis is relevant in this context.
63
Trannoy and Simula (2010) also derive optimal income tax formulas in a model including both migration
and standard labor supply responses.

36

In the EU context, the most interesting application of the tax-induced migration model is at
the high income end. Indeed, there have been heated discussions of brain-drain issues across
EU countries due to diﬀerential tax rates at the top across countries. If we assume that high
incomes respond both along the intensive margin as in Section 4.1.1 with elasticity e, and along
the migration margin with elasticity ηm , then, it is possible to show that the optimal top rate
maximizing tax revenue becomes (see Brewer, Shephard, and Saez, 2010):
Optimal top tax rate adding migration eﬀects: τ ∗ =

1
.
1 + a · e + ηm

(10)

For example if a = 2, e = 0.25, the optimal tax rate with no migration is τ ∗ = 1/(1 + 2 · 0.25) =
2/3. If there is migration with elasticity ηm = 0.5, then the optimal tax rate decreases to
τ ∗ = 1/(1 + 2 · 0.25 + 0.5) = 1/2. Thus, large migration elasticities could indeed decrease
signiﬁcantly the ability of European countries to tax high incomes.
Two important additional points should be made. First, the size of the migration elasticity
ηm depends not only on individual preferences but also on the size of the jurisdiction. Small
jurisdictions–such as a town–typically have large elasticities as individuals can relocate outside
the jurisdiction at low costs, for example without having to change jobs, etc. (see the chapter
in this volume by Glaeser on urban public ﬁnance for a detailed discussion). The elasticity
becomes inﬁnite in the case of very small jurisdictions. Conversely, very large jurisdictions–such
as a large country–have lower elasticities as it is costly to relocate. In the limit case of the full
world, the migration elasticity is naturally zero. Therefore and as is well known, it is harder for
small jurisdictions to implement redistributive taxation and indeed most redistributive tax and
transfer programs tend to be carried out at the country level rather than the regional or city
level.
Second and related, a single jurisdiction does not recognize the external cost it might impose
on others by cutting its top tax rate. In that case, ﬁscal coordination across jurisdictions
(e.g., European countries) could be mutually beneﬁcial to internalize the externality. With
complete ﬁscal coordination, the migration elasticity again becomes irrelevant for optimal tax
policy (see the chapter by Keen and Konrad in this volume for an complete treatment of tax
competition issues). When making policy recommendations, economists should try to be as
clear as possible as to whether they are concerned with a single-country optimum or with a
global welfare perspective.64
64
E.g. the Mirrlees Report is sometimes ambiguous as to whether the objective is to maximize social welfare
at the global level or to ﬁnd the tax system maximizing UK welfare.

37

4.1.4

Empirical Evidence on Top Incomes and Top Tax Rates

Micro-level tax reform studies. A very large literature has used tax reforms and microlevel tax return data to identify the elasticity of reported incomes with respect to the net-of-tax
marginal rate. Those studies typically compare changes in pre-tax incomes of groups aﬀected
by a tax reform to changes in pre-tax incomes of groups unaﬀected by the reform. Hence,
such tax reform based analysis can only estimate short-term responses (typically 1-5 years)
to tax changes. This literature, surveyed in Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz (2012), obtains three
key conclusions that we brieﬂy summarize here. First, there is substantial heterogeneity in
the estimates: Many studies ﬁnding relatively small elasticity estimates (below .25), but some
have found that tax reform episodes do generate large short-term behavioral responses, which
imply large elasticities, particularly at the top of the income distribution. Second however, all
the cases with large behavioral responses are due to tax avoidance such as retiming or income
shifting. To our knowledge, none of the empirical tax reform studies to date have shown large
responses due to changes in real economic behavior such as labor supply or business creation.65
Furthermore, “anatomy analysis” shows that the large tax avoidance responses obtained are
always the consequence of poorly designed tax systems oﬀering arbitrage opportunities66 or
income retiming opportunities in anticipation of or just after tax reforms.67 When the tax
system oﬀers few tax avoidance opportunities, short-term responses to changes in tax rates are
fairly modest with elasticities typically below 0.25.68 Therefore, the results from this literature
ﬁt well with the tax avoidance model presented above with fairly small real elasticities and
potentially large avoidance elasticities that can be sharply reduced through better tax design.
International mobility. Mobility responses to taxation often loom larger in the policy debate
on tax progressivity than traditional within-country labor supply responses.69 A large literature
has shown that capital income mobility is a substantial concern (see e.g. the chapter by Keen and
65

For example, the US Tax Reform Act of 1986 which cut the top marginal tax rate from 50% down to 28% led
to a surge in reported top incomes but no eﬀect on hours of work of top income earners (Moﬃtt and Wilhelm,
2000).
66
For example, Slemrod (1996), Gordon and Slemrod (2000), and Saez (2004c) showed that part of the surge
in top incomes immediately following the US tax cuts of the 1980s was due to income shifting from the corporate
toward the individual sector.
67
Auerbach (1988) showed that realized capital gains surged in 1986, in anticipation of the increase in the tax
rate on realized capital gains starting in 1987. Goolsbee (2000) showed that stock-option realizations surged in
1992, in anticipation of the 1993 increase in top tax rates.
68
For example, Kleven and Schultz (2012) provide very compelling estimates of modest–but not zero–elasticities
around large tax reforms in Denmark, where the tax system oﬀers few avoidance opportunities.
69
For example, most of the objections in the popular and political debate to the recently proposed top marginal
income tax rate of 75% in France are centered around mobility concerns: Will top talented workers (and top
fortunes) leave France?

38

Konrad in this volume). However, there is much less empirical work on the eﬀect of taxation on
the spatial mobility of individuals, especially among high-skilled workers. A small literature has
considered the mobility of people across local jurisdictions within countries.70 While mobility
costs within a country may be small, within country variations in taxes also tend to be modest.
Therefore, it is diﬃcult to extrapolate from those studies to international migration where both
tax diﬀerentials and mobility costs are much higher. There is very little empirical work on the
eﬀect of taxation on international mobility partly due to lack of micro data with citizenship
information and challenges in identifying causal tax eﬀects on migration. In recent decades
however, many countries, particularly in Europe, have introduced preferential tax rates for
speciﬁc groups of foreign workers, and often highly paid foreign workers (see OECD, 2011c,
Table 4.1, p. 138 for a summary of all such existing schemes). Such preferential tax schemes
oﬀer a promising route to identify tax induced mobility eﬀects, recently exploited in two studies.
Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013) study the tax induced mobility of professional football
players in Europe and ﬁnd substantial mobility elasticities. The mobility elasticity of the number
of domestic players with respect to the domestic net-of-tax rate is relatively small, around .15.
However, the mobility elasticity of the number of foreign players with respect to the net-of-tax
rate that applies to foreign players is much larger, around 1. This diﬀerence is due to the
fact that most players still play in their home country. Kleven et al. (2013) conﬁrm that this
latter result applies to the broader market of highly skilled foreign workers and not only football
players. They show, in the case study of Denmark, that the preferential tax scheme for highly
paid foreigners introduced in 1991 doubled the number of high earning foreigners in Denmark.
This translates again into an elasticity of the number of foreign workers with respect to the
net-of-tax rate above one.
Those results imply that, from a single country’s perspective, as the number of foreigners
at the top is still relatively small, the migration elasticity ηm of all top earners with respect
to a single net-of-tax top rate is still relatively small, likely below .25 for most countries. This
is the relevant elasticity to use in formula (10). Hence, the top income tax rate calculation
is unlikely to be drastically aﬀected by migration eﬀects. However, this elasticity is likely to
grow over time as labor markets become better integrated and the fraction of foreign workers
grows. Nevertheless, because the elasticity of the number of foreign workers with respect to
the net-of-tax rate applying to foreign workers is so large, it is indeed advantageous from a
single country perspective to oﬀer such preferential tax schemes. This could explain why such
70

See Kirchgassner and Pommerehne (1996) on mobility across Swiss Cantons in response to Canton taxes or
Young and Varner (2011) on mobility across US states in response to state income taxes.

39

schemes have proliferated in Europe in recent years. Such schemes are typical beggar-thyneighbor policies which reduce the collective ability of countries to tax top earners. Hence,
regulating such schemes at a supra-national level (for example at the European Union level for
European countries) is likely to become a key element in tax coordination policy debates.
Cross country and time series evidence. The simplest way to obtain evidence on the longterm behavioral responses of top incomes to tax rates is to use long time series analysis within
a country or across countries. Data on top incomes over-time and across countries have been
compiled by a number of recent studies (see Atkinson et al. 2011 for a survey) and gathered in
the World Top Incomes Database (Alvaredo et al. 2011). A few recent studies have analyzed the
link between top income shares and top tax rates (Atkinson and Leigh, 2010, Roine, Vlachos,
and Waldenstrom, 2009, and Piketty, Saez, Stantcheva 2011).
There is a strong negative correlation between top tax rates and top income shares, such as
the fraction of total income going to the top 1% of the distribution. This long-run correlation
is present over time within countries as well as across countries. As an important caveat, the
correlation between top tax rates and top income shares may not be causal as other policies
potentially aﬀecting top income shares, such as ﬁnancial or industrial regulation or policies
aﬀecting Unions, may be correlated with top tax rate policy, creating an omitted variable
bias. Alternatively and in reverse causality, higher top income shares may increase the political
inﬂuence of top earners leading to lower top tax rates.71
Panel A in Figure 5 illustrates the cross-country evidence. It plots the change in top income
shares from 1960-4 to 2004-9 (on the y-axis) against the change in the top marginal tax rate
(on the x-axis) for 18 OECD countries. The ﬁgure shows a very clear and strong correlation
between the cut in top tax rates and the increase in the top 1% income share with interesting
heterogeneity. Countries such as France, Germany, Spain, Denmark or Switzerland which did
not experience any signiﬁcant top rate tax cut did not experience large changes in top 1% income
shares. Among the countries which experienced signiﬁcant top rate cuts, some experience a large
increase in top income shares (all ﬁve English speaking countries but also Norway and Finland)
while others experience only modest increases in top income shares (Japan, Italy, Sweden,
Portugal, and the Netherlands). Interestingly, no country experiences a signiﬁcant increase in
top income shares without implementing signiﬁcant top rate tax cuts. Overall, the elasticity
implied by this correlation is large, above 0.5. However, this evidence cannot tell whether the
elasticity is due to real eﬀects, tax evasion, or rent-seeking eﬀects.
71

Analyzing the data in ﬁrst-diﬀerences can alleviate omitted variable bias but can only capture short-term
eﬀects of tax rates on top incomes, which might diﬀer from long-term eﬀects.

40

Panel B in Figure 5 illustrates the time series evidence for the case of the United States. It
depicts the top 1% income shares including realized capital gains (pictured with full diamonds)
and excluding realized capital gains (the empty diamonds) since 1913, which marks the introduction of the US federal income tax. Both top income shares, whether including or excluding
realized capital gains, display an overall U-shape over the century. Panel A also displays (on the
right y-axis) the federal individual income top marginal tax rate for ordinary income (dashed
line) and for long-term realized capital gains (dotted line). Two important lessons emerge from
this panel. Considering ﬁrst the top income share excluding realized capital gains which corresponds roughly to income taxed according to the regular progressive schedule, there is a clear
negative overall correlation between the top 1% income share and the top marginal tax rate,
showing again that the elasticity of reported income with respect to the net-of-tax rate is large
in the long-run. Second, the correlation between the top 1% income share and the top tax rate
also holds for the series including capital gains. Realized capital gains have been traditionally
tax favored (as illustrated by the gap between the top tax rate and the tax rate on realized
capital gains in the ﬁgure) and have constituted the main channel for tax avoidance of upper
incomes.72 This suggests that, in contrast to short-run tax reform analysis, income shifting
responses cannot be the main channel creating the long-run correlation between top income
shares and top tax rates.73
If the long-term correlation between top income shares and top tax rates is not driven by
tax avoidance, the key question is whether it is driven by real supply side responses or whether
it reﬂects rent-seeking eﬀects whereby top earners can gain at the expense of others when top
rates are low. In principle, the two types of behavioral responses can be distinguished by
looking at economic growth as supply-side responses aﬀect economic growth while rent-seeking
responses do not. Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva (2011) analyze cross-country time series for
OECD countries since 1960 and do not ﬁnd any evidence that cuts in top tax rates stimulate
growth. This suggests that rent-seeking eﬀects likely play a role in the correlation between
top tax rates and top incomes, and therefore that optimal top tax rates might be substantially
larger than what it commonly assumed (say, above 80% rather than 50%-60%). In our view,
72

When individual top tax rates are high (relative to corporate and realized capital gains tax rates), it becomes
more advantageous for upper incomes to organize their business activity using the corporate form and retain
proﬁts in the corporation. Proﬁts only show up on individual returns as realized capital gains when the corporate
stock is eventually sold (see Gordon and Slemrod, 2000 for a detailed empirical analysis).
73
If top income share variations were due solely to tax avoidance, taxable income subject to the progressive
tax schedule should be much more elastic than a broader income deﬁnition that also includes forms of income
that are tax favored. Indeed, in the pure tax avoidance scenario, total real income of top earners should be
completely inelastic to tax rates.

41

this is the right model to account for the quasi-conﬁscatory top tax rates during large parts of
the 20th century (particularly in the US and in the UK; see Figure 1 above). Needless to say,
more compelling empirical identiﬁcation would be very useful to cast further light on this key
issue for the optimal taxation of top earners.74

4.2
4.2.1

Optimal Nonlinear Schedule
Continuous Model of Mirrlees

It is possible to obtain the formula for the optimal marginal tax rate T  (z) at income level z
for the fully general nonlinear income tax using a similar variational method as the one used to
derive the top income tax rate. To simplify the exposition, we consider the case with no income
eﬀects, where labor supply depends solely on the net-of-tax rate 1 − T  (z).75 We present in the
text a graphical proof adapted from Saez (2001) and Diamond and Saez (2011) and we relegate
to the appendix the formal presentation and derivation in the standard Mirrlees model with no
income eﬀects (as in the analysis of Diamond, 1998).
Figure 6 depicts the optimal marginal tax rate derivation at income level z. Again, the
horizontal axis in Figure 6 shows pre-tax income, while the vertical axis shows disposable income.
Consider a situation in which the marginal tax rate is increased by dτ in the small band from
z to z + dz, but left unchanged anywhere else. The tax reform has three eﬀects.
First, the mechanical tax increase, leaving aside behavioral responses, will be the gap between
the solid and dashed lines, shown by the vertical arrow equal to dzdτ . The total mechanical
tax increase is dM = dzdτ [1 − H(z)] as there are 1 − H(z) individuals above z.
Second, this tax increase creates a social welfare cost of dW = −dzdτ [1 − H(z)]g + (z) where
g + (z) is deﬁned as the average (unweighted) social marginal welfare weight for individuals with
income above z.
Third, there is a behavioral response to the tax change. Those in the income range from z
to z + dz have a behavioral response to the higher marginal tax rate, shown by the horizontal
line pointing left. Assuming away income eﬀects, this is the only behavioral response; those
with income levels above z + dz face no change in marginal tax rates and hence have no behavioral response. A taxpayer in the small band reduces her income by δz = −ezdτ /(1 − T  (z))
where e is the elasticity of earnings z with respect to the net-of-tax rate 1 − T  . As there
74

Piketty, Saez, Stantcheva (2011) provide suggestive micro-level evidence. They show that CEO pay sensitivity to outcomes outside CEOs’ control (such as industry wide shocks) is higher when top rates are low, both
in the US time series and across countries.
75
Atkinson (1995) and Diamond (1998) showed that this case generates simpler formulas. Saez (2001) considers
the case with income eﬀects.

42

are h(z)dz taxpayers in the band, those behavioral responses lead to a tax loss equal to
dB = −dzdτ h(z)ezT  (z)/(1 − T  (z)).76
At the optimum, the three eﬀects should cancel out so that dM + dW + dB = 0. Deﬁne the
local Pareto parameter as α(z) = zh(z)/(1 − H(z)).77 This leads to the following optimal tax
formula
Optimal nonlinear marginal tax rate: T  (z) =

1 − g + (z)
1 − g + (z) + α(z) · e

(11)

Formula (11) has essentially the same form as (7). Five further points are worth noting.
First, the simple graphical proof shows that the formula does not depend on the strong homogeneity assumptions of the standard Mirrlees model where individuals diﬀer solely through a
skill parameter. This implies that the formula actually carries over to heterogeneous populations
as is the case of the basic linear tax rate formula (3).78
Second, the optimal tax rate naturally decreases with g + (z), the average social marginal
welfare weight above z. Under standard assumptions where social marginal welfare weights
decrease with income, g + (z) is decreasing in z. With no income eﬀects, the average social
marginal welfare weight is equal to one (see Section 2.1 above) so that g + (0) = 1 and g + (z) < 1
for z > 0. This immediately implies that T  (z) ≥ 0 for any z, one of the few general results
coming out of the Mirrlees model and ﬁrst demonstrated by Mirrlees (1971) and Seade (1982).79
A decreasing g + (z) tends to make the tax system more progressive. Note that the extreme
Rawlsian case has g + (z) = 0 for all z except at z = 0 (assuming realistically that the most
disadvantaged are those with no earnings). In that case, the formula simpliﬁes to T  (z) =
1/(1 + α(z) · e) and the optimal tax system maximizes tax revenue raised to make the lump sum
demogrant −T (0) as large as possible.
Third, the optimal tax rate decreases with the elasticity e at income level z as a higher
elasticity leads to larger eﬃciency costs in the small band (z, z + dz). Note that this elasticity
76

This derivation has ignored the fact that the tax schedule is locally nonlinear. Saez (2001) shows that, in the
exact formula for dB, the density h(z) should be replaced by the “virtual density” h∗ (z) deﬁned as the density
at z that would arise if the nonlinear tax system were replaced by the linearized tax system at point z (see the
appendix for a formal treatment).
77
We call α(z) a local Pareto parameter because for an exact Pareto distribution, α(z) is constant and equal
to the Pareto parameter a.
78
This point does not seem to have been formally established in the case of optimal tax theory but is well known
in the mathematically equivalent optimal nonlinear pricing problem in the Industrial Organization literature (see
e.g., Wilson, 1993, Section 8.4).
79 
T (z) < 0 is never optimal in the Mirrlees model when marginal welfare weights decrease with z. This is
because increasing T  (z) locally (as depicted on Figure 6) would raise more revenue from everybody above z
which is desirable for redistribution. The behavioral response δz in the small band would further increase tax
revenue (as T  (z) < 0) making the reform desirable.

43

remains a pure substitution elasticity even in the presence of income eﬀects.80
Fourth, the optimal tax rate decreases with the local Pareto parameter α(z) = zh(z)/[1 −
H(z)] which reﬂects the ratio of the total income of those aﬀected by the marginal tax rate at
z relative to the number of people at higher income levels. The intuition for this follows the
derivation from Figure 6. Increasing T  (z) creates eﬃciency costs proportional to the number of
people at income level z times the income level z while it raises more taxes (with no distortion)
from everybody above z. As shown on Figure 4 for the US case, empirically α(z) ﬁrst increases
and then decreases before being approximately constant in the top tail. Hence, when z is large,
formula (11) converges to the optimal top rate formula (7) that we derived earlier.
Fifth, suppose the government has no taste for redistribution and wants to raise an exogenous
amount of revenue while minimizing eﬃciency costs. If lump sum taxes are realistically ruled
out because those with no earnings could not possibly pay them, then the optimal tax system
is still given by (11) with constant social marginal welfare weights and hence constant g + (z) set
to exactly raise the needed amount of exogenous revenue (Saez, 1999).
Increasing marginal tax rates at the top. With an elasticity e constant across income
groups, as g + (z) decreases with z and α(z) also decreases with z in the upper part of the
distribution (approximately the top 5% in the US case, see Figure 4), formula (11) implies that
the optimal marginal tax rate should increase with z at the upper end, i.e., the income tax
should be progressive at the top. Diamond (1998) provides formal theoretical results in the
Mirrlees model with no income eﬀects.
Numerical simulations. For low z, g + (z) decreases but α(z) increases. Numerical simulations
calibrated using the actual US earnings distribution presented in Saez (2001) show that the α(z)
eﬀect dominates at the bottom so that the marginal tax rate is high and decreasing for low z.
We come back to this important issue when we discuss the optimal proﬁle of transfers below.
Therefore, assuming that the elasticity is constant with z, the optimal marginal tax rate in the
Mirrlees model is U-shaped with income, ﬁrst decreasing with income and then increasing with
income before converging to its limit value given by formula (7).
4.2.2

Discrete Models

Stiglitz (1982) developed the 2 skill-type discrete version of the Mirrlees (1971) model where
individuals can have either a low or a high wage rate. This discrete model has been used
80

Income eﬀects positively aﬀect labor supply above z so that the mechanical tax revenue increase is actually
higher than dzdτ [1 − H(z)] and the optimal tax rate is correspondingly higher (see Saez, 2001).

44

widely in the subsequent literature because it has long been perceived as more tractable than
the continuous model of Mirrlees. However, the discrete model is perhaps deceiving when it
comes to understanding optimal tax progressivity. Indeed, the zero top marginal tax rate result
implies that the marginal tax rate on the highest skill is zero and hence lower than the marginal
tax rate on the lowest skill, suggesting that the marginal tax rate should decrease with earnings.
Furthermore, it is impossible to express optimal tax formulas in the Stiglitz (1982) model in
terms of estimable statistics and hence to quantitatively calibrate the model.
More recently, Piketty (1997) introduced and Saez (2002a) further developed an alternative
form of discrete Mirrlees model with a ﬁnite number of possible earnings levels z0 = 0 < z1 <
... < zN (corresponding for example to diﬀerent possible jobs) but a continuum of individual
types so that the fraction of individuals at each earnings level is a smooth function of the tax
system. This model generates formulas close to the continuum case, and can also be easily
extended to incorporate extensive labor supply responses, as we shall see.
Formally, individual i has a utility function ui (cn , n) deﬁned on after-tax income cn ≥ 0 and
job choice n = 0, ..., N . Each individual chooses n to maximize ui (cn , n) where cn = zn − Tn
is the after-tax reward in occupation n. For a given tax and transfer schedule (c0 , ..., cN ), a
fraction hn (c0 , ..., cN ) of individuals choose occupation n. It is assumed that the tastes for work
embodied in the individual utilities are smoothly distributed so that the aggregate functions
hn are diﬀerentiable. Denoting by n(i) the occupational choice of individual i, the government
chooses (T0 , ..., TN ) so as to maximize welfare

SW F = ωi G[ui (zn(i) − Tn(i) , n(i))]dν(i) s.t.
i



hn Tn ≥ E

(p).

n

Even though the population is potentially very heterogeneous, as possible work outcomes are in
ﬁnite number, the maximization problem is a simple ﬁnite dimensional maximization problem.
The ﬁrst order condition with respect to Tn is
N


∂hm
(1 − gn )hn =
Tn
∂cn
m=0

1
with gn =
p hn


i∈job n

ω i G (ui )uic (cn , n)dν(i).

(12)

Hence, gn is the average social marginal welfare weight among individuals in occupation n.81
This model allows for any type of behavioral responses. Two special cases are of particular
interest: pure intensive responses as in the standard Mirrlees (1971) model and pure extensive
81
When obtaining (12), it is important to note that, because of the envelope theorem, the eﬀect of an inﬁnitesimal change in cn has no discrete eﬀect on welfare for individuals moving in or out of occupation n. Hence, the
welfare eﬀects on movers is second order. See Saez (2002a), appendix for complete details.

45

responses. We consider in this section the intensive model case and defer to Section 4.3.2 the
extensive model case.
The intensive model. The intensive model with no income eﬀects (ﬁrst developed by Piketty,
1997) can be obtained by assuming that the population is partitioned into N groups. An
individual in group n ∈ (0, .., N − 1) can only work in two adjacent occupations n and n + 1.
For example, with no eﬀort the individual can hold job n and with some eﬀort the individual
can obtain job n + 1.82 This implies that the function hn depends only on cn+1 , cn , and
cn−1 . Assuming no income eﬀects, with a slight abuse of notation, hn can be expressed as
hn (cn+1 − cn , cn − cn−1 ). In that context, we can denote by τn = (Tn − Tn−1 )/(zn − zn−1 ) the
marginal tax rate between earnings levels zn−1 and zn and by en =

1−τn ∂hn
hn ∂(1−τn )

the elasticity

of the fraction of individuals in occupation n with respect to the net-of-tax rate 1 − τn . The
optimal tax formula (12) can be re-arranged as:
Optimal marginal tax rate, discrete model:

τn
1
=
1 − τn
en




− gm )hm
.
hn

m≥n (1

(13)

The proof is presented in Saez (2002a). Note that the form of the optimal formula is actually
very close the continuum case where the marginal tax rate from equation (11) can also be
∞
written as: T  (z)/[1 − T  (z)] = (1/e)[ z (1 − g(z  ))dH(z  )/(zh(z))].

4.3

Optimal Proﬁle of Transfers

4.3.1

Intensive Margin Responses

It is possible to obtain a formula for the optimal phase-out rate of the demogrant in the optimal
income tax model of Mirrlees (1971) where labor supply responds only through the intensive
margin.
Recall ﬁrst that when the minimum income z0 is positive, the optimal marginal tax rate at
the very bottom is zero (this result was ﬁrst proved by Seade, 1977). This can be seen from
formula (11) as G(z0 ) = 1.83
82

Those preferences are embodied in the individual utility functions ui . In the case just described, we would
/ {n, n + 1}.
have ui (c, n) = c, ui (c, n + 1) = c − θi with θi cost of eﬀort to get job n + 1, and ui (c, m) = −∞ if m ∈
83
This result can be seen as the symmetric counterpart of the zero-top result. At the top, it is straightforward
to show that the optimum marginal tax rate cannot be positive (if it were, set it to zero above ztop , the top
earner works more, is better oﬀ, and pays the same taxes). However, it is not as easy to show that the top rate
cannot be negative (this requires the more sophisticated argument presented in comments of formula (11)). At
the bottom symmetrically, it is straightforward to show that the optimum marginal tax rate cannot be negative
(if it were, set it to zero below zbottom , the bottom earner works less, is better oﬀ, and pays the same taxes).
However, it is not as easy to show that the bottom rate cannot be positive (this again requires a symmetric
argument to the one presented in comments of formula (11).)

46

However, the empirically relevant case is z0 = 0 with a non-zero fraction h0 > 0 of the
population not working and earning zero. In that case, the optimal phase-out rate τ1 at the
bottom can be written as:
Optimal bottom marginal tax rate in Mirrlees model: τ1 =

g0 − 1
,
g0 − 1 + e0

(14)

where g0 is the average social marginal welfare weight on zero earners and e0 = −[(1 −
τ1 )/h0 ]dh0 /d(1 − τ1 ) is the elasticity of the fraction non-working h0 with respect to the bottom net-of-tax rate 1 − τ1 with a minus sign so that e0 > 0.84 This formula is proved by Saez
(2002a) in the discrete model presented above.85
The formula also applies in the standard Mirrlees model although it does not seem to have
been ever noticed and formally presented. We present the proof in the standard Mirrlees model
in the appendix. In the text, we present a simple graphical proof adapted from Diamond and
Saez (2011) using the discrete model with intensive margin responses presented above.
As illustrated on Figure 7, suppose that low ability individuals can choose either to work
and earn z1 or not work and earn zero (z0 = 0). The government oﬀers a transfer c0 = −T (0) to
those not working phased out at rate τ1 so that those working receive on net c1 = (1 − τ1 )z1 + c0 .
In words, non-workers keep a fraction 1 − τ1 of their earnings should they work and earn z1 .
Therefore, increasing τ1 discourages some low income workers from working. Suppose now that
the government increases both the c0 by dc0 and the phase-out rate by dτ1 leaving the tax
schedule unchanged for those with income equal to or above z1 so that dc0 = z1 dτ1 as depicted
on Figure 7. The ﬁscal cost is −h0 dc0 but the welfare beneﬁt is h0 g0 dc0 where g0 is the social
welfare weight on non-workers. Because behavioral responses take place along the intensive
margin only in the Mirrlees model, with no income change above z1 , the labor supply of those
above z1 is not aﬀected by the reform. By deﬁnition of e0 , a number dh0 = dτ1 e0 h0 /(1 − τ1 )
of low income workers stop working creating a revenue loss of −τ1 z1 dh0 = −dc0 h0 e0 τ1 /(1 − τ1 ).
At the optimum, the three eﬀects sum to zero leading to the optimal bottom rate formula (14).
Three points are worth noting about formula (14).
First, if society values redistribution toward zero earners, then g0 is likely to be large (relative
to 1). In that case, τ1 is going to be high even if the elasticity e0 is large. For example, if g0 = 3
and e0 = .5 then τ1 = 80%, a very high phase out rate. The intuition is simple: increasing
transfers by increasing the phase-out rate is valuable if g0 is large, the ﬁscal cost due to the
84

This elasticity e0 reﬂects substitution eﬀects only, as income eﬀects are second order when the marginal tax
rate is changed only on a small band of income at the bottom.
85
It can
 be obtained from equation (13) noting that the average social marginal welfare weight is equal to one
so that m≥0 (1 − gm )hm = 0. Therefore, τ1 /(1 − τ1 ) = (1/e1 )(g0 − 1)h0 /h1 . Finally, note that h1 e1 = h0 e0 .

47

behavioral response is relatively modest as those dropping out of the labor force would have
had very modest earnings anyway. The phase-out rate is highest in the Rawlsian case where all
the social welfare weight is concentrated at the bottom.86
Second and conversely, if society considers that non-workers are primarily free-loaders taking
advantage of transfers, then g0 < 1 is conceivable. In that case, the optimal phase-out rate
is negative and the government provides higher transfers for low income earners rather than
those out-of-work. Naturally, this cannot happen under the standard assumption where social
marginal welfare weights decrease with income.
Finally, note that it is not possible to obtain an explicit formula for the optimal demogrant
−T (0) as the demogrant is determined in general equilibrium. This is a general feature of
optimal tax problems (in the optimal linear tax rate, the demogrant was also deduced from the
optimal tax rate τ using the government budget constraint).

4.3.2

Extensive Margin Responses

The optimality of a traditional means-tested transfer program with a high phase-out rate depends critically on the assumption of intensive labor supply responses. Empirically however,
there is substantial evidence that labor supply responses, particularly among low income earners, are also substantial along the extensive margin with less compelling evidence of intensive
marginal labor supply response.87 In that case, it is optimal to give higher transfers to low
income workers rather than non-workers, which amounts to a negative phase-out rate, as with
the current Earned Income Tax Credit (Diamond, 1980; Saez, 2002a).
To see this, consider now a model where behavioral responses of low- and mid-income earners
take place through the extensive elasticity only, i.e., whether or not to work, and that earnings
when working do not respond to marginal tax rates. Within the general discrete model developed in Section 4.2.2, the extensive model can be obtained by assuming that each individual
can only work in one occupation or be unemployed. This can be embodied in the individual
utility functions by assuming that ui (cn , n) = −∞ for all occupations n ≥ 1 except the one
corresponding to the skill of the individual. This structure implies that the fraction of the
population hn working in occupation n depends only on c0 and cn for n ≥ 1. As a result,
86
In the Rawlsian case, g0 = 1/h0 and the optimum phase-out rate is almost 100% when the fraction nonworking h0 is small.
87
Chetty (2012) argues that intensive elasticities are more aﬀected by frictions or inattention issues than
extensive elasticities. This makes it more challenging to identify long-run intensive elasticities. For example,
Chetty, Friedman, Saez (2012) show that intensive responses to the EITC can also be substantial in the long-run
in places where knowledge about the EITC is high.

48

and using the fact that ∂hn /∂cn + ∂h0 /∂cn = 0, and deﬁning the elasticity of participation
en = [(1 − τn )/hn ]dhn /d(1 − τn ), equation (12) becomes,
Optimal tax rate with extensive responses only:

1
τn
= (1 − gn ).
1 − τn
en

(15)

To obtain this result, as depicted on Figure 8, suppose the government starts from a transfer
scheme with a positive phase-out rate τ1 > 0 and introduces an additional small in-work beneﬁt
dc1 that increases net transfers to low income workers earning z1 . Let h1 be the fraction of low
income workers with earnings z1 . The reform has again three eﬀects.
First, the reform has a mechanical ﬁscal cost dM = −h1 dc1 for the government. Second, it
generates a social welfare gain, dW = g1 h1 dc1 where g1 is the marginal social welfare weight
on low income workers with earnings z1 . Third, there is a tax revenue gain due to behavioral
responses dB = τ1 z1 dh1 = e1 [τ1 /(1 − τ1 )]h1 dc1 . If g1 > 1, then dW + dM > 0. In that case, if
τ1 > 0, then dB > 0, implying that τ1 > 0 cannot be optimal. The optimal τ1 is such that


τ1
,
0 = dM + dW + dB = h1 dc1 g1 − 1 + e1
1 − τ1
implying that the optimal phase-out rate at the bottom is given by:
Optimal bottom tax rate, extensive model: τ1 =

1 − g1
,
1 − g1 + e1

τ1 < 0 if g1 > 1, (16)

Intuitively, starting with a transfer system with a positive phase-out rate as depicted on
Figure 8 and ignoring behavioral responses, an in-work beneﬁt reform depicted on Figure 8 is
desirable if the government values redistribution to low income earners. If behavioral responses
are solely along the extensive margin, this reform induces some non-workers to start working
to take advantage of the in-work beneﬁt. However, because we start from a situation with a
positive phase-out rate, this behavioral response increases tax revenue as low income workers
still end up receiving a smaller transfer than non-workers. Hence, the in-work beneﬁt increases
social welfare implying that a positive phase-out rate cannot be optimal.88 Another way to see
this is the following. Increasing c0 distorts the labor supply decision of all types of workers who
might quit working. In contrast, increasing c1 distorts labor supply of low skilled workers only.
88

At the optimum, it is always the case that g1 < 1 + e1 so that the denominator in formula (16) is always
τ1
positive. To see this, suppose g1 ≥ 1 + e1 , then g1 − 1 + e1 1−τ
≥ e1 /(1 − τ1 ) > 0 as τ1 < 1, implying that
1
the reform dc1 described above is always welfare improving. This result can be understood as follows. Suppose
we start from an initial tax system (not optimal) where g1 > 1 + e1 , i.e., low skilled workers are deserving and
their elasticity e1 is not too high. In such a conﬁguration, it is always desirable to increase in-work beneﬁts for
low-skilled workers. Increasing in-work beneﬁts reduces g1 as low-skilled workers become less and less in need
of additional support. At the optimum where (16) holds, g1 < 1 + e1 . In the extreme case with no behavioral
responses, τ1 should be set so that g1 = 1. Conversely, when the elasticity e1 is very large, the optimal bottom
tax rate goes to zero.

49

Hence an in-work beneﬁt is less distortionary than an out-of-work beneﬁt in the pure extensive
model.
4.3.3

Policy Practice

In practice, both extensive and intensive elasticities are present. An intensive margin response
would induce those earning slightly more than the minimum to reduce labor supply to take
advantage of the in-work beneﬁt, thus reducing tax revenue. Therefore, the government has to
trade-oﬀ the two eﬀects. If, as empirical studies show (see e.g., Blundell and MaCurdy 1999
for a survey), the extensive elasticity of choosing whether to participate in the labor market
is large relative to the intensive elasticity of choosing how many hours to work, initially low
(or even negative) phase-out rates combined with high positive phase-out rates further up the
distribution would be the optimal proﬁle.
In recent decades in most OECD countries, a concern arose that traditional welfare programs
overly discouraged work and there has been a marked shift toward lowering the marginal tax
rate for low earners through a combination of: a) introduction and then expansion of in-work
beneﬁts such as the Earned Income Tax Credit in the United States or the Family Credit in
the United Kingdom;89 b) reduction of the statutory phase-out rates in transfer programs for
earned income as under the U.S. welfare reform; and c) reduction of payroll taxes for low income
earners.90 Those reforms are consistent with the logic of the optimal tax model we have outlined,
as they both encourage labor force participation and provide transfers to low income workers
seen as a deserving group. As we saw on Figure 2, the current US system imposes marginal
tax rates close to zero on the ﬁrst $15,000 of earnings but signiﬁcantly higher marginal rates
between $15,000 and $30,000.
How can we explain however that means-tested social welfare programs with high phase-out
rates were widely used in prior decades? Historically, most means-tested transfer programs
started as narrow programs targeting speciﬁc groups deemed unable to earn enough such as
widows with children, the elderly, or the disabled. For example, the ancestor of the traditional
US welfare program (Aid for Families with Dependent Children, renamed Temporary Aid for
Needy Families after the 1996 welfare reform) were “mothers’ pensions” state programs providing help primarily to widows with children and no resources (Katz, 1996). If beneﬁciaries cannot
work but diﬀer in terms of unearned income (for example, the presence of a private pension),
then the optimal redistribution scheme is indeed a transfer combined with a 100% phasing-out
89
90

See OECD, 2005 for a review of all the in-work beneﬁts introduced in OECD countries up to year 2004.
See OECD 2011b for a summary of such payroll tax reductions in OECD countries.

50

rate. As governments expanded the scope of transfers, a larger fraction of beneﬁciaries were
potentially able to work. The actual tax policy response to this moral hazard problem over
the last few decades has been remarkably close to the lessons from optimal tax theory we have
outlined.
Note that following the Reagan and Thatcher conservative revolutions two other elements
likely played a role in the shift from traditional means-tested programs toward in-work beneﬁts.
First, it is conceivable that society has less tolerance for non-workers living oﬀ government
transfers because it believes, rightly or wrongly, that most of such non-workers could actually
work and earn a living on their own absent government transfers. This means that the social
welfare weights on non-workers has fallen relative to the social welfare weights on workers, and
especially low income workers. This eﬀect can be captured in our model simply assuming that
social welfare weights change (see Section 6 below for a discussion of how social welfare weights
could be formed in non-utilitarian contexts). Second and related, the perception that relying on
transfers generates negative externalities on children or neighbors through a “culture of welfare
dependency” might have increased. Such externalities are not incorporated in our basic model
but could conceivably be added. In both cases, perceptions of the public and actual facts do
not necessarily align (see e.g., Bane and Ellwood, 1994 for a detailed empirical analysis).

5

Extensions

5.1

Tagging

We have assumed that T (z) depends only on earnings z. In reality, the government can observe
many other characteristics (denoted by vector X) also correlated with ability (and hence social
welfare weights) such as gender, race, age, disability, family structure, height, etc. Hence, the
government could set T (z, X) and use the characteristic X as a “tag” in the tax system. There
are two noteworthy theoretical results.
First, if characteristic X is immutable then there should be full redistribution across groups
with diﬀerent X. This can be seen as follows. Suppose X is a binary 0-1 variable. If the average
social marginal welfare weight for group 1 is higher than for group 0, a lump sum tax on group
0 funding a lump sum transfer on group 1 will increase total social welfare.
Second, if characteristic X is not immutable, i.e., it can be manipulated through cheating,91
then it is still desirable to make taxes depend on X (in addition to z). At the optimum however,
91

A good example would be disability status that can only be imperfectly observed and that individuals can
fake to some extent.

51

the redistribution across the X groups will not be complete. To see this, suppose again that
X is a binary 0-1 variable and that we start from a pure income tax T (z). As X is correlated
with ability, the average social marginal welfare weight for group 1 is diﬀerent from the one for
group 0. Let us assume it is higher. In that case, a small lump sum transfer from group 0 to
group 1 increases social welfare, absent any behavioral response. As X is no longer immutable,
this small transfer might induce some individuals to switch from group 0 to group 1. However,
because we start from a uniﬁed tax system, at the margin those who switch do not create any
ﬁrst order ﬁscal cost (nor any welfare cost through the standard envelope theorem argument).92
Those points on tagging have been well known in the literature for decades following the
analysis of Akerlof (1978) and Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982) for tagging disadvantaged groups
for welfare beneﬁts. It has received recent attention in Mankiw and Weinzierl (2010) and
Weinzierl (2011) who use the examples of height and age respectively to argue that the standard
utilitarian maximization framework fails to incorporate important elements of real tax policy
design.
Indeed, in reality, actual tax systems depend on a very limited set of characteristics besides income. Those characteristics are primarily family structure (in particular the number
of dependent children), disability status (for permanent and temporary disability programs).
Hence, characteristics used reﬂect direct “need” (for example, the size of the household relative
to income), or direct “ability-to-earn” (as is the case with disability status). To the best of our
knowledge, the case for using indirect tags correlated with ability in the tax or transfer system
has never been made in practice in the policy debate, implying that society does have a strong
aversion for using indirect tags. We come back to this issue in Section 6 when we discuss the
limits of utilitarianism.

5.2

Supplementary Commodity Taxation

The government can also implement diﬀerentiated commodity taxation in addition to nonlinear
income taxes and transfers. The usual hypothesis is that commodity taxes have to be linear
because of re-trading (see e.g., Guesnerie, 1995, chapter 1). The most common form of commodity taxation, value added taxes and general sales taxes, do display some variation in rates
across goods, with exemptions for speciﬁc goods, such as food or housing. Such exemptions are
in general justiﬁed on redistributive grounds. The government also imposes additional taxes on
92
Note that this derivation assumes that labor supply choices z are independent of X. This assumption is
reasonable when X is manipulated through cheating only but would not necessarily hold if X was manipulated
through real choices (e.g., hurting oneself to becoming truly disabled).

52

speciﬁc goods such as gasoline, tobacco, alcohol, airplane tickets, or motor vehicles.93 Here, we
want to analyze whether it is desirable to supplement the optimal nonlinear labor income tax
with diﬀerentiated linear commodity taxation.
Consider a model with K consumption goods c = (c1 , .., cK ) with pre-tax prices p =
(p1 , .., pK ). Individual i derives utility from the K consumption goods and earnings supply
according to a utility function ui (c1 , .., cK , z). The question we want to address is whether the
government can increase social welfare using diﬀerentiated commodity taxation t = (t1 , .., tK )
in addition to nonlinear optimal income tax on earnings z. Naturally, adding ﬁscal tools cannot
reduce social welfare. However, Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) demonstrated the following.
Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem: Commodity taxes cannot increase social welfare if utility functions are weakly separable in consumption goods vs. leisure and the sub-utility of consumption
goods is the same across individuals, i.e., ui (c1 , .., cK , z) = U i (v(c1 , .., cK ), z) with the sub-utility
function v(c1 , .., cK ) homogenous across individuals.
The original proof by Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) was based on optimum conditions and not
intuitive. Recently, Laroque (2005) and Kaplow (2006) have simultaneously and independently
proposed a much simpler and intuitive proof that we present here.
Proof: The idea of the proof is that a tax system (T (.), t) that includes both a nonlinear income
tax and a vector of commodity taxes can be replaced by a pure income tax (T̄ (.), t = 0) that
keeps all individual utilities constant and raises at least as much tax revenue.
Let V (p + t, y) = maxc v(c1 , .., cK ) subject to (p + t) · c ≤ y be the indirect utility of
consumption goods common to all individuals. Consider replacing (T (.), t) with (T̄ (.), t = 0)
where T̄ (z) is deﬁned such that V (p + t, z − T (z)) = V (p, z − T̄ (z)). Such a T̄ (z) naturally exists
(and is unique) as V (p, y) is strictly increasing in y. This implies that U i (V (p+t, z −T (z)), z) =
U i (V (p, z − T̄ (z)), z) for all z. Hence, both the utility and the labor supply choice are unchanged
for each individual i.
By deﬁnition of an indirect utility, attaining utility of consumption V (p, z − T̄ (z)) at price
p costs at least z − T̄ (z). Let ci be the consumer choice of individual i under the initial tax
system (T (.), t). Individual i attains utility V (p, z − T̄ (z)) = V (p + t, z − T (z)) when choosing
ci . Hence p · ci ≥ z − T̄ (z). As (p + t) · ci = z − T (z), we have T̄ (z) ≥ T (z) + t · ci , i.e., the
93

Traditionally, excise taxes have been used on goods where transactions were relatively easy for the government to monitor. In modern times, current excise taxes are often justiﬁed because of externalities (e.g., gasoline
taxes because of pollution or global warming), or “internalities” (e.g., tobacco and addiction in models with
self-control issues). We assume away such eﬀects in what follows. Externalities are covered in the handbook
chapter by Bovenberg and Goulder (2002).

53

government collects more taxes with (T̄ (.), t = 0) which completes the proof. QED.
Intuitively, with separability and homogeneity, conditional on earnings z, the consumption
choices c = (c1 , .., cK ) do not provide any information on ability. Hence, diﬀerentiated commodity taxes t1 , .., tK create a tax distortion with no beneﬁt and it is better to do all the redistribution
with the individual nonlinear income tax. With the weaker linear income taxation tool, stronger
assumptions on preferences, namely linear Engel curves uniform across individuals, are needed
to obtain the commodity tax result (Deaton 1981).94 Intuitively, in the linear tax case, unless
Engel curves are linear, commodity taxation can be useful to “non-linearize” the tax system.
Heterogeneous preferences. Saez (2002b) shows that the Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem can
be naturally generalized to cases with heterogeneous preferences. No tax on commodity k is
desirable under three assumptions: (a) conditional on income z, social marginal welfare weights
are uncorrelated with the levels of consumption of good k, (b) conditional on income z, the
behavioral elasticities of earnings are uncorrelated with the consumption of good k, (c) at any
income level z, the average individual variation in consumption of good k with z is identical to
the cross-sectional variation in consumption of good k with z.
Assumption (a) is clearly necessary and might fail when earnings z is no longer a suﬃcient
statistic for measuring welfare. For example, if some individuals face high uninsured medical
expenses due to poor health, then this assumption would not hold, and it would be desirable to subsidize health expenditures.95 However, when heterogeneity in consumption reﬂects
heterogeneity in preferences and not in need, assumption (a) is a natural assumption.
Assumption (b) is a technical assumption required to ensure that consumption of speciﬁc
goods is not a tag for low responsiveness of labor supply to taxation. For example, if consumers of
luxury cars happened to have much lower labor supply elasticities than average, it would become
eﬃcient to tax luxury cars as a way to indirectly tax more the earnings of those less responsive
individuals. In practice, too little is known about the heterogeneity in labor supply across
individuals to exploit such possibilities. Hence, assumption (b) is also a natural assumption.
94

The Laroque-Kaplow method can be easily adapted to the linear earnings tax case. Consider a linear
earnings tax with tax rate τ and demogrant R. The same proof carries over if any tax system (τ, R, t) can be
replaced by a pure income tax (τ̄ , R̄, t = 0) such that V ((1 − τ )z + E, p + t) = V ((1 − τ̄ )z + Ē, p) for all z.
This is possible if and only if V (y, p) takes the linear form φ(p) · y + ψ(p) (up to an increasing transformation).
This in turn is equivalent to having a direct sub-utility of consumption of the form v(c1 − c01 (q), .., cK − c0K (q))
homogeneous of degree 1 (up to an increasing transformation) which delivers aﬃne Engel curves of the form
ck (y, q) = c0k (q) + dk (q)y. Importantly, the sub-utility has to be uniform across individuals.
95
It also fails in the case with bequests as earnings are no longer a suﬃcient statistic for lifetime resources in
that case. This implies that positive bequest taxes are desirable when the redistributive tastes of the government
are strong enough (Piketty and Saez, 2012a,b).

54

Assumption (c) is the critical assumption. When it fails, the thought experiment to decide
on whether commodity k ought to be taxed is the following. Suppose high ability individuals
are forced to work less and earn only as much as lower ability individuals. In that scenario, if
higher ability individuals consume more of good k than lower ability individuals, then taxing
good k is desirable. This can happen for two reasons. First, high ability people may have a
relatively higher taste for good k (independently of income) in which case taxing good k is a
form of indirect tagging of high ability. Second, good k is positively related to leisure, i.e.,
consumption of good k increases when leisure increases keeping after-tax income constant. This
suggests taxing more holiday related expenses and subsidizing work related expenses such as
child care.
In general the Atkinson-Stiglitz assumption is a good starting place for most goods. This
implies that lower or zero VAT rates on some goods for redistribution purposes is ineﬃcient (in
addition to being administratively burdensome). Under those assumptions, eliminating such
preferential rates and replacing them with a more redistributive income tax and transfer system
would increase social welfare.96

5.3

In-Kind Transfers

As we discussed in Section 2, the largest transfer programs are in-kind rather than cash. OECD
countries in general provide universal public health care beneﬁts and public education. They
also often provide in-kind housing or nutrition beneﬁts on a means-tested basis.
As is well known, from a rational individual perspective, if the in-kind beneﬁt is tradable, it
is equivalent to cash. Most in-kind beneﬁts however are not tradable. In that case, recipients
may be forced to over-consume the good provided in-kind and would instead prefer to receive
the cash equivalent value of the in-kind transfer. Therefore, from a narrow rational individual
perspective, cash transfers dominate in-kind transfers. From a social perspective, three broad
lines of justiﬁcation have been provided in favor of in-kind beneﬁts.97
1. Commodity Egalitarianism. A number of goods, such as education or health care are
seen as rights everybody in society is entitled to.98 Those goods are hence put in the same
96

This is one of the main recommendations of the recent Mirrlees review (Mirrlees, 2011). The political issue
is that it would be diﬃcult in practice to ensure that the VAT reform would indeed by accompanied by truly
compensating changes on the income tax and transfer side. Boadway (2012) provides a comprehensive summary
of the discussions and applications of the Atkinson and Stiglitz theorem in the literature.
97
The traditional externality and public good justiﬁcation, analyzed extensively, may also apply to some
although not all types of non-cash beneﬁts and is left aside here.
98
Retirement beneﬁts, although not strictly speaking in-kind beneﬁts, can also be seen as non-cash beneﬁts
because they are not transferrable over time, i.e., a young worker typically cannot borrow against her future

55

category as other rights that democratic governments oﬀer to all citizens without distinction
such as protection under the law, free speech, right to vote, etc. The diﬃculty with this view is
that it does not say which level of education or health care should be seen as a right.
2. Paternalism. The government might want to impose its preferences on transfer recipients.
For example, voters might support providing free shelter and free meals to the homeless but
would oppose giving them cash that might be used for alcohol or tobacco consumption. In
that case, recipients would rather get the cash equivalent value of the non-cash transfers they
get but society’s paternalistic views prevail upon recipients’ preferences. Those arguments have
been developed mostly by libertarians to criticize in-kind beneﬁts (e.g., Milton Friedman was
favorable to basic redistribution through a negative income tax cash transfer rather than in-kind
beneﬁts).
3. Individual Failures. Related, recipients could themselves realize that, if provided with
only cash, they might choose too little health care, education, or retirement savings for their
long-term well being, perhaps because of lack of information or self-control problems (e.g., hyperbolic discounting is an elegant way to model such self-control issues). In this case, recipients
understand that non-cash beneﬁts are in their best interest. Hence, recipients would actually
support getting such non-cash beneﬁts instead of the equivalent cash-value. This type of rationalization for non-cash transfers hence diﬀers drastically from the paternalistic view. The
fact that all advanced economies systematically provide large amounts of non-cash beneﬁts universally (retirement, health, education) through a democratic process is more consistent with
the “individual failures” scenario than the “paternalism” scenario. The case of education, and
especially primary education, is particularly important. Children cannot be expected to have
fully forward looking rational preferences. Parents make educational choices on behalf of their
children and most–but not all–parents have the best interests of their children at heart. Compulsory and free public education is a simple way for the government to ensure that all children
get a minimum level of education regardless of how caring their parents are.
4. Second-Best Eﬃciency. A number of studies have shown that, with limited information
and limited policy tools, non-cash beneﬁts can actually be desirable in a “second-best” equilibrium. In-kind beneﬁts can be used by the government to relax the incentive constraint created
by the optimal tax problem. This point was ﬁrst noted by Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982) and
later developed in a number of studies (see Currie and Gahvari, 2008 and Boadway, 2012, Chapter 4 for detailed surveys). Those results are closely related to the Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976)
retirement beneﬁts.

56

theorem presented above. If the utility function is not separable between consumption goods
and leisure, then we know that commodity taxation is useful to supplement optimal nonlinear
earnings taxation. By the same token, it can be shown that providing an in-kind transfer of
a good complementary with work is desirable because it makes it relatively more costly for
high-skill people to work less. Although such “second-best” arguments have attracted the most
attention in the optimal tax literature, they are second-order in the public debate which focuses
primarily on the other justiﬁcations we discussed above.

5.4

Family Taxation

In practice, the treatment of families raises important issues. Any tax and transfer system
must make a choice on how to treat singles vs. married households and how to make taxes
and transfers depend on the number of children. There is relatively little normative work on
those questions, in large part because the standard utilitarian framework is not successful at
capturing the key trade-oﬀs. Kaplow (2008), chapter 8 provides a detailed review.
Couples. Any income tax system needs to decide how to treat couples vs. single individuals.
As couples typically share resources, welfare is best measured by family income rather than
individual income. There are two main treatments of the family in actual tax (or transfer) systems. (a) The individual system where every person is taxed separately based on her individual
income. In that case, couples are treated as two separate individuals. As a result, an individual
system does not impose any tax or subsidy on marriage as tax liability is independent of living
arrangements. At the same time, it taxes in the same way a person married to a wealthy spouse
vs. a person married to a spouse with no income. (b) The family system where the income tax
is based on total family income, i.e., the sum of the income of both spouses in case of married
couples. The family system can naturally modulate the tax burden based on total family resources, which best measures welfare under complete sharing within families. However and as
a result, a family tax system with progressive tax brackets cannot be neutral with respect to
living arrangements, creating either a marriage tax or a marriage subsidy. Under progressive
taxation, if the tax brackets for married couples are the same as for individuals, the family
system typically creates a marriage tax. If the tax brackets for married couple are twice as wide
as for individuals, the family system typically creates a marriage subsidy.99
Hence and as is well known, it is impossible to have a tax system that simultaneously meets
99

The US system creates marriage subsidies for low to middle income families and marriage taxes for high
income families with two earners.

57

three desirable properties: (1) the tax burden is based on family income, (2) the tax system is
marriage neutral, (3) the tax system is progressive (i.e., the tax system is not strictly linear).
Although those properties clearly matter in the public debate, it is not possible to formalize
their trade-oﬀ within the traditional utilitarian framework as the utilitarian principle cannot
put a weight on the marriage neutrality principle.
If marriage responds strongly to any tax penalty or subsidy, it is better to reduce the
marriage penalty/subsidy and move toward an individualized system. This issue might be
particularly important in countries (such as Scandinavian countries for example), where many
couples cohabit without being formally married and as it is diﬃcult (and intrusive) for the
government to observe (and monitor) cohabitation status.
Traditionally, the labor supply of secondary earners–typically married women–has been
found to be more elastic than the labor supply of primary earners–typically married men (see
Blundell and MaCurdy 1999 for a survey). Under the standard Ramsey taxation logic, this
implies that it is more eﬃcient to tax secondary earners less (Boskin and Sheshinski 1983). If
the tax system is progressive, this goal is naturally achieved under an individual based system
as secondary earners are taxed on their sole earnings. Note however that the diﬀerence in labor
supply elasticities between primary and secondary earners has likely declined over time as more
and more married women work (Blau and Kahn 2007).
In practice, most OECD countries have switched from family based to individual based
income taxation. In contrast, transfer systems remain based on family income. It is therefore
acceptable to the public that a spouse with modest earnings would face a low tax rate, no matter
how high the earnings of her/his spouse are.100 In contrast, it appears unacceptable to the public
that a spouse with modest earnings should receive means-tested transfers if the earnings of his
or her spouse are high. A potential explanation could be framing eﬀects as direct transfers might
be more salient than an equivalent reduction in taxes. Kleven, Kreiner, and Saez (2009) oﬀer a
potential explanation in a standard utilitarian model with labor supply where they show that
the optimal joint tax system is to have transfers for non-working spouses (or equivalently taxes
on secondary earnings) that decrease with primary earnings. The intuition is the following.
With concave utilities, the presence of secondary earnings make a bigger diﬀerence in welfare
when primary earnings are low than when primary earnings are large. Hence, it is more valuable
to compensate one earner couples (relative to two earner couples) when primary earnings are
low. This translates into an implicit tax on secondary earnings that decreases with primary
100

Note that under a progressive and individual based tax system, only small earnings of secondary earners
face low tax rates. As secondary earnings increase, they get taxed at progressively higher rates.

58

earnings. Such negative jointness in the tax system is approximately achieved by having family
based means-tested transfers along with individually based income taxation.
Children. Most tax and transfer systems oﬀer tax reductions for children or increases in
beneﬁts for children. The rationale for such transfers is simply that, conditional on income z,
families with more children are more in need of transfers and have less ability to pay taxes. The
interesting question that arises is how the net transfer (additional child beneﬁts or reduction in
taxes) per additional child should vary with income z. On the one hand, the need for children
related transfers is highest for families with very small incomes. On the other hand, the cost of
children is higher for families with higher incomes particularly when parents work and need to
purchase childcare.
Actual tax and transfers do seem to take both considerations into account. Means-tested
transfers tend to oﬀer child beneﬁts that are phased-out with earnings. Income taxes tend to
oﬀer child beneﬁts that increase with income for two reasons. First, the lowest income earners
do not have taxable income and hence do not beneﬁt from child related tax reductions. Second,
child related tax reductions are typically a ﬁxed deduction from taxable income which is more
valuable in upper income tax brackets. Hence, the level of child beneﬁts tends to be U-shaped
as a function of earnings. Two important qualiﬁcations should be made.
First, as mentioned in Section 4.3.3, a number of countries have introduced in-work beneﬁts
that are tied to work and presence of children. This tends to make child beneﬁts less decreasing
with income at the low income end. In the United States, because of the large EITC and child tax
credits and small traditional means-tested transfers, the beneﬁt per child is actually increasing
with family earnings at the bottom. Second, another large child beneﬁt often subsidized or
government provided is pre-school child care (infant child care, kindergarten starting at age
2 or 3, etc.). Such child care beneﬁts are quantitatively large and most valuable when both
parents work or for single working parents. Hence, economically, they are a form of in-kind
in-work beneﬁt which also promotes labor force participation (see OECD, 2006, Figure 4.1,
p.129 for an empirical analysis). It is perhaps not a coincidence that cash in-work beneﬁts for
children are highest in the US and the UK, countries which provide minimal child care public
beneﬁts. Understanding in that context whether a cash transfer or an in-kind child care beneﬁt
is preferable is an interesting research question that has received little attention.
Child related beneﬁts raise two additional interesting issues.
First, families do not take decisions as a single unit (Chiappori 1988). Interestingly, in the
case of children, cash transfers to mothers (or grandmothers) have larger impacts on children’s
59

consumption than transfers to fathers. This has been shown in the UK context (Lundberg et
al. 1997) when the administration of child tax beneﬁts was changed from a reduction in tax
withholdings of parents (often the father) to a direct check to the mother. Similar eﬀects have
been documented in the case of cash beneﬁts for the elderly in South Africa (Duﬂo 2003). This
evidence suggests that in-kind beneﬁts (such as child care or pre-school) might be preferable if
the goal is to ensure that resources go toward children. As mentioned above, primary education is
again the most important example of in-kind beneﬁts designed so that children beneﬁt regardless
of how caring parents are.
Second, child beneﬁts might promote fertility. A large empirical literature has found that
child beneﬁts have sometimes positive but in general quite modest eﬀects on fertility (see Gauthier 2007 for a survey). There can be externalities (both positive and negative) associated
with children. For example, there can be congestion eﬀects (such as global warming) associated
with larger populations. Alternatively, declines in populations can have adverse eﬀects on sustainability of pay-as-you go pension arrangements. Such externalities should be factored into
discussions of optimal child beneﬁts.

5.5

Relative Income Concerns

Economists have long been interested in the possibility that individuals care not only about their
absolute income but also their income relative to others. Recently, substantial evidence coming
from observational studies (e.g., Luttmer 2005), lab experiments (e.g., Fehr and Schmidt, 1999),
and ﬁeld experiments (Card et al. 2012) provide support for relative income eﬀects. A number
of optimal tax studies have incorporated relative income in the analysis (Boskin and Sheshinski,
1978 analyze the linear income tax case and Oswald, 1983 and Tuomala 1990, Chapter 8 consider
the nonlinear income tax case). Those studies ﬁnd that in general relative income concerns tend
to increase optimal tax rates. Relative income eﬀects can be modeled in a number of ways. The
simplest way, which we consider here, is to posit that individual utility also depends on the
utility of others.101
Relative income concerns aﬀect optimal tax analysis in two ways. First, it changes the social
marginal welfare weights as a decrease in the utility of others has a direct eﬀect on one’s utility
(keeping one’s work and income situation constant), creating externalities. In our view, the
simplest way to capture this eﬀect is to consider that those externalities aﬀect the social welfare
weights. If a decrease in a person’s income increases others’ utility, then the social welfare weight
101

Alternatives could be to make individual utility depends on the earnings or consumption of others.

60

on this person ought to be reduced by this external eﬀect. Whether such externalities should be
factored in the social welfare function is a deep and diﬃcult question. Surely, hurting somebody
with higher taxes for the sole satisfaction of envy seems morally wrong, Hence, social welfare
weights should not be allowed to be negative for anybody no matter how strong the envy eﬀects.
At the same, it seems to us that relative income concerns are a much more powerful and realistic
way to justify social welfare weights decreasing with income than standard utilitarianism with
concave utility of consumption.
Second, relative income concerns aﬀect labor supply decisions. For example, if utility functions are such that u(c/c̄, z) with c̄ average consumption in the economy, then a proportional
tax on consumption aﬀects c and c̄ equally and hence has no impact on labor supply. This
might be a simple explanation for why labor supply is relatively inelastic with respect to secular increases in wage rates over the long-term process of economic growth (Ramey and Francis
2009).102 This labor supply channel eﬀect is fully captured by the behavioral response elasticity
and hence does not change the optimal tax formulas.
As an illustration, let us go back to the optimal top tax rate analysis from Section 4.1
with a small variation dτ in the top tax rate. The key diﬀerence in the analysis is that the
reduction in welfare for top bracket earners would now have a positive externality on the utility
of lower income individuals. As long as this external eﬀect is weakly separable from labor supply
choices, i.e., U i (ui (c, z), ū−i ) where ui (c, z) is the standard utility function and ū−i is the vector
of utilities of all other (non i) individuals, the individual earnings z i decisions are not aﬀected by
the external eﬀect. The external eﬀect is proportional to the direct welfare eﬀect on top bracket
earners and the strength of the externality. Therefore, the external eﬀect simply reduces the
social marginal value of consumption of top bracket earners from g to ĝ. The optimal tax
formula retains the same form as before τ = (1 − ĝ)/(1 − ĝ + a · e).
In sum, we think that relative income concerns are a useful way to interpret and justify
optimal tax analysis and can be incorporated within standard optimal tax analysis.

5.6

Other Extensions

Endogenous wages. The standard assumption in optimal labor income tax theory is that
pre-tax wage rates are exogenous, i.e., that there is perfect substitutability between skills in
production. Interestingly, in the discrete occupational models we have introduced in Section
4.2.2, this assumption can be relaxed without aﬀecting the general optimal tax formula (12).
102

An alternative explanation is that income and substitution eﬀects cancel out so that large uncompensated
increases in wage rates have little eﬀect on labor supply.

61

To see this, consider a general production function F (h1 , .., hN ) of the consumption good with
constant returns to scale.103 In that case, wages are set by marginal product zn = ∂F/∂hn . The
maximization of the government can be rewritten as choosing (c0 , .., cN ) to maximize


hn cn + E ≤ F (h1 , .., hN ) (p).
SW F = ωi G(ui (cn (i), n(i)))dν(i) s.t.
i

n

Note that any explicit reference to wages zn has disappeared from this maximization problem
and the ﬁrst order condition with respect to cn immediately leads to the same optimal tax
formula (12).
The intuition in a basic two skill model is the following. Suppose an increase in high skill
taxes leads to a reduction in high skill labor supply and hence an increase in high skill wages (and
a decrease in low skill wages) through demand eﬀects. Because of the absence of proﬁts, those
demand eﬀects are a pure transfer from low to high skill workers. Therefore, the government can
readjust the tax on high and low skills to oﬀset those demand eﬀects on the net consumption
levels at no net ﬁscal cost, leaving the optimal tax formula unchanged.104
Theoretically, this result arises because the discrete occupational model is eﬀectively mathematically identical to a Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) optimal commodity tax model where
each occupation is a speciﬁc good taxed at a speciﬁc rate. As is well known from Diamond
and Mirrlees (1971), optimal Ramsey tax formulas depend solely on consumers’ demand and
do not depend on production functions. This generates two important additional consequences.
First, the production eﬃciency result of Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) carries over to the discrete occupational choice model, implying that distortions in the production process or tariﬀs
(in the case of an open economy) are not desirable. Second, in an extended model with many
consumption goods, the theorem of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) also carries over to the discrete occupational choice model. Namely, diﬀerentiated commodity taxation is not desirable
to supplement optimal nonlinear earnings taxation under the standard separability assumption
presented above. Those results are formally proven in Saez (2004b). They stand in sharp contrast to results obtained in the Stiglitz (1982) discrete model with endogenous wages where it
is shown that the optimal tax formulas are aﬀected by endogenous wages (Stiglitz, 1982), and
103

If returns were not constant, there would be pure proﬁts, the results would carry through assuming that
pure proﬁts can be taxed 100%.
104
The same result applies when considering diﬀerentiated linear taxation of capital and labor income. What
matters for optimal tax formulas are the supply elasticities of labor (and capital) and the eﬀects on the prices
of factors are again irrelevant. Taxing labor more reduces labor supply, increases the wage rate, and reduces the
return on capital, creating indirect redistribution from capital earners to labor earners. However, this indirect
redistribution is irrelevant for optimal tax analysis as the government can adjust the capital and labor tax rates
to fully oﬀset it at no ﬁscal cost.

62

where the production eﬃciency theorem and the Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem do not carry over
(Naito, 1999). Saez (2004b) argues that the occupational model best captures the long-term
when individuals choose their occupations while the Stiglitz (1982) model captures a short-term
situation where individuals have ﬁxed skills and only adjust hours of work.
Workfare, take-up costs, and screening. Workfare can be deﬁned as requiring transfer
beneﬁciaries to work, typically for a public project. In its extreme form, the work required
has no productive value. In that case, workfare is similar to imposing an ordeal, such as time
consuming take-up costs, on welfare beneﬁciaries. The literature has focused primarily on such
“useless workfare requirements”. Besley and Coate (1992) show that, if the government cares
about poverty measured by net-income rather than individual utilities, it can be optimal to
impose workfare. In their model, workfare screens away higher wage individuals who have a
higher opportunity cost of time.105
Cuﬀ (2000) shows, in a standard Stiglitz (1982) two-type discrete model that a useless
workfare program is never desirable with a standard welfarist objective. Interestingly, Cuﬀ
(2000) then extends the analysis to include heterogeneity in tastes for work (in addition to the
standard wage rate heterogeneity). When there are lazy vs. hard working low skill workers and
when society does not like to redistribute toward lazy low skill workers, workfare can become
desirable. This is because work requirements are more costly to lazy types than hard working
types.
In practice, ﬁnding ordeals which hurt more the undeserving beneﬁciaries than the deserving
beneﬁciaries seems diﬃcult. In particular, if society feels that welfare is too generous, it is more
eﬃcient to cut beneﬁts directly rather than impose ordeals. Both reduce welfare beneﬁts (and
hence the incentives to become a recipient) but at least direct cuts save on government spending.
Screening mechanisms that also impose costs on recipients, (e.g., ﬁling out forms, medical
tests, etc.) can be desirable when they are successful in screening deserving recipients (e.g.,
the truly disabled) vs. undeserving recipients (e.g., those faking disability). Diamond and
Sheshinski (1995) propose an analysis along those lines in the case of disability insurance (see
also the chapter by Chetty and Finkelstein in this volume for more details on optimal social
insurance). The key diﬀerence with useless workfare or ordeals is that such screening is directly
designed at separating deserving vs. undeserving recipients. It is very unlikely that blanket
ordeals can achieve this. Today, data driven screening (i.e., checking administrative databases
105

Related, Kleven and Kopczuk (2011) show that imposing complex take-up rules that improve screening but
reduce take-up is optimal when the government objective is poverty alleviation instead of standard welfare.

63

for potential earnings, etc.) are far more powerful and eﬃcient than direct in person screening
(and also a lot less intrusive for recipients).
Minimum wages. The minimum wage is another policy tool that can be used for redistribution
toward low skill workers. At the same time minimum wages can create unemployment among low
skill workers, creating a trade-oﬀ between equity and eﬃciency. A small literature has examined
the desirability of minimum wages in addition to optimal taxes and transfers in the standard
competitive labor market with endogenous wage rates (as in the model discussed above).106
Lee and Saez (2012) use the occupational model of Section 4.3.2 with endogenous wages
and prove two results. First, they show that a binding minimum wage is desirable under the
strong assumption that unemployment induced by the minimum wage hits the lowest surplus
workers ﬁrst. The intuition for this result is simple and can be understood using Figure 8.
Suppose a minimum wage is set at level z1 and that transfers to low skilled workers earning z1
are increased. The presence of the minimum wage at z1 rations low skill work and eﬀectively
prevents the labor supply responses from taking place. Some non-workers would like to work and
earn z1 but cannot ﬁnd jobs because those jobs are rationed by the minimum wage. Therefore,
the minimum wage enhances the ability of the government to redistribute (via an EITC type
beneﬁt) toward low skill workers.
Second, when labor supply responses are along the extensive margin only, which is the
empirically relevant case, the co-existence of a minimum wage with a positive tax rate on lowskilled work is always (second-best) Pareto ineﬃcient. A Pareto improving policy consists of
reducing the pre-tax minimum wage while keeping constant the post-tax minimum wage by
increasing transfers to low-skilled workers, and ﬁnancing this reform by increasing taxes on
higher paid workers. Importantly, this result is true whether or not rationing induced by the
minimum wage is eﬃcient or not. This result can also rationalize policies adopted in many
OECD countries in recent decades that have decreased the minimum wage while reducing the
implicit tax on low skill work through a combination of reduced payroll taxes for low skill
workers and in-work beneﬁts of the EITC type for low skill workers.
Optimal transfers in recessions. In practice, some transfers (such as unemployment insurance in the United States) can be made more generous during recessions. Traditionally, optimal
policy over the business cycle has been analyzed in the macro-economics literature rather than
the public economics literature.107 The macro-economics literature, however, rarely focuses on
106

A larger literature has considered minimum wages in labor markets with imperfections that we do not review
here.
107
Stabilization policy was one of the three pillars of public policy in the famous Musgrave terminology, the

64

distributional issues. There are three channels through which recessions can aﬀect the calculus
of optimal transfers for those out-of-work.
First, recessions are a time of high unemployment where people want to work but cannot
ﬁnd jobs. This suggests that employment is limited by demand eﬀects rather than the supply
eﬀects of the traditional optimal tax analysis. As a result, in recessions, unemployment is likely
to be less sensitive to supply-side changes in search eﬀorts and job search is likely to generate
a negative externality on other job seekers in the queue. Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2010)
capture this eﬀect in a search model where job rationing arises in recessions and show that
unemployment insurance should be more generous during recessions. Crépon et al. (2012),
using a large scale job placement aid randomized experiment in France, show that indeed there
are negative externalities of job placement aid on other job seekers and that those externalities
are larger when unemployment is high.
Second, in recessions, the ability to smooth consumption might be reduced, as the long-term
unemployed might exhaust their buﬀer stock savings and might face credit constraints. This
implies that the gap in social marginal utility of consumption between workers and non-workers
might grow during recessions, further increasing the value of redistributing from workers to the
unemployed (Chetty, 2008).
Third and related, individuals are less likely to be responsible for their unemployment status
in a recession than in an expansion. In an expansion when jobs are easy to ﬁnd, long unemployment spells are more likely to be due to low search eﬀorts than in a recession when jobs
are diﬃcult to ﬁnd even with large search eﬀorts. If society wants to redistributive toward the
hard-searching unemployed–i.e., those who would not have found jobs even absent unemployment beneﬁts–then it seems desirable to have time limited beneﬁts during good times combined
with expanded beneﬁt durations in bad times. We will come back to such non-utilitarian social
preferences in Section 6.
Education policy. Education plays a critical role in generating labor market skills. All advanced economies provide free public education at the K-12 level and heavily subsidize higher
education. As we have seen earlier, there is a strong rationale for providing K-12 public education to correct potential parenting failures. For higher education, the presence of credit
constraints might lead to sub-optimal educational levels, providing a strong rationale for government provision of loans (see e.g., Lochner and Monge, 2011).108 However, governments in
other two being the allocative and redistributive policies.
108
The government has better ability than private lenders to enforce repayment of loans based on post-education
earnings. For example, in the United States, it is much more diﬃcult to default on (government provided) student

65

advanced economies not only provide loans but also direct subsidies to higher education. Direct
subsidies could be justiﬁed by “behavioral considerations” if a signiﬁcant fraction of young adults
are not able to make wise educational choices on their own–due for example to informational or
self-control issues.
A small literature in optimal taxation has examined the desirability of education subsidies
in fully rational models. Higher education subsidies encourage skill acquisition but tend to
beneﬁt more the relatively skilled and hence are likely regressive. Absent any ability to observe
educational choices, the total elasticity of earnings with respect to net-of-tax rates is due to both
labor supply and education choices. If education choices are elastic, the corresponding optimal
income tax should incorporate the full elasticity and not solely the labor supply elasticity. This
naturally leads to lower optimal tax rates than those calibrated using solely the labor supply
elasticity. Diamond and Mirrlees (2002) develop this point, which they call the “Le Chatelier”
principle.109
Suppose now that the government can observe educational choices and hence directly subsidize (or tax) them in addition to using income based taxes and transfers. In that context,
redistributive taxes and transfers discourage both labor supply and education investments as
they reduce the net rewards from higher education. Bovenberg and Jacobs (2005) consider
such a model and show that combining educational subsidies with redistributive income based
taxation is optimal–consistent with real policies.
In the simplest version of their model, education d increases the wage rate w = nφ(d) (with
φ(d) increasing and concave and n being innate ability) at a cost d. Individuals choose d and l
to maximize utility c − h(l) subject to c = (1 − τ )nφ(d) − (1 − s)d + R where τ is the income tax
rate, s the subsidy rate on education expenses d, and R the demogrant. In this simple model,
d is an intermediate good that does not directly enter the utility function which depends solely
on c and l. The education choice is given by the ﬁrst order condition (1 − τ )nφ (d) = 1 − s.
Hence, education is pure cost of production and individuals should be taxed on their earnings
net of education costs nφ(d)l − d. This implies that s should be set exactly equal to τ .
loans than on private consumer credit loans.
109
Related, Best and Kleven (2012) derive optimal tax formulas in a context where eﬀort when young has
positive eﬀects on wages later in life.

66

6

Limits of the Welfarist Approach and Alternatives

6.1

Issues with the Welfarist Approach

All our analysis so far has followed the standard welfarist approach whereby the government
objective is to maximize a weighted sum of individual utilities (or an increasing transformation
of utilities). As we saw, all optimal tax formulas can be expressed in terms of the social marginal
welfare weights attached to each individual which measure the social value of an extra dollar of
consumption to each individual.
In standard optimal tax analysis, the utilitarian case (maximizing the unweighted sum of
individual utilities) is by far the most widely used. In that case, social welfare weights are
proportional to the marginal utility of consumption. As we have seen, this criterion generates
a number of predictions at odds with actual tax systems and with people’s intuitive sense of
redistributive justice.
First, if individuals do not respond to taxes, i.e., if pre-tax incomes are ﬁxed, and individual
utilities are concave, then utilitarianism recommends a 100% tax and full redistribution. In
reality, even absent behavioral responses, many and perhaps even most people would still object
to conﬁscatory taxation on the grounds that people deserve to keep part of the income they
have created.
Second and related, views on taxes and redistribution seem largely shaped by views on
whether the income generating process is fair and whether individual incomes are deserved or
not. The public tends to dislike the redistribution of fairly earned income through one’s eﬀort
but is in favor of redistributing income earned unfairly or due to pure luck (see Piketty 1995 for
a theoretical model and Alesina and Giuliano, 2011 for a recent survey). Such distinctions are
irrelevant for utilitarianism.
Third, as we have seen in Section 5.1 on tagging, under utilitarianism, optimal taxes should
depend on all observable characteristics which are correlated with intrinsic earning ability. In
practice, taxes and transfers use very few of the potentially available tags. Society seems to have
horizontal equity concerns and using tags to achieve indirect redistribution is hence perceived
to be unfair.
Fourth, perceptions about recipients seem to matter a great deal for the public views on
transfers. Most people support transfers for people really unable to work, such as the truly
disabled but most people dislike transfers to people able to work and who would work absent
transfers. In the standard model, behavioral responses matter for optimal taxes only through

67

their eﬀects on the government budget. In reality, the presence of behavioral responses also
colors the public perceptions on how deserving transfer beneﬁciaries are.

6.2

Alternatives

A number of alternatives to welfarism have been proposed in the literature.
Pareto Principle. First, let us recall that the standard utilitarian criterion can be easily
extended, as we have seen, by considering a weighted sum of individual utilities (instead of a
simple sum). Those positive weights are called Pareto weights. By changing those weights, we
can describe the set of all second-best Pareto eﬃcient tax equilibria. It seems natural that any
“optimal tax system” should be at least second-best Pareto eﬃcient, i.e., no feasible tax reform
can improve the welfare of everybody. Hence, the Pareto principle imposes a reasonable but
weak condition on tax optima. Indeed, optimal tax analysis was particularly interested in ﬁnding
properties that hold true for all such second-best optima.110 Those properties are relatively few,
an example being the Atkinson and Stiglitz theorem. Hence, considering arbitrary weights is
not going to be enough to obtain deﬁnite conclusions in general. Hence, it is necessary to be
able to put more structure on those Pareto weights so that we can select among the wide set of
second-best Pareto optimal tax systems.
All the examples of alternatives to utilitarianism we describe next show that any criterion
leads to a speciﬁc set of marginal social welfare weights.
Rawlsian Criterion. In the Rawlsian criterion, Pareto weights are concentrated solely on
the most disadvantaged person in the economy. This amounts to maximizing the utility of the
person with the minimum utility, hence this criterion is also called the maxi-min objective.
A judgement needs to be made as to who is the most disadvantaged person. In models with
homogeneous preferences and heterogeneous skills, the most disadvantaged person is naturally
the person with the lowest skill and hence the lowest earnings. This criterion has the appealing
feature that, once society agrees on who is the most disadvantaged person, the optimum is
independent of the cardinal choice for individual utilities. The key weakness of this criterion is
that it concentrates all social welfare on the most disadvantaged and hence represents extreme
redistributive tastes. Intuitively, it seems clear that the political process will put weight on a
broader set of voters than solely the most disadvantaged. Hence, the Rawlsian principle makes
sense politically only if the most disadvantaged form a majority of the population. This is not
110

Guesnerie (1995) studies the structure of Pareto optima in the Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) model of linear
commodity taxation and Werning (2007) studies the structure of Pareto optima in the Mirrlees (1971) model of
nonlinear optimal income taxation.

68

a realistic assumption in the case of redistribution of labor income.111 For example, we have
seen in Section 3.1 that a standard median voter outcome puts all the weight on the median
voter preferences.
Libertarianism and Beneﬁts Principle. At the other extreme, libertarians argue that the
government should not do any redistribution through taxes and transfers. Therefore, taxes
should be set according to the beneﬁts received from government spending, individual by individual. This is known as the beneﬁts principle of taxation. Any redistribution over and above
beneﬁts is seen as unjust conﬁscation of individual incomes. Such a principle can be formally
captured by assuming that social marginal welfare weights are identical across individuals (in
the situation where taxes correspond to beneﬁts). In that case, additional redistribution does
not add to social welfare.112 While some voters may hold libertarian views, as we discussed in
Section 1.1, all OECD countries do accomplish very substantial redistribution across individuals, and hence depart very signiﬁcantly from the beneﬁts principle of taxation. This shows that
the beneﬁts principle cannot by itself account for actual tax systems.
Principles of Responsibility and Compensation. The general idea is that individuals
should be compensated for circumstances aﬀecting their welfare over which they have no control,
such as their family background or disability at birth. This is the principle of compensation.
In contrast, individuals should be held responsible for circumstances which they control such as
how many hours they work. Hence, no redistribution should take place based on such choices.
This is the principle of responsibility. These principles are presented and discussed in detail in
Kolm (1996), Roemer (1998), Fleurbaey (2008), and Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2011).
An example often presented in the literature is that of individuals diﬀering by their wage rate
which they do not control (for example because it is due to exogenous ability), and by their taste
for leisure (some people prefer goods consumption, some people prefer leisure consumption). By
the principle of compensation, it is fair to redistribute from high wage to low wage individuals.
By the principle of responsibility, it is unfair to redistribute from goods lovers toward leisure
lovers. When there is only one dimension of heterogeneity, those principles are easy to apply.
For example, if individuals diﬀer only according to their wage rate (and not in their tastes), then
111

It is a more realistic assumption in the case of inheritance taxation where indeed about half of the population
receives negligible inheritances (see Piketty and Saez, 2012a,b for an analysis of optimal inheritance taxation
along those lines).
112
Weinzierl (2012) proposes a formalization of this principle and considers mixed utilitarian and libertarian
objectives. Feldstein (2012) argues that it is “repugnant” to put zero asymptotic welfare weight on top earners
(as implied by the utilitarian framework used in the Mirrlees Review), but does not propose an explicit model
specifying how the proper welfare weights should be set.

69

the principle of compensation boils down to a Rawlsian criterion whereby the tax and transfer
system should provide as much compensation as possible to the lowest wage people. In terms of
welfarism, social marginal welfare weights are fully concentrated on the lowest wage person. If
individuals diﬀer solely in taste for work, the principle of responsibility calls for no redistribution
at all because everybody has the same time endowment that they can divide between work and
leisure based on their relative tastes for goods consumption vs. leisure consumption. It would
be unfair to redistribute based on tastes.113 The standard welfarist approach cannot easily
obtain this meaningful result, except through a renormalization of Pareto weights so that social
marginal utilities of consumption are the same across individuals (absent transfers).114
However, those two principles can conﬂict in situations where there is heterogeneity in both
dimensions (skills and taste for leisure). Fleurbaey (2004) presents a simple example in a
two skill, two levels of taste for leisure model showing that it is not possible to fulﬁll both the
responsibility principle and the compensation principle at the same time. Therefore, some trade
oﬀ needs to be made between the two principles. This trade-oﬀ needs to be speciﬁed through
a social objective function. Fleurbaey (2008) reviews this literature and the many criteria that
have been proposed.115
Equal Opportunity. One prominent example of how to trade-oﬀ the responsibility vs. the
compensation principles is Roemer (1998) and Roemer et al. (2003) who propose an Equal
Opportunity criterion. In the model of Roemer et al. (2003), individuals diﬀer solely in their
wage rate w but the wage rate depends in part on family background and in part on merit (i.e.,
personal eﬀort in getting an education, getting ahead, etc.). The model uses quasi-linear utility
functions u = c − h(l) uniform across individuals. In the model, people are responsible for wage
diﬀerences due to merit but not for wage diﬀerences due to family background. Suppose for
simplicity there is a low and high family background. The distribution of wage rates is equal
to F0 (w) and F1 (w) among those coming from low and high family backgrounds respectively.
Assume that high family background provides an advantage so that F1 (w) stochastically dominates F0 (w). The government wants to redistribute from high to low family backgrounds but
does not want to redistribute across individuals with diﬀerent wages within a family background
113

This becomes clear when one considers an equivalent model where everybody has the same money endowment
to divide between two goods, say apples and oranges. In such an economy, there is no reason to discriminate in
favor of or against apple lovers vs. orange lovers.
114
Lockwood and Weinzierl (2012) explore the eﬀects of taste heterogeneity for optimal income taxation and
show that it can substantially aﬀect optimal tax rates through its eﬀects on social marginal welfare weights.
115
A number of those criteria can violate the Pareto principle, which is an unappealing feature. Hence, additional axioms have to be added to ensure that the Pareto principle is respected.

70

group because their position within the group is due to merit. The government can only observe
earnings wl and cannot observe family background (nor the wage rate). Hence, the government
is limited to using a nonlinear income tax T (wl) and cannot discriminate directly based on
family background. Individuals choose l to maximize their utility u = wl − T (wl) − h(l).
By assumption, two individuals in the same wage percentile p within their family background
group are equally deserving. Therefore, any discrepancy in the utility across family background
conditional on wage percentile should be corrected. This can be captured by a local social
welfare function at percentile p given by mini=0,1 [wp,i lp,i − T (wp,i lp,i ) − h(lp,i )] where wp,i is the
p-th percentile wage rate in family background group i, and lp,i the labor supply choice of the
p-th percentile wage person in group i. Total social welfare is then obtained by summing across
all percentiles. Hence, we have
SW F =



p=1

min [wp,i lp,i − T (wp,i lp,i ) − h(lp,i )]dp.

p=0 i=0,1

Eﬀectively, the social criterion is locally Rawlsian as it wants to redistribute across family
background groups conditional on merit (percentile) to level the ﬁeld as much as possible but
does not value redistribution within a family background group (as utilities are quasi-linear).
Because high family background provides an advantage, we have wp,1 > wp,0 . Hence the p-th
percentile individual in the high family background has a higher utility than the p-th percentile
individual in the low family background. As a result, total social welfare can be rewritten as:

 p=1
[wp,0 lp,0 − T (wp,0 lp,0 ) − h(lp,0 )]dp = [wl − T (wl) − h(l)]dF0 (w),
SW F =
w

p=0

This criterion is equivalent to a standard welfarist objective



g(w)[wl − T (wl) − h(l)]dF (w)

with the following social marginal welfare weights. The weights are equal to zero for those with
high family background and equal and constant for those with low family background. Hence,
the average social welfare weight at wage w is simply g(w) = f0 (w)/(f0 (w) + f1 (w)), i.e., the
relative fraction of individuals at wage w coming from a low family background. Presumably,
g(w) decreases with w as it is harder to obtain (through merit) a high wage when coming from
a low family background.
The standard Diamond (1998) optimal nonlinear tax theory of Section 4 applies in this
case by simply substituting the standard welfarist weights by those weights. For example, the
optimal top tax rate is given again by the simple formula τ = (1 − g)/(1 − g + a · e) where g
is the relative fraction of top earners coming from a low family background. If nobody coming
from a low family background can make it to the top, then g = 0 and the optimal top tax rate
is set to maximize tax revenue.
71

Generalized Social Welfare Weights. A systematic approach recently proposed by Saez
and Stantcheva (2013) is to consider generalized social marginal welfare weights that are exante speciﬁed to ﬁt justice principles. Those social marginal welfare weights reﬂect the relative
value of marginal consumption that society places on each individual. Hence, they can be used
to evaluate the aggregate social gain or loss created by any revenue neutral tax reform. A tax
system is “optimal” if no small revenue neutral reform yields a net gain when adding gains
and losses across individuals weighted using those generalized social marginal welfare weights.
Importantly, the optimum no longer necessarily maximizes an ex-ante social objective function.
Naturally, the optimal tax system that arises is second-best Pareto eﬃcient as long as the social
marginal welfare weights are speciﬁed to be non-negative.
This framework is therefore general and contains as special cases virtually all the situations
we have discussed before. The use of suitable generalized social welfare weights can resolve
many of the puzzles of the traditional utilitarian approach and account for existing tax policy
debates and structures.
First, if generalized social marginal welfare weights depend positively on net taxes paid, in
addition to net disposable income, the optimal tax rate is no longer 100% even absent behavioral
responses.
Second, generalized social welfare weights can also capture the fact that society prefers
taxes on income due to luck rather than taxes on income due to work. As shown in the example
above from Roemer et al. (2003), the social welfare weights can be set to zero for those who
have an undue advantage because of family background or income due to luck. Such “locally
Rawlsian” weights capture the intuition that it is fair to redistribute along some dimensions but
not others. When redistribution is deemed fair, it should be as large as possible as long as it
beneﬁts those deemed disadvantaged. Piketty and Saez (2012a,b) also use such weights in the
context of inheritance taxation where weights are set to zero for all those who receive positive
inheritances. In the context of inheritance taxation, this yields relatively robust outcomes, due
to the fact that the bottom half of the population generally receives close to zero inheritance.
We suspect that this approach could be fruitfully extended to the optimal taxation of top labor
incomes. For example, if individuals whose parents were in the bottom half of the income
distribution have small probabilities to reach the top 1% of the earnings distribution, then
this probability could be used as the welfare weight for the top 1%. One key advantage of
this approach based upon transition probabilities and mobility matrices is that it provides an
objective, non-ideological basis upon which welfare evaluations can be made.

72

Third and related, generalized social welfare weights can capture horizontal equity concerns
as well. Weights can be set to zero on anybody who beneﬁts from a favorable treatment based
on a policy that creates horizontal inequity (such as, for instance, shorter people in a tax system
based on height). In that case, tax policies creating horizontal inequities will arise only if they
beneﬁt the group that is being discriminated against. I.e., taxing the tall more is desirable only
if the tall end up better oﬀ in this new tax system as well. This drastically reduces the scope
for using additional characteristics in the tax and transfer system, consistent with the rare use
of tags in real policies.
Fourth, generalized social welfare weights can be made dependent on what individuals would
have done absent taxes and transfers. For example, social welfare weights can be set to zero on
“free loaders” who would have worked absent means-tested transfers. This sharply reduces the
desirability of transfers when behavioral responses are large for fairness reasons (in addition to
the standard budgetary reason).
Naturally, the ﬂexibility of generalized social weights begs the question of what social welfare weights ought to be and how they are formed. First, generalized welfare weights can be
derived from social justice principles, leading to a normative theory of taxation. The most famous example is the Rawlsian theory where the generalized social marginal welfare weights are
concentrated solely on the most disadvantaged members of society. As we discussed, “locally
Rawlsian” weights as in Roemer (1998), Roemer et al. (2003), or Piketty and Saez (2012a,b)
can also be normatively appealing to model preferences for redistribution based on some but
not all characteristics. Second, generalized welfare weights could also be derived empirically,
by estimating actual social preferences of the public, leading to a positive theory of taxation.
There is indeed a small body of work trying to uncover perceptions of the public about various tax policies. Those approaches either start from the existing tax and transfers system and
reverse-engineer it to obtain the underlying social preferences (see e.g. Ahmad and Stern (1984)
for commodity taxation and Bourguignon and Spadaro (2012) for nonlinear income taxation) or
directly elicit preferences on various social issues in surveys (see e.g., Fong (2001) and Frohlich
and Oppenheimer (1992)). Social preferences of the public are shaped by beliefs about what
drives disparities in individual economic outcomes (eﬀort, luck, background, etc.) as in the
model of Piketty (1995). In principle, economists can cast light on those mechanisms and hence
enlighten public perceptions so as to move the debate back to higher level normative principles.

73

A

Appendix

A.1

Formal Derivation of the Optimal Nonlinear Tax Rate

We specialize the Mirrlees (1971) model to the case with no income eﬀects, as in Diamond
(1998). All individuals have the same quasilinear utility function u(c, l) = c − v(l) where c is
disposable income and l is labor supply with v(l) increasing and convex in l. Individuals diﬀer
only in their skill level, denoted by n, which measures their marginal productivity. Earnings are
equal to z = nl. The population is normalized to one and the distribution of skills is F (n), with
density f (n) and support [0, ∞). The government cannot observe skills and thus is restricted to
setting taxes as a function only of earnings, c = z − T (z). Individual n chooses ln to maximize
utility nl − T (nl) − v(l) leading to ﬁrst order condition n(1 − T  (nl)) = v  (l).
Under a linearized income tax system with constant marginal tax rate τ , the labor supply
function l → l(n(1 − τ )) is implicitly deﬁned by the equation n(1 − τ ) = v  (l). Hence dl/d(n(1 −
τ )) = 1/v  (l) and hence the elasticity of labor supply with respect to the net-of-tax rate 1 − τ
is e = (n(1 − τ )/l)dl/d(n(1 − τ )) = v  (l)/lv  (l). As there are no income eﬀects, this elasticity
is both the compensated and the uncompensated elasticity.
Let cn , zn = nln , and un denote the consumption, earnings, and utility level of an individual
with skill n. The government maximizes a social welfare function,



cn f (n)dn ≤ nln f (n)dn − E (p).
W = G(un )f (n)dn s.t.
In the maximization program of the government, un is regarded as the state variable, ln as the
control variable, while cn = un +v(ln ) is a function of un and ln . Using the envelope theorem and
the individual ﬁrst order condition, the utility un of individual n satisﬁes dun /dn = ln v  (ln )/n.
Hence, the Hamiltonian is
H = [G(un ) + p · (nln − un − v(ln ))]f (n) + φ(n) ·

ln v  (ln )
,
n

where φ(n) is the multiplier of the state variable. The ﬁrst order condition with respect to l is
φ(n)
· [v  (ln ) + ln v  (ln )] = 0.
n
The ﬁrst order condition with respect to u is
p [n − v  (ln )] f (n) +

dφ(n)
= [G (un ) − p] f (n),
dn
∞
which can be integrated to yield −φ(n) = n [p − G (um )]f (m)dm where we have used the
transversality condition φ(∞) = 0. The other transversality condition φ(0) = 0 yields p =
∞ 
G (um )f (m)dm, i.e., social marginal welfare weights G (um )/p average to one.
0
Using this equation for φ(n), and noting that n − v  (ln ) = nT  (zn ), and that [v  (ln ) +
ln v  (ln )]/n = [v  (ln )/n][1 + 1/e] = [1 − T  (zn )][1 + 1/e], we can rewrite the ﬁrst order condition
with respect to ln as:

 ∞
(1 − gm )dF (m)
T  (zn )
1
n
= 1+
·
,
(17)

1 − T (zn )
e
nf (n)
−

74

where gm = G (um )/p is the social marginal welfare weight on individual m. This formula is
derived in Diamond (1998).
Under a linearized income tax system with marginal tax rate τ , we have zn = nl(n(1 − τ ))
and hence dzn /dn = l + (1 − τ )ndl/d(n(1 − τ )) = ln · (1 + e). Therefore, denoting by h(zn ) the
density of earnings at zn if the nonlinear tax were replaced by a linearized tax with marginal
tax rate τ = T  (zn ), we have h(zn )dzn = f (n)dn and hence f (n) = h(zn )ln (1 + e). Therefore,
nf (n) = zn h(zn )(1 + e) and we can rewrite equation (17) as
 ∞

(1 − gm )dF (m)
T  (zn )
1
1
1 − H(zn )
n
=
·
=
·
· (1 − G(zn )),
(18)
1 − T  (zn )
e
zn h(zn )
e
zn h(zn )
∞
where G(zn ) = n gm dF (m)/(1 − F (n)) is the average marginal social welfare weight on indi∞
viduals above zn . Changing variables from n to zn , we have G(zn ) = zn gm dH(zm ))/(1−H(zn ))
where H(zn ) is the actual (not virtual) cumulative distribution of earnings. This establishes
equation (11) in the main text. Note that the transversality condition implies that G(z0 = 0) =
1.
Equation (17) is particularly easy to use for numerical simulations calibrated to the actual
income distribution. Using the speciﬁed utility function u = c − v(l), the distribution F (n) is
calibrated so that, using the actual tax system, the resulting earnings distribution H(z) match
the actual earnings distribution. Once F (n) is obtained, formula (17) can be used iteratively
until a ﬁxed point tax system T  (zn ) is found. See e.g., Brewer at al. (2010) for an application
to the UK case.

A.2

Optimal Bottom Tax Rate in the Mirrlees Model

In the Mirrlees (1971) model, all individuals have the same utility function u(c, l) increasing
in disposable income c and decreasing in labor supply l. Individuals diﬀer only in their skill
level, denoted by n, which measures their marginal productivity. Earnings are equal to z = nl.
The population is normalized to one and the distribution of skills is F (n), with density f (n)
and support [0, ∞). The government cannot observe skills and thus is restricted to setting
taxes as a function only of earnings, c = z − T (z). Individual n chooses ln to maximize utility
u(nl − T (nl), l) leading to ﬁrst order condition n(1 − T  (nln ))uc + ul = 0. Let cn , zn = nln , and
un denote the consumption, earnings, and utility level of an individual with skill n. Note that
l0 = 0 and c0 = −T (0).
To have a fraction of non-workers, we assume that ul (c, l = 0) > 0 for all c ≥ 0. As a result,
all individuals with skill n below n0 deﬁned as n0 (1 − T  (0))uc (c0 , 0) + ul (c0 , 0) = 0 will not work
and choose the corner solution ln = 0 and cn = c0 = −T (0). Hence, the fraction non-working
in the population is F (n0 ) and naturally depends on both 1 − T  (0) (substitution eﬀects) and
−T (0) (income eﬀects).
Using the envelope theorem, the utility un of individual n satisﬁes dun /dn = −ln ul /n. Note
that this equation remains true even for non-workers at the bottom as un = u(−c0 , 0) is constant
with n and hence dun /dn = 0 for n ≤ n0 .

75

The government maximizes a social welfare function,



cn f (n)dn ≤ nln f (n)dn − E
W = G(un )f (n)dn s.t.

(p).

Following Mirrlees (1971), in the maximization program of the government, un is regarded as
the state variable, ln as the control variable, while cn is determined implicitly as a function of
un and ln from the equation un = u(cn , ln ). The Hamiltonian is
H = [G(un ) + p · (nln − cn )]f (n) + φ(n) ·

−ln ul (cn , ln )
,
n

where φ(n) is the multiplier of the state variable. As ∂c/∂l = −ul /uc , the ﬁrst order condition
with respect to l is


ul
ul
φ(n)
p n+
f (n) +
= 0.
· −ul − ln ull + ln ucl
uc
n
uc
At n = n0 , l = 0, n0 + ul /uc = n0 T  (0), and this ﬁrst order condition becomes
pn0 f (n0 )T  (0) =

φ(n0 )ul
.
n0

As ∂c/∂u = 1/uc , the ﬁrst order condition with respect to u is


dφ(n)
ln ucl
p

−
f (n) − φ(n)
= G (un ) −
.
dn
uc
nuc
For n ≤ n0 , ln = 0, un = u(c0 , 0), uc = uc (c0 , 0) are constant with n so that this equation
simpliﬁes to:


dφ(n)
p

= G (u0 ) −
f (n),
−
dn
uc
and can be integrated from n = 0 to n = n0 to yield


G (u0 )uc
p
φ(n0 ) =
F (n0 ),
1−
uc
p
where we have used the transversality condition φ(0) = 0. Replacing this expression for φ(n0 )
into the ﬁrst order condition for l at n = n0 yields



 
G (u0 )uc
G (u0 )uc
ul


n0 f (n0 )T (0) =
F (n0 ) = (1 − T (0))
− 1 F (n0 ),
1−
uc n0
p
p
which can be rewritten as
T  (0)
F (n0 )
= (g0 − 1) ·

1 − T (0)
n0 f (n0 )

or T  (0) =

g0 − 1
g0 − 1 +

n0 f (n0 )
F (n0 )

,

(19)

where g0 = G (u0 )uc /p is the social marginal welfare weight on non-workers.116
116

Mirrlees (1971), equation (44), p. 185 came close to this equation but failed to note the key simpliﬁcation
for one of the terms (ψy in Mirrlees’ notation) at the bottom when labor supply is zero.

76

Recall that n0 (1 − T  (0))uc (c0 , 0) + ul (c0 , 0) = 0 which deﬁnes n0 (1 − T  (0), c0 ). Hence,
the substitution eﬀect of 1 − T  (0) on n0 (keeping c0 constant) is such that ∂n0 /∂(1 − T  (0)) =
−n0 /(1−T  (0)). Hence, the elasticity of the fraction non-working F (n0 ) with respect to 1−T  (0)
is
n0 f (n0 )
1 − T  (0) dF (n0 )
1 − T  (0)
∂n0
e0 ≡ −
·
f
(n
=
,
=
−
)
·
0
F (n0 ) d(1 − T  (0)) c0
F (n0 )
∂(1 − T  (0))
F (n0 )
which allows us to rewrite (19) as
T  (0) =

g0 − 1
,
g0 − 1 + e0

exactly as in the discrete model formula (14) presented in the text.
Note that with quasi-linear iso-elastic preferences of the form u(c, l) = c − l1+e /(1 + e), the
individual ﬁrst order condition is [n(1 − T  )]e so that everybody with n > 0 works. If there
is a positive fraction of individuals with zero skill (and hence not working), the formula above
applies with e0 = 0 so that T  (0) = 1. Intuitively, the fraction of individuals aﬀected by a
change in T  (0) is negligible relative to the number of non-workers so that behavioral responses
are negligible and hence e0 = 0.

77

References
Adema, W., P. Fron and M. Ladaique, 2011. “Is the European Welfare State Really
More Expensive? Indicators on Social Spending, 1980-2012; and a Manual to the OECD Social
Expenditure Database”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 124.
Ahmad, Ehtisham and Nicholas Stern. 1984. “The theory of reform and Indian direct
taxes,” Journal of Public Economics, 25, 259-298.
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano. 2011. “Preferences for Redistribution,” in A. Bisin
and J. Benhabib (eds.), Handbook of Social Economics, Amsterdam:North Holland, Chapter 4,
93–132.
Alvaredo, Facundo, Anthony Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. 2011.
The World Top Incomes Database, online at http://g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/topincomes/
Ardant, Gabriel. 1971. Histoire de l’impôt (Volumes 1 and 2), Paris: Fayard, 1971.
Atkinson, Anthony. 1995. Public Economics in Action. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Atkinson, Anthony and Andrew Leigh. 2010. “Understanding the Distribution of Top
Incomes in Five Anglo-Saxon Countries over the Twentieth Century.” IZA Discussion Paper,
No. 4937, May.
Atkinson, Anthony, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. 2011. “Top Incomes in the
Long-Run of History”, Journal of Economic Literature, 49(1), 3-71.
Atkinson, Anthony, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1976. “The Design of Tax Structure: Direct
Versus Indirect Taxation.” Journal of Public Economics, 6(1-2), 55-75.
Atkinson, Anthony, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. Lectures in Public Economics. New
York: McGraw Hill.
Auerbach, Alan. 1988. “Capital Gains Taxation in the United States.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 2: 595-631.
Auerbach, Alan and James Hines. 2002. “Taxation and Economic Eﬃciency.” In Handbook
of Public Economics, 1st edition, Volume 3, eds. Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, 13471421. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Bane, Mary Jo and David T. Ellwood. 1994. Welfare Realities: From Rhetoric to Reform,
Harvard University Press: Cambridge.
Bebchuk, Lucian, and Jesse Fried. 2004. Pay without Performance: The Unfulﬁlled
Promise of Executive Compensation, Harvard University Press: Cambridge.
Bentham, Jeremy. 1791. Principles of Morals and Legislation, London: Doubleday.
Besley, Timothy and Stevene Coate. 1992.“Workfare versus Welfare: Incentives Arguments
for Work Requirements in Poverty-Alleviation Programs”, American Economic Review 82, 249261.
Best, Michael and Henrik Kleven. 2012. “Optimal Income Taxation with Career Eﬀects
of Work Eﬀort”, LSE Working Paper.
Blau, Francine and Lawrence Kahn. 2007. “Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of
Married Women: 1980-2000,” Journal of Labor Economics 25, 393–438.
Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy. 1999. “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Approaches.” In O. Ashenfelter, D. Card, ed., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3,
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
78

Boadway, Robin. 2012. From Optimal Tax Theory to Tax Policy: Retrospective and Prospective Views, 2009 Munich Lectures in Economics (Cambridge: MIT Press).
Boskin, Michael J. and Eytan Sheshinski. 1978. “Optimal Redistributive Taxation when
Individual Welfare Depends upon Relative Income,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 92(4),
589-601.
Boskin, Michael J. and Eytan Sheshinski. 1983. “Optimal tax treatment of the family:
Married couples,” Journal of Public Economics 20(3), 281-297.
Bourguignon, François and Amedeo Spadaro. 2012. “Tax-beneﬁt Revealed Social Preferences,” Journal of Economic Inequality 10(1), 75-108.
Bovenberg, A. Lans and Lawrence H. Goulder. 2002. “Environmental Taxation and
Regulation.” In Handbook of Public Economics, 1st edition, Volume 3, eds. Alan Auerbach and
Martin Feldstein, 1471-1545. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Brewer, Michael, Emmanuel Saez and Andrew Shephard. 2010. “Means-testing and
Tax Rates on Earnings.” in Dimension of Tax Design: The Mirrlees Review, Institute for Fiscal
Studies, Oxford University Press, 90-173.
Cagé, Julia, and Lucie Gadenne. 2012. “The Fiscal Cost of Trade Liberalization,” Working
Paper, Harvard and PSE
Card, David, Alex Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “Inequality at
Work: The Eﬀect of Peers Salary on Job Satisfaction,” American Economic Review 102(6).
Chetty, Raj. 2006. “A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion,” American Economic
Review 96(5), 1821–1834.
Chetty, Raj. 2008. “Moral Hazard vs. Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance,”
Journal of Political Economy 116(2), 173-234.
Chetty, Raj. 2009a. “Suﬃcient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural
and Reduced-Form Methods.”Annual Review of Economics, 1: 451-488.
Chetty, Raj. 2009b. “Is the Taxable Income Elasticity Suﬃcient to Calculate Deadweight
Loss? The Implications of Evasion and Avoidance.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 1(2), 31-52.
Chetty, Raj. 2012. “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro
and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply,” Econometrica 80(3), 969–1018.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “Using Diﬀerences in Knowledge across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings,” NBER Working
Paper No. 18232.
Chiappori, Pierre-André. 1988. “Rational Household Labor Supply”, Econometrica 56(1),
63–90. duﬂ Christiansen, Vidar, and Matti Tuomala. 2008. “On taxing capital income
with income shifting.” International Tax and Public Finance, 15: 527-545.
Congdon, William, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2012. “A Reduced Form Approach to Behavioral Public Finance,” Annual Review of Economics 4, 511–540.
Crépon, Bruno, Esther Duﬂo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot, and Philippe
Zamora. 2012. “Do Labor Market Policies Have Displacement Eﬀect? Evidence from a
Clustered Randomized Experiment,” NBER Working Paper No. 18597, forthcoming Quarterly
Journal of Economics.

79

Cuﬀ, Katherine. 2000. “Optimality of Workfare with Heterogeneous Preferences.” Canadian
Journal of Economics, 33, 149–174.
Currie, Janet and Firouz Gahvari. 2008. “Transfers in Cash and In-Kind: Theory Meets
the Data,” Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2), 333-83.
Deaton, Angus 1979. “Optimally Uniform Commodity Taxes.” Economic Letters, 2, 357–361.
Delalande, Nicolas. 2011a. Les Batailles de l’impôt. Consentement et résistances de 1789 à
nos jours, Paris, Seuil, coll. “L’Univers historique”.
Delalande, Nicolas. 2011b. “La Réforme Fiscale et l’Invention des Classes Moyennes–
L’Exemple de la Création de l’Impôt sur le Revenu,” in P. Bezes and A. Siné (eds.) Gouverner
(par) les Finances Publiques, Paris: Presses de Sciences Po.
Diamond, Peter. 1975. “A Many-Person Ramsey Tax Rule,” Journal of Public Economics
4(4), 335-342.
Diamond, Peter. 1980. “Income Taxation with Fixed Hours of Work,” Journal of Public
Economics 13, February, 101-110.
Diamond, Peter. 1998. “Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern
of Optimal Marginal Tax Rates”, American Economic Review 88, 83-95.
Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees. 1971. “Optimal Taxation and Public Production I:
Production Eﬃciency and II: Tax Rules.” American Economic Review, 61: 8-27 and 261-278.
Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees. 2002. “Optimal Taxation and the Le Chatelier
Principle,” unpublished MIT working paper.
Diamond, Peter, and Emmanuel Saez. 2011. “The Case for a Progressive Tax: From
Basic Research to Policy Recommendations,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(4), 165-190.
Diamond, Peter, and Eytan Sheshinski. 1995. “Economic Aspects of Optimal Disability
Beneﬁts,” Journal of Public Economics 57, 1-23.
Duﬂo, Esther. 2003. “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old-Age Pensions and IntraHousehold Allocation in South Africa,” World Bank Economic Review, 17, 1-25.
Dupuit, Jules. 1844. “On the measurement of the utility of public works” translated in
K.J. Arrow and T. Scitovsky (eds.): Readings in welfare economics (1969), London: Allen and
Unwin.
Eaton, Jonathan and Harvey S. Rosen. 1980. “Optimal Redistributive Taxation and
Uncertainty,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 95, 357-364.
Edgeworth, F. Y. 1897. “The Pure Theory of Taxation,” Economic Journal 7, 46-70, 226-238,
and 550-571.
Feldstein, Martin. 1995. “The Eﬀect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel
Study of the 1986 Tax Reform Act.” Journal of Political Economy, 103(3), 551-572.
Feldstein, Martin. 1999. “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4), 674-680.
Feldstein, Martin. 2012. “The Mirrlees Review,” Journal of Economic Literature 50(3),
781-790.
Fehr, Ernst, and Klaus M. Schmidt. 1999. “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and
Cooperation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3), 817–868.

80

Fisher, Irving. 1919. “Economists in Public Service: Annual Address of the President,”
American Economic Review, 9(1), 5-21.
Fleurbaey, Marc. 2004. “On Fair Compensation,” Theory and Decision, 36, 277–307.
Fleurbaey, Marc. 2008. Fairness, Responsability and Welfare, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Fleurbaey, Marc, and François Maniquet. 2011. A Theory of Fairness and Social Welfare,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Flora, Peter. 1983. State, Economy, and Society in Western Europe, 1815-1975, Volume I,
Macmillan Press: London
Fong, Christina. 2001. “Social Preferences, Self-interest, and the Demand for Redistribution,”
Journal of Public Economics 82(2), 225–246.
Frohlich, N, and J.A. Oppenheimer. 1992. Choosing Justice: An Experimental Approach
to Ethical Theory, Berkeley University of California Press.
Gauthier, Anne H. 2007. “The Impact of Family Policies on Fertility in Industrialized Countries: A Review of the Literature”, Population Research and Policy Review, 26(3), 323-346.
Golosov, Michael, Tsyvinski, Aleh, and Ivan Werning 2006. “New Dynamic Public
Finance: A User’s Guide,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Goolsbee, Austan. 2000. “What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive
Compensation.”Journal of Political Economy, 108(2), 352-378.
Gordon, Roger, and Joel Slemrod. 2000. “Are ‘Real’ Responses to Taxes Simply Income
Shifting Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases?” In Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic
Consequences of Taxing the Rich, ed. Joel Slemrod, 240-288. New York: Russell Sage Foundation and Harvard University Press.
Guesnerie, Roger. 1995. A Contribution to the Pure Theory of Taxation, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Hungerbuhler, Mathias, Lehmann, Etienne, Parmentier, Alexis, and Van Der Linden, Bruno. 2006. “Optimal Redistributive Taxation in a Search Equilibrium Model,” Review
of Economic Studies, 73, 743–767.
Kaplow, Louis. 2006. “On the Undesirability of Commodity Taxation Even When Income
Taxation Is Not Optimal.” Journal of Public Economics, 90(6-7), 1235-50.
Kaplow, Louis 2008. The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics, Princeton University
Press: Princeton.
Katz, Michael B. 1996. In the Shadow of the Poorhouse: A Social History of Welfare in the
United States. New York, NY, Basic Books, 2nd edition.
Kirchgassner, Gebhard and Werner Pommerehne. 1996. “Tax harmonization and tax
competition in the European Union: Lessons from Switzerland,” Journal of Public Economics
60, 351-371.
Kleven, Henrik, and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2011. “Transfer Program Complexity and the
Take Up of Social Beneﬁts,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3, 54-90.
Kleven, Henrik, Claus Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez. 2009a. “The Optimal Income
Taxation of Couples,” Econometrica 77(2), 537-560.
Kleven, Henrik, Claus Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez. 2009b. “Why Can Modern Gov-

81

ernments Tax So Much? An Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries,” NBER Working
Paper No. 15218.
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Taxation and International Mobility of Superstars: Evidence from the European Football Market”, forthcoming
American Economic Review.
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, Emmanuel Saez, and Esben Schultz. 2013 “Migration and Wage Eﬀects of Taxing Top Earners: Evidence from the Foreigners’ Tax Scheme in
Denmark”, NBER Working Paper.
Kleven, Henrik and Esben Schultz. 2012. “Estimating Taxable Income Responses using
Danish Tax Reforms”, LSE Working Paper.
Kocherlakota, Narayana R. 2010. The New Dynamic Public Finance, Princeton, Princeton
University Press.
Kolm, Serge-Christophe. 1996. Modern Theories of Justice, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2005. “Tax Bases, Tax Rates and the Elasticity of Reported Income.”
Journal of Public Economics, 89(11-12), 2093-2119.
Landais, Camille, Pascal Michaillat, and Emmanuel Saez. 2010. “Optimal Unemployment Insurance over the Business Cycle”, NBER Working Paper No. 16526.
Landais, Camille, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. 2011. Pour une révolution
ﬁscale: Un impôt sur le revenu pour le XXIème siècle, Paris: Le Seuil.
Laroque, Guy R. 2005. “Indirect Taxation is Superﬂuous under Separability and Taste
Homogeneity: A Simple Proof.” Economics Letters, 87(1), 141-4.
Lee, David and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “Optimal Minimum Wage in Competitive Labor
Markets,” Journal of Public Economics 96(9-10), 739–749.
Lindert, Peter. 2004. Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth since the
Eighteenth Century. Two volumes (Cambridge University Press, 2004).
Lochner, Lance and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. 2004. “The Nature of Credit Constraints
and Human Capital,” American Economic Review 101(6), 2487–2529.
Lockwood, Benjamin B. and Matthew C. Weinzierl. 2012. “De Gustibus non est
Taxandum: Theory and Evidence on Preference Heterogeneity and Redistribution”, NBER
Working Paper No. 17784.
Lundberg, S. R. Pollak and T. Wales. 1997. “Do Husbands and Wives Pool Their
Resources? Evidence from the United Kingdom Child Beneﬁt”, Journal of Human Resources
32, 463-480.
Luttmer, Erzo. 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120(3), 963–1002.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Matthew Weinzierl. 2010. “The Optimal Taxation of Height:
A Case Study of Utilitarian Income Redistribution.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 2(1), 155-76.
Mehrotra, Ajay K. 2005. “Edwin R.A. Seligman and the Beginnings of the U.S. Income
Tax”, Tax Notes, November 14, 2005, 933-950.
Mirrlees, James A. 1971. “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation.”
Review of Economic Studies, 38: 175-208.

82

Mirrlees, James A. 1976. “Optimal Tax Theory: A Synthesis,” Journal of Public Economics
6, 327-358.
Mirrlees, James A. 1982. “Migration and Optimal Income Taxes.” Journal of Public Economics 18, 319-41.
Mirrlees, James A. 1986. “The Theory of Optimal Taxation,” in: K. J. Arrow and M.D.
Intriligator (ed.), Handbook of Mathematical Economics volume 3, chapter 24, 1197-1249. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Mirrlees, James A. (ed.) 2010. Dimension of Tax Design: The Mirrlees Review, Institute
for Fiscal Studies, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mirrlees, James A. (ed.) 2011. Tax By Design: The Mirrlees Review, Institute for Fiscal
Studies, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moﬃtt, Robert, and Mark Wilhelm. 2000. “Taxation and the Labor Supply Decisions of
the Aﬄuent.” In Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, ed. Joel
Slemrod, 193-234. New York: Russell Sage Foundation and Harvard University Press.
Musgrave, Richard. 1985. “A Brief History of Fiscal Doctrine,” in: A. J. Auerbach and
M. Feldstein (ed.), Handbook of Public Economics, volume 1, chapter 1, 1-59. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Naito, Hisahiro. 1999. “Re-examination of Uniform Commodity Taxes under a Non-Linear
Income Tax System and its Implication for Production Eﬃciency.” Journal of Public Economics
71, 165–188.
OECD. 1986. Personal income tax systems, OECD, Paris.
OECD. 2005. “Increasing ﬁnancial incentives to work: the role of in-work beneﬁts”, Chapter
3 in OECD Employment Outlook, OECD, Paris, 2005 Edition.
OECD. 2006. “Policies Targeted at Speciﬁc Workforce Groups or Labour Market Segments”,
Chapter 4 in OECD Employment Outlook: Boosting Jobs and Incomes, OECD, Paris, 2006
Edition.
OECD 2011a. Revenue Statistics, 1965-2010, OECD, Paris, 2011 Edition.
OECD. 2011b. “The Taxation of Low-Income Workers”, Chapter 2 in OECD Tax Policy Study
No. 21: Taxation and Employment, OECD, Paris.
OECD. 2011c. “The Taxation of Mobile High-Skilled Workers”, Chapter 4 in OECD Tax
Policy Study No. 21: Taxation and Employment, OECD, Paris.
Oswald, Andrew J. 1983. “Altruism, jealousy and the theory of optimal non-linear taxation,”
Journal of Public Economics 20(1), 77-87.
Pareto, Vilfredo. 1896. “La courbe de la répartition de la richesse,” Ecrits sur la courbe de
la répartition de la richesse, (writings by Pareto collected by G. Busino, Librairie Droz, 1965),
1-15.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 2002. “Political Economics and Public Finance,”
in: A. J. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (ed.), Handbook of Public Economics, volume 3, chapter
24, 991-1042. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Piketty, Thomas. 1995 “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110(3), 551-584.
Piketty, Thomas. 1997 “La Redistribution Fiscale face au Chômage,” Revue Française

83

d’Economie, 12, 157-201.
Piketty, Thomas. 2001, Les Hauts revenus en France au 20e siècle - Inégalités et redistributions 1901-1998, Paris: Grasset, 807p.
Piketty, Thomas, and Nancy Qian. 2009. “Income Inequality and Progressive Income
Taxation in China and India: 1986-2015” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
1(2), 53-63.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States,
1913-1998,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1), 1-39.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2007. “How Progressive is the U.S. Federal Tax
System? A Historical and International Perspective,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(1),
3-24.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012a. “A Theory of Optimal Capital Taxation,”
NBER Working Paper No. 17989.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012b. “A Theory of Optimal Inheritance Taxation,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 9241.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2011. “Optimal Taxation
of Top Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities”, NBER Working Paper No. 17616.
Pirttila, Jukka, and Hakan Selin. 2011. “Income Shifting within a Dual Income Tax
System: Evidence from the Finnish Tax Reform of 1993,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
113(1), 120-144.
Ramey, Valerie A., and Neville Francis. 2009. “A Century of Work and Leisure.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(2), 189–224.
Ramsey, Frank. 1927. “A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation,” Economic Journal
37(145), 47–61.
Roemer, John. 1998. Equality of Opportunity, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Roemer, John et al., 2003. “To What Extent Do Fiscal Systems Equalize Opportunities for
Income Acquisition Among Citizens?” Journal of Public Economics, 87, 539-565.
Roine, Jesper, Jonas Vlachos, Daniel Waldenstrom. 2009. “The Long-Run Determinants of Inequality: What Can We Learn from Top Income Data?” Journal of Public Economics,
93(7-8), 974-988.
Rothschild, Casey, and Florian Scheuer. 2011. “Optimal Taxation with Rent-Seeking”
NBER working paper No. 17035.
Sadka, Efraim. 1976. “On Income Distribution, Incentive Eﬀects and Optimal Income Taxation,” Review of Economic Studies, 43(1), 261-268.
Saez, Emmanuel. 1999. “A Characterization of the Income Tax Schedule Minimizing Deadweight Burden,” MIT Ph.D. thesis (chapter 3).
Saez, Emmanuel. 2001. “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,” Review of
Economic Studies 68, 205-229.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2002a. “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive
Labour Supply Responses.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(2), 1039-73.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2002b. “The Desirability of Commodity Taxation under Non-linear Income
Taxation and Heterogeneous Tastes.” Journal of Public Economics, 83(2), 217-230.

84

Saez, Emmanuel. 2004a. “The Optimal Treatment of Tax Expenditures,” Journal of Public
Economics, 88(12), 2657-2684.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2004b. “Direct or Indirect Tax Instruments for Redistribution: Short-Run
versus Long-Run,” Journal of Public Economics, 88(3-4), 503-518.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2004c. “Reported Incomes and Marginal Tax Rates, 1960-2000: Evidence
and Policy Implications.” in James Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, 18: 117-174.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth Giertz. 2012. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature
50(1), 3-50.
Saez, Emmanuel and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2013. “Generalized Social Marginal Welfare
Weights for Optimal Tax Theory”, NBER Working Paper.
Seade, Jesus K. 1977. “On the Shape of Optimal Tax Schedules,” Journal of Public Economics, 7(1), 203-236.
Seade, Jesus K. 1982. “On the Sign of the Optimum Marginal Income Tax,” Review of
Economic Studies, 49: 637-643.
Seligman, Edwin R. A. 1911. The Income Tax: A Study of the History, Theory and Practice
of Income Taxation at Home and Abroad, Macmillan.
Sheshinski, Eytan. 1972. “The Optimal Linear Income Tax.” Review of Economic Studies
39(3), 297-302.
Simula, Laurent and Alain Trannoy. 2010. “Optimal Income Tax under the Threat of
Migration by Top-Income Earners.” Journal of Public Economics 94, 163-173.
Slemrod, Joel. 1996. “High Income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s: The Anatomy
of Behavioral Response.” In Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation, eds. Martin Feldstein and James Poterba, 169-192. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Slemrod, Joel and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2002. “The Optimal Elasticity of Taxable Income.”
Journal of Public Economics, 84(1), 91-112.
Slemrod, Joel and Shlomo Yitzhaki. 2002. “Tax Avoidance, Evasion and Administration.”
In Handbook of Public Economics, 1st edition, Volume 3, eds. Alan Auerbach and Martin
Feldstein, 1423-1470. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Sorensen, Peter B. 1999. “Optimal Tax Progressivity in Imperfect Labour Markets,” Labour
Economics 6, 435-452.
Stantcheva, Stefanie. 2011. “Optimal Taxation with Adverse Selection in the Labor market,”
MIT Working Paper.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 1982. “Self-selection and Pareto Eﬃcient Taxation.” Journal of Public
Economics 17, 213-240.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 1987. “Pareto eﬃcient and optimal taxation and the new new welfare
economics,” in: A. J. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (ed.), Handbook of Public Economics, volume
2, chapter 15, 991-1042. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Tuomala, Matti. 1990. Optimal Income Tax and Redistribution, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
U.S. Treasury. 2005. Simple, Fair, and Pro-Growth: Proposals to Fix America’s Tax System.
President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform, Washington, D.C.
U.S. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service. 2012. “Statistics of Income:

85

Individual Statistical Tables by Tax Rate and Income Percentile,” Table 1 available online at
http://www.irs.gov/taxstats/indtaxstats/article/0,,id=133521,00.html
Vickrey, William. 1945. “Measuring Marginal Utility by Reactions to Risk,” Econometrica
13, 319-333.
Webber, Carolyn, and Aaron B. Wildavsky. 1986. A History of Taxation and Expenditure in the Western World. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Weinzierl, Matthew C. 2011. “The Surprising Power of Age-Dependent Taxes.” Review of
Economic Studies, 78(4), 1490-1518.
Weinzierl, Matthew C. 2012. “Why Do We Redistribute So Much But Tag So Little? The
Principle of Equal Sacriﬁce and Optimal Taxation”, Harvard Business School Working Paper,
No. 12-64.
Werning, Ivan. 2007. “Pareto Eﬃcient Income Taxation”, MIT working paper.
Wilson, R.B. 1993. Nonlinear Pricing. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Young, C. and C. Varner. 2011. “Millionaire Migration and State Taxation of Top Incomes:
Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” National Tax Journal 64, 255-284.

86

Table 1. Public spending in OECD countries (2000-2010, percent of GDP)

US
(1)

Germany
(2)

France
(3)

UK
(4)

Total
OECD
(5)

Total public spending

35.4%

44.1%

51.0%

42.1%

38.7%

Social public spending
Education
Health
Pensions
Income support to working age
Other social public spending

22.4%
4.7%
7.7%
6.0%
2.7%
1.3%

30.6%
4.4%
7.8%
10.1%
3.9%
4.4%

34.3%
5.2%
7.1%
12.2%
4.8%
5.1%

26.2%
4.8%
6.1%
4.8%
4.9%
5.7%

25.1%
4.9%
5.6%
6.5%
4.4%
3.7%

Other public spending

13.0%

13.5%

16.7%

15.9%

13.6%

Notes and sources: OECD Economic Outlook 2012, Annex Tables 25-31; Adema et al., 2011, Table 1.2; Education at a Glance,
OECD 2011, Table B4.1. Total public spending includes all government outlays (except net debt interest payments). Other social
public spending includes social services to the elderly and the disabled, family services, housing and other social policy areas
(see Adema et al., 2011, p.21). We report 2000-2010 averages so as to smooth business cycle variations. Note that tax to GDP
ratios are a little bit lower than spending to GDP ratios for two reasons: (a) governments typically run budget deficits (which can
be large, around 5-8 GDP points during recessions), (b) governments get revenue from non-tax sources (such as user fees,
profits from government owned firms, etc.).

Table 2. Optimal Linear Tax Rate Formula τ = (1-g)/(1-g+e)
Elasticity e=.25
(empirically realistic)

Elasticity e=.5 (high)

Elasticity e=1
(extreme)

Parameter
g
Tax rate τ
(1)
(2)

Parameter
g
Tax rate τ
(3)
(4)

Parameter
g
Tax rate τ
(5)
(6)

A. Optimal linear tax rate τ
Rawlsian revenue maximizing rate

0%

80%

0%

67%

0%

50%

Utilitarian (CRRA=1, uc=1/c)

61%

61%

54%

48%

44%

36%

Median voter optimum (zmedian/zaverage=70%)

70%

55%

70%

38%

70%

23%

B. Revealed preferences g for redistribution
Low tax country (US): Tax rate τ = 35%

87%

35%

73%

35%

46%

35%

High tax country (EU): Tax rate τ = 50%

75%

50%

50%

50%

0%

50%

Notes: This table illustrates the use of the optimal linear tax rate formula τ=(1-g)/(1-g+e) derived in the main text. It reports combinations of τ and g in
various situations corresponding to different elasticities e (across columns) and different social objectives (across rows). Recall that g is the ratio of
average earnings weighted by social marginal welfare weights to unweighted average earnings. Panel A considers the standard case where g is pinned
down by a given social objective criterion and τ is then given by the optimal tax formula. The first row is the Rawlsian criterion (or revenue maximizing tax
rate) with g=0. The second row is a utilitarian criterion with coefficient of relative risk aversion (CRRA) equal to one (social marginal welfare weights are
proportional to uc=1/c where c=(1-τ)z+R is disposable income). g is endogenously determined using the actual US earnings distribution and assuming that
government required spending (outside transfers) is 10% of total earnings. The third row is the median voter optimum with a median to average earnings
ratio of 70% (corresponding approximately to the current US situation). Panel B considers the inverse problem of determining the social preference
parameter g for a given tax rate τ. The first row uses τ=35%, corresponding to a low tax country such as the United States. The second row uses τ=50%,
corresponding to a high tax country such as a typical country from the European Union.

Top Individual Income Marginal Tax Rates 1900-2011
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%

U.S.

30%

U.K.

20%

France

10%

Germany

2010

2000

1990

1980

1970

1960

1950

1940

1930

1920

1910

1900

0%

Figure 1: Top Marginal Income Tax Rates in the US, UK, France, Germany
This ﬁgure, taken from Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva (2011), depicts the top marginal individual income tax
rate in the US, UK, France, Germany since 1900. The tax rate includes only the top statutory individual income
tax rate applying to ordinary income with no tax preference. State income taxes are not included in the case
of the United States. For France, we include both the progressive individual income tax and the ﬂat rate tax
“Contribution Sociale Généralisée”.

89

$50,000

45 Degree Line
$40,000

Disposable income

US

France

$30,000

$20,000

$10,000

$0
$0

$10,000

$20,000

$30,000

$40,000

$50,000

Gross Earnings (with employer payroll taxes)

Figure 2: Tax/transfer system in the US and France, 2010, single parent with two children
The ﬁgure depicts the budget set for a single parent with two children in France and the United States (exchange
rate 1 Euro = $1.3). The ﬁgure includes payroll taxes and income taxes on the tax side. It includes means-tested
transfer programs (TANF and Food stamps in the United States, and the minimum income–RSA for France) and
tax credits (the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Tax Credit in the United States, in-work beneﬁt Prime
pour l’Emploi and cash family beneﬁts in France). Note that this graph ignores important elements. First, the
health insurance Medicaid program in the United States is means-tested and adds a signiﬁcant layer of implicit
taxation on low income work. France oﬀers universal health insurance which does not create any additional
implicit tax on work. Second, the graph ignores in-kind beneﬁts for children such as subsidized child care and
free pre-school kindergarten in France that have signiﬁcant value for working single parents. Such programs
barely exist in the United States. Third, the graph ignores temporary unemployment insurance beneﬁts which
depend on previous earnings for those who have become recently unemployed and which are signiﬁcantly more
generous in France both in level and duration.

90

Disposable
Income
c=z-T(z)

Top bracket: slope 1-τ above z*
Reform: slope 1-τdτ above z*

Mechanical tax increase:

dτ[z-z*]

z*-T(z*)

Behavioral response tax loss:

τ dz = - dτ e z τ/(1-τ)

0

z*

z

Pre-tax income z

Figure 3: Optimal Top Tax Rate Derivation
The ﬁgure, adapted from Diamond and Saez (2011), depicts the derivation of the optimal top tax rate τ =
1/(1 + ae) by considering a small reform around the optimum which increases the top marginal tax rate τ by dτ
above z ∗ . A taxpayer with income z mechanically pays dτ [z − z ∗ ] extra taxes but, by deﬁnition of the elasticity
e of earnings with respect to the net-of-tax rate 1 − τ , also reduces his income by dz = −dτ ez/(1 − τ ) leading to
a loss in tax revenue equal to dτ ezτ /(1 − τ ). Summing across all top bracket taxpayers and denoting by z the
average income above z ∗ and a = z/(z − z ∗ ), we obtain the revenue maximizing tax rate τ = 1/(1 + ae). This
is the optimum tax rate when the government sets zero marginal welfare weights on top income earners.

91

2.5
2
1.5
1
0

200000
400000
600000
800000
z* = Adjusted Gross Income (current 2005 $)
a=zm/(zm-z*) with zm=E(z|z>z*)

1000000

alpha=z*h(z*)/(1-H(z*))

Figure 4: Empirical Pareto Coeﬃcients in the United States, 2005
The ﬁgure, from Diamond and Saez (2011), depicts in solid line the ratio a = zm /(zm − z ∗ ) with z ∗ ranging from
$0 to $1,000,000 annual income and zm the average income above z ∗ using US tax return micro data for 2005.
Income is deﬁned as Adjusted Gross Income reported on tax returns and is expressed in current 2005 dollars.
Vertical lines depict the 90th percentile ($99,200) and 99th percentile ($350,500) nominal thresholds as of 2005.
The ratio a is equal to one at z ∗ = 0, and is almost constant above the 99th percentile and slightly below 1.5,
showing that the top of the distribution is extremely well approximated by a Pareto distribution for purposes
of implementing the optimal top tax rate formula τ = 1/(1 + ae). Denoting by h(z) the density and by H(z)
the cdf of the income distribution, the ﬁgure also displays in dotted line the ratio α(z ∗ ) = z ∗ h(z ∗ )/(1 − H(z ∗ ))
which is also approximately constant, around 1.5, above the top percentile. A decreasing (or constant) α(z)
combined with a decreasing g + (z) and a constant e(z) implies that the optimal marginal tax rate T  (z) =
[1 − g + (z)]/[1 − g + (z) + α(z)e(z)] increases with z.

92

Change in Top 1% Income Share (points)
0
2
4
6
8
10

A. Changes in Top 1% Shares and Top MTR since 1960
US

Elasticity= .47 (.11)

UK
Ireland

Portugal

Norway
Canada
Italy

Australia
Spain

NZ
Sweden

Japan

Denmark

France
Finland

Germany
Switzerland

Netherlands

−40

−30
−20
−10
Change in Top Marginal Tax Rate (points)

0

10

Top MTR

Top 1% (excl. KG)

MTR K gains

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Marginal Tax Rates (%)

Top 1% Share

0

0

Top 1% Income Shares (%)
5
10
15
20

25

B. US Top 1% Income Shares and Top MTR

1913 1923 1933 1943 1953 1963 1973 1983 1993 2003
Year

Figure 5: Top Marginal Tax Rates and Top Incomes Shares
This ﬁgure is from Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva (2011). Panel A depicts the change in top income shares against
the change in top income tax rate from 1960-4 to 2005-9 based on data for 18 OECD countries (exact years
depend on availability of top income share data in the World Top Incomes Database (Alvaredo et al. 2011).
Panel B depicts the top 1% US income shares including realized capital gains in full diamonds and excluding
realized capital gains in empty diamonds from 1913 to 2010. Computations are based on family market cash
income. Income excludes government transfers and is before individual taxes (source is Piketty and Saez, 2003,
series updated to 2010). Panel B also depicts the top marginal tax rate on ordinary income and on realized
long-term capital gains.

93

Small band (z,z+dz): slope 1- T(z)
Reform: slope 1- T(z)dτ

Disposable
Income Mechanical tax increase: dτdz [1-H(z)]
c=z-T(z) Social welfare effect: -dτdz [1-H(z)] g+(z)
dτdz
Behavioral response:
δz = - dτ e z/(1-T(z))
Tax loss: T(z) δz h(z)dz
= -h(z) e z [T(z)/(1-T(z))] dzdτ
0

z

z+dz

Pre-tax income z

Figure 6: Derivation of the Optimal Marginal Tax Rate at Income Level z
The ﬁgure, adapted from from Diamond and Saez (2011), depicts the optimal marginal tax rate derivation at
income level z by considering a small reform around the optimum, whereby the marginal tax rate in the small band
(z, z + dz) is increased by dτ . This reform mechanically increases taxes by dτ dz for all taxpayers above the small
band, leading to a mechanical tax increase dτ dz[1 − H(z)] and a social welfare cost of −dτ dz[1 − H(z)]g + (z).
Assuming away income eﬀects, the only behavioral response is a substitution eﬀect in the small band: The
h(z)dz taxpayers in the band reduce their income by δz = −dτ ez/(1 − T  (z)) leading to a tax loss equal to
−dτ dzh(z)ezT  (z)/(1 − T  (z)). At the optimum, the three eﬀects cancel out leading to the optimal tax formula
T  (z)/(1 − T  (z)) = (1/e)(1 − g + (z))(1 − H(z))/(zh(z)), or equivalently T  (z) = [1 − g + (z)]/[1 − g + (z) + α(z)e]
after introducing α(z) = zh(z)/(1 − H(z)).

94

Reform: Increase τ1 by dτ1 and c0 by dc0=z1dτ1
Disposable
Income
c

1) Mechanical fiscal cost: dM=-H0dc1=-H0z1dτ1
2) Welfare effect: dW=g0H0dc1=g0H0z1dτ1
3) Fiscal cost due to behavioral responses:
dB=-dH0 τ1 z1 = dτ1e0 H0 z1 τ1/(1-τ1)

Optimal phase-out rate τ1:
dM+dW+dB=0

c0+dc0
c0

 τ1/(1-τ1) = (g0-1)/e0

Slope 1-τ1
45o
0

z1

Earnings z

Figure 7: Optimal Bottom Marginal Tax Rate with only Intensive Labor Supply Responses
The ﬁgure, adapted from from Diamond and Saez (2011), depicts the derivation of the optimal marginal tax
rate at the bottom in the discrete Mirrlees (1971) model with labor supply responses along the intensive margin
only. Let H0 be the fraction of the population not working. This is a function of 1 − τ1 , the net-of-tax rate at
the bottom, with elasticity e0 . We consider a small reform around the optimum: The government increases the
maximum transfer by c0 by increasing the phase-out rate by dτ1 leaving the tax schedule unchanged for those
with income above z1 . This creates three eﬀects which cancel out at the optimum. At the optimum, we have
τ1 /(1 − τ1 ) = (g0 − 1)/e0 or τ1 = (g0 − 1)/(g0 − 1 + e0 ). Under standard redistributive preferences, g0 is large
implying that τ1 is large.

95

Disposable
Income
c

Starting from a positive phasing-out rate τ1>0:
1) Increasing transfers by dc1 at z1 is desirable for
redistribution: net effect (g1-1)h1 dc1> 0 if g1>1
2) Participation response saves government revenue
τ1 z1 dh1 = e1 h1 dc1 τ1/(1-τ1) >0
 Win-win reform …if intensive response is small

Optimal phase-out rate τ1:
(g1-1)h1 dc1 + e1 h1 dc1 τ1/(1-τ1) = 0

c0
Slope 1-τ1

 τ1/(1-τ1) = (1-g1)/e1 < 0 if g1>1

45o
0

z1

z2

Earnings z

Figure 8: Optimal Bottom Marginal Tax Rate with Extensive Labor Supply Responses
The ﬁgure, adapted from from Diamond and Saez (2011), depicts the derivation of the optimal marginal tax rate
at the bottom in the discrete model with labor supply responses along the extensive margin only. Starting with
a positive phase-out rate τ1 > 0, the government introduces a small in-work beneﬁt dc1 . Let h1 be the fraction of
low income workers with earnings z1 , and let e1 be the elasticity of h1 with respect to the participation net-of-tax
rate 1 − τ1 . The reform has three standard eﬀects: mechanical ﬁscal cost dM = −h1 dc1 , social welfare gain,
dW = g1 h1 dc1 , and tax revenue gain due to behavioral responses dB = τ1 z1 dh1 = e1 h1 dc1 τ1 /(1 − τ1 ). If g1 > 1,
then dW + dM > 0. If τ1 > 0, then dB > 0 implying that τ1 > 0 cannot be optimal. The optimal τ1 is such
that dM + dW + dB = 0 implying that τ1 /(1 − τ1 ) = (1 − g1 )/e1 .

96

