                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         HIGHWAY TO SUCCESS:
   THE IMPACT OF THE GOLDEN QUADRILATERAL PROJECT FOR THE LOCATION
              AND PERFORMANCE OF INDIAN MANUFACTURING

                                             Ejaz Ghani
                                        Arti Grover Goswami
                                          William R. Kerr

                                        Working Paper 18524
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18524


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




We are grateful to Partha Mukhopadhyay, Stephen O’Connell, Hyoung Gun Wang and seminar participants
for helpful suggestions/comments. We are particularly indebted to Sarah Elizabeth Antos and Henry
Jewell for excellent data work and maps. We thank the World Bank’s South Asia Labor Flagship team
for providing the primary datasets used in this paper. Funding for this project was provided by a Private
Enterprise Development in Low-Income Countries grant by the Centre or Economic Policy Research
and by World Bank’s Multi-Donor Trade Trust Fund. Kerr was a paid short-term contractor of the
World Bank for this project. The views expressed here are those of the authors and not of any institution
they may be associated with. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Ejaz Ghani, Arti Grover Goswami, and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Highway to Success: The Impact of the Golden Quadrilateral Project for the Location and
Performance of Indian Manufacturing
Ejaz Ghani, Arti Grover Goswami, and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 18524
November 2012
JEL No. L10,L25,L26,L60,L90,L91,L92,M13,O10,R00,R10,R11,R14

                                                ABSTRACT

We investigate the impact of the Golden Quadrilateral (GQ) highway project on the Indian organized
manufacturing sector using enterprise data. The GQ project upgraded the quality and width of 5,846
km of roads in India. We use a difference-in-difference estimation strategy to compare non-nodal districts
based upon their distance from the highway system. We find several positive effects for non-nodal
districts located 0-10 km from GQ that are not present in districts 10-50 km away, most notably higher
entry rates and increases in plant productivity. These results are not present for districts located on
another major highway system, the North-South East-West corridor (NS-EW). Improvements for portions
of the NS-EW system were planned to occur at the same time as GQ but were subsequently delayed.
Additional tests show that the GQ project’s effect operates in part through a stronger sorting of land-intensive
industries from nodal districts to non-nodal districts located on the GQ network. The GQ upgrades
further helped spread economic activity to moderate-density districts and intermediate cities.


Ejaz Ghani                                             William R. Kerr
South Asia PREM                                        Harvard Business School
The World Bank                                         Rock Center 212
Washington D.C.                                        Soldiers Field
Eghani@worldbank.org                                   Boston, MA 02163
                                                       and NBER
Arti Grover Goswami                                    wkerr@hbs.edu
World Bank
Washington, DC
agrover1@worldbank.org
Section 1: Introduction

Adequate transportation infrastructure is an essential ingredient for economic development and growth.
Beyond simply facilitating cheaper and more efficient movements of goods, people, and ideas across
places, transportation infrastructure impacts the distribution of economic activity and development across
regions, the extent to which agglomeration economies and efficient sorting can be realized, the levels of
competition among industries and concomitant reallocation of inputs towards productive enterprises, and
much more. Rapidly expanding countries like India and China often face severe constraints on their
transportation infrastructure. Many business leaders, policy makers, and academics describe infrastructure
as a critical hurdle for sustained growth that must be met with public funding, but to date we have a very
limited understanding of the economic impact of those projects.


We study the impact of the Golden Quadrilateral (GQ) project, a large-scale highway construction and
improvement project in India. The GQ project sought to improve the connection of four major cities in
India: Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, and Kolkata. The GQ system comprises 5,846 km (3,633 mi) of road
connecting many of the major industrial, agricultural, and cultural centers of India. It is the fifth-longest
highway in the world. The massive project began in 2001, was two-thirds complete by 2005, and mostly
finished in 2007. Datta (2011), a study that we describe in greater detail below, finds that GQ upgrades
quickly improved the inventory management and sourcing choices of manufacturing plants located in
non-nodal districts along the GQ network by 2005.


This paper investigates the impact of the GQ highway upgrades on the organization and performance of
the organized manufacturing sector for India. Several studies evaluate the performance of Indian
manufacturing, especially after the liberalization reforms (e.g. Kochhar et al. 2006, Ahluwalia 2000,
Besley and Burgess 2004). Some authors argue that Indian manufacturing has been constrained by
inadequate infrastructure and that industries that are dependent upon infrastructure have not been able to
reap the maximum benefits of the liberalization’s reforms (e.g. Gupta et al. 2008, Gupta and Kumar 2010,
Mitra et al. 1998).


We employ plant-level data from the years 1994, 2000, 2005, and 2007 to study the impact of highway
infrastructure investments on Indian manufacturing. We study how proximity to GQ in non-nodal districts
affected the organization of manufacturing activity using establishment counts, employment, and output
levels, especially among newly entering plants that are making location choice decisions before or after
the upgrades. This work on the organization of the manufacturing sector also considers industry-level


                                                                                                           2
sorting and the extent to which intermediate cities in India are becoming more attractive for
manufacturing plants. We study the impact for the sector’s performance through measures of average
labor productivity and total factor productivity (TFP).


Our work exploits several forms of variation to identify the effects. First, our data include two surveys
before and after the upgrades, which allows us to exploit pre-post variation for the GQ upgrades. Second,
we use GIS software to code how far districts are from the GQ network. Throughout this paper, we
measure effects for nodal districts in the GQ network, but we do not ascribe a causal interpretation to
these effects because the GQ upgrades were in large part designed to improve the connections of these
hubs and the GQ upgrade decision may have been endogenous to the growth prospects of these hubs.
Instead, our key focus is on non-nodal districts that are very close to the GQ network compared to those
that are farther away. We specifically compare non-nodal districts 0-10 km from the GQ network to
districts 10-50 km away (and in some specifications with additional concentric rings to 200 km away).
Additional sources of variation come from the sequence in which districts were upgraded, differences in
industry traits within the manufacturing sector, and differences in the traits of non-nodal districts 0-10 km
from the GQ network.


We find generally positive effects of the GQ upgrades on the organized manufacturing sector. Panel
estimations find substantial growth in entry rates in non-nodal districts within 10 km of the GQ network
after the GQ upgrades. These patterns are absent in districts 10-50 km away, and the data suggest that
there might have even been declines in entry rates in districts farther away (perhaps indicative of a more
substantial shift of activity towards the GQ network due to the improved connectivity). Heightened entry
rates are evident in districts where the GQ project upgraded existing highways and where the GQ project
constructed new highways where none existed before.


Beyond entry rates, we find positive but statistically insignificant impacts for the total level of
manufacturing activity across all districts within 10 km of the GQ network. There is greater heterogeneity
on this dimension, however, with the construction of new highways being associated with aggregate
activity gains. As we discuss, the limited impact for upgrades of existing highways for total activity could
be due to the fact that our sample end point in 2007 is not sufficiently removed from the GQ upgrades—
such that we can observe the marginal entry decisions but not the long-term consequences of these
decisions for business locations. The differences could also be due to higher exit rates for incumbents in
the area. While we can observe new firms with our data, we are unfortunately limited with respect to
measuring the exit margin.

                                                                                                           3
In terms of performance, panel estimations show a substantial increase in labor productivity and TFP
among manufacturing plants in non-nodal districts within 10 km of the GQ network that is not present in
districts that are 10-50 km removed or farther.


Beyond the variation afforded by distance of districts from the GQ network, we undertake two additional
exercises that indicate these changes in district outcomes are mostly linked to the GQ upgrades. First, we
examine dynamic panel estimations. For our entry results, these dynamic models do not find a lead effect
in non-nodal districts prior to the GQ upgrades. These specifications suggest that the timing of the
improvements in the manufacturing sector is closely tied to the timing of the improvements in the GQ
network. On the other hand, for our productivity results, we observe a dip in performance in the 2000
period before the GQ upgrades for non-nodal districts that may suggest our productivity results are in part
capturing a rebound in activity from this decline that is not linked to the GQ upgrades. As a second
approach, we separate districts by when the GQ upgrades were completed. Differences in coefficient
magnitudes by implementation date are again consistent with the economic effects we measure being due
to the GQ improvements.


Second, India has a second major highway network called the North-South East-West (NS-EW) highway.
The NS-EW highway was scheduled for a partial upgrade at the same time as the GQ network, but this
upgrade was delayed. The upgrade has since been undertaken. Comparisons of non-nodal districts on GQ
to non-nodal districts on NS-EW are attractive given the comparable initial condition of being located on
a major transportation network. Moreover, the government intended to start upgrading the NS-EW
highway network, albeit on a somewhat smaller scale, at the same time as the GQ upgrades. We do not
find similar effects along the NS-EW highway system that we observe along the GQ highway system for
either our entry or performance results, which is comforting for experimental design.


Building from these exercises, we next study the extent to which the GQ upgrades influenced the
organization of manufacturing activity. We find that the heightened entry rates following the GQ
upgrades in non-nodal districts within 10 km of the GQ network were strongest in industries that are very
land and building intensive. Interestingly, we find the opposite pattern for nodal districts, where the shift
is towards industries that are less intensive in land and buildings. These intuitive patterns are suggestive
evidence that the GQ upgrades improved the spatial allocation of activity in India, similar to
improvements in within-district spatial allocation due to infrastructure observed by Ghani et al. (2012).
Looking at differences in district density, the effects of GQ upgrades are evident in districts with high and

                                                                                                           4
medium density, but are weak in districts with low density. The medium-density findings may suggest
that GQ upgrades helped activate intermediate cities, where some observers believe India’s development
has underperformed compared to China.


Our project contributes to the literature on the economic impacts of transportation networks in developing
economies, which is unfortunately quite small relative to its policy importance. The closest related study
is Datta (2011), who evaluates the impact of GQ upgrades using inventory management questions
contained in the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys for India in the years 2002 and 2005. Even with the
short time window of three years, Datta (2011) finds that firms located in non-nodal districts along the
GQ network witnessed a larger decline in the average input inventory (measured in terms of the number
of days of production for which the inventory held was sufficient) relative to those located on other
highways. He also finds that firms in districts closer to the GQ network were more likely to switch their
primary input suppliers vis-à-vis firms farther away. These results suggest improved efficiency and
sourcing for establishments on the GQ network after its upgrade.


Beyond India, several recent studies find positive economic effects in non-nodal locations due to
transportation infrastructure in China (e.g., Banerjee et al. 2012, Roberts et al. 2012, Baum-Snow et al.
2012). These studies complement the larger literature on the United States (e.g., Fernald 1998, Chandra
and Thompson 2000, Michaels 2008, Duranton and Turner 2012, Baum‐Snow 2007, Lahr et al. 2005)1,
those undertaken in historical settings (e.g., Donaldson 2010, Donaldson and Hornbeck 2012), and those
focusing on other developing or emerging economies (e.g., Brown et al. 2008, Ulimwengu et al. 2009). A
related literature considers non-transportation infrastructure investments in developing economies (e.g.,
Duflo and Pande 2007, Dinkelman 2011).2


Recent papers in these literatures have grappled with concerns regarding the endogenous placement of
infrastructure that prevents a causal interpretation of infrastructure’s role. As Duranton and Turner (2011)
highlight, the endogenous placement could bias findings in either direction. Infrastructure investments

1
    The impact of highways has been studied for other developed countries as well. For example, Holl and
Viladecans‐Marsal (2011) study the impact of highways on Spanish cities while Hsu and Zhang (2011) work with
Japanese data.
2
    More broadly, a number of studies find high elasticities of private output with respect to public capital, often
greater than 0.3, but some more disaggregated studies cast some doubt on these elasticities by observing that
infrastructure has not been necessarily related to productivity in sectors that should have benefited the most. See, for
example, Aschauer (1989), Munnell (1990), and Otto and Voss (1994).

                                                                                                                      5
may be made to encourage development of regions with high growth potential, which would upwardly
bias measurements of economic effects that do not control for this underlying potential. However, there
are many cases where infrastructure investments are made to try to turn around and preserve struggling
regions. They may also be directed through the political process towards non-optimal locations (i.e.,
“bridges to nowhere”). These latter scenarios would downward bias results.


The most prominent identification technique in this work is the use of historical transportation networks
or straight lines between nodal cities to predict whether or not a major transportation route exists.3 This
approach helps us understand the importance of transportation networks in terms of their existence, but it
does not help policy makers evaluate the likely impact from investments into improving existing
networks. The sums of this latter type of investment are very large and growing. Through 2006 and
inclusive of the GQ upgrades, India invested US$71 billion for the National Highways Development
Program to upgrade, rehabilitate, and widen India’s major highways to international standards. A recent
Committee on Estimates report for the Ministry of Roads, Transport and Highways suggests an ongoing
investment need for Indian highways of about US$15 billion annually for the next 15 to 20 years (The
Economic Times, April 29, 2012). Our panel analysis allows us to shed new light on these important
questions, with the dynamic models and the comparison to the NS-EW highway preserving counterfactual
scenarios as best possible.


The remainder of this paper is as follows: Section 2 gives a synopsis of highways in India and the GQ
Project. Section 3 describes the data used for this paper and its development. Section 4 presents the
empirical work of the paper, determining the impact of highway improvements on economic activity.
Section 5 concludes.


Section 2: India’s Highways and the Golden Quadrilateral Project


Road transport is the principal mode of movement of goods and people in India, accounting for 65% of
freight movement and 80% of passenger traffic. The road network in India has three categories: (i)
national highways that serve interstate long-distance traffic; (ii) state highways and major district roads
that carry mainly intrastate traffic; and (iii) district and rural roads that carry mainly intra-district traffic.
As of January 2012, India possessed 71,972 km of national highways and expressways and 3.25 million


3
    Donaldson (2010) rules out spurious effects in estimating the impact of railroad construction in India by evaluating
the hypothetical effects of four railroad lines that were planned but never actually built.

                                                                                                                      6
km of secondary and tertiary roads. While national highways constitute about 1.7% of the road network,
they carry more than 40% of the total traffic volume.4


To meet its transportation needs, India launched its National Highways Development Project (NHDP) in
2001. This project, the largest highway project ever undertaken by India, aimed at improving the Golden
Quadrilateral (GQ) network, the North-South and East-West (NS-EW) Corridors, Port Connectivity, and
other projects in several phases. The total length of national highways planned to be upgraded (i.e.,
strengthened and expanded to four lanes) under the NHDP was 13,494 km; the NHDP also sought to
build 1,500 km of new expressways with six or more lanes and 1,000 km of other new national highways,
including road connectivity to the major ports in the country. Thus, in a majority of cases, the NHDP
sought to upgrade a basic infrastructure that existed, rather than build infrastructure where none
previously existed.5


The NHDP has evolved to include seven different phases, and our paper focuses on the first two stages.
NHDP Phase I was approved in December 2000 at an estimated cost of Rs 30,300 crore (1999 prices).
Phase I planned to improve 5,846 km of the GQ network, 981 km of NS-EW, 356 km of Port
Connectivity, and 315 km of other national highways, for a total improvement of 7,498 km. Phase II was
approved in December 2003 at an estimated cost of Rs 34,339 crore (2002 prices). This phase planned to
improve 6,161 km of NS-EW and 486 km of other national highways, for a total improvement of 6,647
km. About 442 km length of highway is common between GQ and NS-EW.


The GQ network, totaling a length of 5,846 km, connects the four major cities of Delhi, Mumbai,
Chennai, and Kolkata. Figure 1 provides a map of the GQ network. Beyond the four major cities that the
GQ network connects, the highway touches many smaller cities like Dhanbad in Bihar, Chittaurgarh in
Rajasthan, and Guntur in Andhra Pradesh. The GQ upgrades began in 2001, with a target completion date


4
    Source: National Highway Authority of India website: http://www.nhai.org/. The Committee on Infrastructure
continues to project that the growth in demand for road transport in India will be 1.5-2 times faster than that for
other modes. Available at: http://www.infrastructure.gov.in. By comparison, highways constitute 5% of the road
network in Brazil, Japan, and the United States and 13% in Korea and the United Kingdom (World Road Statistics
2009).
5
    The GQ program in particular sought to upgrade highways to international standards of four- or six-laned, dual-
carriageway highways with grade separators and access roads. In 2002, this group was only 4% of India’s highways,
and the GQ work raised this share to 12% by the end of 2006.



                                                                                                                 7
of 2004. To complete the GQ upgrades, 128 separate contracts were awarded. In total, 23% of the work
was completed by the end of 2002, 80% by the end of 2004, 95% by the end of 2006, and 98% by the end
of 2010. Differences in completion points were due to initial delays in awarding contracts, land
acquisition and zoning challenges, funding delays,6 and related contractual problems. Some have also
observed that India’s construction sector was not fully prepared for a project of this scope. As of August
2011, the cost of the GQ upgrades was about US$6 billion (1999 prices), about half of the initial
estimates.


The NS-EW network, with an aggregate span of 7,300 km, is also shown in Figure 1. This network
connects Srinagar in the north to Kanyakumari in the south, and Silchar in the east to Porbandar in the
west. The NS-EW upgrades were initially planned to begin in Phase I of NHDP along with the GQ
upgrades. The scope of the first phase of upgrades was smaller at 981 km, or 13% of the total network,
with the remainder originally planned to be completed by 2007. However, work on the NS-EW corridor
was pushed into Phase II and later, due to issues with land acquisition, zoning permits, and similar. In
total, 2% of the work was completed by the end of 2002, 4% by the end of 2004, and 10% by the end of
2006. These figures include the overlapping portions with the GQ network that represent about 40% of
the NS-EW progress by 2006. Since then, the planned upgrades for the NS-EW have expanded
substantially. As of January 2012, 5,945 of the 7,300 kilometers in the project have been completed, at an
estimated cost of US$12 billion.


Section 3: Data Preparation

We employ repeated cross-sectional surveys of manufacturing establishments carried out by the
government of India. Our work studies surveys that were conducted in fiscal years 1994, 2000, 2005, and
2007 for the organized sector. In all cases, the survey was undertaken over two fiscal years (e.g., the 1994
survey was conducted during 1994-1995), but we will only refer to the initial year for simplicity. This
time span allows us two surveys before and after the GQ upgrades. This section describes some key
features of these data for our study.7




6
    The initial two phases were about 90% publicly funded and focused on regional implementation. The NHDP
allows for public-private partnerships, which it hopes will become a larger share of future development.
7
    For additional detail on the manufacturing survey data, see Nataraj (2011), Kathuria et al. (2010), Fernandes and
Pakes (2008), Hasan and Jandoc (2010), and Ghani et al. (2011).

                                                                                                                   8
It is important to first define the organized manufacturing sector of the Indian economy. The organized
manufacturing sector is comprised of establishments with more than ten workers if the establishment uses
electricity. If the establishment does not use electricity, the threshold is 20 workers or more. These
establishments are required to register under the India Factories Act of 1948. The unorganized
manufacturing sector is, by default, comprised of establishments which fall outside the scope of the
Factories Act. The organized sector accounts for over 80% of India’s manufacturing output, while the
unorganized sector accounts for a high share of plants and employment (Ghani et al. 2012). We focus on
the organized sector in this study.


The organized manufacturing sector is surveyed by the Central Statistical Organization through the
Annual Survey of Industries (ASI). Establishments are surveyed with state and four-digit National
Industry Classification (NIC) stratification. We use the provided sample weights to construct population-
level estimates of organized manufacturing activity at the district and two-digit NIC level. Districts are
administrative subdivisions of Indian states or union territories. As we discuss further below, we use
district variation to provide more granular distances from the various highway networks.


ASI surveys record several economic characteristics of plants like employment, output, capital, raw
materials, and land and building value. For measures of total manufacturing activity in locations, we
aggregate the activity of plants up to the district or district-industry level. We also develop measures of
labor productivity and TFP. Labor productivity is measured through output per employee at the plant
level, with an average then taken across plants for a district. TFP is calculated through a residual
regression approach. For every two-digit NIC industry and year, we regress log value-added (output
minus raw materials) of plants on their log employment and log capital. The residual from this regression
for each plant is taken as its TFP. We then take the average of these residuals across plants for a district.


As our data are repeated cross-sections, rather than panels with unique plant identifiers, there are limits
with respect to some of our analyses. Perhaps most notably, we do not have accurate measures of exiting
plants. Our data do, however, allow us to measure and study new entrants. Plants are distinguished by
whether or not they are less than four years old. We will use the term “young” plant or new entrant to
describe the activity of plants that are less than four years old. We aggregate young plant activity at the
district level, similar to metrics of total activity.


Our core sample contains 312 districts. This sample is roughly half of the total number of districts in India
of 630, but it accounts for over 90% of plants, employment, and output in the manufacturing sector

                                                                                                                9
throughout the period of study. The reductions from the 630 baseline occur due to the following. First, the
ASI surveys only record data for about 400 districts due to the lack of organized manufacturing (or its
extremely limited presence) in many districts.8 Second, we drop states that have a small share of
organized manufacturing.9 Last, we make an additional restriction for our regression sample that
manufacturing activity in terms of plants, employment, and output in districts be observed at all points
from 1994 to 2007.


The requirements with respect to continuous measurement of districts are motivated by a desire to have a
consistent sample before and after the GQ upgrades. The requirements with respect to minimum share of
states in organized manufacturing are motivated by a desire to have reasonably measured plant traits,
especially with respect to labor productivity and plant TFP. With respect to the latter, we also exclude
plants that have negative value added, which accounts for 6%-7% of employment. These restrictions are
again not very significant in terms of economic activity, with our final sample retaining more than 90% of
Indian manufacturing activity.


Our next step is to measure the distance of districts to various highway networks. We calculate these
distances using official highway maps and ArcMap GIS software. Our reported results use the shortest
straight-line distance of a district to a given highway network. We find very similar results when using the
distance to a given highway network measured from the district centroid. The empirical appendix
provides additional details on our data sources and preparation, with the most attention given to how we
map GQ traits that we ascertain at the project level to district-level conditions for pairing with ASI data.


Our empirical specifications use a non-parametric approach with respect to distance to estimate treatment
effects from the highway upgrades. We define indicator variables that take a value of one if the shortest
distance of a district to the indicated highway network is within the specified range; a value of zero is
assigned otherwise. We report most of our results using four distance bands: nodal districts, districts
located 0-10 km from a highway, districts located 10-50 km from a highway, and districts over 50 km
from a highway. In an alternative setup, the last distance band is further broken down into three bands:


8
    For instance, the ASI surveys the entire country except the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, and Sikkim and
Union Territory of Lakshadweep, so these states are naturally excluded.
9
    These states are Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Jammu and Kashmir,
Tripura, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Assam. The average share of organized manufacturing from these
states varies from 0.2% to 0.5% in terms of establishment counts, employment or output levels.

                                                                                                                 10
districts located 50-125 km from a highway, districts located 125-200 km from a highway, and districts
over 200 km from a highway.


In all of our empirical work, our core focus is on the non-nodal districts of a highway. We measure effects
for nodal districts, but the interpretation of these results will always be challenging as the highway
projects are intended to improve the connectivity of the nodal districts. For the GQ network, we follow
Datta (2011) in defining the nodal districts as Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, and Kolkata. In addition, Datta
(2011) describes several contiguous suburbs (Gurgaon, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, and NOIDA for Delhi;
Thane for Mumbai) as being on the GQ network as “a matter of design rather than fortuitousness”. We
include these suburbs in the nodal districts. For the NS-EW network, we define Delhi, Chandigarh,
NOIDA, Gurgaon, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Hyderabad, and Bangalore to be the nodal districts using
similar criteria as that applied to the GQ network.


Tables 1a and 1b present simple descriptive statistics that portray some of the empirical results that
follow. Table 1a starts by providing the count of districts by distance bands to the GQ network and by
distance bands to the NS-EW network. As we do not need the panel nature of districts for these
descriptive exercises, we retain some of the smaller districts that are not continuously measured to
provide as complete a picture as possible (the total district count is 370). For both highway networks,
roughly one-third of districts fall within 0-10 or 10-50 km from the network, with roughly two-thirds of
districts over 50 km away from the network.


Panel A provides descriptive tabulations from the 1994 and 2000 data that come before the GQ upgrades,
and Panel B provides similar tabulations for the 2005 and 2007 data that follow the GQ upgrades.
Columns 2-4 provide aggregates of manufacturing activity within each spatial grouping, averaging the
two surveys, and Columns 5-7 provide similar figures for young establishments less than four years old.
Column 8 provides means of labor productivity across plants in the range. One important observation
from these tabulations is that non-nodal districts in close proximity to the highway networks typically
account for around 40% of Indian manufacturing activity.


Table 1b provides some simple calculations. Panel A considers the log growth in activity from 1994/2000
to 2005/2007, combining districts within spatial range. Panel B instead tabulates the change in the share
of activity accounted for by that spatial band. Share changes in Panel B are calculated separately for
distances from the GQ and NS-EW networks such that they sum to zero for each group. Accordingly, we
do not present a totals row in Panel B. Share of labor productivity is also not a meaningful concept.

                                                                                                        11
Starting with the top row, our study is set during a period in which plant counts and output are growing
for the organized sector, but employment levels are shrinking overall. This is true in general, and the
divergence is even more pronounced for entrants. Accordingly, labor productivity for establishments is
rising on average.


Looking at differences in growth patterns by distance from the GQ network, non-nodal districts within 10
km of the GQ network demonstrate growth that exceeds that in districts 10-50 km from GQ in every
column. Moreover, in five of the seven columns, the growth in these very proximate districts also exceeds
that in districts over 50 km away from the network. For convenience, we tabulate this ratio near the
bottom of Panel A. The share changes in Panel B also tend to be quite strong considering the big increases
in the nodal cities that are factored into these share changes.


Distance from the NS-EW highway system provides an interesting contrast, even at the level of these
descriptive statistics. First, it is clear that we should be careful about assigning all of the changes observed
for the GQ upgrades in nearby districts to the project, as districts near the NS-EW network also tend to
exhibit growth differences compared to districts 50+ km away as a raw statistic despite the fact that the
upgrade of NS-EW has only just begun by our sample end point. Second, districts near the GQ network
appear to have especially increased plant counts and labor productivity compared to districts near the NS-
EW corridor. These patterns are not conclusive, perhaps most importantly because districts can be close
to both highway systems as shown in Figure 1 (about 8% of GQ is also part of NS-EW), but they provide
a suggestive starting point for our work.


Section 4: Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Highways on Economic Activity

This section analyzes the impact of highway construction on manufacturing activity across districts. We
use simple linear models with outcome variables expressed in logs, with the exception of TFP, which is
expressed in unit standard deviations. Estimations include district and year fixed effects. These district
fixed effects absorb long-run levels in manufacturing activity by district (along with any other fixed trait),
while the year fixed effects absorb aggregate changes in the Indian manufacturing sector.


Estimations report standard errors clustered by district, weight observations by log total district
population in 2001, and have 1,248 observations as the cross of four surveys and 312 districts. We
winsorize outcome variables at the 1%/99% level to guard against outliers. Our district sample is


                                                                                                             12
constructed such that employment, output, and establishment counts are continuously observed. We do
not have this requirement for young plants, and we assign the minimum 1% value for employment,
output, and establishment entry rates where zero entry is observed in order to model the extensive margin
and maintain a consistent sample.


Base Pre-Post Estimations of GQ Upgrades

Table 2a shows the simplest panel estimations where explanatory variables in Panel A are interactions of
two indicator variables for how far a district is from the GQ highway network with an indicator variable
for the post-GQ upgrades (equal to one in 2005 and 2007). The district fixed effects control for the main
effects of distance, and the year fixed effects control for the main effects of the post-GQ upgrades period.
Thus, the interactions quantify differences in outcomes after the GQ upgrades by spatial band compared
to the excluded group that comprises districts located more than 50 km from the GQ network.


Column headers provide the outcome variables studied. Columns 1-3 present measures of total activity in
each district, Columns 4-6 present measures of new entry specifically, and Columns 7 and 8 present our
average productivity measures. The first row shows increases in nodal district activity for Columns 1-6.
As we have noted, we do not emphasize these results much given that the upgrades were built around the
connectivity of the nodal cities. The imprecision in these estimates is mostly due to the fact that there are
only nine nodal districts. As effects are being measured for each band relative to districts more than 50
km from the GQ network, the inclusion or exclusion of the nodal districts does not impact our core results
regarding non-nodal districts.


Our primary emphasis is on the highlighted row where we consider districts that are 0-10 km from the GQ
network but are not nodal districts. To some degree, the upgrades of the GQ network can be taken as
exogenous for these districts. Columns 1-3 find limited effects for the total activity contained in these
districts. As foreshadowed in Table 1b, we find positive point estimates for higher establishment counts
and output in districts 0-10 km from the GQ network after the upgrades, but small declines in
employment. These effects are not statistically significant, and this is not due to small sample size as we
have 76 districts within this range. Columns 4-6 examine instead the entry margin by quantifying levels
of young establishments and their activity. We find much sharper entry effects than the aggregate effects
in Columns 1-3, and these entry results are precisely measured. The districts within 0-10 km of GQ have a
0.4-0.9 log point increase in entry activity after the GQ upgrade compared to districts more than 50 km
away. We further discuss these differences between total levels and entry rates when reviewing Table 2b.


                                                                                                          13
Columns 7 and 8 show an increase in the average labor productivity and TFP in the districts 0-10 km
from the GQ network. These increases are primarily driven by the incumbent establishments of the
districts. We do not separately quantify the labor productivity and TFP changes of new entrants similar to
Columns 4-6, as much of the impact of new entrants comes from the extensive margin and these plant-
level traits are not defined in these cases. The labor productivity result is also evident in a comparison of
Columns 2 and 3, with the difference being that Column 7’s measure is calculated at the plant level. We
return to the interpretation of these productivity results after viewing the dynamic specifications.


For comparison, the third row of Panel A provides the interaction for the districts that are 10-50 km from
the GQ network. None of the effects that we measure for the 0-10 km districts are observed at this spatial
band, which provides a first assurance that these effects can be linked to the GQ upgrades rather than
other features like regional growth differences.


Panel B extends the spatial horizons studies in Panel A to include two additional distance bands for
districts 50-125 km and 125-200 km from the GQ network. These two bands have 48 and 51 districts,
respectively. In this extended framework, we measure effects relative to the 97 districts that are more than
200 km from the GQ network in our sample. Three observations can be made. First, the results for
districts 0-10 km are very similar when using the new baseline. Second, the null results generally found
for districts 10-50 km from the GQ network mostly extend to districts 50-200 km from the GQ network.
Even from a simple association perspective, the manufacturing growth in the period surrounding the GQ
upgrades is localized in districts along the GQ network.


As a final and more speculative point, the negative point estimates in Columns 4-6 have a pattern that
might suggest a “hollowing-out” of new entry towards districts more proximate to the GQ system after
the upgrades. This pattern is similar to Chandra and Thompson’s (2000) finding that U.S. counties that
were next to counties through which U.S. highways were constructed were adversely affected. Chandra
and Thompson (2000) described their results within a theoretical model of spatial competition whereby
regional highway investments aid the nationally-oriented manufacturing industry and lead to the
reallocation of economic activity in more regionally-oriented industries. The point estimates suggest a
similar force might be occurring within Indian manufacturing as well, but the lack of statistical precision
prevents strong conclusions in this regard.




                                                                                                          14
Returning to the differences between Columns 1-3 and 4-6, we suspect that three factors are behind the
weaker response on total activity compared to entry. First, our post-upgrades data come from 2005 and
2007, which is just at the end of the GQ upgrades that began in 2001. It takes time for activity to shift
spatially, especially if there are agglomeration forces or similar with existing industry bases, and we are
likely under-estimating the ultimate changes that may occur in the spatial distribution of Indian
manufacturing as a consequence. By contrast, the entry margin—where location choices are being made
at present—adjust much faster to the changing attractiveness of regions, and thus register sharper effects
in the short- to medium-run. A second reason why total shifts in activity may be dampened in districts on
the GQ network is that entrants may be displacing incumbent establishments from the districts. In fact,
this competition is a key reason cited by proponents for infrastructure investments. Unfortunately, our
data do not allow us to study the exit margin with sufficient detail to make accurate assessments.


Table 2b presents evidence on a third rationale that partly overlaps with the other two. Prior to the GQ
project, there existed some infrastructure linking these cities. In a minority of cases, the existing roads did
not even comprise the beginning of a highway network, and so the GQ project built highways where none
existed before. In other cases, however, a basic highway existed that could be upgraded. Of the 70
districts lying near the GQ network, new highway stretches comprised some or all of the construction for
33 districts, while 37 districts experienced purely upgrade work.


In Table 2b, we split the 0-10 km interaction variable for these two types of interventions. The results are
very interesting. Columns 4-8 show mostly similar entry and productivity consequences regardless of the
initial roadwork’s condition. Columns 1-3, however, show distinct effects regarding total activity. Places
that completely lacked a highway before GQ exhibit increases in aggregate activity. In these cases, the
entry has enough aggregate consequences to register during the time period of our study. On the other
hand, upgrades of existing facilities display null effects. Because of the earlier two limitations noted, it
could be that upgraded portions will also demonstrate increases in aggregate activity in the long-run.


Dynamic Specifications

Table 3a presents a dynamic version of the pre-post estimations using the shorter spatial horizon that
measures effects relative to districts 50+ km from the GQ network. In this specification, we interact the
indicator variables for district distance bands with indicator variables for the years 2000, 2005, and 2007.
By separately estimating effects for each year, we can observe whether the growth patterns appear to




                                                                                                            15
follow the GQ upgrades hypothesized to cause them. Effects are measured relative to the 1994 period. We
include but do not report interactions for nodal districts and each year, as well.


The patterns in Columns 4-6 are comforting for the entry results. We do not observe a substantial uptick
in 2000 that would suggest a pre-trend to the GQ upgrades. This lack of pre-trend also extends to the total
activity measures in Columns 1-3, although we did not observe a substantial pre-post effect for these
results anyway with the full sample. Likewise, we do not observe any worrisome patterns for the districts
10-50 km apart from the GQ network. In fact, the latter provide additional support in that the coefficients
for the 2000 interaction in the 0-10 km (top row) are similar to those for 10-50 km (fourth row), while the
subsequent differences in entry rates in 2005 and 2007 are quite stark.


By contrast, the dynamic specifications suggest that some caution is warranted in interpreting the
observed growth in labor productivity and TFP for districts 0-10 km from the GQ network. The first row
in Columns 7 and 8 show non-trivial performance declines in 2000 compared to 1994 for these districts;
they also highlight that much of the performance gain we observe in Table 2a is through a comparison of
outcomes in 2005 and 2007 against outcomes in 2000, rather than compared to 1994.


There are two potential interpretations that could follow. The first, less-positive interpretation is that the
performance gain we observe in Table 2a is a recovery from some short-term decline in productivity that
is spuriously timed with the GQ upgrades. Some evidence in support of this story is registered in the fact
that TFP growth reverts back to almost 1994 levels in Column 8. However, a second, more-positive
interpretation is that the GQ upgrades managed to stop and reverse some adverse decline in productivity
that these districts were experiencing. Some evidence in support of this story is evident in the fact that
districts 10-50 km from the GQ network also experienced lower productivity in 2000 that did not
subsequently recover. In the end, our analysis provides equal support to both interpretations.


In summary, the dynamic specifications of Table 3a provide support for a causal link in that the observed
increases in entry rates from the simple pre-post estimations have a timing that appears well aligned with
the GQ upgrades. On the other hand, the productivity results are more difficult to interpret and may
suggest that our productivity findings in Table 2a are upwardly biased due to a rebound effect from
spuriously lower productivity levels in 2000.


Table 3b takes a second dynamic approach. Due to the size of the GQ project, some sections were
completed earlier than other sections. Using our framework from Table 2a, we further interact our

                                                                                                           16
indicator variable for being 0-10 km from the GQ network with indicator variables for whether the
district’s work was completed by March 2003, March 2006, or later. Of the 70 districts, 27 districts were
completed prior to March 2003, 27 districts between March 2003 and March 2006, and 16 districts
afterwards. In almost every case in Table 3b, the relative sizes of the effects by implementation date are
consistent with the project’s completion taking hold and influencing economic activity. Given that our
final data survey comes from 2007, it is not surprising that we do not yet see substantial activity in the
districts completed after March 2006. On the other hand, expansions in activity are generally strongest for
districts that were completed by March 2003. Again, the timing of the GQ upgrades is consistent with the
results we observe.


Comparison of GQ Upgrades to NS-EW Highway

Table 4 compares districts proximate to the GQ network to districts proximate to the NS-EW highway
network that was not upgraded. The idea behind this comparison is that districts that are at some distance
from the GQ network may not be a good control group if they have patterns of evolution that do not
mirror what districts immediately on the GQ system would have experienced had the GQ upgrades not
occurred. This comparison to the NS-EW corridor provides perhaps a stronger foundation in this regard,
especially as its upgrades were planned to start close to those of the GQ network before being delayed.


The upgrades scheduled for the NS-EW project were to start contemporaneous to and after the GQ
project. To ensure that we are comparing apples to apples, we identified the segments of the NS-EW
project that were to begin with GQ and those that were to follow in the next phase. We use separate
indicator variables for these two groups so that we can compare against both. Of the 76 districts lying
with 0-10 km of NS-EW, 40 districts were to be covered in the 48 NS-EW projects identified for Phase I.
The empirical appendix provides greater detail on this division.


The powerful result from Table 4 is that none of the outcomes we measure for the GQ system in the post-
upgrade period are observed for districts along the NS-EW corridor. The placebo-like coefficients from
the interactions of post-GQ upgrades with districts lying between 0-10 km from the NS-EW highway are
mostly negative and never statistically significant. The lack of precision is not due to too few districts
along the NS-EW system, as the district counts are comparable and the standard errors are of very similar
magnitude. In Appendix Table 1, we show that null results continue to hold when we combine the NS-
EW indicator variables and that the coefficients are well estimated. Said differently, with the precision
that we estimate the positive responses along the GQ network, we estimate a lack of a change along the


                                                                                                          17
NS-EW corridor. Along with the dynamic results in Tables 3a and 3b, these patterns speak to the likely
link of the economic changes to the GQ upgrades.


Industry Heterogeneity in Entry Patterns

Our last two analyses change the focus from estimating aggregate effects from the GQ upgrades to
identifying in greater detail the heterogeneity in the effects observed by important industry or district
traits. These exercises provide additional confidence around the patterns developed and, as highlighted
below, have special policy relevance in India.


Table 5 describes a key feature of the industry heterogeneity in entry that occurred after the GQ upgrades.
We focus specifically on the land and building intensity of industries. We select this intensity due to the
intuitive inter-relationship that non-nodal districts may have with nodal cities along the GQ network due
to the general greater availability of land outside of urban centers and its cheaper prices. This general
urban-rural or core-periphery pattern is evident in many countries and is associated with efficient sorting
of industry placement. Moreover, this feature has particular importance in India due to government
control over land and building rights, leading some observers to state that India has transitioned from its
“license Raj” to a “rents Raj” (e.g., Subramanian, 2012a,b). Given India’s distorted land markets, the
heightened connectivity brought about by the GQ upgrades may be particularly important for efficient
sorting of industry across spatial locations.


We measure land and building intensity at the national level in the year 2000 through the industry’s
closing net value of the land and building per unit of output. Appendix Table 2 provides specific values,
and we find similar results when only using land intensity. In Table 5, we repeat our entry specifications
isolating district activity observed for industries in three bins: those with low land intensity (the bottom
quartile of intensity), medium intensity (the middle two quartiles), and high intensity (the top quartile).


The patterns in Table 5 are striking. The districts 0-10 km from the GQ network show a pronounced
growth in entry by industries that are land and building intensive. With all three outcome measures of
establishments, employment, and output, there are no adjustments in entry for the least-intensive
industries. This entry effect only becomes statistically and economically important at moderate land and
building intensities, and the effect is largest for industries with the highest intensities. As remarkable, the
opposite pattern is generally observed in the top row for nodal districts—where nodal districts are




                                                                                                              18
experiencing heightened entry of industries that are less land and building intensive after the GQ
upgrades—and no consistent patterns are observed for districts 10-50 km from the GQ network.


These patterns suggest that the GQ upgrades may have helped with the efficient sorting of industries
across locations. Ghani et al. (2012) find that infrastructure aids efficient sorting of industries and plants
within districts, and these patterns show a greater efficiency across districts. Many studies have warned
about the misallocation in the Indian economy (e.g., Hsieh and Klenow 2009), and these results suggest
better connectivity across districts may be able to reduce some of these distortions. More speculatively,
these results also suggest that infrastructure may improve upon land market distortions caused by the
“rent Raj” and similar.10


Highways and Spatial De-Concentration

The development and growth of Indian economy in the last two decades has been accompanied by
widening spatial disparities. Cities like Gurgaon in Haryana and Bangalore in Karnataka have
experienced high growth in economic activity and real estate developments, while many other places
remain mired in poverty and stagnation. These differentials are common to many developing economies
(e.g., World Development Report 2009), as well as advanced economies. For instance, China’s growth is
attributable mainly to coastal provinces. However, unlike China, growth in India’s moderate-sized cities
is relatively lower.11 Desmet et al. (2012) argue that manufacturing in India is slowly moving away from
high-density districts to districts that are less congested, allowing industrial activity to spread more
equally across space.


In this section, we examine whether investment in infrastructure such as highways can play a role in
facilitating the shift of manufacturing activity to intermediate-sized districts. We group districts into three
bins based on their population density: low-density districts are below the median density for India (up to
353 persons per square km); moderate-density districts are those in the middle two quartiles (353-693


10
     We also find evidence of heightened entry following GQ upgrades within industries in the top quartile of the skill
distribution in nodal districts and in districts 0-10 km from the GQ network. Unlike land-intensity, this entry is
uniform and does not display a sorting pattern.
11
     McKinsey Global Institute (2012) highlights the increasing prominence of intermediate cities in many economies,
predicting they will account for half of future GDP growth. McKinsey Global Institute (2010) argues there are
between 70 and 100 medium-sized specialist cities in India whose economies focus on an anchor sector like
manufacturing, resources, transportation, or tourism.

                                                                                                                    19
persons per square km), and high-density districts are those in the top quartile (over 693 persons per
square km).


Table 6 presents the results of interacting the three regressors from our typical approach with indicator
variables for the various density bins. The one exception is that all of the nodal districts are above the
median density for India, and so we do not have a low-density nodal-district effect. Effects continue to be
measured against districts farther than 50 km from the GQ network.


The results in Table 6 suggest that the GQ upgrades have increased new entry the most in high- and
medium-density districts that lie 0-10 km from the GQ network. For instance, moderate-density districts,
like Surat in Gujarat or Srikakulam in Andhra Pradesh, that lie on the GQ highway registered more than
100% increase in new output and new establishment counts after GQ upgrades. On the other hand, the
GQ upgrades are not linked to heightened entry or performance in low-density areas. One interpretation
of these results is that the improved connectivity enables manufacturing establishments to efficiently
locate in intermediate cities, but that localization economies prevalent for the sector continue to preclude
entry in low-density places.12


Our findings are similar to Baum-Snow et al. (2012) who identify how infrastructure aided the
decentralization of industrial production and population in Chinese cities from 1990-2010. Henderson et
al. (2001) similarly find that industrial decentralization in Korea is attributable to massive transport and
communications infrastructure investments in the early 1980s. These and similar studies form the
foundation for development recommendations with respect to infrastructure found in the World Bank’s
(2012) Urbanization Review Flagship Report and comparable policy reports.13


Section 5: Conclusions

This paper evaluates the impact of a large-scale highway project on economic activity in the Indian
manufacturing sector using establishment-level survey data from 1994-2007. The Golden Quadrilateral
highway project of India upgraded the quality and width of 5,846 km of highways linking four major
hubs in India. In the process, this upgrade improved the connectivity and market accessibility of districts
lying close to the highway compared to those more removed. Non-nodal districts located within 0-10 km

12
     For example, Duranton and Puga (2001, 2004), Rosenthal and Strange (2004), Ellison et al. (2010), and Gill and
Goh (2010).
13
     Henderson (2010) provides a broader review of the role of cities in development.

                                                                                                                20
from the GQ network experienced substantial increases in entry levels and higher productivity. Dynamic
specifications and comparisons to the NS-EW highway system mostly confirm these conclusions, with
the most substantial caveat being that the productivity gains may be upwardly biased by a pre-period dip.
The GQ upgrades also appear to have facilitated a more natural sorting of industries that are land and
building intensive from the nodal districts into the periphery locations; the upgrades also appear to be
encouraging decentralization by making intermediate cities more attractive for manufacturing entrants.


There are several points of future research that we hope to undertake. First, we are continuing to examine
the extent to which the GQ project improved the allocative efficiency of the manufacturing sector in
India. Given the high levels of misallocation with which India is starting, improvements in allocation are
most important. Second, we intend to study next the impact of the GQ upgrades on the unorganized
sector. Ghani et al. (2012) highlight the extent to which the organized and unorganized sectors are moving
in different directions within India, with the unorganized sector becoming more urbanized, and we need
to better understand the role that infrastructure connections across districts play in this process. This work
will also examine issues like the gender of business owners to understand how improved highways affect
sub-groups of the population differently. Finally, looking beyond the manufacturing sector, it will be very
interesting to use satellite-based data to examine the aggregate economic outcome associated with these
upgrades.




                                                                                                           21
References

Ahluwalia, M. (2000). “Economic Performance of States in the Post Reforms Period”. Economic and
      Political Weekly, 35(19):1637-1648

Aschauer, D.A. (1989). “Is Public Expenditure Productive?”. Journal of Monetary Economics, 23(2):
       177-200.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo and N. Qian. (2012). “On the Road: Access to Transportation Infrastructure and
       Economic. Growth in China”. NBER Working Paper No. 17897.

Baum-Snow, N. (2007). “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?”. Quarterly Journal of Economics
      122(2): 775–805.

Baum-Snow, N., L. Brandt, V. Henderson, M. Turner and Q. Zhang. (2012). “Roads, Railroads and
      Decentralization of Chinese Cities”. Working Paper.

Besley, T. and R. Burgess. (2004). “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic Performance? Evidence
        from India?”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 91-134.

Brown, D., M. Fay, J. Felkner, S. Lall and H. Wang. (2008). “The Death of Distance? Economic
       Implications of Infrastructure Improvement in Russia”. EIB Papers, 13(2): 126-147.

Chandra, A. and E. Thompson, E. (2000). “Does Public Infrastructure Affect Economic Activity?
       Evidence from the Rural Interstate Highway System”. Regional Science and Urban Economics,
       30(4): 457–490.

Datta, S. (2011). “The Impact of Improved Highways on Indian Firms”.         Journal of Development
        Economics, 99(1): 46–57.

Desmet, K., E. Ghani, S. O’Connell, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2012), “The Spatial Development of India”.
       World Bank Policy Research Paper 6060.

Dinkelman, T. (2011). “The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence from South
       Africa”. American Economic Review, 101(7): 3078–3108.

Donaldson, D. (2010). “Railroads and the Raj: The Economic Impact of Transportation Infrastructure”.
       NBER Working Paper No. 16487.

Donaldson, D. and R. Hornbeck. (2012). “Railroads and American Economic Growth: New Data and
       Theory”. Working Paper.

Duflo, E. and R. Pande. (2007). “Dams”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (2): 601–646.

Duranton, G. and D. Puga. (2004) “Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies”. In Vernon
       Henderson and Jacques François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
       Volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland): 2063–2117.

Duranton, G. and D. Puga (2001). “Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation, and the Life
       Cycle of Products”. American Economic Review, 91(5): 1454-1477.

Duranton, G. and M. Turner. (2011). “The Fundamental Law of Road Congestion: Evidence from US
       Cities”. American Economic Review, 101(6): 2616-2652.


                                                                                                  22
Duranton, G. and M. Turner. (2012). “Urban Growth and Transportation”. Review of Economic Studies,
       forthcoming.

Ellison, G., E. Glaeser and W. Kerr. (2010). “What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence from
        Coagglomeration Patterns”, American Economic Review 100(3): 1195-1213.

Fernald, J.G. (1998). “Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and Productivity”.
        The American Economic Review, 89(3): 619–638.

Fernandes, A. and A. Pakes. (2008). “Factor Utilization in Indian Manufacturing: A Look at the World
       Bank Investment Climate Survey Data”. NBER Working Paper No. 14178.

Ghani, E., W. Kerr, and S. O'Connell. (2011). “Spatial Determinants of Entrepreneurship in India”.
       NBER Working Paper No. 17514.

Ghani, E., A. Goswami, and W. Kerr. (2012). “Is India’s Manufacturing Sector Moving Away from
       Cities?”. NBER Working Paper No. 17992.

Gill Indermit and Chor-Ching Goh. (2012). “Scale Economies and Cities”. World Bank Research
        Observer, 25(2): 235-262.

Gupta, P., R. Hasan, and U. Kumar. (2008). “What Constrains Indian Manufacturing?”. ICRIER Working
        Paper No. 211.

Gupta, P. and U. Kumar. (2010). “Performance of Indian Manufacturing in the Post Reform Period”.
       Working Paper.

Hasan, R. and K. Jandoc. (2010). “The Distribution of Firm Size in India: What Can Survey Data Tell
       Us?”. ADB Economics Working Paper No. 213.

Henderson, V. (2010). “Cities and Development”. Journal of Regional Science, 50(1): 515-540.

Holl, A. and E. Viladecans‐Marsal. (2011). “Infrastructure and Cities: The Impact of New Highways on
        Urban Growth”. Universitat de Barcelona‐Institut d’Economia de Barcelona Working Paper.

Hsieh, C. and P. Klenow. (2009). “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India”. The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1403-1448.

Hsu, W‐T and H. Zhang. (2011). “The Fundamental Law of Highway Congestion: Evidence from
      Japanese Expressways”. Chinese University of Hong Kong Working Paper.

Kathuria, V., S. Natarajan, R. Raj, and K. Sen. (2010). “Organized versus Unorganized Manufacturing
       Performance in India in the Post-Reform Period”. MPRA Working Paper No. 20317.

Kochhar, K. U. Kumar, R. Rajan, A. Subramanian and I. Tokatlidis. (2006). “India’s Pattern of
      Development: What Happened, What Follows?”. IMF Working Paper No. 06/22.

Lahr, M., R. Duran and A. Varughese. (2005). “Estimating the Impact of Highways on Average Travel
       Velocities and Market Size”. Unpublished mimeo.

McKinsey Global Institute. (2010). “India’s Urban Awakening: Building Inclusive Cities, Sustaining
      Economic Growth”. McKinsey & Company, April 2010.

McKinsey Global Institute. (2012). “The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape: What Does it Mean for
      Cities?”. McKinsey & Company, July 2012.

                                                                                                     23
Michaels, G. (2008). “The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from the Interstate
       Highway System”. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (4): 683–701.

Mitra, A., A. Varoudakis and M. Véganzonès. (1998). “State Infrastructure and Productive Performance
        in Indian Manufacturing”. OECD Working Paper No. 139

Munell, A. (1990). “Why has Productivity Growth Declined? Productivity and Public Investment”. New
       England Economic Review, January/February: 3–22.

Nataraj, S. (2011). “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity: Evidence from India’s Formal
        and Informal Manufacturing Sectors”. Journal of International Economics, 85(2): 292-301.

Otto, G. and G. Voss. (1994). “Public Capital and Private Sector Productivity”. The Economic Record,
        70(209): 121–132.

Roberts, M., U. Deichmann, B. Fingleton and T. Shi. (2012). “Evaluating China’s Road to Prosperity: A
        New Economic Geography Approach”. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 42(4): 580–594.

Rosenthal, S. and W. Strange. (2004). “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration
       Economies”. In Vernon Henderson and Jacques François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and
       Urban Economics, Volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland): 2119-2171.

Subramanian, Arvind. (2012a). “The Ideas India Must Shed”. June 4th, 2012.

Subramanian, Arvind. (2012b). “What is India’s Real Growth Potential”. May 23, 2012.

The Economic Times. (2012). “Highway Development Requires Rs 200 cr Investment Every Day”. April
       29, 2012.

The World Bank. (2012). “Planning, Connecting, and Financing Cities—Now”. Urbanization Review
      Flagship Report, The World Bank, Washington DC.

Ulimwengu, J., J. Funes, D. Headey and L. You. (2009). “Paving the Way for Development? The Impact
      of Transport Infrastructure on Agricultural Production and Poverty Reduction in the Democratic
      Republic of Congo”. IFPRI Discussion Paper No. 00944.

World Development Report. (2009). Reshaping Economic Geography, The World Bank, Washington DC.

World Road Statistics. (2009). World Road Statistics 2009: Data 2002-2007. International Road
      Federation, Geneva.




                                                                                                  24
Empirical Appendix

This appendix describes some key resources and data preparation steps regarding highway segments.

Data Source on GQ Details: As per the National Highway Authority of India (NHAI), the GQ highway venture was
a collection of 128 projects implemented all over the country. By March 2011, 120 of these projects had been
completed, while eight were either pending completion or terminated. We compiled information on each of these
120 projects from the annual reports of NHAI from 1998-99 to 2010-2011 as well as from the Ministry of Roads,
Transport and Highways. These annual reports identified the project name for the highway stretch, the length of the
highway stretch, the national highway number, the start date for the project, and target and actual completion dates.

Mapping GQ Projects to Districts: In most cases, the name of the project indicated the start and end towns on a
highway stretch. This information was used to identify districts lying within 10 km of the highway stretch. The start
and end points of the segment along the highway were located in the shape file and that segment was then selected
to query all of the districts located within 10 km of that segment in the GIS software. In some cases, the project
name was not clear or the town name could not be located using the shape file, Google maps, or open street maps. In
such cases, we used information on the NHAI website for the highway project chainage and mapped the preceding
or succeeding highway stretch. We then traced back kilometer by kilometer on the specified highway number to get
the names of the towns that would lie close to the highway stretch.

New Construction versus Upgrades: We obtained information on whether each GQ project focused on new highway
construction or the renovation and upgrade of an existing highway using a supplier database called Process Register.
Process Register is a comprehensive online reference database of suppliers of products and services used in the
process, energy, and greater manufacturing industries. NHAI is a listed supplier on Process Register and most NHAI
projects are listed in the database. Of the 70 districts lying near the GQ network, 37 districts experienced purely
upgrade work. For 33 districts, some or all of the work was new construction.

Implementation Date: We grouped projects by whether they were completed by March 2003, March 2006, or later.
We then matched districts to individual highway projects and their completion dates. Several districts touch two or
more stretches of highway. For such districts, we allocated them to the earliest completion date as they had access to
some connectivity before other districts did. However, we did not allocate a district into an earlier bin if the earlier
GQ project was River Over Bridge (ROB), a bridge section, or a short bypass, as most of these constructions were
small in terms of kilometers of length.

There were some highway projects, such as Vijayawada–Chilkaluripet, which came in several packages, and we
could not distinguish among packages in terms of identifying districts because the start and end points were the
same in all packages. Fortunately, in most cases, such projects were implemented in the same time period, so we
could combine projects to get the set of districts lying within 10 km of the project in question.

Of the 70 districts, 27 districts were completed prior to March 2003, 27 districts between March 2003 and March
2006, and 16 districts after March 2006. Two districts (Pali, Nadia) cannot be classified through the standard route
and required research to ascertain. Pali was classified as being after March 2006 and new construction; Nadia was
classified as being after March 2006 and upgrade. Additional details about these decisions are available from the
authors.

NS-EW Highway Phase I: NS-EW highway projects were identified from the annual reports noted above. The
reports do not explicitly identify projects on the NS-EW corridor as being Phase I or Phase II. Thus, a project was
assigned to be part of Phase I if the target completion date was prior to December 2004, that is, a year after the
approval of the NHDP Phase II when a full-fledged NS-EW upgrade plan was approved by the Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs. NS-EW corridor projects under NHDP Phase II did not start until January 2005. In total, 48
NS-EW projects were identified that aggregate approximately 981 km of NS-EW planned to be completed in Phase I
of NHDP. Of the 48 projects, 15 were to be implemented on the East-West corridor while the rest were scheduled
for the North-South highway. Of the 76 districts lying with 0-10 km of the NS-EW system, 40 districts were to be
covered in the 48 NS-EW projects identified for Phase I.




                                                                                                                     25
Figure 1: Highway networks in India
                                                                  Table 1a: Descriptive statistics
                                              Count of                 Levels of total activity                      Levels of young firm activity                  Labor
                                              districts         Plants     Employment           Output            Plants     Employment        Output            productivity
                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
                                                            A. Average levels of activity in 1994 and 2000, combining districts within spatial range
Total                                            370            81,641         5,879,283        3.9E+11           12,166          563,479          4.5E+10          66,998
Nodal district for GQ                             9             11,365          723,042         5.8E+10            1,403           71,037          5.2E+09          80,312
District 0-10 km from GQ                          76            24,816         2,098,769        1.3E+11            4,054          196,958          1.5E+10          62,998
District 10-50 km from GQ                         42             6,003          375,423         3.4E+10            1,069           44,087          5.8E+09          90,506
District over 50 km from GQ                      243            39,456         2,682,049        1.7E+11            5,641          251,398          1.9E+10          63,248
Nodal district for NS-EW                          11             8,283          515,053         3.5E+10            1,250           61,913          3.6E+09          68,714
District 0-10 km from NS-EW                       90            21,036         1,291,904        7.9E+10            2,913          122,358          8.9E+09          61,165
District 10-50 km from NS-EW                      68            10,484          727,345         4.7E+10            1,711           80,605          5.6E+09          64,349
District over 50 km from NS-EW                   201            41,838         3,344,982        2.3E+11            6,292          298,602          2.7E+10          69,563

                                                            B. Average levels of activity in 2005 and 2007, combining districts within spatial range
Total                                            370           100,951         3,571,552        1.1E+12           16,104          390,145          1.2E+11          300,003
Nodal district for GQ                             9             13,751          489,068         1.7E+11            2,317           68,171          1.8E+10          341,215
District 0-10 km from GQ                          76            33,774         1,208,338        4.0E+11            5,681          135,277          3.9E+10          330,839
District 10-50 km from GQ                         42             7,410          222,213         8.4E+10            1,228           21,779          5.9E+09          376,240
District over 50 km from GQ                      243            46,017         1,651,932        4.2E+11            6,878          164,918          5.7E+10          254,992
Nodal district for NS-EW                          11            11,790          459,878         1.2E+11            2,178           76,201          1.4E+10          266,600
District 0-10 km from NS-EW                       90            24,194          913,526         2.2E+11            3,409           86,212          2.5E+10          241,124
District 10-50 km from NS-EW                      68            12,149          363,300         8.4E+10            1,771           28,999          8.7E+09          230,459
District over 50 km from NS-EW                   201            52,818         1,834,848        6.4E+11            8,746          198,734          7.2E+10          351,460
Notes: Descriptive statistics calculated from Annual Survey of Industries. Districts are local administrative units that generally form the tier of local government immediately
below that of India's subnational states and territories. These are the smallest entities for which data is available with ASI. Nodal districts include Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata,
and Chennai and their contiguous suburbs (Gurgaon, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, and NOIDA for Delhi; Thane for Mumbai). The indicator variable for District 0-10 km from GQ
takes a unit value for non-nodal districts that have minimum straight-line distance from the GQ network of less than 10 km; other distance-related indicator variables are
defined analogously. For the NS-EW network, we define Delhi, Chandigarh, NOIDA, Gurgaon, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Hyderabad, and Bangalore to be the nodal districts.
Labor productivity is total output per employee.
                                                   Table 1b: Descriptive statistics, continued
                                                            Levels of total activity                    Levels of young firm activity              Log labor
                                                     Plants     Employment           Output          Plants     Employment        Output          productivity
                                                      (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                    A. Log growth in activity from 1994/2000 to 2005/2007, combining districts within spatial range
Total                                                1.019           0.968           1.037           1.030           0.972           1.040           1.135
Nodal district for GQ                                1.020           0.971           1.043           1.069           0.996           1.056           1.128
District 0-10 km from GQ                             1.030           0.962           1.043           1.041           0.969           1.041           1.150
District 10-50 km from GQ                            1.024           0.959           1.037           1.020           0.934           1.001           1.125
District over 50 km from GQ                          1.015           0.967           1.035           1.023           0.966           1.046           1.126
Nodal district for NS-EW                             1.039           0.991           1.051           1.078           1.019           1.061           1.122
District 0-10 km from NS-EW                          1.014           0.975           1.041           1.020           0.970           1.046           1.124
District 10-50 km from NS-EW                         1.016           0.949           1.024           1.005           0.910           1.020           1.115
District over 50 km from NS-EW                       1.022           0.960           1.039           1.038           0.968           1.041           1.145
Ratio of 0-10 to 50+ GQ groups                       1.016           0.995           1.008           1.017           1.003           0.995           1.021
Ratio of 0-10 to 50+ NS-EW groups                    0.992           1.016           1.002           0.983           1.002           1.005           0.982
Ratio of 0-10 GQ to 0-10 NS-EW groups                1.016           0.986           1.002           1.021           0.999           0.995           1.023

                                                  B. Change in share of activity from 1994/2000 to 2005/2007, combining districts within spatial range
Nodal district for GQ                               -0.003            0.014           0.008           0.029           0.049           0.036           n.a.
District 0-10 km from GQ                             0.031           -0.019           0.037           0.020          -0.003          -0.006           n.a.
District 10-50 km from GQ                            0.000           -0.002          -0.008          -0.012          -0.022          -0.080           n.a.
District over 50 km from GQ                         -0.027            0.006          -0.038          -0.037          -0.023           0.050           n.a.
Nodal district for NS-EW                             0.015            0.041           0.025           0.032           0.085           0.034           n.a.
District 0-10 km from NS-EW                         -0.018            0.036           0.005          -0.028           0.004           0.015           n.a.
District 10-50 km from NS-EW                        -0.008           -0.022          -0.041          -0.031          -0.069          -0.051           n.a.
District over 50 km from NS-EW                       0.011           -0.055           0.011           0.026          -0.021           0.002           n.a.
Notes: See Table 1a. Share changes in Panel B are calculated separately for distances from the GQ and NS-EW networks such that they sum to zero for each group.
                    Table 2a: Pre-post estimations of the impact of GQ improvements on manufacturing activity
                                                 Log levels of total activity                 Log levels of young firm activity             Log labor       Total factor
                                            Plants     Employment          Output            Plants     Employment       Output            productivity     productivity
                                              (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)
                                                        A. Base spatial horizon measuring effects relative to districts 50+ km from the GQ network
Post GQ upgrades *                           0.560            0.560          0.654            0.702           1.167            1.647           0.084           -0.022
Nodal district                              (0.501)          (0.462)        (0.453)          (0.662)         (0.814)          (0.951)         (0.135)         (0.033)
Post GQ upgrades *                           0.094            -0.039         0.166            0.436           0.471            0.928           0.177           0.086
District 0-10 km from GQ                    (0.112)          (0.131)        (0.176)          (0.172)         (0.239)          (0.346)         (0.093)         (0.042)
Post GQ upgrades *                           -0.023           -0.078         -0.006           -0.012          -0.056           -0.263          0.043           -0.005
District 10-50 km from GQ                   (0.129)          (0.135)        (0.191)          (0.240)         (0.357)          (0.537)         (0.132)         (0.074)
District and year fixed effects              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
Observations                                 1248             1248            1248            1248            1248             1248            1248             1244

                                                      B. Extended spatial horizon measuring effects relative to districts 200+ km from the GQ network
Post GQ upgrades *                           0.513            0.576          0.744            0.621           1.071            1.419           0.158           -0.003
Nodal district                              (0.505)          (0.468)        (0.458)          (0.668)         (0.824)          (0.968)         (0.144)         (0.041)
Post GQ upgrades *                           0.047            -0.022         0.257            0.355           0.376            0.702           0.253           0.104
District 0-10 km from GQ                    (0.128)          (0.144)        (0.177)          (0.186)         (0.266)          (0.382)         (0.103)         (0.048)
Post GQ upgrades *                           -0.071           -0.062         0.084            -0.094          -0.151           -0.490          0.118           0.013
District 10-50 km from GQ                   (0.144)          (0.153)        (0.202)          (0.253)         (0.379)          (0.566)         (0.141)         (0.078)
Post GQ upgrades *                           -0.209           -0.108         -0.018           -0.185          -0.282           -0.545          0.076           0.043
District 50-125 km from GQ                  (0.157)          (0.136)        (0.183)          (0.214)         (0.310)          (0.513)         (0.149)         (0.076)
Post GQ upgrades *                           0.014            0.163          0.361            -0.136          -0.101           -0.356          0.214           0.029
District 125-200 km from GQ                 (0.140)          (0.155)        (0.200)          (0.229)         (0.360)          (0.513)         (0.129)         (0.066)
District and year fixed effects              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
Observations                                 1248             1248            1248            1248            1248             1248            1248             1244
Notes: See Table 1a. Estimations consider the location and productivity of organized-sector manufacturing activity in 312 Indian districts for 1994, 2000, 2005, and 2007
from the Annual Survey of Industries. Young plants are those less than four years old. Panel A estimates effects of GQ upgrades for nearby districts relative to districts
more than 50 km from the GQ network; Panel B includes extended spatial rings to measure effects relative to districts 200 km away from the GQ network. The Post GQ
upgrades variable takes unit value for the years 2005 and 2007 after the GQ upgrades commenced in 2001. Labor productivity is total output per employee, and TFP is the
average residual in each district from a weighted regression of log of value added on logs of employment and capital for each industry and year. Outcome variables are
winsorized at their 1% and 99% levels, and entry variables are coded at the 1% level where no entry is observed to maintain a consistent sample. Estimations report
standard errors clustered by district, include district and year fixed effects, and weight observations by log total district population in 2001.
                              Table 2b: Pre-post estimations split by new construction versus improvements
                                                 Log levels of total activity                 Log levels of young firm activity            Log labor      Total factor
                                            Plants     Employment          Output            Plants     Employment       Output           productivity    productivity
                                              (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)                (8)
Post GQ upgrades *                           0.560           0.560           0.654           0.702           1.167           1.647            0.084           0.011
Nodal district                              (0.501)         (0.462)         (0.454)         (0.663)         (0.814)         (0.951)          (0.135)         (0.033)
Post GQ upgrades *                           0.188           0.102           0.307           0.474           0.440           0.777            0.189           0.094
District 0-10 km from GQ *                  (0.114)         (0.130)         (0.153)         (0.161)         (0.208)         (0.284)          (0.087)         (0.041)
New highway construction
Post GQ upgrades *                           0.009           -0.167          0.038           0.402           0.500           1.066            0.167           0.061
District 0-10 km from GQ *                  (0.160)         (0.191)         (0.272)         (0.266)         (0.370)         (0.533)          (0.138)         (0.054)
Improvement of existing highway
Post GQ upgrades *                           -0.023          -0.078          -0.006          -0.012          -0.056          -0.263           0.043           0.009
District 10-50 km from GQ                   (0.129)         (0.135)         (0.191)         (0.240)         (0.358)         (0.537)          (0.132)         (0.070)
District and year fixed effects              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Observations                                 1248            1248            1248             1248            1248            1248            1248            1244
Notes: See Table 2a. Estimations split local effects along the GQ network by whether the development is new highway construction or the improvement of existing
highways. Effects are measured relative to districts 50+ km from the GQ network.
                       Table 3a: Estimations of dynamic impact of GQ improvements on manufacturing activity
                                                  Log levels of total activity                 Log levels of young firm activity              Log labor      Total factor
                                             Plants     Employment          Output            Plants     Employment       Output             productivity    productivity
                                              (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)
Dynamics for districts 0-10 km from the GQ network:
Year 2000 *                                  0.057            0.179           -0.106           -0.110           -0.107          -0.087           -0.276          -0.098
District 0-10 km from GQ                    (0.168)          (0.207)         (0.298)          (0.257)          (0.319)         (0.480)          (0.160)         (0.065)
Year 2005 *                                  0.092            0.008           0.031            0.303            0.444           1.032            0.018           0.066
District 0-10 km from GQ                    (0.140)          (0.173)         (0.248)          (0.222)          (0.293)         (0.454)          (0.114)         (0.051)
Year 2007 *                                  0.151            0.086           0.198            0.463            0.396           0.741            0.070           0.011
District 0-10 km from GQ                    (0.143)          (0.182)         (0.274)          (0.242)          (0.317)         (0.440)          (0.141)         (0.055)

Dynamics for districts 10-50 km from the GQ network:
Year 2000 *                                  0.090            0.238           0.049            0.137            -0.150          -0.214           -0.193          -0.044
District 10-50 km from GQ                   (0.231)          (0.195)         (0.269)          (0.281)          (0.386)         (0.656)          (0.145)         (0.095)
Year 2005 *                                  0.061            0.024           -0.026           0.050            -0.136          -0.341           -0.081          0.018
District 10-50 km from GQ                   (0.132)          (0.144)         (0.200)          (0.274)          (0.425)         (0.695)          (0.116)         (0.079)
Year 2007 *                                  -0.018           0.056           0.062            0.064            -0.124          -0.398           -0.022          -0.072
District 10-50 km from GQ                   (0.144)          (0.133)         (0.183)          (0.276)          (0.417)         (0.562)          (0.164)         (0.087)
District and year fixed effects              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Observations                                 1248             1248             1248            1248             1248            1248             1248             1244
Notes: See Table 2a. Estimates include unreported interactions of year effects and nodal districts. Effects are estimated relative to districts more than 50 km from the GQ
network.
                              Table 3b: Dynamic estimations using dates of GQ project completion by district
                                               Log levels of total activity        Log levels of young firm activity    Log labor     Total factor
                                          Plants     Employment          Output   Plants     Employment       Output   productivity   productivity
                                            (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)            (8)
Post GQ upgrades *                         0.560         0.560          0.654      0.702        1.167         1.647       0.084          0.011
Nodal district                            (0.501)       (0.463)        (0.454)    (0.663)      (0.815)       (0.952)     (0.135)        (0.033)
Post GQ upgrades *                         0.194         0.171          0.391      0.540        0.658         1.163       0.198          0.061
District 0-10 km from GQ *                (0.154)       (0.148)        (0.200)    (0.229)      (0.289)       (0.429)     (0.140)        (0.043)
Section completed by March 2003
Post GQ upgrades *                         0.079         -0.124         -0.023     0.429        0.401         0.766       0.087          0.082
District 0-10 km from GQ *                (0.167)       (0.226)        (0.304)    (0.253)      (0.377)       (0.545)     (0.125)        (0.047)
Section completed 2003-2006 (March)
Post GQ upgrades *                         -0.053        -0.259         0.099      0.267        0.267         0.801       0.300          0.098
District 0-10 km from GQ *                (0.179)       (0.192)        (0.284)    (0.357)      (0.451)       (0.597)     (0.146)        (0.098)
Section completed after March 2006
Post GQ upgrades *                         -0.023        -0.078         -0.007     -0.012       -0.056        -0.263      0.044          0.009
District 10-50 km from GQ                 (0.129)       (0.135)        (0.191)    (0.240)      (0.358)       (0.538)     (0.132)        (0.070)
District and year fixed effects            Yes           Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes
Observations                               1248          1248            1248      1248         1248          1248        1248           1244
Notes: See Table 2a.
                 Table 4: Estimations of impact of GQ improvements compared to the NS-EW highway not improved
                                                      Log levels of total activity                Log levels of young firm activity           Log labor      Total factor
                                                 Plants     Employment          Output           Plants     Employment       Output          productivity    productivity
                                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
Effects for districts based upon distance from the GQ network:
Post GQ upgrades *                                0.354           0.193           0.289          0.367           0.736           1.253           0.119           -0.070
Nodal district GQ                                (0.389)         (0.374)         (0.359)        (0.613)         (0.828)         (0.943)         (0.154)         (0.057)
Post GQ upgrades *                                0.099           -0.031          0.160          0.370           0.407           0.860           0.165           0.066
District 0-10 km from GQ                         (0.117)         (0.136)         (0.181)        (0.181)         (0.256)         (0.372)         (0.095)         (0.040)
Post GQ upgrades *                                -0.013          -0.059          0.013          -0.045          -0.069          -0.274          0.044           0.005
District 10-50 km from GQ                        (0.130)         (0.136)         (0.192)        (0.246)         (0.365)         (0.547)         (0.132)         (0.070)

Effects for districts based upon distance from the NS-EW network:
Post GQ upgrades *                                0.398           0.712           0.653          0.389           0.584           0.507           -0.116          0.107
Nodal district NS-EW                             (0.434)         (0.486)         (0.406)        (0.684)         (0.779)         (0.732)         (0.143)         (0.064)
Post GQ upgrades *                                -0.128          0.054           0.020          -0.338          -0.314          -0.422          -0.043          -0.081
District 0-10 km from NS-EW *                    (0.125)         (0.110)         (0.169)        (0.198)         (0.327)         (0.479)         (0.138)         (0.054)
Section scheduled for Phase I
Post GQ upgrades *                                0.115           0.086           0.061          -0.233          -0.152          -0.148          -0.017          -0.049
District 0-10 km from NS-EW *                    (0.140)         (0.165)         (0.203)        (0.223)         (0.332)         (0.468)         (0.140)         (0.069)
Section scheduled for Phase II
Post GQ upgrades *                                0.007           -0.050          -0.162         -0.229          -0.284          -0.224          -0.094          -0.029
District 10-50 km from NS-EW                     (0.142)         (0.143)         (0.183)        (0.214)         (0.310)         (0.499)         (0.121)         (0.054)
District and year fixed effects                   Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Observations                                      1248            1248            1248            1248           1248            1248            1248            1244
Notes: See Table 2. Estimations compare results from proximity to the GQ network to a second NS-EW highway network that was planned for partial upgrade at the same time as
the GQ project but was then delayed.
                    Table 5: Estimations of location decisions of new plants by industry land and building intensity
                                             Log new establishment counts                   Log new employment levels                        Log new output levels
                                           by industry land/building intensity           by industry land/building intensity           by industry land/building intensity
                                           0-25th       25th-75th       75th             0-25th       25th-75th       75th             0-25th       25th-75th       75th
                                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)
                                                          A. Base spatial horizon measuring effects relative to districts 50 km from the GQ network
Post GQ upgrades *                          1.102           0.670          0.063          1.839          1.345          0.664           2.258          1.593          1.213
Nodal district                             (0.565)         (0.662)        (0.663)        (0.877)        (0.786)        (0.756)         (1.471)        (0.885)        (1.019)
Post GQ upgrades *                          0.058           0.330          0.585          0.224          0.485          0.698           0.283          0.822          1.047
District 0-10 km from GQ                   (0.183)         (0.158)        (0.195)        (0.296)        (0.244)        (0.303)         (0.511)        (0.341)        (0.443)
Post GQ upgrades *                          -0.203          -0.159         0.101          -0.155         -0.262         0.121           -0.482         -0.384         0.174
District 10-50 km from GQ                  (0.143)         (0.209)        (0.208)        (0.271)        (0.366)        (0.300)         (0.465)        (0.523)        (0.411)
District and year fixed effects              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                                 1248           1248           1248           1248            1248           1248           1248           1248           1248

                                                       B. Extended spatial horizon measuring effects relative to districts 200 km from the GQ network
Post GQ upgrades *                          1.182           0.549          0.032          1.847          1.235          0.684           2.257          1.455          1.097
Nodal district                             (0.570)         (0.669)        (0.669)        (0.883)        (0.802)        (0.770)         (1.483)        (0.907)        (1.041)
Post GQ upgrades *                          0.138           0.209          0.555          0.232          0.375          0.718           0.281          0.684          0.930
District 0-10 km from GQ                   (0.196)         (0.180)        (0.211)        (0.314)        (0.283)        (0.334)         (0.545)        (0.384)        (0.486)
Post GQ upgrades *                          -0.122          -0.280         0.070          -0.148         -0.373         0.141           -0.484         -0.522         0.058
District 10-50 km from GQ                  (0.158)         (0.229)        (0.223)        (0.287)        (0.397)        (0.333)         (0.497)        (0.558)        (0.461)
Post GQ upgrades *                          0.148           -0.241         -0.102         0.020          -0.202         0.056           0.057          -0.264         -0.159
District 50-125 km from GQ                 (0.184)         (0.212)        (0.193)        (0.311)        (0.336)        (0.297)         (0.531)        (0.495)        (0.484)
Post GQ upgrades *                          0.166           -0.235         -0.022         0.010          -0.232         0.024           -0.060         -0.278         -0.294
District 125-200 km from GQ                (0.164)         (0.224)        (0.180)        (0.293)        (0.373)        (0.328)         (0.469)        (0.484)        (0.495)
District and year fixed effects              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                                 1248           1248           1248           1248            1248           1248           1248           1248           1248
Notes: See Table 2. Industries are divided into groups based upon land and building intensity in 2000 at the national level. These three bins include those with low land
intensity (the bottom quartile of intensity), medium intensity (the middle two quartiles), and high intensity (the top quartile).
                 Table 6: Estimations of impact of GQ improvements by district population density
                                                                  Log new           Log new            Log new          Log labor         Total factor
                                                               establishments      employment           output         productivity       productivity
                                                                      (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)
Effects for districts with low density:
Post GQ upgrades *                                                   n.a.               n.a.              n.a.              n.a.               n.a.
Nodal district with low density
Post GQ upgrades *                                                  0.240              0.146             0.361             0.249              0.118
District 0-10 km from GQ with low density                          (0.303)            (0.387)           (0.566)           (0.127)            (0.043)
Post GQ upgrades *                                                  0.104              0.107             0.027             0.091              -0.066
District 10-50 km from GQ with low density                         (0.266)            (0.437)           (0.691)           (0.139)            (0.105)

Effects for districts with moderate density:
Post GQ upgrades *                                                  0.616              1.560             1.488             -0.186             -0.057
Nodal district with moderate density                               (0.090)            (0.137)           (0.207)           (0.056)            (0.028)
Post GQ upgrades *                                                  0.468              0.624             1.067             0.086              0.034
District 0-10 km from GQ with moderate density                     (0.215)            (0.331)           (0.448)           (0.137)            (0.059)
Post GQ upgrades *                                                  -0.412             -0.273            -0.720            0.048              0.106
District 10-50 km from GQ with moderate density                    (0.535)            (0.676)           (0.832)           (0.120)            (0.078)

Effects for districts with high density:
Post GQ upgrades *                                                  0.713              1.119             1.667             0.117              -0.017
Nodal district with high density                                   (0.744)            (0.911)           (1.065)           (0.144)            (0.034)
Post GQ upgrades *                                                  0.670              0.694             1.526             0.225              0.127
District 0-10 km from GQ with high density                         (0.276)            (0.340)           (0.483)           (0.150)            (0.084)
Post GQ upgrades *                                                  0.236              -0.261            -0.514            -0.126             0.023
District 10-50 km from GQ with high density                        (0.536)            (0.898)           (1.453)           (0.546)            (0.180)
District and year fixed effects                                      Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
Observations                                                         1248              1248              1248               1248              1248
Notes: See Table 2. Districts are divided into groups based upon population density in 2000. Low-density districts are below the median density for
India (up to 353 persons per square km); moderate-density districts in the third quartile (353-693 persons per square km), and high-density districts in
top quartile (over 693 persons per square km).
                        Appendix Table 1: Table 4 with a single measure for districts 0-10 km from NS-EW
                                             Log levels of total activity        Log levels of young firm activity    Log labor     Total factor
                                        Plants     Employment          Output   Plants     Employment       Output   productivity   productivity
                                         (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)            (8)
Effects for districts based upon distance from the GQ network:
Post GQ upgrades *                      0.352          0.193          0.289      0.366        0.735         1.251       0.119          -0.096
Nodal district GQ                      (0.389)        (0.374)        (0.359)    (0.613)      (0.827)       (0.942)     (0.154)        (0.060)
Post GQ upgrades *                      0.095          -0.031         0.159      0.368        0.404         0.855       0.165          0.077
District 0-10 km from GQ               (0.117)        (0.136)        (0.181)    (0.180)      (0.255)       (0.372)     (0.095)        (0.043)
Post GQ upgrades *                      -0.020         -0.060         0.012      -0.048       -0.074        -0.282      0.043          -0.008
District 10-50 km from GQ              (0.130)        (0.136)        (0.192)    (0.244)      (0.364)       (0.545)     (0.132)        (0.074)

Effects for districts based upon distance from the NS-EW network:
Post GQ upgrades *                      0.397          0.712          0.653      0.389        0.584         0.507       -0.117         0.103
Nodal district NS-EW                   (0.434)        (0.486)        (0.406)    (0.684)      (0.778)       (0.732)     (0.143)        (0.073)
Post GQ upgrades *                      -0.016         0.069          0.039      -0.290       -0.239        -0.296      -0.031         -0.055
District 0-10 km from NS-EW            (0.106)        (0.107)        (0.142)    (0.167)      (0.260)       (0.376)     (0.106)        (0.050)
Post GQ upgrades *                      0.006          -0.050         -0.162     -0.230       -0.285        -0.225      -0.094         -0.018
District 10-50 km from NS-EW           (0.142)        (0.143)        (0.183)    (0.214)      (0.310)       (0.499)     (0.121)        (0.058)
District and year fixed effects         Yes            Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes
Observations                            1248           1248            1248      1248         1248          1248        1248           1244
Notes: See Table 4.
        Appendix Table 2: Industry-level traits for India's manufacturing sector
                                                                   Total establishment   Land and building
                                                                      counts, 2000        intensity, 2000
15   Food products and beverages                                       2,962,970               0.03
16   Tobacco products                                                  2,062,543               0.03
17   Textiles                                                          2,239,348               0.09
18   Wearing apparel; dressing and dyeing of fur                       2,785,199               0.04
19   Leather tanning; luggage, handbags, footwear                        171,759               0.05
20   Wood and wood products; straw and plating articles                2,720,752               0.04
21   Paper and paper products                                             90,214               0.07
22   Publishing, printing, and media reproduction                        144,293               0.04
23   Coke, refined petroleum, and nuclear fuel                             7,429               0.03
24   Chemicals and chemical products                                     216,410               0.06
25   Rubber and plastic products                                          95,352               0.06
26   Other non-metallic mineral products                                 784,551               0.09
27   Basic metals                                                         43,127               0.05
28   Fabricated metal products, except machinery                         640,256               0.04
29   Machinery and equipment, n.e.c.                                     171,138               0.05
30   Office, accounting, and computing machinery                            303                0.03
31   Electrical machinery and apparatus, n.e.c.                           67,896               0.07
32   Radio, television, and comm. equipment                                7,589               0.05
33   Medical, precision and optical instruments, watches                   9,190               0.07
34   Motor vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailers                          24,186               0.06
35   Other transport equipment                                            17,495               0.06
36   Furniture, manufacturing n.e.c.                                   1,255,784               0.04
Unweighted averages                                                     750,808                0.05
Notes: Descriptive statistics taken from Annual Survey of Industries.
