NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LONG RUN IMPACTS OF CHILDHOOD ACCESS TO THE SAFETY NET
Hilary W. Hoynes
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Douglas Almond
Working Paper 18535
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18535

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

We thank Rucker Johnson, Bhash Mazumder, Doug Miller, Caroline Hoxby and seminar participants
at Northwestern University, Princeton University, UC Davis Center for Poverty Research, UCSB,
UC Berkeley, Stanford, University of Stavanger, the Goldman School, and the University of Michigan
for helpful comments. We are grateful to Bob Schoeni and Donna Nordquist for help with the PSID,
Martha Bailey and Andrew Goodman-Bacon for sharing data on rollout of Community Health Centers,
and Amy Finkelstein and Jean Roth for sharing American Hospital Association (AHA) Annual Survey
data. This work was supported by USDA FANRP Project 235, “Impact of Food Stamps and WIC on
Health and Long Run Economic Outcomes,” the University of Michigan PSID Small Grant Program,
the UC Davis Center for Poverty Research, and UC Davis Committee on Research New Research
Initiative. We appreciate the excellent research assistance of Charles Stoecker, Ankur Patel, Danielle
Sandler, and Andrew Foote. This paper was previously circulated under the title of “Long Run Economic
and Health Impacts of Participation in the Food Stamp Program.” The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Hilary W. Hoynes, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Long Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net
Hilary W. Hoynes, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond
NBER Working Paper No. 18535
November 2012
JEL No. H53,I14
ABSTRACT
A growing economics literature establishes a causal link between in utero shocks and health and human
capital in adulthood. Most studies rely on extreme negative shocks such as famine and pandemics.
We are the first to examine the impact of a positive and policy-driven change in economic resources
available in utero and during childhood. In particular, we focus on the introduction of a key element
of the U.S. safety net, the Food Stamp Program, which was rolled out across counties in the U.S. between
1961 and 1975. We use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to assemble unique data linking family
background and county of residence in early childhood to adult health and economic outcomes. The
identification comes from variation across counties and over birth cohorts in exposure to the food stamp
program. Our findings indicate that the food stamp program has effects decades after initial exposure.
Specifically, access to food stamps in childhood leads to a significant reduction in the incidence of
“metabolic syndrome” (obesity, high blood pressure, and diabetes) and, for women, an increase in
economic self-sufficiency. Overall, our results suggest substantial internal and external benefits of
the safety net that have not previously been quantified.

Hilary W. Hoynes
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
hwhoynes@ucdavis.edu
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
School of Education and Social Policy
Northwestern University
Annenberg Hall, Room 205
2120 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dws@northwestern.edu

Douglas Almond
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
da2152@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
There is substantial evidence on the strong intergenerational correlations in health and
income. As documented by Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson (2002), health and economic disparities
unfold early in life. There is less evidence, however, on causal mechanisms behind this gap. The
“early origins” literature offers some guidance toward the causal relationships underlying
intergenerational correlations. However, whether public policy may be able to benefit by
accessing these “early origins” linkages remains to be been established.
In this paper, we evaluate whether increasing resources available in utero and during
childhood improves later-life health and economic outcomes. In particular, we focus on the
introduction of a key element of the U.S. safety net, the Food Stamp Program (FSP). The FSP
was rolled out at a county by county basis between 1962 and 1975, providing low-income
families vouchers that could be used at grocery stores to purchase food. Economic theory and
prior empirical evidence suggest that these vouchers were treated the same as cash income
(Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2009). Thus, we can utilize the FSP rollout as an identification
strategy for increases in resource availability early in life. Our analysis builds on previous
research finding a positive “first stage” effect of FSP rollout on contemporaneous health, as
measured in natality data by birth weight (Almond, Hoynes, and Schanzenbach 2011, Currie and
Moretti 2008). The program rollout design links the paper to a growing literature evaluating the
introduction of other Great Society programs.1
Our analysis also makes an important contribution to the economics literature that relates
resources in utero and during childhood to economic and health outcomes in adulthood.
1

Other rollout studies examine Head Start (Ludwig and Miller 2007), Medicare (Almond, Chay and Greenstone,
2007, Finkelstein and McKnight 2008), WIC (Hoynes et al 2012), family planning programs (Bailey 2012), Title I
(Cascio et al. 2010), and community health centers (Bailey and Goodman-Bacon 2012).

1

Previous design-based observational studies have generally looked at extreme, negative events
including famines, natural disaster, or disease outbreaks (see Currie 2009, Almond and Currie
2011a, b for recent reviews). A point of departure in our analysis is to evaluate the impact of a
positive and policy-driven event; one that is manifested by an increase in family resources
available in utero and during childhood. This income variation may be relevant for a larger
population than those touched by extreme events. Nevertheless, it is a relatively open question
whether a moderate increase in resources exerts corresponding long-term effects, or whether
these linkages are restricted to extreme events.
The Food Stamp program, recently renamed Supplemental Assistance for Needy Families
or SNAP, is the fundamental safety net in the U.S. Importantly, it is the only public assistance
program that is available to all income eligible families (other programs limit eligibility to
particular groups such as female headed households, children, the disabled or the elderly). It is
currently the largest U.S. cash or near cash means tested transfer program with spending in 2011
of 70 billion dollars compared to 31 billion for TANF and 59 billion for the federal EITC.2 The
importance of the FSP program is particularly apparent in the current Great Recession, where
almost 1 in 7 persons received benefits and lifted more than 5 million families out of poverty3.
Interestingly, in contrast to the rest of the U.S. safety net, the FSP is a federal program and
exhibits little variation across states (Currie 2003). It also has remained largely intact in the
presence of dramatic reforms to other parts of the safety net (Bitler and Hoynes 2010). This lack
2

Food stamp participation has increased to historic highs during the Great Recession. In 2007, food stamps, at 31
billion, compared to 48 billion for the EITC and 27 billion for TANF. Program costs are found at U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services (2012), Internal Revenue Service (2012), and U.S. Department of Agriculture
(2012).
3
The food stamp participation data refer to 2011 (USDA 2012). The poverty data are based on the supplemental
poverty measure (Short 2011) and are for 2010. The anti-poverty effects of the FSP were eclipsed only by the
Earned Income Tax Credit, which lifted more than 6 million families out of poverty.

2

of variation across states and over time presents significant challenges for evaluating the impacts
of the FSP (Currie 2003).
Our main results are for a sample of adults born between 1956 and 1981 who grew up in
disadvantaged families (their parent had less than a high school education). We refer to this as
the “high impact sample.” We employ a difference-in-difference model where the treatment
varies by county of birth and birth cohort, and we include controls for county and year of birth
and interview fixed effects, state linear time trends, and county-year of birth controls. We also
estimate a triple difference model that extends beyond the low education sample and uses
variation across subgroups with varying propensities of being affected by food stamps (Hoynes
and Schanzenbach 2009). Our main treatment variable is the share of time between conception
and age 5 that a food stamp program was available in the individual’s county of birth. We
estimate impacts on weight, height, general health status, disability, the incidence of many
conditions and diseases (e.g. high blood pressure, diabetes, heart disease, etc.), health behaviors
(smoking, drinking), as well as education, earnings, income, and program participation. Because
of the many outcome variables, we follow Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007) and Anderson (2008)
estimate summary standardized indices that aggregate information over multiple treatments.
We find that access to the FSP in utero and in early childhood leads to a large and
statistically significant reduction in the incidence of “metabolic syndrome” (obesity, high blood
pressure, heart disease, diabetes) as well as an increase in reporting to be in good health. We also
find for women, but not men, that access to food stamps in early childhood leads to an increase
in economic self-sufficiency. Our results are robust to adding a rich set of county controls
(possible confounders) and event study models further support the validity of the research
design.
3

Our results not only make a contribution by establishing a link between expanding
resources in childhood and long run health outcomes, but we also can speak to the “program
evaluation” of FSP. Presumably, the FSP passes a cost-benefit criterion based on the
contemporaneous or “real time” benefits (nutrition, anti-poverty). Given that empirical evidence
on “early origins” is relatively recent, the long-term benefits of such longstanding programs were
neither considered nor expected. An additional contribution of our work is, therefore, to explore
the possibility of internal and external benefits of the safety net that have not previously been
quantified. This raises the possibility that policies targeting early childhood may be suboptimally small. In other words, the FSP generates larger private and social benefits when taking
into account the “multiplier effect” on later-life outcomes.
The remainder of our paper is as follows. In Section 2 we summarize the economic
literature on long term effects of early life interventions. In Section 3 we summarize the
biological science literature in order to provide guidance for which health impacts are expected
to be impacted by the FSP treatment. In Section 4 we provide the background on the FSP and in
Section 5 we describe our data. In Section 6 we present our empirical model and Section 7 our
results. We conclude in Section 8.

2. Background and Prior Research
That in utero and early childhood events can have important vestigial effects has been
documented for a wide range of later-life outcomes, including health status, test scores,
education attainment, wages, and mortality. Observational studies have leveraged short, extreme
events experienced in utero as identification strategies (see reviews by Currie 2009 and Almond
and Currie 2011a,b). Examples include famine (Painter et al. 2005, Susser and Lin 1992),
4

disease (Almond 2006, Barreca 2010), and radiation (Almond et al. 2009). A natural question is
how generalizable such linkages are, and in particular whether more routine childhood
experiences may also shape health and economic outcomes during adulthood. To date, there has
been relatively little research that combines the strength of design-based identification strategies
for causal inference with more commonplace treatments/exposures. Those that are amenable to
policy are rarer still.
The shortage of previous work stems from the challenge of marrying identification
strategies for program evaluation to: a) policies that affect children at a young age and b) policies
that can be mapped to data on later-life outcomes in adulthood. Thus, whether “early origins”
are more of an empirical curiosity or a general policy avenue remains largely unknown.
A relatively large literature considers the effect of income on health. Much of this
literature is concerned with the short-term effects of income changes experienced in adulthood,
and there are few studies that considering the long-term effect of early-life income changes. Van
Den Berg, Lindeboom and Portrait (2006) compare Dutch mortality rates among those born
during economic downturns to those born during expansions. Those born during expansions
lived substantially longer, which they argue is not due to changes in cohort composition or other
potential confounders. Banerjee et al. (2010) consider the a 19th century blight of French
vineyards that created a region by birth cohort varying shock to production and hence income.
They find this led to shorter heights in adulthood but no impact on mortality.
A second strand of research has considered the long-term effect of specific, wellidentified programs. Among these studies, the closest is Ludwig and Miller (2007), who
consider the long-term effect of Head Start program. Their approach uses application assistance
provided to poor counties as an instrument for Head Start Program operation, and finds the
5

program reduced childhood mortality rates in affected counties. Furthermore, Ludwig and Miller
find that educational attainment is also higher due to Head Start exposure. Chetty et al. (2011)
and Dynarski, Hyman and Schanzenbach (2011) find persistent effects of class-size reductions
on educational attainment and initial labor market outcomes. Reyes (2007) and Nilsson (2009)
consider the effect of early childhood lead exposure on later life outcomes, and Glied and Neidell
(2010) evaluate the long-term impacts of water fluoridation.4 Chay, Guryan, and Mazumder
(2012) consider the long-term human capital effect of early childhood health, as proxied by local
post-neonatal mortality rates. They find that improved health for young black children during
the late 1960s and early 1970s yielded substantially increased NAEP and AFQT test scores
during the 1980s. Building on Almond, Chay, Greenstone (2007), they argue that improved
access to hospitals following the Civil Rights Act and Medicare-induced desegregation of
hospitals drove the reduction in post-neonatal mortality rates for blacks that subsequently yielded
higher test scores. Likewise, more specific medical interventions in the early postnatal period
have been found to exert long-term effects, including surfactant and related treatments for very
low birth weight infants (Bharadwaj, Loken, and Nielson, 2012) and breastfeedingencouragement by hospital nurses following delivery (Fritzsimmons and Vera-Hernandez 2012).

3. Impacts of Early Nutrition and Expected Effects of the FSP
Causal mechanisms by which early childhood events affect later-life are best understood
for nutrition. This section reviews specific mechanisms by which early malnutrition can impair
development with long-term consequences.
4

Duncan, Ziol-Guest, and Kalil (2010) use the PSID to examine the impact of income during childhood on later life
economic and health outcomes. Importantly, they explore how income during different stages of childhood (early
life, later childhood, etc) affects outcomes and they explore income’s nonlinear impacts. This is an observational
design, however, and it is unclear whether they have recovered causal income channels.

6

Although FSP was clearly a nutrition program, because most recipients received a Food
Stamp Benefit below their normal food expenditures, the program is better understood as an
income transfer (Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2009). However, because recipients were by
definition poor, a large portion of their FSP benefit was spent on food. Further, at the time FSP
was introduced, hunger and nutritional deficiencies were not uncommon among Americans. For
example, a survey of low income families in Texas, Louisiana, Kentucky, and West Virginia in
1968-1970 found that 15 percent of whites and 37 percent of blacks had low hemoglobin levels
as well as relatively high rates of deficiencies in vitamin C, riboflavin and protein (Eisinger
1998). The 1968 CBS documentary “Hunger in America” raised national awareness of the
problem and possibly influenced the policy debate on the FSP (Berry 1984). Here, by briefly
summarizing the linkages between early life nutrition and later life outcomes, we provide
predictions about outcomes that may be altered by our FSP treatment.
Some linkages between early life nutrition and later life outcomes are fairly intuitive. For
example, severely undernourished children may suffer from anemia and listlessness. This may
reduce their ability to invest in learning during childhood and may harm their long-run earnings
and other outcomes. Poor early life nutrition may also directly harm long-run outcomes through
altering the body’s developmental trajectory. There is an emerging scientific consensus that
describes critical periods of development during early life that “program” the body’s long-term
survival outcomes (Barker, 1992; Gluckman and Hanson 2004). During development, the fetus
(and post-natally the child) may take cues from the current environment to predict the type of
environment it is expected to face in the long run and in some cases adapts its formation to better
thrive in the expected environment (Gluckman and Hanson 2004). A problem arises, however,
when the predicted later environment and the actual later environment are substantially different.
7

For example, if nutrients are scarce during the pre- (or early post-natal) period, the developing
body therefore predicts that the future will also be nutritionally deprived. The body may then
invoke (difficult-to-reverse) biological mechanisms to adapt to the predicted future environment.
For example, the metabolic system may adapt in a manner that will allow the individual to
survive in an environment with chronic food shortages. This pattern is termed the “thrifty
phenotype” and is sometimes referred to as the Barker hypothesis. The “problem” arises if in fact
there is not a long-run food shortage, and nutrition is plentiful. In that case, the early-life
metabolic adaptations are a bad match to the actual environment and will increase the likelihood
that the individual develops a “metabolic disorder,” which is the clustered association between
high blood pressure (hypertension), type II diabetes, obesity and cardiovascular disease. The
negative consequences do not usually appear until after reproductive age, which is preferable to
the species from an evolutionary perspective (Barker 1992). Note that both pre- and post-natal
nutrition can drive this programming.
Lasting impacts of nutrient deprivation in both the pre- and post-natal period have been
found on both long-term health and economic outcomes. Much of the experimental work on
nutritional programming has been conducted on rats. In McCance (1962), the researchers
experimentally manipulated how much breast milk was available to baby rats during their normal
21-day suckling period. At the end of the experiment, the treatment group (who were fed less
than normal) were smaller than the control group (who were fed normally). Subsequently, both
groups were fed normally, and the treatment group quickly caught up to normal size. In the
longer-run, however, they found that the (former) treatment rats became more obese than the
control group even though they were fed the same, normal amount. This set off a number of
follow-up studies. In one, the researchers found that if they manipulated the food intake for a
8

different (later) 21-day period, there were no long-run effects. This suggests there is a “critical
period” in the early post-natal period during which programming continues to occur.5
Some of the strongest research on humans comes from studies of the Dutch Hunger
Winter. In World War II, the Nazis imposed strict rationing of food during their occupation of
the Netherlands over the 7 month period between November 1944 and April 1945. As a result,
the previously well-nourished society experienced an abrupt, severe restriction in available
calories. Average caloric intake fell almost overnight from about 1800 calories per day to
between 400 and 800. Upon liberation, the food supply returned to normal levels almost
instantaneously. Because of the abrupt and severe nature of the period of malnutrition, it is
possible to isolate the impact of malnutrition that occurred at different points during
development. Painter et al. (2005) find that children had lower birth weight if exposed to famine
in the third trimester.6 Further, when the cohort that was exposed to malnutrition in utero hit
middle age, they were more likely to be obese, and had higher incidence of heart disease, lower
self-reported health status, and worse mental health (Painter et al. 2005, Susser and Lin 1992).
Almond and Mazumder (2011) consider the effect of nutrition timing during pregnancy
on later-life outcomes, focusing on the Ramadan fast as an identification strategy. They find that
children born with in utero exposure to the Ramadan fast experienced large increases in
disability in adulthood. Because fasting during Ramadan is confined to daylight hours, the
nutritional treatment is relatively mild compared to famine episodes. “Net nutrition” can also be
compromised by infectious disease (Bozzoli, Deaton, and Quintana-Domeque 2009), which can
increase energy expenditure and reduce consumption and absorption of nutrients. Thus, previous
5

Findings from animal models may need to be interpreted with additional caution if the timing of birth occurs at
different stages of development.
6
In a parallel manner, our earlier work (Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2011) finds that children have higher
birth weight if exposed to food stamps in the third trimester.

9

well-identified findings on the long-term effect of the postnatal health environment (esp. Chay,
Guryan, and Mazumder 2012) may also include nutrition as a portion of the underlying
mechanism.
To summarize, the literature has found that lack of nutrition in early life leads to higher
incidence of metabolic syndrome. These impacts have occurred both when the nutritional shock
occurred in utero and when it occurred in the period shortly after birth. Importantly, the long-run
health outcomes have been found even in cases in which birth weight itself was not affected.
Thus the impacts of in utero shocks do not necessarily directly map into birth weight and
evaluating the long term impacts requires the analysis of a many-decade past change, such as we
do in this paper.
In our setting, we examine a policy-driven increase in resources to a population that had
previously experienced chronic low levels of nutrition. Therefore, we expect that individuals
who were exposed to the FSP program in early life will be less likely to have mis-adapted to the
future environment. As a result, we expect to find that these cohorts experience lower incidence
of metabolic syndrome – as measured by high blood pressure, obesity, and diabetes – in adult
life. We also expect to find better human capital outcomes, as measured by education, earnings,
income and the like. Because the literature is unclear about the exact timing of post-natal
damage, we will explore alternative specifications for the timing of FSP exposure.

4. Introduction of the Food Stamp Program
Today, food stamp benefits are the fundamental safety net in the U.S., being the only
public assistance program that is available to all family types (most programs are targeted on
female headed households, children, or the elderly). Eligibility requires satisfying income and
10

asset tests and benefits can be used to purchase most grocery store food goods. A family’s
benefit is equal to the difference between the federally defined maximum benefit level for a
given family size and the amount that the family is deemed to be able to afford to pay for food on
its own according to the benefits formula (essentially 30 percent of cash income, less some
deductions).
The roots of today’s Food Stamp Program began with President Kennedy's 1961
announcement of a pilot food stamp program that was to be established in eight impoverished
counties. The pilot programs were later expanded to 43 counties in 1962 and 1963. The success
of these pilot programs led to the Food Stamp Act of 1964, which gave local areas the authority
to start up the FSP in their county. As with the current FSP, the program was federally funded
and benefits were redeemable at approved retail food stores. In the period following the passage
of the Food Stamp Act, there was a steady stream of counties initiating Food Stamp Programs
and Federal spending on the FSP more than doubled between 1967 and 1969 (from $115 million
to $250 million). Support for a national FSP grew due to a public spotlight on hunger (Berry
1984). This interest culminated in passage of 1973 Amendments to the Food Stamp Act, which
mandated that all counties offer FSP by 1975.
Figure 1 plots the percent of counties with a FSP from 1960 to 1975.7 During the pilot
phase (1961-1964), FSP coverage increased slowly. Beginning in 1964, program growth
accelerated; coverage expanded at a steady pace until all counties were covered in 1974.
Furthermore, there was substantial heterogeneity in timing of adoption of the FSP, both within
and across states. The map in Figure 2 shades counties according to date of FSP adoption
7

Counties are weighted by their 1970 population. Note this is not the food stamp caseload, but represents the
percent of the U.S. population that lived in a county with a FSP.

11

(darker shading denotes a later start up date). Our basic identification strategy considers the
month of FSP adoption for each county to trigger the beginning of the FSP “treatment.”
For our identification strategy to yield causal estimates of the program, it is important to
establish that the timing of FSP adoption appears to be exogenous. Prior to the FSP, some
counties provided food aid through the commodity distribution program (CDP)—which took
surplus food purchased by the Federal government as part of an agricultural price support policy
and distributed those goods to the poor. The 1964 Food Stamp Act allowed for counties to
voluntarily set up a FSP, but the Act also stated that no county could run both the FSP and the
CDP. Thus, for counties which previously ran a CDP, adoption of the FSP implies termination
of the CDP.8 The political accounts of the time suggest that debates about adopting the FSP
pitted powerful agricultural interests (who favored the CDP) against advocates for the poor (who
favored the FSP, see MacDonald 1977; Berry 1984). In particular, counties with strong support
for farming interests (e.g., southern or rural counties) may be late adopters of the FSP. On the
other hand, counties with strong support for the low income population (e.g., northern, urban
counties with large poor populations) may adopt FSP earlier in the period. This systematic
variation in food stamp adoption could lead to spurious estimates of the program impact if those
same county characteristics are associated with differential trends in the outcome variables.
In earlier work (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2009), we documented that larger counties
with a greater fraction of the population that was urban, black, or low income indeed
8

This transition in nutritional assistance would tend to bias downward FSP impact estimates, but we do not think
this bias is substantial because of the limited scope of the CDP. The CDP was not available in all counties and
recipients often had to travel long distances to pick up the items. Further, the commodities were distributed
infrequently and inconsistently, and provided a very narrow set of commodities—the most frequently available were
flour, cornmeal, rice, dried milk, peanut butter and rolled wheat (Citizens’ Board of Inquiry 1968). In contrast, Food
Stamp benefits can be used to purchase a wide range of grocery food items.

12

implemented the FSP earlier (i.e. consistent with the historical accounts).9 Nevertheless, we
found that the county characteristics explain very little of the variation in adoption dates. This is
consistent with the characterization of funding limits controlling the movement of counties off
the waiting list to start up their FSP (Berry 1984). We view the weakness of this model fit as a
strength when it comes to our identification approach in that much of the variation in the
implementation of FSP appears to be idiosyncratic. Nonetheless, in order to control for possible
differences in trends across counties that are spuriously correlated with the county treatment
effect, all of our regressions include interactions of these 1960 pre-treatment county
characteristics with time trends as in Acemoglu et al. (2004) and Hoynes and Schanzenbach
(2009).

5. Data
Given the county rollout of the FSP, our analysis requires data with information on adult
health and economic outcomes as well as county of birth for cohorts that were impacted by the
FSP introduction (1963-1975) at birth or during early childhood. We use the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) which began in 1968 with a sample of approximately 5,000
households, and subsequently followed and interviewed all members and descendants. The
original sample comprises two subsamples: a nationally representative sample of 3,000
households and the “Survey of Economic Opportunity subsample” including 1,900 low-income
and minority households selected from an existing sample. To adjust for this nonrandom
composition, we conduct all analysis using the PSID weights.
9

For more detail, see Table 1 in Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009).

13

Since the beginning of the survey, the PSID has collected detailed information on
economic and demographic outcomes. We use those data to generate adult economic outcomes
such as educational attainment, employment, earnings, family income, and poverty. Starting in
the 1980s and 1990s, the PSID also began regularly collecting information on health outcomes.
We use self-reported general health status (reported on a 5 point scale: excellent, very good, etc.)
and disability (physical or nervous condition that limits the type or amount of work), both of
which have been asked of heads and wives each year beginning in 1984. In addition, the PSID
reports height and weight (hence we can construct obesity10 and height stunting11), and
information on whether a doctor has diagnosed the respondent with specific health conditions
such as diabetes, high blood pressure, heart attack and heart disease.12 These data are also
collected for all heads and wives and have been available since 1999, when the survey became
biennial. These data allow us to test for the prediction that the introduction of food stamps in
early life leads to a reduction in the incidence of metabolic syndrome. In addition, we use
information on health behaviors (smoking and drinking) and health care utilization
(hospitalization).
We use a restricted version of the PSID allowing for identification of county of residence
for each year of the survey (the public-use version of the data identifies state). Because of the
longitudinal and dynastic nature of the data, for each individual, we can assign their county of
residence at birth or, for those born prior to the beginning of PSID data collection, their county
10

Obesity is defined as having a body mass index (weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared) of 30
and above.
11
Height stunting is measured as being below the 5th percentile in the nationally normed height distribution (Lewit
and Kerrebrock 1997). We use a gender-specific height distribution for those aged 30-50 in 2003-2006 reported in
McDowell et al. (2008).
12
Other health conditions measured in the PSID include stroke, arthritis, asthma, cancer, psychiatric problems, lung
disease, and mental ability.

14

of residence in 1968 when their family is first observed in the data. We merge the PSID data to
FSP program information based on this county of birth. The key variable for our analysis is
constructed from the month and year that each county introduced the FSP, which we collected
from USDA annual reports on county FSP caseloads (USDA, various years). With this, and
using the month and year of birth (measured for each person in the survey), we construct
measures of childhood exposure to the FSP. In our main specification, we use the share of time
between conception and age 5 that FSP is available in county of birth.13
Our sample includes individuals born between the years 1956 and 1981. Importantly,
this yields cohorts that span the entire food stamp rollout period (as well as several cohorts both
pre- and post-rollout) to identify the impact on adult outcomes. In addition, we only include
individuals whose family is observed at the individual’s birth or in early life.14 This is necessary
to identify the individual’s county of birth.15 We also use information on the family background
of the individual in early life (whether the child was born into a family is headed by a single
woman, education of head, and family income) as control variables and to identify groups more
and less likely to be impacted by the FSP. We limit the sample to persons age 18 and above for
the health outcomes and age 25 and over for the economic outcomes (to facilitate completed
education). The sample includes one observation for each interview year that the individual
satisfies these age restrictions, and is a head or wife (recall that the health measures are only
asked if a head or wife). We use the PSID data through interview year 2009. Thus given our birth
cohorts (1956-1981) the oldest individuals in our sample are 53 at the end of the period. We
13

We assume a 9-month gestation, so month of conception is 9 months prior to birth month.
In effect, this limits the sample to persons born into original 1968 PSID families.
15
Because of the possibility of nonrandom migration, we calculate childhood exposure to the FSP using county of
birth, rather than the time varying county of residence.
14

15

focus on a “high impact” sample, the sample of adults who grew up in disadvantaged families
(their parent had less than a high school education).
We augment the PSID data with additional county variables to control for possible
county confounders. First, we use county-level variables from the 1960 Census of Population
and Census of Agriculture including: the percent of the 1960 county population that lives in an
urban area, is black, is younger than 5, is older than 65, has income less than $3000 (in 1959
dollars), the percent of land in the county used for farming, and log county population. Second,
we measure for each county and year the number of hospital beds and hospitals per capita (from
the American Hospital Association16), real (non-FSP) government transfers per capita (from the
REIS17), and whether or not the county has a community health center18. We use the AHA and
REIS data and construct averages for the first five years of life (using county and year of birth).
We use the community health center data to measure the share of months between conception
and age 5 that there was a community health center present.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics on our estimation sample. About 69 percent of the
full sample and 60 percent of the high impact (parent low education) sample report to be in
excellent or very good health. About 10 percent report a work disability and less than 5 percent
16

The AHA data provides annual data that allows for us to measure county variables for the first five years of life
for all birth cohorts (the “Hospitals: Guide Issue” publication goes back to 1948). We collapse the hospital level data
to county-year and then convert to per capita measures using historical county population data. We then prepare a
simple average over the first five years of life. We thank Amy Finkelstein and Martin Gaynor for the pre-1976 data,
Jean Roth of the NBER for the 1976 and on data, and Martha Bailey and Andrew Goodman-Bacon for providing
code to clean the data.
17
The REIS data is available for 1959 and 1962 and then annually beginning in 1965. We construct three measures
for real per capita transfers that can be consistently measured throughout this period: cash public assistance benefits
(Aid to Families with Dependent Children, Supplemental Security Income and General Assistance), medical
spending (Medicare and military health care), and cash retirement and disability payments (OASI, DI, other). We
interpolate to fill in the gaps (1960, 1961, 1963, 1964). Analyses with these controls must drop birth cohorts before
1960 due to missing data.
18
The information on community health centers provide the year that the first center established in a county, which
occurred between 1965 and 1974 (Bailey and Goodman-Bacon 2011). We thank Martha Bailey and Andrew
Goodman-Bacon for sharing this data.

16

are diabetic. 12 (17) percent of the full sample (low education subsample) has high blood
pressure and 23 percent (31 percent) are obese.

6. Empirical Model
Our basic specification is a difference-in-differences model, where we compare adult
outcomes for those with early childhood exposure to FSP in their county of birth to those born
earlier (and therefore without childhood FSP exposure). We estimate:

yicb     FSPcb  Xicb  c  b   t s *b  CB60c *b  icb

(1)

where i indexes the individual, c the county of birth, b the birth year, s the state of birth, and t the
survey year. FSP is a measure of food stamp availability in early life. In our base case models we
measure the share of months between conception and age 5 that food stamps is available in the
adult’s birth county.
Because counties adopted FSP at different times, we compare those with or without FSP
access in early childhood by virtue of their county and date of birth. Thus, we can allow for
unrestricted cohort effects at the national level λb , unrestricted county effects ηc, unrestricted
interview year effects γt and state specific linear year of birth trends θs*b. The parameter of
interest is δ, the effect of exposure to FSP, which is identified from variation across counties and
birth cohorts. We also control for individual-level covariates Xicb (including gender, marital
status, race, and a quadratic in age) and family background (whether you were born into a female
headed household, the education attainment of the head of household, and the family’s income to

17

needs ratio19). All models are estimated using the PSID sample weights and we cluster standard
errors by county of birth.
Because of the many outcome variables, we follow Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007) and
Anderson (2008) and estimate summary standardized indices that aggregate information over
multiple treatments. In particular, we form two indices: metabolic syndrome and economic selfsufficiency. As discussed by Kling et al. (2007) aggregating multiple measures in a given area
(e.g. metabolic syndrome) improves statistical power. The summary index is the simple average
across standardized z-score measures of each component. The z-score is calculated by
subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation.20 In the case of metabolic
syndrome, all components are “bads” (obesity, high blood pressure, diabetes, heart disease, heart
attack) and so an increase in metabolic syndrome index indicates a worse outcome. For
economic self-sufficiency, we convert each component of the index so that a higher score is a
better outcome (e.g. convert “poor” to “not poor”). Economic self-sufficiency includes seven
measures: high school graduate, employed, not poor, not on TANF, not on food stamps,
earnings, and family income.21
The validity of our design depends on the exogeneity of the introduction of the FSP
across counties. We address this in two ways. First, following Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009)
we control for trends in the observable determinants of FSP adoption by including interactions
between characteristics of the county of birth and linear trends in year of birth (CB60c*b).
19

These family background measures are averages over the first five years of life, or in the case of the cohorts born
prior to the beginning of the PSID, the first five years of sample.
20
Kling et al (2007) analyze a randomized experiment and use the control group mean and standard deviation in
calculating the z-score. In our quasi-experimental design, we mimic this approach by using the mean and standard
deviation of the cohorts born before food stamp rollout began (cohorts born before 1961).
21
The top-coding of earnings and income changes over the course of the survey. We trim the sample and drop those
(relative few observations) with earnings or income in excess of $300,000.

18

Further, this period of FSP introduction took place during a period of tremendous expansion in
cash and noncash transfer programs as part of the War on Poverty and Great Society. To explore
these possible confounders, we directly control for several characteristics of county of birth
(community health centers, hospitals and hospital beds per capita, and non-FSP government
transfers per capita), measured as averages over the first five years of life.
The basic identification strategy underpinning equation (1) is different from previous
design-based studies in the fetal origins literature and other papers in the “rollout” literature.
Typically, natural experiments induced by famines, disease outbreaks, etc., are episodic: they
turn on and then turn off. In contrast, once the FSP starts operating in a given county, it keeps
operating and does not “turn off”. An analysis of short-term impacts of the policy, such as
maternal exposure and impacts on birth weight (as in Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2011)
leads to a 0/1 treatment variable for “FSP introduction”. However, in the current setting, we have
a much longer period of potential exposure (through childhood). This restricts the set of cohort
comparisons that can be made. For example, we will never observe a birth cohort exposed in
early childhood (e.g., up to age five), but without exposure in later childhood (after age 5).
Instead, comparisons are “from above”: we observe cohorts with the addition of exposure prior
to age five, but this comes on top of exposure at older ages. So, comparisons are inherently
about additional FSP exposure earlier in childhood, conditional on “already” having it later in
childhood. To illustrate the variation we have, Figure 3 shows average FSP exposure by birth
cohort for three measures of food stamp availability: in utero, share of months between birth and
age 5, and share of months between 6 and age 18.

19

7. Results
High Impact Sample

We begin with our “high impact” sample, adults born between 1956 and 1981 that grew
up in disadvantaged families (their parent had less than a high school education). Table 2
presents estimates for metabolic syndrome for the high impact sample. We define FSP exposure
as the share of months between conception and age 5 that the FSP was available in the
individual’s county of birth (“FS share IU-5” in the table). The “metabolic syndrome index” is
the equal weighted average of the z-score of five dichotomous variables: obese, diabetic, high
blood pressure, heart disease and heart attack. This, and all subsequent specifications, include
individual demographics, family background controls, and fixed effects for year of birth, year of
interview, county, state linear trends (in cohort), and 1960 county characteristics linear trends (in
cohort). The effect of access to food stamps in childhood on metabolic syndrome, as shown in
column 1, is -0.294 and is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The magnitude of the
coefficient implies that increasing the share from 0 to 1 (from no exposure to full exposure in
utero to age 5) reduces metabolic syndrome by 0.3 standard deviations.
The remaining columns of Table 2 show the regressions for the individual components of
metabolic syndrome index. While individually only obesity reaches statistical significance, each
of the point estimates indicate an improvement in adult health with the food stamp treatment in
childhood.
The estimates in Table 2 are intent-to-treat estimates, averaging across persons with
higher and lower likelihoods of being affected by food stamps.22 Of course, the food stamp
22

This is a reduced form model, rather than an instrumental variables approach with the FSP rollout instrumenting
for the household’s FSP participation. We do not estimate the IV because participation is measured only beginning
in 1968, the first year of the PSID survey.

20

participation rate is not 100 percent, even in this high impact sample. We estimate that for
families where heads have less than a high school degree, about a quarter participate in food
stamps at some point in their child’s life. Thus to convert these estimates to the treatment on the
treated, one should divide the treatment effects by 0.24.23
Table 3 presents estimates for other health outcomes for the high impact sample. Column
1 presents results for being in “good health” defined as one if the individual reports being in
excellent or very good health (as opposed to good, fair or poor health). The coefficient is 0.11
which implies that going to full exposure between conception and age 5 leads to an 11
percentage point increase compared to a mean of 59 percent, though this is not statistically
significant. Column 2 presents estimates for a work limiting disability and while the coefficient
is negative (e.g. an improvement as expected) it is very small and statistically insignificant.24
The third column indicates that access to the food stamp program leads to a reduction in the risk
of stunting (below the 5th percentile of the nationally-normed distribution of height).25 The final
two columns of the table present results for health behaviors—dichotomous variables for
whether the person ever smoked and whether they drink (at all). Both suggest an improvement
but neither is statistically significant.
We go on to analyze the economic outcomes for the high impact sample in Table 4. The
first column presents estimates for the “economic self-sufficiency index.” This is an equal
23

It is the participation rate of the sample individuals at birth and in early life that is relevant, rather than their
contemporaneous (adult) participation rate. To calculate the 0.24 FSP participation rate, we calculate the share of
families with children who ever report receiving food stamps (in the period when they have children in the
household). We limit the sample to 1978 and later, after the FSP has been rolled out in all counties.
24
Note that the sample size for health status and disability are substantially larger than those in Table 2 because
these questions have been included in the survey since 1984.
25
Table 3 shows that the mean of the stunting measure is below 0.05 which is consistent with the results in XX
finding that the height measures in the PSID are somewhat higher other health surveys. The qualitative results are
the same if we define stunting as below the 10th percentile.

21

weighted average of seven items where, for each, the variables are converted (if needed) such
that an increase in the outcome represents a better outcome. The components are: educational
attainment is high school or higher, not poor, not on food stamps, not on TANF, employed,
earnings and the log of family income. 26 The coefficient on the food stamp treatment is 0.182,
implying that full FSP access to age 5 leads to a 0.2 standard deviation improvement in
economic self-sufficiency (p-value is 0.14). The remainder of the columns provides the estimates
for the individual components of the economic self-sufficiency index. All coefficients with the
exception of employment status suggest that exposure to food stamps leads to an improvement in
economic well-being: increases in education, earnings, and income and a reduction in poverty
and participation in public assistance programs. However, only the coefficient on educational
attainment reaches statistical significance.
Interestingly, the interpretation of the coefficient on adult food stamp receipt (column 4
of Table 4) is potentially more complicated than the biological theories discussed above.
Observational data shows a relatively strong degree of intergenerational transmission of “welfare
use” (Bane and Ellwood 1994). Obtaining causal estimates for intergeneration transmission is
difficult, however, given the strong persistence in other factors associated with economic
success. In any case, the intergeneration transmission story would imply a positive effect of
exposure to food stamps in early life on adult participation in the program. While the results here
are not conclusive given the lack of precision in the estimate, the point estimate (positive on not
participating in food stamps) suggests that on net the biological story dominates.
26

Note that in Table 4, the mean of the self-sufficiency index is not zero. As described above, we use the full sample
of individuals born before 1962 to create the z-scores of each component. The mean here is lower due to our “high
impact” subsample (which is lower SES) and due to our sample being younger (and thus lower earnings etc) than the
pre-1962 sample.

22

In Table 5 we present the main results in the high impact sample by gender of the adult.27
We find quite striking evidence that the effects for economic self-sufficiency is large and
statistically significant for women, compared to the smaller and insignificant results for men.
This is consistent with the several studies that find larger impacts of post-natal, early life
interventions among girls (Anderson 2008, Bleakley 2007, Dahl and Lochner 2012, Field et al.
2009, Kling et al. 2007, Maccini and Yang 2009, Milligan and Stabile 2011). The estimates for
the effect of food stamps on metabolic syndrome are significant for both groups, but larger for
men than for women. The larger effects for men are consistent with the biological evidence that
males are more subject to harm in utero than females (Almond and Currie 2011a).28
Interestingly, the gender differences in self-reported health status show a different pattern, with
significant positive effects concentrated among women. In interpreting these gender differences,
it is important to point out that there is no evidence of pre-natal exposure to food stamps on live
births or infant mortality overall or by gender (Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2011); such
an effect, if present, suggests selective mortality which would cloud the interpretation of these
results.29
Identification in the model comes from variation in food stamp rollout across counties
and birth cohorts. Importantly, the food stamp program was expanded in the midst of the Great
Society, a time when many health and human capital programs were expanding across the U.S.
27

Table 5 shows that we have more women in our sample than men. This is a result of the fact that our sample
includes individuals in survey years when they are a head or spouse and is consistent with the analysis in Andreski
et al. (2009).
28
Males tend to suffer higher mortality rates in response to adverse events than females In addition to higher
mortality, males could also exhibit larger long-term effects if males suffer a more pronounced (unobserved) health
shock than females in response to the same event (e.g. Food Stamps).
29
Aside from biological factors, it is possible that post-natal treatment differs between girls and boys, and that this
might change with food stamp treatment. Interestingly, Lhila and Simon (2008) find that families with girls are more
likely to take up the WIC nutrition program post-natally.

23

Much of that policy variation resulted from state rather than county implementation. However, in
Table 6, we examine the sensitivity of our core health and economics outcomes, to adding
controls for county programs and resources available between ages 0 and 5. The first three
columns examine metabolic syndrome, where the first column repeats the main estimates from
Table 2, column 1. In the second column we add controls for access to health care resources
(hospitals per capita, hospital beds per capita, presence of community health centers). In the third
column we add controls for real per capita government transfers.30 We then repeat the three
specifications for the economic self-sufficiency index in columns 4 to 6. The table shows that our
results are highly robust to adding these controls.
An additional test for the validity of the design is to estimate the model by limiting the
sample to those who are unlikely to have been impacted by the program. In Table 7, we employ
this placebo test and limit to only those individuals from families with high levels of head’s
education (more than a high school education). These results show small, imprecise and
generally wrong-signed impacts for both health and economic outcomes. This adds support to
our approach.
The results so far show that in the high impact sample, we find that childhood exposure
to the food stamp program leads to robust and significant improvement in metabolic syndrome
(obesity, high blood pressure, heart disease and diabetes) for adult men and women. We also find
that childhood exposure to the safety net improves economic outcomes for adult women, but not
for men.
Full Sample Triple Difference
30

The number of observations declines when we add the county controls for government per capita transfers. This is
because the REIS data begins in 1959 and we therefore have to drop all observations with a year of birth 1958 or
earlier.

24

In choosing our preferred sample for this analysis, we face a tradeoff between sample
size (using the full sample of adults) and targeting (using the smaller high impact sample). To
build on the findings for the high impact sample, here we use the full sample of adults in our
PSID sample, but use a triple-difference specification that accounts for different probabilities of
being affected by food stamps. In particular, we augment model (1) above and estimate:

yicb     FSPcb   FSPcb Pg  X icb  c  b   t  g  s * b  CB60c *b  icb

(2)

To capture the varying risks of being treated we multiply the FSP treatment by a group level
food stamp participation rate (Bleakley 2007, Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2009). The group food
stamp participation rate Pg is defined for 12 groups using education (<12, 12, >12), race (white,
nonwhite), and marital status (married, not married) based on the family background of the adult.
We calculate the participation rate in the same fashion as discussed above (to convert intent-totreat to treatment-on-treated). In addition to the variables in the model (1), we add a main effect
for food stamp treatment, fixed effects for each group  g , and (although not shown in (2)),
interactions of Pg with demographics, year of birth and interview fixed effects, and 1960 county
characteristic trends. The coefficient on the main effect for food stamp treatment,  , represents
the impact for a participation rate of zero; therefore we expect this coefficient to be zero. In this
triple difference model, the maintained assumption is that there are no differential trends for high
participation versus low participation groups within early versus late implementing counties.
Results for this specification are presented in Table 8. Note that the main treatment
variable, FS Share IU-5, is interacted with the participation rate and therefore the coefficient
represents the impact of FSP exposure on health and economic outcome for someone who takes
up the program. Thus, these are treatment-on-the-treated estimates and should be compared to
the inflated estimates in the high impact sample.
25

The results in Table 8 show that full exposure to food stamps through age 5 leads to a 0.4
standard deviation reduction in metabolic syndrome and a 30 percentage point increase in
reporting good health. Economic self-sufficiency is improved, but not significantly. The
magnitudes are similar but somewhat smaller than the comparable results for the high impact
sample. Further, as expected the main effect on food stamp exposure (effect implied for a group
with a participation rate of 0) is very small and insignificant.
Does the Timing of Treatment Matter?
All the results thus far measure food stamp treatment as the share of time between
conception and age 5 that food stamps is in place in your county of birth. There are two reasons
to explore alternative specifications for exposure to the food stamps rollout. First, as discussed
above, the nature of our treatment is such that the policy turns on and does not turn off.
Therefore, when a child is treated in early life (e.g. age 0-5) they are also treated in later
childhood. Our estimates, therefore, may be reflecting more exposure than previously considered
which is important for interpreting the magnitudes of the effects. Second, the biological and
economic literature is not clear on when exposure to the safety net matters. Thus exploring
alternative specifications for food stamp exposure can provide new evidence on this important
issue. For this and the remainder of the results we return to the high impact sample.
To explore the timing of food stamp exposure more systematically, and to evaluate the
validity of the research design, we also estimate an event study model. In particular, these
estimates allow us to explore non-parametrically the relationship between age at initial rollout
and adult outcomes. In addition, we can use these results to rule out the presence of pre- (or
post-) trends that could lead to spurious findings. Specifically, we allow for the impact of FSP
program to vary with the age at FSP introduction in their county of birth. For example, a person
26

born in 1970 whose birth county implemented food stamps in 1975 would have an event time of
5. They would have event time of -5 if FSP was implemented in their birth county in 1965 (and
thus they were exposed during their entire childhood).
We estimate a version of model (1) where the main FSP effect (FSPcb) is replaced with a
series of dummies for whether the program was first implemented 5 or more years prior to birth,
4 or 3 years prior to birth, 2 or 1 year prior to birth, at birth or at age 1, at age 2 or 3, age 4 or 5,
and so on up to age 12 or later.31 We present results for metabolic syndrome index in Figure 4.
Note that these are the reverse of a typical event study graph, in that negative “event time” is the
case where a person was fully treated (food stamps was in place in their county prior to birth).
Further, treatment (exposure to the program) increases as we move from the right (treated in later
life) to the left (treated in early life).
While we do not have a strong prediction about the precise shape of the treatment effects,
our hypothesis is that the impact of the FSP treatment should decline as age at initial exposure
increases. Or to state the reverse, the younger the initial age of exposure the larger the
(cumulative) effect of the FSP. If exposure in later childhood does not matter, then the event
study coefficients should be flat on the right end of the graph (suggesting no “pre-trend”).
Eventually, once we hit the point in early childhood when exposure matters, a movement left
(towards earlier initial exposure) should reduce the metabolic syndrome index. Eventually, the
event study should be flat once exposure is “complete” (exposure is prior to conception or an
event time of -1 or before).
The results in Figure 4 are highly consistent with these predictions and quite encouraging
for our research design. They show that the largest effects of the food stamp treatment (in this
31

The omitted coefficient is for exposure at age 10-11, so all results are relative to exposure at that age.

27

case a reduction in metabolic syndrome is good and so a beneficial effect is represented by a
negative impact) are to those who are treated in utero and early childhood. The improvement in
health is steepest with additional exposure between conception and age 4 or 5. The results
suggest that the adult health impacts of the FSP are minimal if the child is exposed after age 5. It
is notable that for negative event time (fully exposed) the line is flat (and similarly that it is flat
across older ages)—this is an important result that can rule out that our estimates are identified
by cohort trends within counties.
Table 9 explores the issue of timing in the regression setting. Column 1 repeats the base
specification for metabolic syndrome, from Table 2 column 1. In the second column, we add a
second exposure variable for the share of months between age 6 and 18 that the adult was
exposed to food stamps. Consistent with the results in Figure 4, the 6-18 coefficient is small and
statistically insignificant; and its addition does not change the magnitude of the coefficient on the
early child exposure. In the third column, we include a dummy for whether food stamps was
available when the adult was in utero (specifically, we look whether the program is in place at
conception). The biological and economic literature predicts that we should see benefits to
exposure in utero. The estimate on in utero exposure is -0.11, implying that exposure in utero
reduces metabolic syndrome. These results are not conclusive (the p-value is 0.13) and, along
with the basic trends illustrated in Figure 1, suggest that we don’t have the power to separately
identify the in utero and share of childhood impacts. The remaining three columns repeat these
specifications for economic self-sufficiency. The results in column 5 suggest that food stamp
exposure in both early and later childhood is beneficial to adult economic outcomes. This is
consistent with a story where by children with better nutrition gain more from school which
translates into higher economic self-sufficiency. The basic patterns—effects on metabolic
28

syndrome result from pre- and early post-natal exposure whereas the effects on economic selfsufficiency result from childhood exposure—are an important result from the analysis.

8. Conclusion
In this paper, we present new evidence that expanding resources in utero and in early
childhood can lead to significant improvement in adult health. In particular, we use the rollout of
the most important cash or near cash safety net in the U.S., the food stamp program. We find that
access to food stamps in utero and in early childhood leads to significant reductions in metabolic
syndrome conditions (obesity, high blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes) in adulthood and, for
women, increases in economic self-sufficiency (increases in educational attainment, earnings,
income, and decreases in welfare participation). Further, we provide new evidence on when
exposure to additional resources matters—the gains are large an increasing with exposure to age
5. Beyond that point the additional resources do not translate into improved adult health
outcomes. These results pass several robustness tests including controlling for other county-year
of birth controls for the Great Society period, a placebo test, and event study models.
Given the near-cash nature of food stamp vouchers (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2009),
the exact biological mechanisms that lead to the long run improvement in health and human
capital is not clear. The availability of food stamps leads to more food consumption (Hoynes and
Schanzenbach 2009, Currie 2003) and thus one clear channel is through an increase in nutrition
in the critical in utero and early life period. Additionally, recent work suggests that additional
income can lead to reductions in cortisol in mothers, reducing biological harm due to persistent
stress (Aizer, Stroud, and Buka, 2009, Evans and Garthwaite 2011).

29

Because “long-term impacts can only be estimated for cohorts treated a long time ago,”
an intrinsic challenge is how to “generalize estimates of long-term effects to current policies”
(Ludwig and Miller, 2007). Some have argued birth weight is a relatively good proxy for the
long-term effect of early life health conditions (Behrman and Rosenzweig 2004, Black,
Devereux, and Salvanes 2007). If birth weight was a “sufficient statistic” for early life exposure,
this would facilitate more timely evaluations of shocks and treatments. However, evidence from
Dutch famine suggests otherwise: the cohort showing the largest birth weight decrease was
exposed to famine later in pregnancy, while the larger long-term morbidity effects appear for the
cohort exposed to famine earlier in pregnancy (Painter et al. 2005). Similarly, Kelly (2009) and
Royer (2009) find less consistent long-term effects of birth weight. In other words, birth weight
may be an unreliable metric of long-term health, and that from an empirical perspective an
important component of this effect remains latent early in life.
Moreover, our analysis finds effects for food stamp exposure through early childhood.
Thus, although in previous work we found that the FSP increased birth weight (Almond, Hoynes
and Schanzenbach 2011), the evidence presented here show that it is unlikely this is the only or
primary mechanism by which food stamps affects long run outcomes.

30

References
Acemouglu, Daron, David Autor and David Lyle,” Women War and Wages: The Impact of Female
Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Mid-Century”, Journal of Political Economy (2004), pp. 497551.
Aizer, Anna, Laura Stroud, and Stephen Buka. 2009. “Maternal Stress and Child Well-Being:
Evidence from Siblings.” Working paper.
Almond, Douglas. 2006. “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of in utero
Infl uenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population.” Journal of Political Economy, 114(4): 672–
712.
Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Chay and Michael Greenstone. 2007. “Civil Rights, the War on Poverty,
and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in the Rural South and Mississippi.” MIT
Department of Economics Working Paper No. 07-04.
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie (2011a) “Human Capital Development before Age Five”.
Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4b: Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, editors.
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie (2011b). “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25, 153-172.
Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, Hongbin Li, and Junsen Zhang (2010). “Long-Term Effects of
the 1959–61 China Famine: Mainland China and Hong Kong.” In The Economic Consequences of
Demographic Change in East Asia, NBER-EASE Vol. 19, ed. T. Ito and A. Rose, 321–50. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, and Mårten Palme (2009). “Chernobyl’s Subclinical Legacy:
Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 124(4): 1729–72.
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder (2011). “Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment:
The Effect of Ramadan Observance During Pregnancy,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 3 (October 2011), 56-85.
Almond, Douglas, Bhashkar Mazumder and Van Ewijk (2010) “Prenatal Ramadan Fasting and
Academic Outcomes in Britain”
Almond, Douglas, Hilary W. Hoynes and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach (2011). “Inside the War on
Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. 93, No. 2: 387-403.
Anderson, Michael (2008). “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, Vol. 103, No. 484.

31

Andreski, Patricia, Katherine McGonagle, and Bob Schoeni (2009). “An Analysis of the Quality of
the Health Data in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,” PSID Technical Series Paper #09-02.
Acemoglu, Daron, David H. Autor, and David Lyle. 2004. “Women, War, and Wages: The Effect of
Female Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Midcentury.” Journal of Political Economy, 112(3):
497–551.
Bailey, Martha (2012). “Reexamining the Impact of U.S. Family Planning Programs on Fertility:
Evidence from the War on Poverty and the Early Years of Title X,” AEJ Applied Economics 4 (2):
62-97.
Bailey, Martha and Andrew Goodman-Bacon (2012). “The War on Poverty's Experiment in Public
Medicine: Community Health Centers and the Mortality of Older Americans,” working paper,
University of Michigan.
Bane, Mary Jo and David Ellwood (1994). Welfare Realities: From Rhetoric to Reform, Harvard
University Press.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Tim Watts (2010). “Long-Run Health
Impacts of Income Shocks: Wine and Phylloxera in Nineteenth-Century France.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 92(4): 714–28.
Barker (1992). Fetal and infant origins of adult disease. London: British Medical Journal.
Barreca, Alan (2010). “The Long-Term Economic Impact of In Utero and Postnatal Exposure to
Malaria.” Journal of Human Resources, 45(4): 865–92.
Behrman, Jere R. and Mark R. Rosenzweig, “Returns to Birthweight”, The Review of Economics and
Statistics (2004), pp. 586-601
Berry, Jeffrey M. 1984. Feeding Hungry People: Rulemaking in the Food Stamp Program. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Bharadwaj, Prashant, Katrine Loken and Chrstopher Neilson 2012. Early-Life Health Interventions
and Academic Achievement. American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Bitler, Marianne and Hilary Hoynes (2010). “The State of the Safety Net in the Post-Welfare Reform
Era,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall 2010, pp. 71-127.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes (2007). “From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 409439
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
American South.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 73–117.
Bozzoli, Carlos, Angus Deaton, and Climent Quintana-Domeque (2009). “Adult Height and
Childhood Disease” Demography. 46(4): 647-649.

32

Cascio, Elizabeth, Nora Gordon, Ethan Lewis, and Sarah Reber (2010). “Paying for Progress:
Conditional Grants and the Desegregation of Southern Schools.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
125(1), 445-482, February 2010.
Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky and Christina Paxson (2002). “Economic Status and Health in
Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient”, American Economic Review pp. 1308-1334
Chay, Kenneth, Jonathan Guryan, and Bhashkar Mazumder (2012). “Birth Cohort and the BlackWhite Achievement Gap: The Role of Access and Health Soon After Birth” Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago Working Paper 2008-20.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Schanzenbach, and Danny
Yagan (2011) “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from
Project STAR.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1593-1660, 2011
Currie, Janet (2003). “U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs,” in Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the
United States, Robert Moffitt (ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Currie, Janet (2009). “Healthy, Wealthy, And Wise: Is There A Causal Relationship Between Child
Health And Human Capital Development?” Journal of Economic Literature, XLVII(1):87–122,
March 2009.
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti (2008). “Did the Introduction of Food Stamps Affect Birth
Outcomes in California?’’ in R. Schoeni, J. House, G. Kaplan, and H. Pollack, (Eds.), Making
Americans Healthier: Social and Economic Policy as Health Policy, (New York: Russell Sage
Press).
Cutler, David M., Angus S. Deaton and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2006). “The Determinants of
Mortality,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, pp. 97-120
Dahl, Gordon and Lance Lochner 2012. “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
Evidence from Changes in the Earned Income Tax Credit,” American Economic Review Vol. 102,
No. 5, pp. 1927-1956.
Dehejia, Rajeev and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2004). “Booms, Busts, and Babies' Health”, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 1091-1130
Duncan, Greg, Kathleen M. Ziol-Guest, and Ariel Kalil (2010). “Early-Childhood Poverty and Adult
Attainment, Behavior, and Health”, Child Development, Volume 81, Number 1, Pages 306–325.
Dynarski, Susan, Joshua M. Hyman, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach (2011). “Experimental
Evidence on the Effect of Childhood Investments on Postsecondary Attainment and Degree
Completion” NBER working paper 17533.
Eisinger, Peter (1998). Toward an End to Hunger. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Evans, William and Craig Garthwaite. 2011. Giving Mom a Break: The Effect of Higher EITC
Payments on Maternal Health, working paper.

33

Field, Erica, Omar Robles, and Maximo Torero (2009). “Iodine Deficiency and Schooling
Attainment in Tanzania,” AEJ Applied.
Finkelstein, Amy, and Robin McKnight. 2008. “What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of
Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending.” Journal of Public Economics,
92(7):1644–68.
Fritzsimons, Emla and Marcos Vera-Hernandez (2012) “Breastfeeding and Children’s
Development.” Manuscript, University College London.
Glied, Sherry and Neidell, Matthew (2010). “The Economic Value of Teeth”, Journal of Human
Resources, pp. 468-496
Gluckman, Peter and Mark Hanson (2004). The Fetal Matrix: Evolution, Development and Disease.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heckman, James J. and Dimitriy V. Masterov (2007). “The Productivity Argument for Investing in
Young Children”, Review of Agricultural Economics, pp. 446-493
Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach (2009) “Consumption Reponses to In-Kind
Transfers: Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics Vol. 1, No. 4, October 2009, pp. 109-139.
Hoynes, Hilary, Marianne Page, and Ann Stevens. 2011. “Can Targeted Transfers Improve
Birth Outcomes? Evidence from the Introduction of the WIC Program.” Journal of Public
Economics, 95(7–8): 813–27.
Internal Revenue Service (2012). http://www.eitc.irs.gov/central/eitcstats/, accessed 9/1/12.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman and Lawrence Katz (2007). “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects,” Econometrica, Vol. 75, No. 1 (January, 2007), 83–119.
Kelly, Elaine (2009). “The scourge of Asian Flu: in utero exposure to pandemic influenza and the
development of a cohort of British children”, Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Lewit, Eugene and Nancy Kerrebrock (1997). “Population-Based Growth Stunting,” The Future of
Children Vol. 7, No. 2, Summer/Fall 1997.
Lhila, Aparna and Kosali Simon (2008). “Prenatal Health Investment Decisions: Does the Child’s
Sex Matter?” Demography, 45(4): 885–905.
Ludwig, Jens and Douglas L. Miller (2007). “Does Head Start Improve Children's Life Chances?
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 159-208
Maccini, Sharon, and Dean Yang. 2009. “Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic
Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall.” American Economic Review, 99(3): 1006–26.
MacDonald, Maurice (1977). Food, Stamps, and Income Maintenance (Madison, WI: Institute for
Poverty Research).

34

McDowell, Margaret, Cheryl Fryar, Cynthia Ogden, and Katherine Flegal (2008). “Anthropometric
Reference Data for Children and Adults: United States, 2003–2006”, National Health Statistics
Reports, Number 1, October 22, 2008.
Milligan, Kevin and Mark Stabile (2011). “Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Wellbeing of Children?
Evidence from Canadian Child Benefit Expansions.” American Economic Journal Economic Policy,
Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 175-205.
Nilsson, Peter (2009). “The Long-term Effects of Early Childhood Lead Exposure: Evidence from
Sharp Changes in Local Air Lead Levels Induced by the Phase-Out of Leaded Gasoline.”
Painter, Rebecca C., Tessa J. Roseboom and Otto P. Bleker (2005). “Prenatal exposure to the Dutch
famine and disease in later life: An overview”, Reproductive Toxicology, pp. 345-352
Paxson, Christina, Elisabeth Donahue, C. Tracy Orleans and Jeanne Ann Grisso (2006). “Childhood
Obesity: Introducing the Issue”, The Future of Children, pp. 3-18
Reyes, Jessica Wolpaw (2007). “Environmental Policy as Social Policy? The Impact of Childhood
Lead Exposure on Crime”, B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 7:1 (Contributions),
October 2007 (2007).
Royer, Heather (2009). “Separated at Girth: US Twin Estimates of the Effects of Birth Weight”,
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, pp. 49-85
Short, Kathleen "The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2010." Current Population Reports
P60-241. U.S. Census Bureau, November 2011.
Snyder, Stephen E and Evans, William N (2006). “The Effect of Income on Mortality: Evidence
from the Social Security Notch”, Review of Economics and Statistics, pp. 482-495
Sullivan, Daniel and Till Von Wachter (2009). “Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis using
Administrative Data”, August 2009, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Susser, ES and SP Lin (1992), “Schizophrenia after Prenatal Exposure to the Dutch Hunger Winter
of 1944-1945,” Archives of General Psychiatry 49(12): 983-8.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, ‘‘Food Stamp Program, Year-End Participation and Bonus Coupons
Issues,’’ technical report, Food and Nutrition Service, (various years).
U.S. Department of Agriculture (2012), Food and Nutrition Service,
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/SNAPsummary.htm, accessed 9/1/12.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2012), Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation, www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofs/data/index.html, accessed 9/1/12.
Van Den Berg, Gerard J., Maarten Lindeboom and France Portrait (2006). “Economic Conditions
Early in Life and Individual Mortality”, American Economic Review, pp. 290-302.

35

Van Ewijk, Reyn (2009). “Long-Term Health Effects on The Next Generation Of Ramadan Fasting
During Pregnancy.” April 2009. CEP Discussion Paper No 926.

36

Figure 1: Weighted Percent of Counties with Food Stamp Program, 1960‐1975

Counties Participating in FSP (weighted %)

100
1961: Pilot
Programs
Initiated

1964 FSA:
Counties Can
Start FSP

80

60

1973 Amend:
Mandatory FSP
by 1975

40

20

0
1960

1962

1964

1966

1968

1970

1972

Source: Authors’ tabulations of food stamp administrative data (U.S. Department of
Agriculture, various years). Counties are weighted by their 1960 population.

37

1974

Figure 2: Food Stamp Program Start Date, By County (1961‐1975)

Note: Authors’ tabulations of food stamp administrative data (U.S. Department of Agriculture, various years). The shading corresponds to
the county FSP start date, where darker shading indicated later county implementation.
38

Figure 3: Food Stamp Exposure in Early Life, Variation by Birth Cohort
1.0
0.9

FSP age 6-18
0.8
0.7
0.6

FSP age 0-5

0.5

FSP in utero

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1956

1958

1960

1962

1964

1966

1968

1970

1972

1974

1976

1978

1980

Note: Authors’ tabulations of food stamp administrative data (U.S. Department of Agriculture,
various years) and PSID sample.

39

Figure 4
Event Study Estimates of the Impact of FSP Exposure on Metabolic Syndrome Index
High Impact Sample
0.4

Outcome = Metabolic Syndrome (Index)
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
‐5+

‐4 to ‐3

‐2 to ‐1

0 to 1

2 to 3

4 to 5

6 to 7

8 to 9

10 to 11

12+

‐0.1
‐0.2
‐0.3
‐0.4
‐0.5
‐0.6

Fully Treated,
FSP in place
prior to birth

Birth
year

Partially treated,
FSP implemented
in early childhood

Untreated
in early
childhood

Age at FSP Introduction in County

Notes: The figure plots coefficients from an event‐study analysis. Event time is defined as age
when FSP is implemented in the birth county. The models are estimated for the sample of
individuals born into families where the head has less than a high school education. Age 10‐11
is the omitted year so estimates are relative to that point. See the text for a description of the
model.

40

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics
FS share age IU‐5
Health Outcomes
Metabolic Health Index
In good health =1
Disabled =1
Diabetes =1
High blood pressure =1
Obesity =1
Heart Disease = 1
Heart Attack = 1
Healthy weight =1
BMI
Body weight (pounds)
Height (inches)
Height below 5th pctile
Economic Outcomes
Economic Outcome Index
Education High School Plus
Log(Total Fam Income)
Earnings (including 0s)
Employed =1
Poverty = 1
Food stamp receipt
TANF Receipt
Health Behaviors
Ever Smoked
Drink Any
Demographics
Male
Nonwhite
High School Grad
Greater than High School
Age
Maried
Family Background
Female headed household
Income to needs ratio (5‐yr average)
Head less than high school education
1960 County Characteristics
Population
Fraction of land, farmland
Fraction of population, urban
Fraction of population, black
Retirement Transfers Per Capita, 0 ‐5 Avg
Medicare Transfers Per Capita, 0‐5 Avg
Other Public Assistance Per Capita, 0‐5 Avg
Number of Hospital Beds, 0‐5 Avg
Number of Hospitals, 0‐5 Avg
CHC Share, Age 0‐5

Full Sample
N
Mean
60782
0.370

High Impact Sample
N
Mean
28808
0.338

22070
60757
60753
22546
22544
24127
22543
22548
24127
24127
24645
24589
24589

‐0.079
0.679
0.096
0.041
0.133
0.240
0.019
0.006
0.408
26.862
193.148
67.760
0.011

9097
28833
28827
9321
9319
10209
9320
9323
10209
10209
10461
10428
10428

0.010
0.581
0.118
0.054
0.187
0.322
0.028
0.008
0.322
28.255
202.688
67.427
0.016

57585
60106
60599
59136
60843
60599
60665
60839

‐0.051
0.903
10.847
35047
0.864
0.184
0.085
0.033

27303
28663
28706
27862
28881
28706
28759
28873

‐0.304
0.786
10.435
23473
0.739
0.339
0.157
0.061

22548
22493

0.447
0.703

9318
9300

0.522
0.600

60898
60777
60106
60106
60898
60897

0.462
0.171
0.390
0.502
32.135
0.585

28905
28823
28663
28663
28905
28904

0.442
0.317
0.500
0.286
32.126
0.542

60898
60898
60496

0.094
2.365
0.345

28905
28905
28905

0.161
1.512
1.000

60882
60882
60882
60882
48009
47568
47568
58098
58098
60898

593,051
48.4
67.0
9.6
928.29
149.71
195.03
4.608
0.036
0.100

28905
28905
28905
28905
21984
21661
21661
27274
27274
28905

514,635
49.4
61.4
13.8
876.26
125.15
194.66
4.494
0.040
0.073

Notes: Author’s tabulations of 1968‐2009 PSID. Sample consists of heads and wives born between 1956‐
1981. Observations from Alaska are dropped because of missing data on food stamp program start date. For
details on sample selection see text.

41

Table 2
Metabolic Syndrome Index for High Impact Sample
Components of metabolic syndrome index
Metabolic syndrome
(index)

Heart
disease

Heart attack

‐0.053
(0.027)

‐0.031
(0.019)

0.33

0.03

0.01

9,217
0.26

8,430
0.13

8,432
0.08

‐0.294***
(0.107)

Diabetes
‐0.032
(0.048)

High blood
pressure
‐0.13
(0.086)

Obesity
‐0.159*
(0.086)

Mean of dep var

0.01

0.05

0.19

Observations
R‐squared

8,246
0.26

8,431
0.19

8,430
0.22

FS share IU‐5

Table 3
Additional Health Outcomes for the High Impact Sample

FS share IU‐5

Y‐mean
Observations
R‐squared

Other health outcomes
In good
Height below
health
Disabled
5th perc.
0.110
‐0.004
‐0.060**
(0.074)
(0.039)
(0.026)

Health behaviors
Ever
smoked
Drink any
‐0.056
‐0.023
(0.064)
(0.049)

0.59

0.12

0.02

0.44

0.70

25,738
0.16

25,731
0.13

9,398
0.22

20,946
0.19

20,896
0.18

Notes to Tables 2 and 3: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on FSP
exposure (share of months between conception and age 5 that FSP is in the county). The sample comes from
the 1968‐2009 PSID and includes heads and wives born between 1956‐1981 who are between 18 and 53 (or
24‐53 for economic outcomes). The high impact sample includes those born into families where the head had
less than a high school education. Estimates are weighted using the PSID weights and clustered on county of
birth. The models control for individual demographics, family background, and fixed effects for year of birth,
year of interview, county, state specific linear cohort, and 1960 county characters interacted with linear
cohort. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at
the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.

42

Table 4
Economic Self‐Sufficiency in the High Impact Sample
Components of economic self sufficiency index
Economic self
High school
sufficiency (index)
plus
FS share IU‐5

Not on food
stamps

Not on
TANF

Employed

Earnings

log(family
income)

0.182
(0.124)

0.184*
(0.108)

0.052
(0.067)

0.032
(0.052)

0.023
(0.026)

‐0.008
(0.056)

3610
(5,064)

0.247
(0.165)

‐0.25

0.80

0.70

0.86

0.95

0.76

24495

10.52

20,115
0.38

21,197
0.29

21,209
0.30

20,115
0.38

21,347
0.16

21,348
0.18

20,529
0.34

21,160
0.37

Y‐mean
Observations
R‐squared

Not Poor

Table 5
Metabolic Syndrome and Economic Self‐Sufficiency in the High Impact Sample, by Gender
Women

Men

Metabolic
syndrome
(index)

Good
Health

Economic self
sufficiency
(index)

Metabolic
syndrome
(index)

Good
Health

Economic self
sufficiency
(index)

‐0.312**
(0.130)

0.336***
(0.100)

0.306*
(0.164)

‐0.526**
(0.251)

‐0.077
(0.112)

0.005
(0.168)

Mean of Dependent Var

0.03

0.53

‐0.37

‐0.01

0.66

‐0.11

Observations
R‐squared

5,062
0.37

15,702
0.22

12,208
0.43

3,184
0.32

10,036
0.18

7,907
0.46

FS Share IU‐5

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on FSP exposure (share of
months between conception and age 5 that FSP is in the county). The sample comes from the 1968‐2009
PSID and includes heads and wives born between 1956‐1981 who are between 18 and 53 (or 24‐53 for
economic outcomes). The high impact sample includes those born into families where the head had less than
a high school education. Estimates are weighted using the PSID weights and clustered on county of birth. The
models control for individual demographics, family background, and fixed effects for year of birth, year of
interview, county, state specific linear cohort, and 1960 county characters interacted with linear cohort.
Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%,
5% and 10% levels.

43

Table 6
Metabolic Syndrome and Economic Self‐Sufficiency in the High Impact Sample, Adding County
Controls
Metabolic syndrome (index)
FS share IU‐5

Economic Self Sufficiency (index)

‐0.294***
(0.107)

‐0.200**
(0.079)

‐0.209**
(0.081)

0.182
(0.124)

0.171
(0.125)

0.210
(0.150)

Y‐mean

0.01

0.01

‐0.02

‐0.25

‐0.27

‐0.26

Observations
R‐squared

8,246
0.26

7,737
0.27

6,561
0.26

20,115
0.38

18,992
0.38

13,268
0.37

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X

Hospitals, beds per capita
Community health center
REIS real per capita transfers

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on FSP exposure (share of
months between conception and age 5 that FSP is in the county). The sample comes from the 1968‐2009
PSID and includes heads and wives born between 1956‐1981 who are between 18 and 53 (or 24‐53 for
economic outcomes). The high impact sample includes those born into families where the head had less than
a high school education. Estimates are weighted using the PSID weights and clustered on county of birth. The
models control for individual demographics, family background, and fixed effects for year of birth, year of
interview, county, state specific linear cohort, and 1960 county characters interacted with linear cohort. The
additional county controls are annual averages from birth to age 5. Standard errors are in parentheses and
***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.

44

Table 7
Placebo Test: Metabolic Syndrome and Economic Self‐Sufficiency for High Education Group

FS share IU‐5

Metabolic syndrome
(index)

Economic Self Sufficiency
(index)

‐0.013
(0.060)

0.073
(0.087)

‐0.17

0.22

5,398
0.24

10,180
0.33

obesity, high blood
pressure

employed, earnings, TANF

good health, disability,
diabetes, heart disease

education, family income,
food stamps

Y‐mean
Observations
R‐squared

"right" signed components

"wrong" signed components

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on FSP exposure (share of
months between conception and age 5 that FSP is in the county). The sample comes from the 1968‐2009
PSID and includes heads and wives born between 1956‐1981 who are between 18 and 53 (or 24‐53 for
economic outcomes). The sample includes those born into families where the head had a high school
education or more. Estimates are weighted using the PSID weights and clustered on county of birth. The
models control for individual demographics, family background, and fixed effects for year of birth, year of
interview, county, state specific linear cohort, and 1960 county characters interacted with linear cohort.
Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and * indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%,
5% and 10% levels.

45

Table 8
Triple Difference Estimates for Metabolic Syndrome and Economic Self‐Sufficiency, Full Sample

FS Share IU‐5 * Pg

FS share IU‐5

Mean of Dependent Var
Observations
R‐squared

Metabolic syndrome
(index)

Good Health

Economic self
sufficiency (index)

‐0.438**
(0.204)

0.292**
(0.133)

0.400
(0.323)

‐0.032
(0.073)

‐0.021
(0.051)

‐0.045
(0.083)

‐0.08

0.68

0.69

19,948
0.20

54,787
0.13

43,117
0.35

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on FSP exposure (share of
months between conception and age 5 that FSP is in the county) interacted with a group specific FSP
participation rate. The sample comes from the 1968‐2009 PSID and includes heads and wives born between
1956‐1981 who are between 18 and 53 (or 24‐53 for economic outcomes). The sample includes those born
into families where the head had a high school education or more. Estimates are weighted using the PSID
weights and clustered on county of birth. The models control for individual demographics, family
background, and fixed effects for year of birth, year of interview, county, state specific linear cohort, and
1960 county characters interacted with linear cohort. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and *
indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.

46

Table 9
Metabolic Syndrome and Economic Self‐Sufficiency in the High Impact Sample, Alternative
Specifications for Timing of Exposure
Metabolic syndrome (index)
FS share IU‐5

‐0.294***
(0.107)

FS share 6‐18

‐0.279**
(0.127)

‐0.241**
(0.111)

Economic Self Sufficiency (index)
0.182
(0.124)

0.060
(0.270)

FS in 1st trimester

0.383**
(0.185)

0.159
(0.116)

0.729*
(0.428)
‐0.107
(0.070)

0.069
(0.080)

Y‐mean

‐0.01

‐0.01

‐0.01

‐0.25

‐0.25

‐0.25

Observations
R‐squared

8,246
0.26

8,246
0.26

8,246
0.26

20,115
0.38

20,115
0.38

20,115
0.38

Notes: Each parameter is from a separate regression of the outcome variable on FSP exposure (share of
months between conception and age 5 that FSP is in the county) interacted with a group specific FSP
participation rate. The sample comes from the 1968‐2009 PSID and includes heads and wives born between
1956‐1981 who are between 18 and 53 (or 24‐53 for economic outcomes). The sample includes those born
into families where the head had a high school education or more. Estimates are weighted using the PSID
weights and clustered on county of birth. The models control for individual demographics, family
background, and fixed effects for year of birth, year of interview, county, state specific linear cohort, and
1960 county characters interacted with linear cohort. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***, **, and *
indicate that the estimates are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.

47

