NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE, DOMESTIC FRICTIONS, AND SCALE EFFECTS
Natalia Ramondo
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
Milagro Saborío-Rodríguez
Working Paper 18532
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18532
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

We have benefited from comments and suggestions from Jim Anderson, Lorenzo Caliendo, Arnaud
Costinot, Jonathan Eaton, Cecile Gaubert, Keith Head, Pete Klenow, Sam Kortum, David Lagakos,
Thierry Mayer, Benjamin Moll, Peter Morrow, Steve Redding, and Mike Waugh, as well as seminar
participants at various conferences and institutions. We thank David Schönholzer for his excellent
research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Natalia Ramondo, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Milagro Saborío-Rodríguez. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade, Domestic Frictions, and Scale Effects
Natalia Ramondo, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Milagro Saborío-Rodríguez
NBER Working Paper No. 18532
November 2012, Revised October 2014
JEL No. F0,F43,O0,O40
ABSTRACT
Because of scale effects, idea-based growth models have the counterfactual implication that larger
countries should be much richer than smaller ones. New trade models share this same problematic
feature: although small countries gain more from trade than large ones, this is not strong enough to
offset the underlying scale effects. In fact, new trade models exhibit other counterfactual implications
associated with scale effects – in particular, domestic trade shares and relative income levels increase
too steeply with country size. We argue that these implications are largely a result of the standard assumption
that countries are fully integrated domestically, as if they were a single dot in space. We depart from
this assumption by treating countries as collections of regions that face positive costs to trade amongst
themselves. The resulting model is largely consistent with the data. For example, for a small and rich
country like Denmark, our calibrated model implies a real per-capita income of 81 percent the United
States’s, much closer to the data (94 percent) than the trade model with no domestic frictions (40 percent).
Natalia Ramondo
University of California at San Diego
IRPS
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519
LA Jolla, CA 92093-0519
nramondo@ucsd.edu
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
University of California at Berkeley
Department of Economics
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
andres1000@gmail.com

Milagro Saborío-Rodríguez
Department of Agricultural Economics
and Rural Sociology
Pennsylvania State University
308 Armsby Building
University Park, PA 16801
msaborio@catie.ac.cr

1

Introduction

Scale effects are so central a feature of innovation-led growth theory that, in Jones’s (2005)
words, "rejecting one is largely equivalent to rejecting the other." Because of scale effects,
idea-based growth models such as Jones (1995) and Kortum (1997) imply that larger countries should be richer than smaller ones.1 There is some disagreement in the literature on
whether such scale effects are present in the data, but it is safe to say that they are very
small compared to those implied by the theory.2
New trade models such as Krugman (1980), Eaton and Kortum (2001) and Melitz
(2003) are also idea-based models, and carry the same counterfactual implication that real
income per capita strongly increases with country size.3 One might expect scale effects
in such models to be offset by the fact that small countries tend to gain more from trade
than large ones. It turns out, however, that although small countries do gain more from
trade, these gains are not large enough to neutralize the underlying scale effects. In fact,
new trade models exhibit other counterfactual implications associated with scale effects
– in particular, domestic trade shares and relative income levels increase too steeply with
country size.
Our paper argues that these counterfactual scale effects are largely a result of the crude
way in which geography has been treated in these growth and trade models. The usual
assumption is that countries are fully integrated domestically, as if they were a single dot
in space. We depart from this assumption by treating countries as a group of regions that
share a common labor market while facing positive costs to trade amongst themselves.
We study the qualitative and quantitative implications of these domestic frictions, and
show that they partially offset the scale effects present in the model, leading to a better
match with the data.
Previous literature has highlighted the importance of domestic trade costs. For the
United States, Hilberry and Hummels (2008) find that manufacturing shipments between
1

First-generation endogenous growth models such as Romer (1990), Grossman and Helpman (1991), and
Aghion and Howitt (1992) feature “strong” scale effects, whereby scale increases growth, whereas secondgeneration semi-endogenous growth models such as Jones (1995), Kortum (1997), Aghion and Howitt (1998,
Ch. 12), Dinopoulos and Thompson (1998), Peretto (1998), and Young (1998), feature “weak” scale effects,
whereby scale increases income levels rather than growth (see Jones, 2005, for a detailed discussion). Models that do not display any scale effects, such as Lucas (2009), Alvarez, Buera, and Lucas (2013), and Lucas
and Moll (2013), depart from the standard assumption that ideas are non-rival by assuming that (1) knowledge can only be used in production when it is embodied in individuals with limited time endowments,
and that (2) individuals face search frictions in learning about better ideas.
2
Rose (2006) conducts an empirical investigation of scale effects and finds none. The calibrated growth
model in Jones (2002) implies an income-size elasticity of one fifth.
3
We cite Eaton and Kortum (2001) rather than Eaton and Kortum (2002) because technology levels are
endogenous in the former and exogeneous in the latter.

1

establishments in the same zip-code are three times larger than between establishments
in different zip codes. Agnosteva, Anderson, and Yotov (2013) calculate domestic trade
costs for inter-provincial trade in Canada to be 109 percent, while Tombe and Winter
(2014) find domestic trade costs within the United States, Canada, and China, between
100 and 140 percent. The calibrated model of domestic trade and economic geography by
Allen and Arkolakis (2014) implies average trade costs between metropolitan areas of the
United States of 55 percent.
Section 2 presents the model and studies the implications of domestic frictions at a
theoretical level. We build on the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model—henceforth EK—at
the level of regions and then focus on the country-level implications. We assume that
there is full labor mobility across regions within countries and that workers have heterogeneous productivity across regions. Specifically, each worker independently draws his
or her productivity in each region from a given distribution. Not surprisingly, if there
are no domestic frictions, our model is isomorphic to EK in terms of trade flows and real
income levels. In the presence of domestic frictions, the behavior of the model depends
on whether regions within each country are symmetric or asymmetric.
If regions are symmetric, the model displays the same gravity equation for countrylevel trade flows as in EK, and country-level gains from trade can be computed using
the formula in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012)—henceforth, the ACR
formula. These two results no longer hold when regions are asymmetric, but we establish
two useful results for this case. First, if international trade costs are compatible with a
hub-and-spoke structure then country-level trade flows satisfy a gravity equation that is
similar to the one in EK (and Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003), except that multilateral
resistance terms have to be constructed as averages of region-level variables. Second, we
provide a generalization of the ACR formula to the case of multi-region countries with
domestic frictions. As in Redding (2014), computing gains from trade now requires trade
shares between all regions of the country rather than just a country-level measure of the
domestic trade share.
Section 3 focuses on scale effects. We start by allowing technology levels, which were
assumed exogenous in Section 2, to be proportional to the size of the economy, as in
Krugman (1980), Eaton and Kortum (2001) and Melitz (2003). We show that this assumption leads to aggregate economies of scale which are (partially) offset by the presence of
domestic frictions. Intuitively, to the extent that large countries are composed of more regions, trade costs among regions reduce the advantage of country size and weaken scale
effects.
Section 4 calibrates the model using data on population and geography for 287 metropoli2

tan areas, international trade flows for 26 OECD countries, and intra-national trade flows
for the United States. We calibrate the key parameter determining the strength of economies
of scale by appealing to the growth and trade literatures, as well as cross-country estimates of scale effects. Trade costs between regions, both within and across countries, are
estimated from distance data between metropolitan areas.
The calibration reveals that domestic frictions greatly improve the fit of the trade
model with the data. In particular, domestic frictions cut in half the model’s implied
elasticity of productivity with respect to country size, getting closer to the small elasticity
we observe in the data. To illustrate this result, consider the case of Denmark. Given
its small size relative to the United States, the model with no domestic frictions implies
that its productivity level would be 38 percent of the US level while in the data this is 94
percent. In contrast, our calibrated model implies a relative productivity level for Denmark of 81. Domestic frictions also make the model better match observed import shares,
relative income levels, and prices.
Section 5 compares the implications of the calibrated model to those of a simpler
model with domestic frictions but symmetric regions. The symmetric model is quite attractive because it retains many of the convenient features of EK, including the standard
country-level gravity equation and the validity of the ACR formula for the gains from
trade, and yet it does a better job in matching the data than EK thanks to the presence of
domestic frictions. We find that the symmetric model approximates quite well the calibrated model and conclude that the model with symmetric regions and domestic frictions
strikes a good balance between the convenience of the gravity model with no domestic
frictions and the goodness of fit of the general model as calibrated in Section 4.
Our paper makes a contribution to an emerging literature exploring the interaction between international trade and domestic economic geography using quantitative models—
see Redding (2014), Fajgelbaum and Redding (2014), and Cosar and Fajgelbaum (2014).
Of these papers, the closest to ours is Redding (2014), who also extends the EK model by
having countries as collections of regions sharing a single labor market. Redding (2014)
focuses on the gains from trade at the region level, and shows that such gains differ from
the ACR formula because of the presence of congestion effects. In our model there are no
congestion effects and region-level gains from trade are still given by the ACR formula.
More importantly, our focus is on trade flows and real wages at the level of countries
rather than regions. In particular, we quantify the extent to which domestic frictions improve the fit of the standard trade model with the country-level data, devoting special
attention to scale effects.
Our paper is related to a literature that studies the relationship between country size,
3

openness, and productivity. Jones (2005) discusses the implications of alternative growth
models for scale effects. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) and Anderson and Yotov
(2010) show that in a standard gravity model, under some special conditions, home bias
increases with country size, leading to lower import shares for larger countries. At the
empirical level, Redding and Venables (2004) and Head and Mayer (2011) show that
income increases with a measure of "market potential," which is increasing in country
size, while Ades and Glaeser (1999), Alesina, Spolaore, and Wacziarg (2000), Frankel and
Romer (1999), and Alcala and Ciccone (2004) document a positive effect of country size
and trade openness on income levels. Other papers fail to find a positive effect of country
size on productivity – see Rose (2006). Our contribution to this literature is to show that,
relative to the data, country-level scale effects are too strong in models without domestic
trade costs, and that adding these costs allows the model to better matches the observed
relationship between country size and productivity, import shares, relative income levels,
and prices.4
Alvarez and Lucas (2007) and Waugh (2010) calibrate an Eaton and Kortum (2002)
model to match observed trade flows and cross-country income levels. Both of these
calibrations assume that there are no domestic trade costs, but allow technology levels
to vary across countries. In fact, strong scale effects are avoided in these two calibrated
models by having technology levels that decrease rapidly with country size. Since it is
hard to defend such systematic variation in the level of technologies, we calibrate the
technology parameters to observed R&D intensities, which do not vary systematically
with size in our sample of OECD countries.
We acknowledge that small countries can avoid the disadvantage of their size by using foreign ideas. Loosely speaking, technology levels vary less than proportionally with
country size if countries share ideas through technology diffusion, and this will weaken
country-level scale effects. In a working-paper version of this paper we have explored the
robustness of our results to allowing for one particular channel for international technology diffusion, namely multinational production.5 The benefit of focusing on this channel
is that multinational production in the model can be mapped directly to data (Ramondo
and Rodriguez-Clare, 2013). We find that our results are robust to this extension: scale
effects are too strong in a model with trade and multinational production, but adding
domestic frictions significantly decreases the gap between model and data. In the Con4

When estimating market potential, Redding and Venables (2004) and Head and Mayer (2011) recognized the importance of domestic frictions and estimated gravity equations that include the domestic trade
pair and a measure of internal distance (e.g., a transformation of country area) to proxy for domestic trade
costs. They did not explore, however, the role of domestic frictions on cross-country income levels and
import shares.
5
See Ramondo, Rodríguez-Clare, and Saborío-Rodríguez (2012).

4

clusion we briefly discuss the challenges in allowing for other channels for international
technology diffusion.

2

Model

In this section we present a trade model in which countries are defined as collections
of economies sharing a single labor market. We start with the Ricardian trade model
developed by Eaton and Kortum (2002)—henceforth EK—but applied here to subnational
economies, or "regions," which exhibit an elastic labor supply thanks to labor mobility
within countries. After presenting the basic assumptions and defining the equilibrium,
we show that if there are no domestic trade costs then our model generates exactly the
same country-level implications as the EK model. We then consider a simple departure
from the case of zero domestic trade costs, namely one in which regions belonging to the
same country are fully symmetric. This case is particularly interesting because it leads to
very similar results to the EK model for the gravity equation and for trade flows, and yet
shows clearly how domestic trade costs affect real wages. We then allow for asymmetric
regions and discuss conditions under which the model still exhibits a standard gravity
equation for country-level trade flows. Finally, we discuss how the presence of domestic
trade costs affects the gains from trade.

2.1

Set up

There are M subnational economies, or "regions", indexed by m and N countries indexed
by n. Let Ωn be the set of regions belonging to country n and Mn be the number of regions
in that set. Labor is the only factor of production, available in quantity Ln in country n.
There is a continuum of goods in the interval [0, 1], and preferences are CES with
elasticity of substitution σ. Technologies are linear with good-specific productivities in
region m drawn from a Fréchet distribution with parameters θ > σ − 1 and Tm . These
draws are independent across goods and across countries. There are iceberg trade costs
dmk ≥ 1 to export from k to m, with dmm = 1 and dmk ≤ dml dlk for all m, l, k (triangular
inequality). There is perfect competition.
There is perfect labor mobility within countries, but workers have heterogeneous productivity across regions. We model this heterogeneity by assuming that each worker in
country n draws an efficiency parameter zm in each region m ∈ Ωn from a Fréchet distribution with parameters κ > 1 and Am . These draws are independent across workers and
5

across regions.
In this section we treat technology levels Tm as exogeneous and show that these technology levels along with trade costs and the Am parameters determine the location of
workers within each country. For the purposes of this section, we could have assumed
that workers were homogeneous, in which case technology levels and trade costs alone
would determine the equilibrium location of workers. We introduce worker heterogeneity because this will be critical to have a non-degenerate spatial equilibrium when we allow for scale effects in Section 3. In that section we make technology levels endogeneous
to population by assuming that Tm scales up proportionally with population in region m.
Under that assumption, but without heterogeneity (i.e., with κ → ∞), all workers would
tend to move to a single region.6

2.2

Equilibrium

Bilateral trade flows between regions satisfy the standard expression in the EK model,
Tk w−θ d−θ
Xmk = P k −θmk−θ Xm ,
l Tl wl dml

(1)

where wk is the wage per efficiency unit in region k and Xm ≡
in region m. In turn, price indices are

P

k

Xmk is total expenditure

!−1/θ
Pm = µ−1

X

Tk wk−θ d−θ
mk

,

(2)

k

+ 1)1/(σ−1) > 0.
where µ ≡ Γ( 1−σ
θ
Workers choose to live in the region where their real income is highest. A worker
in country n with productivity zm for each m ∈ Ωn chooses to live in m if and only if
zm0 wm0 /Pm0 ≤ zm wm /Pm for all m0 ∈ Ωn .7 The following lemma characterizes the equilibrium allocation of workers to regions.
Lemma 1. The share of workers in country n that locates in region m ∈ Ωn is
π m = Am (wm /Pm )κ /Vnκ
6

(3)

An alternative and perhaps more standard approach in the literature is to assume that there is a fixed
supply of "housing" in each region—see Helpman (1998) and Redding (2014). We chose worker heterogeneity rather than housing because it is more suitable to be integrated into the EK framework.
7
If zm0 wm0 /Pm0 = zm wm /Pm , the worker is indifferent between m0 and m. We ignore this possibility
since it is a measure-zero event that has no impact on the equilibrium variables.

6

where

!1/κ
Vn ≡

X

κ

Am (wm /Pm )

,

(4)

m∈Ωn

while the total efficiency units of labor supplied in region m are
Em = γLn Vn π m (wm /Pm )−1 ,

(5)

where γ ≡ Γ(1 − 1/κ) > 0.
Equation (3) reveals that the labor supply to each region has an elasticity of κ. The
case of homogeneous workers arises in the limit as κ → ∞, which implies that the labor
supply to each region becomes perfectly elastic.8
The equilibrium is determined by combining the labor supply determined in Lemma 1
with the labor demand coming from the EK side of the model. Trade balance at the region
level implies Xm = wm Em , so the labor market clearing condition in region m entails
w m Em =

X Tm w−θ d−θ
P m−θkm−θ wk Ek .
l Tl wl dkl
k

(6)

Combined with (2)-(5), this constitutes a system that we can solve to determine equilibrium wages, which in turn can be used to solve for the remaining equilibrium variables.
Now we introduce some additional notation to keep track of country-level variables.
P
enj ≡ P
e
Let X
k∈Ωj
m∈Ωn Xmk denote total trade flows from country j to country n, Xn ≡
P
en /Ln the average
en ≡ X
m∈Ωn Xm total income and expenditure in country n, and w
nominal income per worker in country n.
The expected real income of workers in country n (before the z 0 s are realized) is given
by γVn . This result simply follows by noting that the expected nominal income of workers
that choose region m ∈ Ωn is wm Em /(Ln π m ) = γVn Pm , hence the expected real income of
these and all workers in country n is γVn . This will be our measure of country-level
welfare.

2.3

Frictionless Domestic Trade

We start by considering the special case in which there are no domestic trade costs, that is,
dmk = 1 for all m, k ∈ Ωn . By the triangular inequality, this implies that dmk = dm0 k0 for all
Specifically, letting ω ∗n ≡ max {wm /Pm for m ∈ Ωn }, the labor supply to region m becomes perfectly
elastic at wage ω ∗n Pm .
8

7

m, m0 ∈ Ωn and k, k 0 ∈ Ωi (i.e., international trade costs are the same for all regions within
a country). The absence of domestic trade costs implies that Pm = Pk for all m, k ∈ Ωn .
Combined with the results in Lemma 1 and the expression in (6), it is easy to establish the
following proposition.
Proposition 1. If dmk = 1 for all m, k ∈ Ωn , population shares across regions within
countries are unaffected by trade and given by
θ/(κ+θ)

πm = P

Am

κ/(κ+θ)

Tm

θ/(κ+θ)

k∈Ωn(m)

Ak

κ/(κ+θ)

.

Tk

(7)

Country-level trade shares and price indices are
Tei w
e−θ τ −θ
λni = P i −θni −θ
ee τ
j
nj
j Tj w
and

(8)

!−1/θ
Pen = µ−1

X

Tei w
ei−θ τ −θ
ni

,

(9)

i

where Tei is a country-level technology parameter given by
!(κ+θ)/κ
Tei =

X

Aθ/(κ+θ)
Tmκ/(κ+θ)
m

(10)

m∈Ωi

and
τ ni ≡ dmk for m ∈ Ωn and k ∈ Ωi for n 6= i,

(11)

with τ nn = 1, are the country-level trade costs. Country-level welfare is given by
Vn = µTen1/θ λ−1/θ
nn .

(12)

The expression in (12) is exactly the one for real wages in the EK model. In fact, under
frictionless domestic trade, our model is isomorphic to the EK model, despite the fact that
countries are a collection of heterogenous regions.

2.4

Symmetric Regions

Now we assume that regions within countries are symmetric:
A1. [Symmetry] Am = Am0 and Tm = Tm0 for all m, m0 ∈ Ωn , and dmk = dm0 k0 for all
8

m, m0 ∈ Ωn and k, k 0 ∈ Ωi .
As we formally prove in the next proposition, this assumption implies that, at the
country-level, the symmetric model with domestic trade costs is isomorphic to the EK
model of trade with the only exception that the trade cost of a country with itself is a
function of its size, given by the number of regions Mn , and the iceberg trade cost among
different regions belonging to that country, which we denote by δ n .
Proposition 2. Under A1, country-level trade shares and price indices are as in (8) and
(9), respectively, with
!θ/κ
!
X
X
Tei =
Am
Tm
(13)
m∈Ωi

m∈Ωi

and τ ni as in (11), and

τ nn ≡

Mn − 1 −θ
1
+
δ
Mn
Mn n

−1/θ
,

(14)

where δ n ≡ dmk for m 6= k with m, k ∈ Ωn . In addition, country-level welfare is
−1/θ
Vn = µTen1/θ τ −1
nn λnn .

(15)

The key departure from the standard case in Proposition 1 is caused by the presence
of trade costs between regions belonging to the same country, δ n > 1, which in our model
leads to positive domestic trade costs given by (14). According to Proposition 2, these
domestic trade costs are a weighted power mean with exponent −θ of the cost of intraregional trade, which we assume is one, and the cost of trade between regions belonging
to the same country δ n , with weights given by 1/Mn and 1−1/Mn . Notice that (14) implies
that countries with the same δ n may have different τ nn because of their different size; in
particular, larger countries would have larger domestic trade costs.

2.5

Country-Level Gravity

Proposition 2 shows that A1 is sufficient for the model to exhibit a standard gravity equation. But A1 is not necessary for that: the following assumption departs from symmetry
but still ensures that country level trade flows satisfy the gravity equation, as we show
below.
A2. [Hub and Spoke System for International Trade] For all j 6= n, if k ∈ Ωj and m ∈ Ωn
then dmk = ν m τ nj ν k .
This assumption states that all international trade is done through a single location
9

(e.g., a port) in each country, but it does not impose any restriction on domestic trade costs
dmk for m, k ∈ Ωn , except those associated with the triangular inequality, dmk ≤ ν m ν k .9
Proposition 3. Under A2, country-level trade shares are, for n 6= i,
−θ e e
eni = µθ τ ni Xn Xi ,
X
−θ
Φ−θ
n Ξi

(16)

where
Φn ≡

!1/θ
X Xm  Pm θ
and Ξi ≡
en ν m
X
m∈Ω
n

Xw
ei−θ Tk (wk /w
ei )−θ ν −θ
k
e
Xi

!1/θ
.

k∈Ωi

Equation (16) implies that, under A2, the parameter θ is the trade elasticity for countrylevel trade flows, just as in the EK model. Thus, given some measure of trade costs τ ni , we
can still estimate parameter θ from an OLS regression with exporter and importer fixed
effects using country-level trade flows.10
It is useful to compare (16) with the analogous equation from the EK model where
each country is composed of a single region. In that case, with δ k = 1 for all k, (16)
collapses to
e e
τ −θ
ni Xn Xi
eni = µθ
.
X
ei )−1
Pe−θ (Tei w
e−θ /X
n

i

In this equation, the importer fixed effect captures an inward multilateral resistance term
(i.e., the price index), while the exporter fixed effect captures the product of an exogenous
technology level and an endogenous outward multilateral resistance term. With multiregion countries, as in (16), the fixed effects have a more subtle connection to the equilibrium variables. The importer fixed effect, Φn , can be seen as the weighted average of the
multilateral resistance term of the different regions inside the country, with weights given
by GDP shares. The exporter fixed effect captures the product of an endogenous outward
multilateral resistance term, w
ei−θ , and a technology level that is a weighted average of the
regional technology parameters Tk with endogenous weights given by (wk /w
ei )−θ ν −θ
k .
9

Let distk be the distance between region k ∈ Ωn and the hub of country n. One example of trade costs
that satisfy A2 is where trade costs are log linear in physical distance and regions are located on line, so
β
δ k = β 0 distk 1 when k is not the hub and dmk = β 0 |distk − distm |β 1 for m 6= k and m, k ∈ Ωn . Alternatively,
we could have a hub and spoke system for domestic trade, in which case dmk = δ m δ k for m 6= k and
m, k ∈ Ωn .
10
Of course, if one had region-level trade flows, as used by Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) for the
United States and Canada, then A2 would not be necessary to justify such a regression.

10

2.6

Gains from Trade

We define the country-level gains from trade as the increase in welfare that results from
moving from autarky to the trade equilibrium. With no domestic trade costs or under A1,
these gains are a simple formula of the domestic trade share, λnn , and the trade elasticity,
θ:
(17)
GTn = λ−1/θ
nn .
This formula does not hold in the presence of domestic trade costs when A1 is violated.
In this case, to obtain country-level gains from trade, we need to use the model to compute the counterfactual equilibrium under autarky. We proceed as in Dekle, Eaton and
Kortum (2007) and compute x̂ = x0 /x, with x0 being the variable x in the counterfactual
equilibrium and x being the same variable in the observed equilibrium.
For the next proposition, we need to introduce notation for region-level trade shares:
ψ mk ≡ Xmk /Xm .
Proposition 4. With dˆmk = ∞ for m 6= k and dˆmk = 1 for m = k, m, k ∈ Ωn , the countrylevel gains from trade are given by

GTn =

−κ/θ

X

!−1/κ
(18)

,

π m ψ̂ mm

m∈Ωn

where ψ̂ mm is given by

−θ
ŵm
,
−θ
k∈Ωn ψ mk ŵk

(19)

ψ̂ mm = P

and ŵm is given by the solution to the system
! κ−1
θ
κ
Xm ŵm

X
l∈Ωn

ψ ml ŵl−θ

=

X
k∈Ωn

ψ ŵ−θ
P km m −θ Xk ŵkκ
l∈Ωn ψ kl ŵl

! κ−1
θ
X

ψ kl ŵl−θ

, for m ∈ Ωn . (20)

l∈Ωn

One implication of Proposition 4 is that, with no domestic trade costs or with domestic
trade costs and A1, the gains from trade collapse to the expression in (17). For the general
case, Proposition 4 implies that to compute the gains from trade for country n one only
needs data for that country. In particular, the system in (20) can be solved for ŵm for
m ∈ Ωn for some particular country n given data on region-level trade shares ψ km for all
k, m ∈ Ωn and region-level expenditure shares Xm for all m ∈ Ωn .11
11

−1/θ

As shown in the proof of Proposition 4, the real wage change for region m satisfies ŵm /P̂m = ψ̂ mm .
−1/θ

This is different from the result in Redding (2014), where ŵm /P̂m depends on ψ̂ mm as well as the welfare

11

We are interested in comparing GTn obtained in this way with the gains from trade
computed directly (and incorrectly) using country-level trade data and (17), which is the
standard formula for the gains from trade in EK and other gravity models, as shown by
Arkolakis et al. (2012). Data on trade flows between regions are available for Canada and
the United States—see Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003) and Redding (2014). Hence, we
can compute the gains from trade for those two countries applying the results of Proposition 4. We set θ = 4 and κ = 1.4, as explained in Section 4. The gains from trade for the
United States computed using Proposition 4 are 0.67 percent, while the ones computed
using (17) are 0.77 percent; for Canada the analogous numbers are 6.35 and 6.48 percent.12
These results show that the expression in (17) yields a good approximation of the "exact"
gains from trade associated with the multi-region model. The gains calculated using (17)
are a direct result of the domestic trade share (λnn ) decreasing by three percent (i.e. from
one to 0.97) for the United States, and 22 percent (i.e. from one to 0.78) for Canada. The
gains coming from applying Proposition 4 are a result of all regions, as expected, becoming more open, and hence, increasing their real wage. The change in the degree of
regional openness, however, is heterogenous across regions in a country, ranging from a
decrease in ψ mm of almost six percent to less than half a percent for the United States, and
from 33 to 17 percent for Canada. If all regions were alike, each of them would experience the same decrease in the share of intra-regional trade, which would be the same as
the country-level domestic trade share.
Unfortunately, the necessary data to follow the procedure suggested by Proposition 4
are not available for countries other than the United States and Canada. Armed with the
calibrated model, in Section 4, we compute the exact gains from trade for all countries in
our sample and compare with the results coming from (17).

3

Scale Effects

In the previous Section we treated the technology parameters Tm as exogenous. In this
Section we first argue that technology levels should be allowed to depend positively on
the size of the region; we then show that this dependency leads to aggregate economies of
scale; and finally we study how the strength of such scale effects are affected by domestic
trade costs.
It is natural to expect larger regions to have better technologies. Suppose that we
effect of migration in or out of region m through congestion effects.
12
This exercise is done using data on trade flows across four U.S. and three Canadian regions as in Redding (2014).

12

merged two identical regions with technology parameter T into a single region. It is easy
to show that the new region would have a technology parameter 2T .13 Thus, everything
else equal, if a region m is twice as large as region k, then Tm = 2Tk . Since labor is the only
factor of production in our model, it is natural to use the number of workers to measure
the size of a region, and hence to expect Tm to be proportional to π m Ln .14
This relation between technology levels and population was derived formally by Eaton
and Kortum (2001) in a model of endogenous innovation and Bertrand competition, and
it also emerges naturally in trade models with monopolistic competition, as we discuss
below. This leads us to the following assumption:
A3. [Technology Scales with Population] Tm = φn π m Ln for all m ∈ Ωn .
We allow φn to vary with n to reflect differences in "innovation intensity" across countries. This parameter will be calibrated to R&D employment shares in the quantitative
analysis. The important part of this assumption, however, is that technology levels are
proportional to population.
As a parenthesis, we note here that equivalent formulations of our model in Section 2
plus A3 could be derived building on Krugman (1980) or Melitz (2003) rather than EK.15
With Krugman (1980), all the results in Section 2 would hold replacing θ by σ − 1 (with σ
being the elasticity of substitution), and A3 would follow immediately from the free entry
condition combined with the standard assumption that the fixed cost of production is not
systematically related to country size. With Melitz (2003), we would need to assume that
the productivity distribution is Pareto, as in Chaney (2008). If the Pareto shape parameter
is θ and either θ ≈ σ − 1, or the fixed cost of selling in market m is proportional to its
population, π m Ln , then again A3 would hold because of free entry.
Real wages in country n are also affected by the parameters Am for m ∈ Ωn . The
following assumption ensures that these parameters can affect the labor allocation across
regions but not their productivity:
P
A4. [Normalization of A0 s] m∈Ωn Am = 1 for all n.
Assumptions A3 and A4 lead to country-level scale effects: everything else equal,
larger countries will exhibit higher real income levels. We can see this effect most clearly
13

This result follows from the fact that if x and y are distributed Fréchet with parameters θ and Tx and
Ty , respectively, then max {x, y} is distributed Fréchet with parameters θ and Tx + Ty .
14
Formally, let a “technology” be a productivity ξ drawn from a Fréchet distribution with parameters
θ and φ, and assume that the number of technologies per good is equal to the number of workers. It is
then easy to show that the best technology for a good, max ξ, is distributed Fréchet with parameters θ and
φπ m Ln .
15
The Appendix shows the derivations.

13

in the case of no domestic trade costs. In this case, Proposition 1 combined with A3
and A4 implies that population shares across regions within countries are π m = Am .
Combining this result with the definition of Ten in (10) yields Ten = φn Ln , which plugged
into (12) reveals that the real wage is given by Vn = µ (φn Ln )1/θ λ−1/θ
nn . Thus, conditional
on trade shares and innovation intensity, real income levels increase with country size
with an elasticity 1/θ. This is because a larger population is linked to a higher stock of
non-rival ideas (i.e., technologies), and more ideas imply a superior technology frontier.
The strength of this effect is linked to the Fréchet parameter θ: the lower is θ, the higher is
the dispersion of productivity draws from this distribution, and the more an increase in
the stock of ideas improves the technology frontier. These are the aggregate economies of
scale that play a critical role in semi-endogenous growth models (Kortum, 1997) and that
underpin the gains from openness in EK-type models (see Eaton and Kortum, 2001; and
Arkolakis et al., 2008).
In the rest of this section we study how domestic trade costs affect the strength of scale
effects for the case in which regions within each country are fully symmetric, as captured
by A1. This is the only case for which we can provide analytical results; in Section 4, we
calibrate the model assuming A3 and A4, but no A1, and present quantitative results for
the strength of scale effects on real and relative wages, and import shares.

3.1

Scale Effects with Exogenous Trade Shares

We start by providing results for real income levels taking trade shares as given.
Recall from Proposition 2 that under A1 the average real income per worker (henceforth, simply real wage) is determined by the country-level technology parameter, do1/θ
−1/θ
mestic trade costs, and the domestic trade share: Vn = µTen τ −1
nn λnn . Under A3 and A4,
we now have Tm = φn Ln /Mn and Am = 1/Mn for all m ∈ Ωn , hence Ten = φn Ln , so we can
write
Vn = µ ×
φ1/θ
×
L1/θ
×
τ −1
×
λ−1/θ
.
(21)
n
nn
n
{z }
|{z}
|{z}
| nn
|{z}
R&D Intensity

Pure Scale Effect

Domestic Frictions

Gains from Trade

There are four distinct forces that determine real wages across countries: innovation intensity, pure scale effects, domestic trade costs, and the gains from trade.
In the presence of domestic trade costs, economies of scale depend on how τ nn is
affected by country size, Ln . To derive sharper results, assume that size scales with the
number of regions, Ln = Mn L̄, and δ n = δ, for all n.16 Then all variation in τ nn comes from
16

It suffices that δ n does not systematically vary with country size.

14

variation in the number of regions Mn . In particular, τ nn is decreasing in country size, so
domestic trade costs offset scale effects. More specifically, the strength of economies of
scale adjusted by the presence of domestic frictions, conditional on trade shares, is given
by ∂ ln Vn /∂ ln Ln = (1/θ)(δ/τ nn )−θ : if δ = 1, then τ nn = 1 and ε = 1/θ; otherwise the term
(δ/τ nn )−θ is lower than one and offsets economies of scale, ε < 1/θ.
As a final remark, notice that, conditional on observed domestic and international trade
shares, it is easy to explore the effect of the parameter θ on the real wage. Let On ≡ λ−1
nn ,
P
enn where X̂nn ≡
and Dn ≡ Mn X̂nn /X
m∈Ωn Xmm refers to total intra-region trade flows in
country n . From (1) and (8), we get
τ θnn =

Mn X̂nn
.
enn
X

(22)

We can then rewrite (21), relative to the United States, as
Vn
=
VU S

"

φn L n
φU S L U S



Dn
DU S

−1 

On
OU S

#1/θ
.

(23)

All the terms inside the bracket come from the data. Hence, it is easy to conclude that for
countries with a lower real wage than the one for the United States, a higher θ increases
the relative real wage towards one; the opposite is true for countries with a higher real
wage than the one for the United States.

3.2

Scale Effects with Endogenous Trade Shares

We have so far focused on the implications of domestic trade costs on real wages conditional on domestic trade shares. To derive analytical results on the unconditional effects
of country size in the presence of domestic trade costs, we need to impose some additional restrictions. In particular, we assume that international and domestic trade costs
are uniform and that countries are symmetric in terms of their innovation intensity.
A5. [Uniform Trade Costs and Innovation Intensity] δ n = δ for all n, τ ni = τ for all n 6= i
and φi = φ for all i.
Under this (admittedly strong) assumption, which we maintain only for the next Proposition, we can characterize how country size matters also for import shares, nominal
wages, and price levels.
Proposition 5. Assume A1, A3, and A5. If τ > δ then larger countries have lower import
shares, higher wages, and lower price levels. If τ = δ then larger countries have lower
15

import shares, but wages and prices do not vary with country size.
As expected, import shares decline with country size and large countries gain less
from trade, but aggregate economies of scale are strong enough so that the overall effect
is for real wages to increase with size. Proposition 5 also establishes that real wages
increase with country size both because of higher wages and because of lower prices.
More importantly, these scale effects disappear when τ = δ, suggesting that domestic
trade costs weaken scale effects. This is illustrated in Figure 1. For θ = 4, we alternately
fixed δ = 1 and δ = 2.7, and chose τ for each δ to match an average import share of 0.39
(as observed in the data for our sample of 26 countries). For each case, the figure shows
the implied import shares, nominal wages, real wages, and prices against country size.
All four variables vary strongly with size in the model with no domestic trade costs, but
this dependence is severely weakened when these costs are considered.

3.3

Domestic Trade Costs vs International Trade Cost Asymmetries

The strong relation between country size and import shares in the model with no domestic trade costs in Figure 1 could be due to the restriction on trade costs imposed by A5.
In principle, one could replicate the effects of domestic trade costs in a model without
them if international trade costs were chosen appropriately. As we next show, the key is
whether one allows for asymmetries in international trade costs, and whether one deviates from A3 by allowing for a systematic pattern between innovation intensity (Tei /Li )
and country size (Li ). We explore this possibility by comparing the implications of three
models that differ in terms of the assumptions on trade costs: symmetric international
trade costs with domestic trade costs ("RRS"); asymmetric international trade costs with
asymmetries arising from importer-specific terms, as in EK ("EK"); and asymmetric international trade costs with asymmetries arising from exporter-specific terms ("W"), as in
Waugh (2010). To proceed, let αni = αin for all i 6= n be the symmetric component of trade
costs and consider the following alternative assumptions for trade costs:
A6. [Symmetric Trade Costs with Domestic Frictions] τ RRS
= αni for all i 6= n, and τ RRS
ni
nn
as in (14).
EK
A6’. [Trade Costs with Asymmetries from Importer Effects] τ EK
ni = Fn αni for all i 6= n
and τ EK
nn = 1 for all n.
W
A6”. [Trade Costs with Asymmetries from Exporter Effects] τ W
ni = Fi αni for all i 6= n
and τ W
nn = 1 for all n.

All three models impose A1 and have the same parameter θ and the same coun16

try sizes, Li , but they may differ in technology levels and trade costs. The RRS model
has technology levels TeiRRS and trade costs satisfying A6. The EK model has the same
technology levels as the RRS model, TeiEK = TeiRRS , and trade costs satisfying A6’ with

eW
eRRS τ RRS −θ and trade costs
FnEK = 1/τ RRS
nn . The W model has technology levels Ti = Ti
ii
.
satisfying A6” with FiW = 1/τ RRS
ii
The following result follows directly from the expression for trade flows in (8) and
price levels in (9).
Proposition 6. Under A1, A3, and A6, the RRS, EK, and W models generate the same
equilibrium wages and trade flows. The equilibrium price levels are the same as in the
RRS and W models, but they differ in the EK model: PenW = PenRRS and PenEK = PenRRS /τ RRS
nn .
According to this Proposition, if one adjusts the technology levels appropriately, the
models with asymmetric international trade costs as in Waugh (2010) and with symmetric international trade costs with domestic trade costs are equivalent in all respects. Note,
−θ
increasing with country size and no sys. With τ RRS
however, that TeiW = TeiRRS τ RRS
ii
ii
tematic relationship between φi and country size, this expression implies that small countries would tend to exhibit higher values of TeiW /Li .
Proposition 6 also implies that, although wages and trade flows are the same across
all three models, prices in EK are systematically high in small countries when compared
with prices in the RRS and W models, since PenEK = PenRRS /τ RRS
and τ RRS
increases with
nn
nn
size. This point is analogous to the one made by Waugh (2010), but applied here to large
versus small as opposed to rich versus poor countries.17

4

Quantitative analysis

In this Section, we quantify the general model. The goal is to explore the role of domestic
trade costs in reconciling the standard model of trade with the data in key dimensions
(real and nominal wages, prices, and import shares), across countries of different size. We
only impose A3 and A4—that is, technology scales with population and a normalization
of the average workers’ productivity in each location within a country (Am ), respectively.
17

Is it possible to achieve a full equivalence between RRS and EK by deviating from TeiEK = TeiRRS ? The
answer is no, since the only way in which (8) holds for the two models is by imposing TeiEK = TeiRRS and
FnEK = 1/τ RRS
nn .

17

4.1

Calibration Procedure

We consider a set of 26 OECD countries for which all the variables needed are available.
We restrict the sample to this set of countries to ensure that the main differences across
countries are dominated by size, geography, and R&D, rather than other variables outside
the model. Additionally, the definition adopted for ‘’region" in the data is fairly homogenous among OECD countries.
We need to calibrate the parameters κ and θ, the vectors Mn and Ln , for all n, and Tm
and Am , for all m, as well as the matrix of trade costs dmk , for all m, k.
Calibration of κ. We set κ to 1.3, following Suarez-Serrato and Zidar (2014). Our
parameter κ, which refers to the workers’ heterogeneity in productivity across locations,
is isomorphic to the (inverse of the) parameter in their paper that captures heterogeneity
in workers preferences for locations with different levels of amenities. They estimate
this parameter by targeting the reduced-form effect of state taxes on the growth rates of
wages, establishments, population, and rental cost, across U.S. states.18
Calibration of θ. As in the standard trade model, the value of θ is critical for our exercise. Head and Mayer (2014) survey the estimates for the trade elasticity in the literature
and conclude that, even though the variance is large, the mean estimate, for the sub-set
of structural gravity estimates, is -3.78 with a median of -5.13.19
We choose θ = 4 which encompasses values obtained not only by the trade literature
but also the growth literature and the empirical literature on scale effects.20 The implied
18

In the context of a spatial model of trade, where both heterogenous workers and firms are mobile,
their paper analyzes the effects of state corporate tax cuts on welfare. They estimate simultaneously the
dispersion of idiosyncratic preferences, the dispersion of idiosyncratic firms’ productivity, and the elasticity
of housing supply.
19
Among structural gravity estimates, Eaton and Kortum (2002) get an estimate of θ in the range of 3 to
12, while Bernard, Jensen, Eaton, and Kortum (2004) estimate θ = 4. More recently, Simonovska and Waugh
(2013) estimate θ between 2.5 and 5 with a preferred estimate of 4, and Arkolakis, Ramondo, RodriguezClare, and Yeaple (2013) get an estimate between 4.5 and 5.5. Other group of papers estimates the trade
elasticity using data on different sectors, obtaining estimates between 6.5 and 8 (see Costinot, Donaldson,
and Komunjer, 2012; Shapiro, 2013; and Caliendo and Parro, 2014).
20
Assuming that Ln grows at a constant rate gL > 0 in all countries and invoking A3, the growth rate
of Ten is equal to gL . The long-run income growth rate is then g = gL /θ, which in the symmetric version
of the model simply follows from differentiating (21) with respect to time (with a constant Mn ). In the
general version of the model this follows because trade shares and population shares are not affected by
growth which is common across countries. With gL = 0.048, the growth rate of research employment, and
g = 0.01, the growth rate of TFP, among a group of rich OECD countries, both from Jones (2002), θ = 4.8
Jones and Romer (2010) follow a similar procedure and conclude that the data supports g/gL = 1/4, which
implies θ = 4. In turn, Alcala and Ciccone (2004) show that controlling for a country’s geography (land
area), institutions, and trade openness, larger countries in terms of population have a higher real GDP per
capita with an elasticity of 0.3. In the symmetric version of the model, this elasticity can be interpreted in the
context of (21) in which geography is captured by τ nn , institutions by φn , and trade openness is represented
by the last term on the right-hand side of (21); the coefficient on Ln , 1/θ, can then be equated to 0.3, which

18

(conditional) elasticity of the real wage with respect to size is then 1/θ = 1/4, in-between
the one in Jones (2002) of 1/5, and the one in Alcala and Ciccone (2004) of 1/3.21
Our general model does not generate a log-linear gravity equation at the country level,
as the models from where the estimation of θ is taken do. Hence, we check whether
an Ordinary-Least-Square (OLS) regression of the (log of) simulated trade shares on the
(log of) calibrated trade costs, with both importer and exporter fixed effects, delivers a
coefficient close to four.
Calibration of the number of regions. We assume that the number of regions for each
country in the model, Mn , equals the number of metropolitan areas observed in the data.
We use data on 287 metro areas from the OECD, with a population of 500,000 or more.22
For all countries, except Australia, New Zealand, Turkey and Iceland, the data are from
the OECD Metropolitan Database; for these four missing countries, we use data from the
OECD Regional Database. Column 8 in Table 1 presents the number of regions for each
country. The number of metropolitan areas is strongly correlated with our measure of
country size (0.90).
Calibration of technology and size. We calibrate the parameter Tm assuming A3,
Tm = φn π m Ln , and that φn varies directly with the share of R&D employment observed
in the data at the country level.23 We use data on R&D employment from the World Development Indicators averaged over the nineties. We measure Ln as equipped labor, from
Klenow and Rodríguez-Clare (2005), to account for differences in physical and human
capital per worker; we take an average over the nineties as well.24
We refer to the term φn Ln as R&D-adjusted country size, and we adopt it as our measure of country size—see column 6 in Table 1. The population share of region m, π m , is
an endogenous variable coming from the computation of the model’s equilibrium. We
choose Am for region m in country n such that we exactly match the population share of
implies θ = 3.3.
21
This elasticity may seem high relative to estimates of the income-size elasticity in the urban economics
literature. For example, Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, Puga, and Roux (2012) find an elasticity of productivity with respect to density at the city level between 0.04 to 0.1. One should keep in mind, however, that
these are reduced form elasticities, whereas our 1/4 is a structural elasticity. Thus, the same reasons (i.e., internal frictions and trade openness) that make small countries richer than implied by the strong scale effects
associated with an elasticity of 1/4 should also lead to a lower observed effect of city-size on productivity
in the cross-sectional data.
22
These metro areas follow a harmonized functional definition developed by the OECD.
23
Data on R&D by region are either very low quality or unavailable.
24
The size elasticity of R&D employment shares, for our sample of countries, is low (-0.07 with s.e. of
0.09). Using the number of patents per unit of equipped labor registered by country n’s residents, at home
and abroad, rather than R&D employment shares, as a proxy for φn , does not change our results below. Similarly to R&D employment shares, small countries do not have a systematically higher number of patents
per capita.

19

region m in country n observed in the data; the normalization given by A4 is also imposed. We use data on population for each of the metropolitan areas in the sample, from
OECD, for the year 2000. The (cumulative) population share of our sample of metro areas,
for each country, is presented in column 9 of Table 1.25
Calibration of Trade Costs. We need to calibrate the whole matrix of trade costs between regions, dmk , for m ∈ Ωi and k ∈ Ωn , for all i, n. This amount to a 287 × 287 matrix
(i.e., the number of regions in our sample). The obvious limitation is that data on trade
flows between any two regions in our sample are not available (except for the United
States and Canada). Hence, we proceed by imposing more structure on the trade costs.
In particular, we assume that
β I

2 mk
mk
distmk
dmk = β I0mk β 1−I
1

+β 3 (1−Imk )

,

(24)

with dmm = 1. The variable distmk denotes geographical distance between region m and
k which is computed from longitude and latitude data for each metropolitan area in our
sample. The variable Imk is a dummy variable that equals one if m and k belong to the
same country, and zero otherwise.
We choose the coefficient β 0 to match the share of intra-regional trade in total domestic
P
enn . We
trade for the United States. In the model, this variable is given by m∈Ωn Xmm /X
use data from the Commodity Flow Survey (CFS) on manufacturing trade flows between
geographical units within the United States, for 2007. We measure total intra-regional
trade as the sum across all the regions of the intra-region manufacturing shipments, while
enn is total domestic manufacturing trade flows. As explained in more detail in Section
X
5.1, this share ranges from 0.35 using metropolitan areas to 0.45 using U.S. states. We
target a mid-value of 0.40.26
We calibrate the coefficient β 1 to match the average bilateral trade shares in manueni are from STAN,
facturing observed in the data. Data on country-level trade flows X
en is calculated (from the same
averaged over 1996-2001, while country-level absorption X
source) as gross production minus total exports plus total imports from countries in our
sample. In our sample, the average international (bilateral) trade share is 0.0156.
The empirical evidence indicates that the distance elasticity for inter-regional trade
flows is similar to the one obtained for international trade flows. Table 2 presents the re25

Since in the model the population of region m is π m Ln , where Ln is equipped labor from the data, effectively, we are assigning the total country-level equipped labor to the regions in our sample proportionally
to their population.
26
There is a discrepancy between the definition of metropolitan areas for the United States in the OECD
and the CFS: of the 70 metropolitan areas recorded in the OECD data set, 55 can be matched with metropolitan areas found in the CFS for which trade data are available.

20

sults for different gravity specifications. For our sample of 26 countries, the OLS distance
elasticity ranges from -1.01 to -1.1. Poisson estimates are lower, between -0.75 and -0.95.
These estimates are within the range estimated in the literature, as surveyed by Head
and Mayer (2014): the mean and median structural estimates, which corresponds to gravity estimates with fixed effects, are around -1.1. Using data on trade flows among U.S.
metropolitan areas, we get a coefficient between -1.12 (OLS) and -1.25 (PPML).27 These
estimates are similar to the ones found by Allen and Arkolakis (2014) for metropolitan
areas within the United States when trade is restricted to road mode, and similar to the
distance elasticity in Tombe and Winter (2014) for inter-provincial trade in Canada. Given
this evidence, and given θ = 4, we impose β 2 = β 3 = 0.27. Similarly as for the trade elasticity θ, because the general model does not deliver a log-linear gravity equation at the
country level, we check how close the simulated data are to the imposed international
distance elasticity.28
Results. Table 3 summarizes the calibrated parameters and the R-squared coming
from comparing international trade shares in the data and the model, which is 0.96.29
The value of θ we impose comes from models that deliver a log-linear equation of
country-level trade flows on trade costs; our general model, however, does not. Hence,
we check whether the implied value of the OLS coefficient from regressing the simulated
international trade shares on the calibrated international trade costs, which are calculated
using (24), is close to four. Including two sets of fixed effects for origin and destination
country, we get a coefficient of 3.96 (s.e. 0.079). The same reasoning applies to the calibrated distance elasticity: the OLS elasticity of trade shares on distance between country
i and n, is -1.07 (s.e. 0.021), in the range of the one observed in the data for international
trade flows.
Column 2 in Table 4 shows an index of country-level domestic trade costs constructed
based on a procedure in Agnosteva et al. (2013),
!−1/θ
τ nn =

X
m∈Ωn

πm

X

π k d−θ
mk

,

(25)

k6=m,k∈Ωn

where π m is the population of region m, as a share of country n’s total population. The
27

Inter-regional trade for the United States is between the sub-set of 55 metro areas in the United States
for which we have trade data from the CFS, for 2007.
28
Additionally, as a robustness check, we run a calibration procedure that calibrates this elasticity (and
β 1 ) to minimize the sum of squares differences between trade shares in the data and model; results are
reassuring since
the implied elasticity of trade costs to distance is 0.29.
P
29

R2 = 1 −

data
−λmodel
)2
ni
n,i (λni
P
data
2
)
n,i (λni

.

21

domestic cost index is, as expected, higher for larger countries: in our sample of countries,
its correlation with our measure of country size is 0.70, while the one with the number
of regions is 0.86. Our calibration indicates that, for instance, a small country like Denmark has τ DN K,DN K almost half the one for the United States, while a large country like
Japan has τ JP N,JP N of around 70 percent the one of the United States. This result already
suggests that domestic trade costs will undermine the strength of aggregate scale effects.
Finally, our estimates of domestic trade costs can be compared with the estimates coming from the index developed by Head and Ries (2001), and Head, Mayer, and Ries (2010).
Using the matrix of domestic trade for the United States, their index amounts to
dhr
mk


≡

Xmk Xkm
Xkk Xmm

− 2θ1
.

(26)

Figure 2 shows the relation of trade costs across regions of the United States with distance,
using our calibrated trade costs (dmk ) and the index in (26), for the sub-set of 55 U.S.
metropolitan areas for which trade flows are available from the CFS, for 2007. While the
distance elasticity for the model’s domestic costs is 0.27, as calibrated above, the one for
the domestic costs calculated using the Head and Ries index is 0.21, reaching 0.28 if two
sets of origin and destination fixed effects are included as controls. Not surprisingly, dHR
mk
is much more dispersed than dmk , but it has a higher mean (3.29 vs 2.55), suggesting that
our estimates of domestic trade costs, at least for the United States, are on the conservative
side.

4.2

The Role of Domestic Frictions

We use the calibrated model to explore how the presence of domestic frictions affects the
strength of scale effects on real wages, import shares, price indices and nominal wages.
Domestic trade costs can offset scale effects, but by how much? Does the model with scale
effects, international trade, and domestic frictions ((i.e., the full model) do a good job in
matching the data for wages, price indices and import shares?
In the data, the real wage is computed as real GDP (PPP-adjusted) from the Penn
World Tables (7.1) divided by our measure of equipped labor, Ln . The real wage calculated in this way is simply TFP; we henceforth refer to this variable indistinctly as real
wage or TFP for country n. The import share for country n is calculated as 1 − λnn , with
enn /X
en . The nominal wage in the data is calculated as GDP at current prices from
λnn ≡ X
the World Development Indicators, divided by our measure of equipped labor. The price
index is simply calculated as the nominal wage divided by the real wage. All variables
22

are averages over 1996-2001. Domestic trade shares, real and current GDP per capita, for
each country, are summarized in column 1 to 3 of Table 1 .
Figure 3 shows the following decomposition of the real wages (relative to the U.S.)
across coutnries: the real wage implied by our full model (blue dots); the real wage implied by the model with only scale effects (green dots)—which implies imposing β 0 = 1,
β 1 = ∞, and β 2 = 0; and the real wage with both scale effects and international trade but
no domestic frictions (red dots)—which implies β 0 = 1 and β 2 = 0. We also show the real
wages observed in the data (black dots). Real wages are plotted against our measure of
R&D-adjusted country size. 30
It is clear that the model with only scale effects severely underestimates the real wage
for the smallest countries (green vs black dots). According to that model, the real wage
for a small country like Denmark would be only 33 percent of the one in the United
States, reflecting very strong scale effects. In contrast, the observed relative real wage of
Denmark is 94 percent. The implications are similar when we look at the six smallest
countries in our sample: the model with only scale effects implies a relative real wage of
30 percent, whereas in the data these countries have an average real wage almost equal to
the one in the United States. Further, the size elasticity of real wages is equal to 1/θ = 1/4
in the model, whereas the one in the data, calculated using an OLS regression with a
constant and robust standard errors, is not statistically different from zero (-0.006 with
s.e. 0.03).
We calculate how much adding international trade and domestic trade costs to the
model help in matching the observed real wages for countries of different sizes. We first
consider the model with trade but no domestic frictions. As the red dots indicate in Figure
3, trade openness does not help much in bringing the model closer to the data. Focusing
again on Denmark, the standard trade model with no domestic trade costs implies a relative real wage for Denmark of 38 percent, only a small improvement over the model
with only scale effects. For the six smallest countries, the model implies a real wage of 33
percent, higher than the 30 percent generated by the model with no trade, but still very
far from the data.
It is important to clarify that, as expected, small countries do gain more from trade
than large countries (the size correlation is -0.42). It is just that these gains are not large
enough to have a substantial role in closing the gap between the model with only scale
effects and the data. For example, in our calibrated model, as shown in column 3 of Table
6 , Denmark has much larger gains from trade than the United States (22 vs 2.2 percent),
but almost ten-fold higher gains increase the implied relative real wage of Denmark from
30

Table 7 in the Appendix shows the numbers behind the figure.

23

only 33 to 38 percent.
Adding domestic trade costs to the model helps to reconcile the model with the data
(blue vs black dots in Figure 3). Because the index of domestic trade costs in (25) is
strongly correlated with country size, these frictions undermine scale effects. Going back
to the example of Denmark, the model with scale effects, international trade, and domestic frictions implies a relative real wage of 81 percent, much closer to the data (94 percent)
than the real wage implied by the model with only scale effects (33 percent). The full
model’s implied relative wage for the six smallest countries in the sample is 71 percent,
closing the gap between the model with only scale effects and the data by almost 60 percent. The elasticity of the real wage with respect to country size implied by the model
is still significantly positive (0.13 with s.e. 0.02), but almost half the one implied by the
model with only scale effects of 0.25.
As Figure 3 reveals, the main contribution in getting the full model to better match
the data comes from adding domestic trade costs. Indeed, focusing again on Denmark,
domestic frictions close almost 60 percent of the gap between the real wage in the data
and in the model with only scale effects, while openness to trade only closes around eight
percent. For the six smallest countries in our sample, domestic frictions close almost 45
percent of the gap, while trade openness closes around five percent.
More formally, we use the root mean squared error,
rmse ≡ (

1 X model
2 0.5
(x
− xdata
n ) ) ,
N n n

(27)

as a measure of the fit of the model with the data for the variable x. For the full model,
real wages have rmse = 0.31, while for the model with only scale effects rmse = 0.56. For
the model with trade openness and no domestic trade costs, we get rmse = 0.54, while for
the model with domestic frictions and no trade, we get rmse = 0.37. The improvement in
fit for our model with domestic trade costs is particularly high for the small countries in
our sample.
In Figures 4 to 7 we compare the calibrated models with and without domestic trade
costs in terms of real wages, import shares, nominal wages, and price indices, across
countries of different size. The model without domestic frictions is calibrated using the
procedure described above, but assuming dmk = 1 for all m, k ∈ Ωn (Table 3 also summarizes the calibrated parameters and goodness of fit for this model). In these figures, solid
lines represent fitted lines through the dots. The pink line represents the general model,
while the red line represents the calibrated model without domestic trade costs. The black
line fits the data.
24

Figure 4 makes clear that in the calibrated model with no domestic trade costs, real
wages rise too rapidly across countries of different size: the size elasticity of the real wage
is 0.20 (s.e. 0.01), much higher than the zero elasticity observed in the data and double
the one delivered by the model with domestic trade costs.
As Table 5 indicates, the average import shares are matched well by both the calibrated models with and without domestic trade costs. But the pattern they present across
countries of different size resembles the one shown in our theoretical example in Figure
1: in the model with no frictions, import shares decrease too rapidly with country size, as
indicated by the magnitude of the size elasticities presented in Table 5. The model without domestic trade costs implies that import shares decline with size with an elasticity of
−0.39 (s.e. 0.09), higher than the one in the data, which is −0.23 (s.e. 0.06). The model
with domestic trade costs does better in this regard: the implied elasticity is −0.27 (s.e.
0.06).31
It is also clear from Figures 6 and 7 that the behavior of real wages in the model with
no domestic trade costs is the result of nominal wages that rise—and prices that fall—too
steeply with size. As shown in Table 5, the model with no domestic trade costs implies
size elasticities of the nominal wage (0.10 with s.e. 0.01) and price index (−0.09 with s.e.
0.01) that are too high (in absolute value) relative to the ones in the data. Both elasticities
are halved as we introduce domestic frictions. The main reason why the model with
domestic trade costs still generates a large size elasticity of real wages is because of its
implication that prices fall with size (elasticity of −0.05 with s.e. 0.01), whereas in the
data the size elasticity of the price index is positive but not significantly different from
zero (0.07 with s.e. 0.04).
Our results are related to those in Waugh (2010), who shows that his model without
domestic trade costs does well in matching real wages across countries. The main difference is that while we impose that Tei /Li is pinned down by R&D employment shares,
Waugh (2010) estimates Tei so that the model without domestic trade costs matches the
trade data.32 As implied by Proposition 6 in Section 3, a model without domestic trade
costs can generate the same trade shares and real wages as a model with domestic trade
31

The calibrated model without domestic trade costs in Alvarez and Lucas (2007) also matches fairly well
the relationship between size and import shares across countries. As we assume in A3, Alvarez and Lucas
(2007) allow technology levels to scale up with size, but rather than using equipped labor as a measure
of size, they calibrate Ln so that w
en Ln in the model equals nominal GDP in the data. Letting en be efficiency per unit of equipped labor in country n, their procedure is equivalent to calibrating en such that
en (Ln /λn )1/θ matches observed TFP levels. For our sample of countries, their calibrated size (en Ln ) has
much less variation than the observed measure of equipped labor across countries (std. of 0.05 vs 0.21),
which implies that small countries have a much higher efficiency per unit of equipped labor than large
ones.
32
The variable Li used in Waugh (2010) is equipped labor from Caselli (2005).

25

costs, but with Tei /Li ratios that are systematically lower for large countries. This is precisely what Waugh (2010) obtains in his model for our sample of countries: the estimated
(average) Tei /Li ratios are 12 times higher for the five smallest countries in our sample
than for the five largest. Moreover, for our sample of countries the elasticity of Waugh’s
estimated Tei /Li ratios with respect to country size is -0.94 (s.e. 0.29).33
The Gains from Trade. We show in Section 2 that the general model does not deliver
the simple ACR formula for the gains from trade in (17) which only requires countrylevel trade shares for its computation. However, it is interesting to compare the gains
from trade calculated (wrongly) using that simple formula applied to the simulated trade
shares delivered by the general model, and the gains computed correctly using the change
in real wages from autarky to the calibrated equilibrium, described in Proposition 4. Comparing the results in columns 2 and 3 in Table 6, we can see that the expression for the
gains from trade in (17) approximates extremely well the ‘’true" gains from trade.

5

Alternative Geographies

We explore three different geographic structures for the quantitative model: a symmetric structure; a symmetric hub-and-spoke structure; and an international hub-and-spoke
structure. While the first two geographic structures assume A1, the third one satisfies A2.
These alternative calibrations are worth exploring for three reasons. First, under A1,
the calibration of the model becomes extremely simple because we can apply the data directly to (17) to compute the gains from trade, and we can use the data on intra-regional
trade shares, for the United States, to directly calibrate domestic trade cots. Second, because all three cases deliver a log-linear gravity equation at the country level, the calibration of the parameter θ is fully consistent with the approach described above. Finally, all
four calibrated models with domestic frictions yield very similar results for the patterns
of real wages, trade shares, nominal wages, and prices, across countries of different size.

5.1

Symmetry

Calibration. We keep, as in the general case, θ = 4, Tm = φn π m Ln , with φn equal to R&D
employment shares in the data, Ln our measure of equipped labor, and Mn the number of
33

The elasticity of Tei /Li with respect to country size computed for the the 77 countries considered in
Waugh (2010) is still negative (−0.3), but not significantly different from zero (s.e. 0.3). Germany and
Iceland are not in Waugh (2010)’s sample.

26

metropolitan areas observed in the data, from OECD. Notice that our symmetry assumption simply implies that π m = 1/Mn , for all m ∈ Ωn .
Under A1, we also have that dmk = dm0 k0 , with m, m0 ∈ Ωn and k, k 0 ∈ Ωi , n 6= i. Hence,
the expression for international trade costs in (24) collapses to
β

(28)

τ ni = β 1 distni3 ,

with i 6= n, and distni the geographical distance between country i and n.34 Applying the
same procedure as for the calibration of the general model, we impose β 3 = 0.27. We then
calibrate the constant β 1 to simply match the average bilateral trade share observed in the
data among our sample of 26 OECD countries.35
The crucial parameters to calibrate in the symmetric case are domestic trade costs τ nn ,
for which we impose the structure given by (14). We calibrate the parameter δ n based on
data on domestic trade flows for the United States. From (1) and (8), we get
τ θnn

=

Mn

P

m∈Ωn

enn
X

Xmm

.

(29)

Given the observed share of intra-regional trade in a country, (29) can be used together
with Mn and θ to infer τ nn , which can then be combined with (14) to get an estimate of δ n .
We consider shipments between 100 geographical units within the United States from
the CFS, for 2007.36 This yields an intra-regional trade share of 0.35, implying that 35
percent of domestic U.S. trade flows are actually intra-regional trade flows. With MU S =
100 and θ = 4, we get δ U S = 2.7.37, 38 This estimate is in the middle range of the ones
34

The variable distni denotes distance between the most populated cities, or official capitals, in country
n and i, respectively, from Centre d’Etudes Prospectives et Informations Internationales (CEPII).
35
As it is clear from (21), we could have directly used the data on trade shares applied to calculate the
gains from trade and real wages—as we do below— rather than estimating the matrix of international trade
costs. We proceed, however, keeping our calibration close to the one for our general model for comparison purposes. Additionally, the matrix of international trade costs is needed to calculate the equilibrium
nominal wages, prices, and trade shares.
36
These units include 48 Consolidated Statistical Areas (CSA), 18 Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA),
and 33 units represent the remaining portions of (some of) the states, for 2007, from the Commodity Flow
Survey. For each of these 99 geographical units, we compute the total purchases from the United States
and subtract trade with the 99 geographical units to get trade with the rest of the United States, which is
considered the 100th geographical unit.
37
Notice that the relatively high estimate for δ U S is a direct consequence of assuming θ = 4 combined
with the relatively little inter-regional trade we observe in the data; in a frictionless world where δ U S = 1,
the share of intra-regional trade would be 1/100 = 0.01.
38
Our estimates are in line with the high trade costs that are commonly estimated in gravity models
(see Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004; and Head and Mayer, 2014). As mentioned in the Introduction,
Hillberry and Hummels (2008) find that shipments between establishments in the same zip code are much
larger than between establishments in different zip codes. One explanation for this finding is the existence

27

obtained using other aggregation of the data. For instance, if we use trade flows between
the 51 states of the United States, for 2007, the share of intra-regional trade is 0.45, which
implies δ U S = 2.5. If we consider the same definition of metro areas as in the OECD
data, we end up with 55 regions for which we have trade flows from the CFS. With this
aggregation of the data, the share of intra-regional trade is 0.58 and δ U S = 2.9. Moreover,
for Canada, the other country for which we have data on manufacturing trade flows
between provinces, for 2007, that same trade share is 0.79; the implied δ CAN is 2.5.39
Lacking data on domestic trade flows for other countries in our sample, we impose
δ n = 2.7 for all n. We are still allowing for differences in τ nn across countries that come
from differences in country size through Mn ; this is precisely what offsets the economies
of scale in the symmetric model with domestic trade costs.
Column 2 in Table 4 shows the calibrated τ nn ’s, relative to the United States, for each
country. Our calibration indicates that, for instance, a small country like Denmark with
MDN K = 1 has τ DN K,DN K around 40 percent the one for the United States. Conversely,
a large country like Japan, with MJP N = 36, has τ JP N,JP N calibrated to be 90 percent the
one of the United States.
Further, in Figure 8, we plot the calibrated measure of domestic trade costs implied
by our symmetric calibration (blue dots) and the index for domestic trade costs in (25)
implied by the calibration of the general model (pink dots). On average, these domestic
trade costs are not very different from the ones calibrated using the general model (0.64
vs 0.63, respectively, relative to the U.S.), while their size elasticity is higher (0.14 vs 0.09,
respectively).
Results. Armed with the calibrated model, we compare the symmetric and asymmetric quantitative models and ask how much better the general model does in comparison to
the symmetric model, in reconciling the standard trade model with the data. The answer
is: not much.
Figures 4 to 7 show results for real wages, import shares, nominal wages, and price
indices, across countries of different size. Solid lines represent fitted lines through the
dots. Blue and pink dots represent the symmetric and general models, respectively, with
domestic trade costs. Red dots represent the calibrated model with no domestic trade
of non-tradable goods even within the manufacturing sector. As emphasized by Holmes and Stevens (2010),
there are many manufactured goods that are specialty local goods (e.g., custom-made goods that need faceto-face contact between buyers and sellers), and hence non-traded. If we assumed in our model that a share
of manufactured goods were non-tradable, the required δ n would be lower, but the consequences for our
quantitative exercise would be very similar to the ones from the baseline calibrated model.
39
The source is British Columbia Statistics, at http : //www.bcstats.gov.bc.ca/data/buss tat/trade.asp.
Other papers that used these data are McCallum (1995), Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), and more
recently, Tombe and Winter (2014).

28

costs which is calibrated by imposing τ nn = 1.
As it is clear from Figures 4 to 7 (and the statistics in Table 5), the models with domestic
trade costs capture much better the observed pattern of trade, wages—both nominal and
real— and prices, across countries of different sizes.
Additionally, as the solid blue and pink (fitted) lines in all these figures suggest, the
symmetric case is an extremely good approximation of the general case, particularly for
small countries. This results can be further seen by comparing the statistics in Table 5 for
the model with symmetric domestic trade costs and the general model.
For instance, the implied income elasticity is even lower for the symmetric than for the
asymmetric calibrated model (0.09 vs 0.13, respectively) less than half the one implied by
the calibrated model with no domestic trade costs (0.20). Additionally, while the model
without domestic trade costs implies that import shares decline with size with an elasticity of −0.39, the one for the model with symmetric domestic trade costs is -0.15, closer
to the elasticity observed in the data of −0.23, but not as good as the one implied by the
asymmetric model (−0.27). Finally, the size elasticities for the nominal wage and price
index are very similar to the ones obtained from the asymmetric quantitative model, and
closer to the ones in the data than the ones implied by the model without domestic trade
costs.
The Gains from Trade. We could have used directly the data on domestic trade shares
and (17) to calculate the gains from trade in (21), rather than the simulated trade shares,
and avoid the calibration of the matrix of international trade costs. Columns 1 and 4 in
Table 6 record the gains from trade calculated with real and simulated data, respectively.
Our calibrated procedure underestimates the gains from trade for small countries and
overestimates them for large countries. But this is not enough to change the results regarding the importance of domestic trade costs in closing the gap between the data and
the model with only scale effects: for the set of the six smallest countries in our sample,
domestic trade costs close almost 50 percent of that gap, while trade openness does it in
less than eight percent.40
Gravity. Under A1, the model implies that country-level trade flows are log-linear in
trade costs. Rather than imposing the structure in (14) for δ n , we alternately estimate domestic trade costs using data on international bilateral trade shares and gravity equations.
Notice that these estimates are also valid for the two alternative geographies presented
next, for which country-level trade flows also follow a gravity equation.
40

These numbers are calculated using (21)) and plugging τ nn from column 2 in Table 4, the gains from
trade from column 1 in Table 6, and our R&D adjusted country-size variable from column 6 in Table 1.

29

Our identifying assumption is that trade costs are symmetric.41 From (8), we get
λni
=
λnn



τ ni w
ei
τ nn w
en

−θ e
Ti
.
Ten

(30)

Assuming that international trade costs are as in (28) and taking logs yield
log

λni
= Si − Hn − θβ 3 log distni + εni ,
λnn

(31)

where
Si ≡ log Tei − θβ 1 − θ log w
ei ,

(32)

Hn ≡ log Ten − θ log τ nn − θ log w
en

(33)

and

gather source and destination country characteristics, respectively. The variable εni is an
error term reflecting measurement error and/or barriers to trade arising from all other
country-pair specific factors (and orthogonal to the observable variables).42 Subtracting
(33) from (32), for country n, and rearranging terms yields
1
log τ̂ nn = (Sn − Hn ).
θ

(34)

We estimate (31) by OLS (shown in column 4 of Table 2), and assuming θ = 4, we compute τ̂ nn as indicated by (34)—see column 4 in Table 4. We plot this measure of domestic trade costs, τ̂ nn against our measure of country size in Figure 8 (red dots). Just as
for the calibrated domestic trade costs above, the estimated τ̂ nn exhibits a strong positive relationship with country size (0.7), implying a high positive correlation between τ̂ nn
and our calibrated τ nn ’s (0.79). Thus, under the assumption of symmetric (international)
trade costs, the data on international trade shares suggest the existence of domestic trade
costs that increase with size, as implied by the structure of our symmetric model. In fact,
the elasticity of the estimated τ̂ nn with respect to R&D-adjusted size doubles the corresponding elasticity for the calibrated τ nn ’s, for the symmetric model, and is three times
larger than the size elasticity implied by our calibration of domestic frictions in the general model (0.28 vs 0.14 vs 0.09, respectively). The stronger relation with size presented
by gravity estimates of domestic frictions would make the role of domestic trade costs
41

The equivalence shown in Proposition 6 in Section 3 between the EK, Waugh (2010), and our model,
implies that, without the symmetry assumption on costs, the country-level data applied to the gravity
equation in (31) could not be used to estimate domestic trade costs separately from country-specific effects
on trade costs.
42
We also add a dummy for sharing a border and a dummy for sharing the same language to the costs in
(28).

30

even more important.43

5.2

Symmetric Hub-and-Spoke

We now change the calibration of domestic trade costs by preserving A1 but relaxing the
assumption on a common δ across countries. We assume that domestic trade costs are
proportional to the country’s area; hence, we assign higher domestic costs to larger countries in terms of area. This case is one commonly found in the literature where domestic
pairs are included in the estimation of gravity equations and domestic distances are calculated as a transformation of country area (see Redding and Venables, 2004; and Head
and Mayer, 2013).
We assume that regions are located in a circle within a country and that goods have
to be shipped first to a centrally located hub before reaching their final destination, either
domestic or international. The area of the circle is equated to the country’s area observed
in the data (see column 10 in Table 1), and the radio of the circle determines the distance
between any region in a country and its hub. Hence, for any two regions in the same
β
country n, trade costs in (24) collapse to δ n = (β 0 distn2 )2 , with distn = (arean /π)0.5 (i.e.,
the radio of the circle). For any two regions in different countries n and i, trade costs
are then given by δ n τ ni δ i , with τ ni as in (28). We use again the calibration procedure
described in Section 4.1 where we impose β 2 = β 3 = 0.27, and calibrate β 0 and β 1 to
match, respectively, the intra-region trade share for the United States and the average
bilateral international trade share.
Column 3 in Table 4 shows the implied δ n ’s for each country. A country like Denmark,
with an area equal to 0.5 percent the area of the United States and only one region, has
costs that are almost one quarter the U.S. costs, while Japan with an area equal to four
percent the area of the United States, but 36 regions, has two fifth their costs. For both
countries, these estimates are the lowest across the different calibrations. In general, these
calibrated domestic costs are, on average, around two thirds lower than the ones implied
by the remaining calibrations—even though the difference between large and small countries is 1.5 as also implied by our general calibration.
Table 5 shows that this version of the model matches even better than the symmetric
and asymmetric model the pattern of real wages across countries of different size: the
income-size elasticity is 0.07 (s.e. 0.05), closer to the one observed in the data. Nonetheless, this calibrated version of our model misses the pattern of import shares across coun43

A similar size elasticity for domestic trade costs would arise if we estimated the gravity equation in (31)
including the domestic pair, as done by Head and Mayer (2013).

31

tries of different size: as for the model with no domestic trade costs, import shares decrease too rapidly with country size in comparison to the pattern observed in the data
(-0.39 vs -0.23).

5.3

International Hub-and-Spoke

We now calibrate the model dropping A1, but assuming A2. This assumption implies
that while regions within a country can trade between them directly, they have to ship
goods to a hub region in order to trade with the rest of the world. Under A2, for m ∈ Ωn
and k ∈ Ωi with n 6= i, trade costs are given by
dIHS
mk = dmhn dhn hi dkhi ,

(35)

where hn and hi denote the hub regions in countries n and i, respectively. We assume that
each of the trade costs in (35) follows the functional form proposed in (24). Hence, for
two regions m and k, (24) collapses to
β I

2−Imk 1−Imk
2 mk
dIHS
β1
distmk
(distmhn distkhi disthn hi )β 3 (1−Imk ) .
mk = β 0

(36)

We impose the same restriction as in the general case, namely, β 2 = β 3 = 0.27, and
calibrate the constants β 0 and β 1 to match, respectively, the observed share of intra-region
trade for the United States and the average bilateral trade share among our sample of
countries. Of course, this geographic configuration entails the need to choose a hub region
for each country: among our sample of metropolitan areas, we choose the most populated
area in each country as the international hub.
This geographic structure does the poorest in terms of fit with the data (the R-squared
is 0.82). Nonetheless, as the statistics in Table 5 show, this model gets the closest to the
data in terms of the income-size elasticity (0.06 with s.e. 0.03), and in terms of the average
real wage, relative to the U.S., for the six smallest countries in our sample. The better fit in
terms of real wage is the result of a much lower price-size elasticity (-0.01 with s.e. 0.01).
This calibrated model misses, however, the pattern of import shares across countries of
different size: the implied trade-size elasticity is -0.5 (s.e. 0.08), more than double the one
observed in the data of -0.23 (s.e. 0.06).
It is worth mentioning that the fit of the international hub-and-spoke case improves
substantially if one allows for a lower distance elasticity for the trade cost between a

32

region and its international hub,
β 3 (1−I

β I

2−Imk 1−Imk
2 mk
distmk
((distmhn distkhi )α disthn hi )
β1
dIHS
mk = β 0

mk )

,

(37)

with 0 < α < 1. With α = 0.03—and β 0 and β 1 adjusted accordingly to match, respectively, the average international bilateral trade share and intra-regional trade shares for
the United States, the R-squared reaches 0.96, the same as the fit achieved by the other
calibrated versions of the model. Of course, the implied distance elasticity to the international hub is very low, 0.008. This version of the calibrated international hub-and-spoke
delivers very similar results to the general calibrated case in terms of averages and income elasticities for real and nominal wages, as well as import shares across countries of
different size.

6

Conclusion

Models in which growth is driven by innovation naturally lead to scale effects. This feature results in the counterfactual implication that larger countries should be much richer
than smaller ones. These scale effects are also present in the standard gravity model of
trade. In those models, trade and scale lead to TFP gains through exactly the same mechanism as in innovation-led growth models, namely an expansion in the set of available
non-rival ideas. These trade models, as idea-based growth models do, assume that any innovation produced in a given country is instantly available to all residents of that country.
We depart from the standard assumption and build a trade model in which countries are
a collection of regions and trade between regions in a country is costly. We calibrate the
model and evaluate the role of domestic frictions in reconciling the data and the theory.
The calibrated model reveals that domestic frictions are key to explain the discrepancy
between the standard trade model and the data. By weakening scale effects, domestic
frictions not only help the model better match the observed productivity levels across
countries; they also make the model better match observed import shares, relative income
levels, and price indices.
An obvious limitation of our analysis is that we restricted our attention to differences
across countries only coming from differences in R&D-adjusted size, gains from trade,
and domestic frictions. Some forces left out of the model can be potentially important to
further reconcile the model and the data.
One obvious possibility is that small countries benefit from “better institutions,” which

33

in the model would be reflected in higher technology levels (φn ) than those implied by the
share of labor devoted to R&D. But small countries are not systematically better in terms
of schooling levels, corruption in government, bureaucratic quality, and rule of law; the
data do not support the idea that smallness confers some productivity advantage through
better institutions.44
We conjecture that allowing for international technology diffusion would further bring
the model closer to the data regarding the strength of scale effects. As we found in a
working paper version of the paper, however, extending our model to incorporate multinational production does not have a sizable effect on the implied scale effects. One would
then need to model a technology diffusion process by which ideas from one country can
be used by domestic firms in other countries. Unfortunately, except for the small part that
happens through licensing, technology diffusion does not leave a paper trail that can be
used to directly measure the value of production done in a country by domestic firms using foreign technologies.45 The big challenge of incorporating diffusion as an additional
channel for the gains from openness is to discipline the amount of diffusion occurring
across countries as it is not directly observable in the data. Our paper can be seen as a
step in that direction since, after controlling for observable sources of gains from openness and domestic frictions, any difference in TFP between the data and the model could
be attributed to non-observable diffusion. Our framework could be taken a step further
and be used to discipline parameters related to diffusion. This is an important topic left
for future research.

References
[1] Ades, Alberto, and Edward L. Glaeser. 1999. “Evidence on Growth, Increasing Returns, and the Extent of the Market”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3), 1025-1045.
44

Schooling levels are average years of schooling from Barro and Lee (2000); corruption in government,
rule of law, and bureaucratic quality, are indices ranging from zero (worst) to six (best), from Beck, Clarke,
Groff, Keefer, and Walsh (2001). Patents per unit of R&D-adjusted equipped labor from country i registered
in all other countries in the sample (including itself) are from the World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO), average over 2000-2005.
45
According to the data published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, royalties and licenses paid to
U.S. parents and foreign affiliates by unaffiliated parties for the use of intangibles represented only one
percent of total affiliates sales, in 1999. Some indirect evidence points to the importance of international
diffusion for growth. Eaton and Kortum (1996, 1999) develop a quantitative model that allows them to use
international patent data to indirectly infer diffusion flows. They estimate that most of the productivity
growth in OECD countries, except for the United States, is due to foreign research: between 84 percent and
89 percent in Germany, France, and the United Kingdom, and around 65 percent for Japan. Keller (2004)
also finds that, for nine countries that are smaller than the United Kingdom, the contribution of domestic
sources to productivity growth is about ten percent.

34

[2] Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. 1992. “A model of growth through creative
destruction”. Econometrica 60(2): 323–351.
[3] Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. 1998. Endogenous Growth Theory. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
[4] Agnosteva, Delina, James E. Anderson, and Yoto Yotov. 2013. “Intra- and Interregional Trade Costs: Measurement and Aggregation”. NBER Working Paper 19872.
[5] Alcala, Francisco, and Antonio Ciccone. 2004. “Trade and productivity”. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119 (2), 613-646.
[6] Alesina, Alberto, Enrico Spolaore, and Romain Wacziarg. 2000. “Economic Integration and Political Disintegration”. American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 5 (Dec.,
2000), pp. 1276-1296.
[7] Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis. 2014. “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial
Economy”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1085–1140.
[8] Alvarez, Fernando, and Robert E. Lucas. 2007. “General Equilibrium Analysis of the
Eaton-Kortum Model of International Trade”. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6).
[9] Alvarez, Fernando, Francisco J. Buera, and Robert E. Lucas. 2013. “Idea Flows, Economic Growth, and Trade”. NBER Working Paper No. 19667.
[10] Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle”. The American Economic Review, 93(1): 170–192.
[11] Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2004. “Trade Costs”. Journal of Economic
Literature, 42(3): 691–751.
[12] Anderson, James E., and Yoto Yotov. 2010. “The Changing Incidence of Geography”.
American Economic Review 100(5): 2157—86.
[13] Arkolakis, Costas, Svletana Demidova, Peter Klenow, and Andrés RodríguezClare. 2008. “Endogenous Variety and the Gains from Trade” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 98(2): 444—450.
[14] Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2012. “New
Trade Models, Same Old Gains?” American Economic Review, 102(1): 94–130.
[15] Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Stephen
Yeaple. 2013. “Innovation and Production in the Global Economy”. NBER Working
Paper No. 18792.
[16] Aten, Bettina, Alan Heston, and Robert Summers. 2009. Penn World Table Version
7.1. Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income, and Prices at the
University of Pennsylvania.
[17] Barro Robert J., and Jong-Wha Lee. 2000. “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and Implications”. CID Working Paper 42.
35

[18] Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh.
2001. “New Tools in Comparative Political Economy: The Database of Political
Institu- tions”. World Bank Economic Review (1), 165–
[19] Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2014. “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare
Effects of NAFTA.”. Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
[20] Caselli, Francesco. 2005. “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in
Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1,
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[21] Chaney, Thomas. 2008. “Distorted Gravity: the Intensive and Extensive Margins of
International Trade”. American Economic Review, 98(4): 1707–21.
[22] Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, Diego Puga, and
Sébastien Roux. 2012. “The productivity advantages of large cities: Distinguishing
agglomeration from firm selection”. Econometrica, forthcoming.
[23] Cosar, Kerem, and Pablo Fajgelbaum. 2014. “Internal Geography, International
Trade, and Regional Specialization”. NBER Working Paper 19697.
[24] Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare. 2013. “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the
Consequences of Globalization”. Chapter forthcoming in the Handbook of International Economics Vol. 4, eds. Gopinath, Helpman, and Rogoff, Elsevier.
[25] Costinot, Arnaud, David Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer. 2012. “What Goods Do
Countries Trade? A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas”. Review of Economic
Studies, 79(2): 581—608.
[26] Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum. 2007. "Unbalanced Trade".
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 97(2): 351—355.
[27] Dinopoulos, Elias, and Peter Thompson. 1998.“chumpeterian growth without scale
effects”. Journal of Economic Growth, 3 (4): 313–335.
[28] Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 1996. “Trade in ideas Patenting and productivity in the OECD”. Journal of International Economics, 40(3-4): 251–278.
[29] Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel S. Kortum. 1999. “International Technology Diffusion:
Theory and Measurement”. International Economic Review, 40(3): 537–570.
[30] Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel S. Kortum. 2001. “Technology, Trade, and Growth: A
Unified Framework”. European Economic Review, 45: 742–755.
[31] Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel S. Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography and Trade”.
Econometrica, 70(5).
[32] Fajgelbaum, Pablo, and Stephen Redding. 2014. “Exernal Integration, Structural
Transformation, and Economic Development ”. NBER Working Paper 20217.

36

[33] Frankel, Jacob, and David Romer. 1999. “Does trade cause growth?” American Economic Review, 89(3): 379–399.
[34] Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the
Global Economy. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[35] Head, Keith and John Ries. 2001. “Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation as an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade”. American Economic Review, Vol. 91(4): 858–876.
[36] Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer and John Ries. 2010. “The erosion of colonial trade
linkages after independence”. Journal of International Economics, 81(1):1–14
[37] Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2011. “Gravity, Market Potential, and Economic
Development”. Journal of Economic Geography, 11(2): 281–294.
[38] Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2013. “Gravity Equations: Workhorse,Toolkit, and
Cookbook”. Chapter forthcoming in the Handbook of International Economics Vol.
4, eds. Gopinath, Helpman, and Rogoff, Elsevier.
[39] Helpman, Elhanan. 1998. “The Size of Regions”. In Topics in Public Economics: Theoretical and Applied Analysis, ed. David Pines, Efraim Sadka, and Itzhak Zilcha,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[40] Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels. 2008. “Trade responses to geographic frictions: A decomposition using micro-data”. European Economic Review, 52(3): 527–550.
[41] Holmes, Thomas J., and John J. Stevens. 2010. “An Alternative Theory of the Plant
Size Distribution with an Application to Trade”. NBER Working Paper 15957.
[42] Jones, Charles I. 1995. “R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth”. Journal of Political
Economy, 103: 759–784.
[43] Jones, Charles I. 2002. “Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas”, American Economic Review, 92(1): 220–239.
[44] Jones, Charles I. 2005. “Growth and Ideas”, Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1A, P.
Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds., 1064–1108 (chapter 16).
[45] Jones, Charles I. and Paul M. Romer 2010. “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions, Population, and Human Capital”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
2(1): 224–45.
[46] Keller, Wolfang. 2004.“International Technology diffusion”, Journal of Economic Literature, 42: 752—782
[47] Klenow, Peter J., and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2005. “Externalities and Growth”,
Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1A, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds., 817-861 (chapter 11).

37

[48] Kortum, Samuel S. 1997. “Research, Patenting and Technological Change”. Econometrica 65, 1389-1419.
[49] Krugman, Paul. 1980. "Scale economies, product differentiation, and the pattern of
trade", American Economic Review, 70(5), 950—959.
[50] Lucas, Robert E.. 2009. “Ideas and Growth”. Economica, 76(301): pp. 1–19.
[51] Lucas, Robert E., and Benjamin Moll. 2013. “Knowledge Growth and the Allocation
of Time”. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
[52] McCallum, John. 1995. “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns”. The American Economic Review, 85(3): 615–623.
[53] Melitz, Marc. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity”. Econometrica 71: 1695–1725.
[54] Peretto, Pietro. 1998. “Technological change and population growth”. Journal of Economic Growth, 3 (4): 283–311.
[55] Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2010. “Growth, Size, and Openness: A Quantitative Approach”. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
100(2): 62–67.
[56] Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Milagro Saborío-Rodríguez.
2012. “Scale Effects and Productivity Across Countries: The Role of Openness and
Domestic Frictions”. NBER Working Paper 18532.
[57] Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2013. “Trade, Multinational Production, and the Gains from Openness”. Journal of Political Economy, 121(2): 273-322.
[58] Redding, Stephen J. and Anthony Venables. 2004. "Economic Geography and International Inequality". Journal of International Economics, 62(1): 53–82.
[59] Redding, Stephen J. 2014. “Goods Trade, Factor mobility, and Welfare”. NBER
Working Paper 18008.
[60] Rose, Andrew K. 2006. “Size Really Doesn’t Matter: In Search of a National Scale
Effect”. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 20(4): 482-507.
[61] Shapiro, Joseph. 2013. “Trade, CO2, and the Environment”. Mimeo, Yale U.
[62] Simonovska, Ina, and Michael Waugh. 2013. “The Elasticity of Trade for Developing
Nations: Estimates and Evidence ”. Journal of International Economics 92(1): 34—50.
[63] Suarez Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Owen Zidar. 2014. “Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms”.
Mimeo, U. of Chicago BOOTH School of Business.
[64] Trevor, Tombe, and Jennifer Winter. 2014. “What’s Inside Counts: Migration, Taxes,
and the Internal Gains from Trade”. Mimeo, University of Calgary.
38

[65] Waugh, Michael. 2010. “International Trade and Income Differences”. American Economic Review, 100(5): 2093–2124.
[66] Young, Alwyn. 1998. “Growth without scale effects”. Journal of Political Economy, 106
(1), 41–63.

39

Figure 1: The Role of Domestic Frictions. Symmetry.
0

Log of Nominal wage (relative to U.S.)

0

Log of Import share

−0.5
dom. fric
no dom.fric.

−1

−1.5

−2

−2.5

−3
−8

−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

dom. fric
no dom.fric.

−0.05
−0.1
−0.15
−0.2
−0.25
−0.3
−0.35
−0.4
−0.45
−0.5
−8

0

−7

Log of R&D−adjusted country size (relative to U.S.)

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

−1

0

0
dom. fric
no dom.fric.

0.6

Log of Real wage (relative to U.S.)

Log of Price index (relative to U.S.)

0.7

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
−8

−6

Log of R&D−adjusted country size (relative to U.S.)

−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6

−0.8

−1

−1.2

−1.4
−8

0

Log of R&D−adjusted country size (relative to U.S.)

dom. fric
no dom.fric.

−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

Log of R&D−adjusted country size (relative to U.S.)

R&D-adjusted country size refers to φn Ln with φn = 1 for all n and Ln a measure of equipped labor from the
data.

40

Figure 2: Head and Ries Index for U.S. Regions: Data and Model.
2.5

Log of Head and Ries index

2

1.5

1

0.5

model
data
0

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

7.5

8

8.5

Log of distance

The Head and Ries index in the data refers to the expression in (26), while in the model, it refers to the expression
in (24), both calculated for 55 metropolitan areas in the United States.

41

Figure 3: Scale Effects, Trade Openness, and Domestic Frictions. General Model.

0.5

Log of real wage (relative to U.S.)

0

−0.5

−1

scale effects
scale effects + trade
scale effects + trade + dom.fric.
data

−1.5

−2
−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

Log of R&D−adjusted country size (relative to U.S.)

R&D-adjusted country size refers to φn Ln , where φn is the share of R&D employment observed in the data and
Ln is a measure of equipped labor from the data.

42

Figure 4: Real Wages: Calibrated Models and Data.

0.4

Log of real wage (relative to U.S.)

0.2

0

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6

−0.8

no dom.fric.
sym.dom.fric.

−1

asym.dom.fric.
data

−1.2

−1.4
−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

Log of R&D−adjusted country size (relative to U.S.)

‘’No dom.fric." refers to the model without domestic frictions; ‘’sym. dom.fric." refers to the symmetric model
with domestic frictions; ‘’asym. dom.fric." refers to the general asymmetric model. In the data, the real wage is
computed as real GDP (PPP-adjusted) divided by equipped labor, Ln . R&D-adjusted country size refers to φn Ln ,
where φn is the share of R&D employment observed in the data.

43

Figure 5: Import Shares: Calibrated Models and Data.

0

−0.5

Log of import shares

−1

−1.5

−2

−2.5
no dom.fric.
sym.dom.fric.

−3

asym.dom.fric.
data
−3.5
−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

Log of R&D−adjusted country size (relative to U.S.)

‘’No dom.fric." refers to the model without domestic frictions; ‘’sym. dom.fric." refers to the symmetric model with
domestic frictions; ‘’asym. dom.fric." refers to the general asymmetric model. In the data, import shares refer to
total imports, as share of absorption, in the manufacturing sector. R&D-adjusted country size refers to φn Ln , where
φn is the share of R&D employment observed in the data and Ln is a measure of equipped labor.

44

Figure 6: Nominal Wages: Calibrated Models and Data.

0.4

Log of wages (relative to U.S.)

0.2

0

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6
no dom.fric.
sym.dom.fric.
asym.dom.fric.

−0.8

data
−1
−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

Log of R&D−adjusted country size (relative to U.S.)

‘’No dom.fric." refers to the model without domestic frictions; ‘’sym. dom.fric." refers to the symmetric model with
domestic frictions; ‘’asym. dom.fric." refers to the general asymmetric model. In the data, the nominal wage is
calculated as GDP at current prices divided by equipped labor, Ln . R&D-adjusted country size refers to φn Ln ,
where φn is the share of R&D employment observed in the data.

45

Figure 7: Price Indices: Calibrated Models and Data.

0.8

Log of price index (relative to U.S.)

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2

−0.4

no dom.fric.
sym.dom.fric.
asym.dom.fric.
data

−0.6

−0.8

−1
−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

Log of R&D−adjusted country size (relative to U.S.)

‘’No dom.fric." refers to the model without domestic frictions; ‘’sym. dom.fric." refers to the symmetric model
with domestic frictions; ‘’asym. dom.fric." refers to the general asymmetric model. In the data, the price index is
calculated as the nominal wage divided by the real wage. R&D-adjusted country size refers to φn Ln , where φn is
the share of R&D employment observed in the data and Ln is a measure of equipped labor.

46

Figure 8: Gravity and Calibrated Domestic Frictions.

Log of domestic frictions (relative to U.S.)

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

−1.5
gravity
sym. model
−2
asym. model

−2.5
−7

−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

Log of R&D−adjusted country size (relative to U.S.)

"Gravity" refers to τ̂ nn in (34) estimated through the gravity equation in (31). ‘’Sym. model" refers to
τ nn calculated using (14). ‘’Asym. model" refers to τ nn calculated applying the aggregation in (25) to
the calibrated domestic costs. R&D-adjusted country size refers to φn Ln , where φn is the share of R&D
employment observed in the data and Ln is a measure of equipped labor.

47

Table 1: Data Summary.
Domestic
Trade shares
(1)

RGDP
p.c.
(2)

CGDP
p.c
(3)

R&D
emp.
(4)

Equipped
labor
(5)

Country
Size
(6)=(4)*(5)

Number of
metro areas
(7)

Pop
share
(8)

Country
area
(9)

Australia
0.83
0.97
0.78
0.68
7.92
0.05
8
66
9.01
Austria
0.44
1.12
1.09
0.49
2.92
0.01
3
47
0.08
Benelux
0.20
1.16
1.08
0.58
9.30
0.05
9
82
0.08
Canada
0.49
0.86
0.68
0.63
13.99
0.08
9
56
9.98
Switzerland
0.51
0.88
1.12
0.60
3.60
0.02
3
35
0.04
Denmark
0.42
0.94
1.15
0.63
2.25
0.01
1
36
0.04
Spain
0.71
1.14
0.83
0.38
10.76
0.04
8
36
0.50
Finland
0.68
0.84
0.92
1.23
2.06
0.02
1
27
0.34
France
0.68
1.07
1.08
0.59
20.08
0.10
15
40
0.68
Great Britain
0.64
1.00
0.98
0.53
20.83
0.10
15
41
0.27
Germany
0.70
0.92
0.96
0.60
33.73
0.18
24
39
0.36
Greece
0.63
0.90
0.63
0.30
2.90
0.01
2
40
0.13
Hungary
0.48
0.65
0.28
0.29
2.47
0.01
1
28
0.09
Ireland
0.28
1.32
1.25
0.51
1.04
0.005
1
37
0.07
Iceland
0.40
1.17
1.09
0.96
0.11
0.001
1
63
0.10
Italy
0.78
1.20
1.07
0.29
16.73
0.04
11
30
0.30
Japan
0.94
0.72
0.98
0.80
66.31
0.46
36
68
0.38
Korea
0.83
0.63
0.44
0.51
16.04
0.07
10
72
0.10
Mexico
0.63
0.78
0.40
0.06
16.60
0.01
33
51
1.97
Norway
0.57
1.11
1.07
0.81
2.21
0.02
1
25
0.32
New Zealand
0.64
0.74
0.61
0.48
1.48
0.01
1
33
0.27
Poland
0.68
0.50
0.24
0.32
10.07
0.03
8
30
0.31
Portugal
0.59
0.97
0.70
0.33
2.48
0.01
2
39
0.09
Sweden
0.59
0.81
0.97
0.83
3.90
0.03
3
37
0.45
Turkey
0.74
0.61
0.26
0.07
10.83
0.01
11
41
0.78
United States
0.85
1.00
1.00
0.87
130.10
1.00
70
53
9.83
Domestic trade in manufacturing in column 1 is calculated as a share of absorption in manufacturing. RGDP p.c. in
column 2 is PPP-adjusted real GDP divided by equipped labor (in column 5, in millions). CGDP p.c. in column 3 is
GDP in current U.S. dollars divided by equipped labor. R&D employment in column 4 is calculated as a share of total
employment (%). Column 7 shows the number of metro areas, while column 8 shows their population as a share of
the country’s total population. Column 9 shows a country’s area (in millions of squared kilometers). Real GDP and
current GDP per capita, as well as country size, are relative to the United States. Variables are averages over 1996-2001.

48

Table 2: Gravity Estimates.
OLS
Dep. variable

Log of trade share
international
U.S. domestic
(1)
(2)
(3)

Log of distance
common int.’ border
common language
R-squared
Observations

PPML
Log of norm. trade share
international
(4)

Trade share
international
U.S. domestic
(5)
(6)
(7)

-1.009
0.06*
0.126
0.13
0.38
0.10*

-1.084
0.05*

-1.122
0.028*

-1.01
0.06*
0.126
0.13
0.38
0.105*

-0.752
0.05*
0.411
0.11*
0.35
0.13*

-0.944
0.05*

-1.259
0.04*

0.999
650

0.987
650

0.986
2,220

0.988
650

650

650

2,961

eni /X
en for n 6= i, for 26 OECD countries, while in columns 3 and
In columns 1-2 and 5-6, trade shares refer to λni ≡= X
7 trade shares refer to λmk ≡ Xmk /Xm , for m 6= k, for 55 metropolitan areas in the United States. Normalized trade
shares in column 4 refer to λni /λnn . All regressions with importer and exporter fixed effects. Robust standard errors
with ∗ denote a level of significance of p < 0.01

Table 3: Calibrated Parameters.

β0
β1
β2 = β3

no dom.fric.

asym. dom.fric.

sym. dom.fric.

sym. hub-spoke

int’. hub-spoke

n.a.
0.81
0.27

2.33
2.89
0.27

n.a.
1.22
0.27

1.32
2.24
0.27

1.33
10.38
0.27

R-squared
0.94
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.82
The parameters β’s are from (24). ’No dom.fric.", ‘’asym. dom.fric.", ‘’sym. dom.fric." , ‘’sym. hub-spoke" , and ‘’int’.
hub-spoke" refer, respectively, to the calibrated models with no domestic trade costs, asymmetric and symmetric
domestic trade costs, and symmetric and international hub-and-spoke.

49

Table 4: Domestic Trade Costs.
Calibrated Models
(1)
(2)
(3)

Gravity estimates
(4)

Australia
Austria
Benelux
Canada
Switzerland
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Iceland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Norway
New Zealand
Poland
Portugal
Sweden
Turkey
United States

0.73
0.57
0.59
0.75
0.58
0.50
0.71
0.50
0.70
0.64
0.72
0.55
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.72
0.70
0.60
0.78
0.50
0.50
0.67
0.57
0.61
0.67
1.00

0.70
0.56
0.71
0.71
0.56
0.43
0.70
0.43
0.79
0.79
0.86
0.50
0.43
0.43
0.43
0.74
0.92
0.73
0.91
0.43
0.43
0.70
0.50
0.56
0.74
1.00

0.98
0.28
0.27
1.00
0.23
0.23
0.45
0.40
0.49
0.38
0.41
0.31
0.28
0.26
0.29
0.39
0.41
0.29
0.65
0.40
0.38
0.39
0.28
0.43
0.50
1.00

0.40
0.36
0.37
0.43
0.43
0.32
0.51
0.41
0.64
0.58
0.74
0.24
0.27
0.31
0.13
0.70
1.08
0.66
0.43
0.31
0.25
0.33
0.32
0.46
0.33
1.00

Avg all
Avg 6 smallest
Avg 6 largest

0.63 0.64
0.50 0.43
0.75 0.85

0.44
0.33
0.51

0.46
0.29
0.79

Columns 1 to 3 record, respectively, calibrated domestic trade costs from the general, symmetric, and
symmetric hub-and-spoke models. In column 1, domestic trade costs are aggregated using (25). Estimates
in column 4 refer to τ̂ nn resulting from applying the gravity estimates in (31) to (34). All variables are
calculated relative to the United States. The six smallest countries (with respect to R&D-adjusted size) are
Iceland, Ireland, New Zealand, Finland, Norway, and Denmark, while the six largest countries are Italy,
France, Great Britain, Germany, Japan, and the United States.

50

Table 5: Calibrated Models and Data: Summary Statistics.

full sample

Average
6 largest countries

Size elasticity

rmse

6 smallest countries

Real Wage
data
no dom.fric.
asym. dom.fric
sym. dom.fric.
sym. hub-spoke
int’. hub-spoke

0.92
0.49
0.76
0.75
1.25
0.82

0.95
0.59
0.85
0.74
1.39
0.82

1.02
0.38
0.71
0.77
1.19
0.96

-0.01 (0.03)
0.20 (0.01)
0.13 (0.02)
0.09 (0.02)
0.07 (0.05)
0.06 (0.03)

n.a.
0.50
0.31
0.29
0.58
0.28

Import Share
data
no dom.fric.
asym. dom.fric
sym. dom.fric.
sym. hub-spoke
int’. hub-spoke

0.39
0.39
0.39
0.39
0.39
0.38

0.27
0.22
0.30
0.38
0.23
0.14

0.50
0.59
0.48
0.40
0.58
0.78

-0.23 (0.06)
-0.39 (0.09 )
-0.27 (0.06)
-0.15 (0.07)
-0.37 (0.09)
-0.50 (0.08)

n.a.
0.13
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.24

Nominal Wage
data
no dom.fric.
asym. dom.fric
sym. dom.fric.
sym. hub-spoke
int’. hub-spoke

0.83
0.67
0.85
0.82
1.02
0.87

0.91
0.72
0.85
0.80
1.05
0.82

1.01
0.63
0.88
0.87
1.05
1.02

0.07 (0.06)
0.10 (0.01)
0.06 (0.02)
0.06 (0.02)
0.05 (0.03)
0.03 (0.03)

n.a.
0.30
0.24
0.24
0.30
0.23

Price Index
data
no dom.fric.
asym. dom.fric
sym. dom.fric.
sym. hub-spoke
int’. hub-spoke

0.88
1.45
1.09
1.12
0.88
1.07

0.97
1.25
1.02
1.10
0.81
1.07

1.00
1.71
1.16
1.15
0.92
0.97

0.07 (0.04)
-0.09 (0.01)
-0.05 (0.01)
-0.04 (0.01)
-0.02 (0.03)
-0.01 (0.01)

n.a.
0.67
0.36
0.38
0.36
0.37

‘’No dom.fric.", ‘’asym. dom.fric.", ‘’sym. dom.fric." , ‘’sym. hub-spoke", and ‘’int’. hub-spoke",
refer, respectively to the calibrated models with no domestic trade costs, asymmetric and symmetric domestic trade costs, and symmetric and international hub-and-spoke.The real wage, nominal
wage, and price index, for country n, are calculated relative to the United States. The size elasticity of each variable is from an OLS regressions with a constant and robust standard errors (in
parenthesis). rmse is the root mean squared error defined in (27). The six smallest countries (with
respect to R&D-adjusted size) are Iceland, Ireland, New Zealand, Finland, Norway, and Denmark,
while the six largest countries are Italy, France, Great Britain, Germany, Japan, and the United
States.

51

Table 6: The Gains from Trade.
Data
ACR formula
(1)
Australia
Austria
Benelux
Canada
Switzerland
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Iceland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Norway
New Zealand
Poland
Portugal
Sweden
Turkey
United States

1.049
1.226
1.489
1.194
1.183
1.239
1.088
1.101
1.101
1.120
1.094
1.122
1.200
1.379
1.258
1.066
1.015
1.049
1.123
1.149
1.116
1.099
1.143
1.140
1.079
1.041

General Model
Symmetric Model
ACR formula model
ACR formula
(2)
(3)
(4)
1.029
1.258
1.184
1.111
1.303
1.222
1.124
1.117
1.136
1.093
1.102
1.142
1.194
1.279
1.462
1.130
1.017
1.050
1.109
1.150
1.036
1.153
1.163
1.186
1.098
1.022

1.028
1.259
1.184
1.110
1.303
1.222
1.123
1.117
1.135
1.092
1.102
1.142
1.194
1.279
1.462
1.130
1.016
1.049
1.108
1.150
1.036
1.153
1.163
1.189
1.096
1.021

1.026
1.228
1.404
1.206
1.254
1.144
1.118
1.088
1.219
1.196
1.177
1.115
1.137
1.211
1.357
1.120
1.024
1.068
1.089
1.109
1.025
1.148
1.131
1.132
1.130
1.028

Avg all
1.149
1.149
1.149
1.149
Avg 6 smallest
1.207
1.211
1.211
1.156
Avg 6 largest
1.073
1.083
1.083
1.127
Column 1 shows the gains from trade calculated directly applying the ACR formula in (17) to
the data, while columns 2 and 4 show the gains calculated from applying the ACR formula
to the simulated data. Column 3 computes the gains from trade as the change the real wage
between an equilibrium with trade and an autarky equilibrium, using the general model. The
six smallest countries (with respect to R&D-adjusted size) are Iceland, Ireland, New Zealand,
Finland, Norway, and Denmark, while the six largest countries are Italy, France, Great Britain,
Germany, Japan, and the United States.

52

A

Proof of Lemma 1

Let n(m) be the country to which region m belongs (i.e., m ∈ Ωn ) and let

Ψm ≡ z s.t. zm wm /Pm ≥ zk wk /Pk for all k ∈ Ωn(m) .
R
The share of workers that choose to live in region m is then π m ≡ Ψm dFn(m) (z), where
Fn(m) (z) is the joint distribution function of z in country n(m). In turn, total efficiency
R
units of labor supplied in region m is Em ≡ Ln(m) Ψm zm dFn(m) (z).
To simplify notation, we drop country sub-indices and use ω m ≡ wm /Pm . We first
P
prove that π m = Am ω κm /V κ , where V κ ≡ k Ak ω κk . The probability that ω m Zm ≥ ω k Zk
for all k is the same as the probability that ω m Zm ≥ Ym ≡ maxk6=m ω k Zk . But note that the
probability that Ym ≤ y is the same as the probability that Zk ≤ y/ω k for all k 6= m, which
P
−κ
κ
k6=m Ak ω k . Hence,
is e−y
Pr (Zm = z and Ym ≤ ω m z) = κAm z −κ−1 e−V

κ (ω

−κ
m z)

.

(38)

The probability that Zm ≥ Ym /ω m is obtained by integration across all z,
Z
πm =

∞

κAm z −κ−1 e−V

κ (ω

−κ
m z)

dz =

0

Am ω κm
.
Vκ

We now prove that Em = γLπ m ωVm . The result in (38) implies that
κ
Am w m
Em = L
Vκ

Z

∞
−κ −κ −V
κV κ wm
z e

κ (ω

−κ
m z)

dz.

0

R∞
−κ −κ −V κ (ω m z)−κ
But 0 κV κ wm
z e
dz is just the mean of a Fréchet distribution with parame1/κ
κ −κ
κ
ters κ and V wm , which is known to be γ (V κ ω −κ
. Together with π m = Am wm
/V κ , this
m )
establishes the result.

B

Proof of Proposition 1

We know that Pm = Pm0 for all m, m0 ∈ Ωn , hence
κ
Am w m
.
κ
k∈Ωn Ak wk

πm = P

53

(39)

Then (6) can be written as
!1/κ

κ
Am wm
γLn P
κ
k∈Ωn Ak wm

X

−θ
= Tm w m

κ
Ak w m

X
P
l

k∈Ωn

d−θ
lm
wE.
−θ −θ l l
k Tk wk dlk

κ+θ
Since djm = djm0 for all m, m0 ∈ Ωn and all j, then this implies that (Am /Tm ) wm
does not
vary with m ∈ Ωn , hence
wm = vn (Tm /Am )1/(κ+θ)

for some vn . Together with (39), this implies (7). In turn, this implies that total income in
P
country n is m∈Ωn wm Em = w
en Ln , where
!1/κ
X

w
en ≡ γvn

Aθ/(κ+θ)
Tmκ/(κ+θ)
m

.

m∈Ωn

Adding up over m ∈ Ωn on both sides in the labor market clearing condition above yields
xn L n =

X

P

m

 −θ
−θ
τ jn
Tm w m

P P
j

i

k∈Ωi

Tk wk−θ τ −θ
ji

xj Lj

Noting that
X

−θ
Tm w m
= vn−θ

m∈Ωn

X

Tmκ/(κ+θ) Aθ/(κ+θ)
m

m∈Ωn

and rearranging, we get (7).
Letting λjn denote the country-level trade shares, we have
Tei w
ei−θ τ −θ
ni
λni = P
−θ −θ
e
ej τ nj
j Tj w
while the price index in any region of country n is
!−1/θ
Pen = µ−1

XX
i

Tk w
ek−θ τ −θ
ni

!−1/θ
= µ−1

X
i

k∈Ωi

This implies that
Tei w
ei−θ τ −θ
ni
λni = 
−θ
µPen

54

Tei w
ei−θ τ −θ
ni

and hence given that τ nn = 1 we have
w
en
= µTen1/θ λ−1/θ
nn .
e
Pn
But it is easy to show that, with no domestic trade costs, w
en /Pen = γVn , which yields (12).

C

Proof of Proposition 2

P
eni ≡ P
Replacing (1) into X
k∈Ωi Xmk , we get
m∈Ωn
enl =
X

X X
m∈Ωn k∈Ωl

Tk wk−θ d−θ
mk
Xm .
P
−θ −θ
k0 Tk0 wk0 dmk0

Using A1, for n 6= l, we have
Xnl =

X X
m∈Ωn k∈Ωl

=

X
m∈Ωn

=

en
X
Tk wk−θ d−θ
mk
P P
−θ −θ M
n
j
k0 ∈Ωj Tk0 wk0 dmk0

P

j6=n

X
m∈Ωn

P

j6=n

en
Tel w
el−θ τ −θ
X
nl
e
Tej w
e−θ τ −θ + (Mn − 1) (Ten /Mn )w
en−θ δ −θ
en−θ Mn
n + (Tn /Mn )w
j

nj

Tel w
el−θ τ −θ
nl h
−θ −θ
−θ
e
e
Tj w
e τ + Tn w
e
j

nj

n

1
Mn

+

Mn −1 −θ
δn
Mn

i

en
X
Mn

Tel w
el−θ τ −θ
nl
e .
X
= P
−θ −θ n
ej w
T
e
τ
j
nj
j
Similarly, for n = l,
enn =
X

X X
m∈Ωn k∈Ωl

en
X
Tk wk−θ d−θ
mk
P P
−θ −θ M
n
j
k0 ∈Ωj Tk0 wk0 dmk0

en
e
(Mn − 1) (Ten /Mn )w
en−θ δ −θ
X
en−θ
n + (Tn /Mn )w
=
P
e e−θ τ −θ + (Mn − 1) (Ten /Mn )w
e
en−θ δ −θ
en−θ Mn
n + (Tn /Mn )w
j
nj
j6=n Tj w
m∈Ωn
h
i
−θ
Ten w
en−θ M1n + MMn −1
δ
n
n
en
h
iX
= P
−θ −θ
1
Mn −1 −θ
−θ
e
e
ej τ nj + Tn w
en Mn + Mn δ n
j6=n Tj w
X

Ten w
e−θ τ −θ e
= P n −θnn−θ X
n.
ej w
T
e
τ
j
nj
j

(40)
(41)

(42)

(43)

55

This establishes that
Tel (w
el /Ml )−θ τ −θ
nl
e
e
λnl ≡ Xnl /Xn = P
,
−θ
e
ej /Mj ) τ −θ
nj
j Tj (w
!1/κ
X

w
en = γVn Pen = γ

Am

(w
en /Mn )

m∈Ωn

Total income in country n is
X

en =
X

m∈Ωn

Using Vn ≡

P

m∈Ωn

X

wm E m =

γLn Vn π m Pm = γLn Vn Pen

m∈Ωn

Am (wm /Pm )κ

1/κ

then
!1/κ

w
en = γVn Pen = γ

X

Am

(w
en /Mn )

m∈Ωn

Turning to the price index, we know that for m ∈ Ωn , we have Pen = Pm . Hence,
−1/θ


Pen = µ−1 

XX
j

= µ−1

= µ−1


Tk wk−θ d−θ
mk

k∈Ωj

Ten −θ
Ten −θ −θ
w
e
w
e
δ
+
Tej w
ej−θ τ −θ
+
(M
−
1)
n
nj
Mn n n
Mn n
j6=n
!−1/θ
X
Tej w
e−θ τ −θ
.
X

j

nj

j

so that
λnn
and hence

Ten w
en−θ τ −θ
nn
,
=
−θ
e
(µPn )

w
en
−1/θ
= µTen1/θ τ −1
nn λnn .
Pen

56

!−1/θ

Finally, note that
!1/κ
X

Vn ≡

Am (wm /Pm )κ

m∈Ωn

= (Mn Am )1/κ wm /Pm
= (Mn Am )1/κ µTe1/θ τ −1 λ−1/θ .
nn nn

n

D

Proof of Proposition 3

Note that (1) together with A2 implies that, for n 6= i,
eni ≡
X

X X

X X Tk w−θ (ν m τ ni ν k )−θ
k

Xmk =

m∈Ωn k∈Ωi

= τ −θ
ni

(µPm )−θ

m∈Ωn k∈Ωi

!
X Xm  Pm θ
µ−θ ν m
m∈Ω

Xm

!
X

−θ

Tk (wk ν k )

.

k∈Ωi

n

Rearranging terms, we get (16).

E

Proof of Proposition 4

Combining (4) with (3) implies that

GTn =

X


πm

m∈Ωn

ŵm

κ !−1/κ
.

P̂m

(44)

We use ψ mk to denote region-level trade shares, ψ mk ≡ Xmk /Xm . Using (1), we get
−θ ˆ−θ
ŵm
dkm

ψ̂ km = P

l

,

(45)

ψ mk ŵk−θ dˆ−θ
mk .

(46)

ψ kl ŵl−θ dˆ−θ
kl

while using (2) we get
P̂m−θ =

X
k

57

Combined, these equations yield the standard result that changes in real wages are determined by changes in domestic trade shares and the parameter θ,
−1/θ

ŵm /P̂m = ψ̂ mm .
Plugging into (44) yields (18).
To compute GTn we then need to compute ψ̂ mm for all m ∈ Ωn . In the model without trade costs or with symmetry, this is trivial, but here we need to use the model and
compute ψ̂ mm for a move to autarky at the country level, which entails dˆmk = ∞ for
n(m) 6= n(k) and dˆmk = 1 for n(m) = n(k).
To proceed, we turn to the labor market clearing condition in the counterfactual equilibrium. Using x0 = xx̂ and plugging in for ψ̂ km from (45), and using Xm ≡ wm Em , this
P
κ−1 κ
ŵm P̂m1−κ , so
can be written as Xm X̂m = k ψ km ψ̂ km Xk X̂k . From (5) we get X̂m = GTn(m)
that
X
κ−1 κ
κ−1 κ 1−κ
Xm GTn(m)
ŵm P̂m1−κ =
ψ km ψ̂ km Xk GTj(k)
ŵk P̂k .
k

Combined with (44) , (45) and (46), this is a system of M equations in the M unknowns,
{ŵ1 , ..., ŵM }. This determines wages changes given changes in trade costs, dˆmk and given
data π m , Xm , and ψ mk . Given a solution, we can then use (45) applied to m = k to get
ψ̂ mm and finally plug above to get GTn .
As mentioned above, the move to autarky entails dˆmk = ∞ for n(m) 6= n(k) and
dˆmk = 1 for n(m) = n(k). Plugging this into the system above implies that
!(κ−1)/θ
κ
Xm ŵm

X

ψ ml ŵl−θ

l∈Ωn

=

−θ
ψ km ŵm

X

−θ
l∈Ωn ψ kl ŵl

P
k∈Ωn

!(κ−1)/θ
Xk ŵkκ

X

ψ kl ŵl−θ

for m ∈ Ωn .

l∈Ωn

(47)
Solving this non-linear system we find ŵn for all m ∈ Ωn and all n. We can then compute
ψ̂ mm for all m and GTn for all n.

P
e
Note that if there were no domestic trade costs, then necessarily ψ km = ψ m ≡
l∈Ωn ψ l Xm /Xn
for all k, m ∈ Ωn , and (47) yields ŵm = 1 for all m ∈ Ωn (or any constant across m). This
−1/θ
P
P
implies that ψ̂ mm = 1/ l∈Ωn ψ l for all m ∈ Ωn , and hence GTn =
ψ
. But
l∈Ωn l
ψ l = ψ ml ≡ Xml /Xm for all m, hence
enn =
X

X X
m∈Ωn k∈Ωn

Xmk =

X X
m∈Ωn k∈Ωn

58

en
ψ k Xm = X

X
k∈Ωn

ψk ,

so that
X

enn /X
en =
λnn ≡ X

ψk ,

k∈Ωn

and we finally get GTn = λ−1/θ
nn . In the case of symmetry (A1), it is obvious that ŵm = 1
for all m ∈ Ωn (or any constant across m), so that we again have the same result even with
trade costs.

F

Proof of Proposition 5

Equilibrium wages are determined by the system
w
ei Li =

X
n

with
τ −θ
nn =
Given A3, and letting Φ ≡
w
ei Mi

P

j


w
ei−θ 1 − δ −θ + w
ei−θ Mi δ −θ

 w
ei Mi
=
Φ+w
ei−θ 1 − δ −θ + Mi δ −θ − τ −θ
X
Mi w
ei−θ τ −θ

 w
+
en Mn ,
Φ+w
en−θ 1 − δ −θ + Mn δ −θ − τ −θ
n6=i

Φ+w
e−θ
P

1
Mn − 1 −θ
+
δ .
Mn
Mn

Mj w
ej−θ τ −θ ,

and hence,

where Γ ≡

Li w
e−θ τ −θ
en Ln ,
P i −θni −θ w
ej τ nj
j Lj w

w
e1+θ
 = τ −θ Γ/Φ,
−θ
−θ
−θ
1−δ +M δ −τ

w
en Mn
.
−θ
n Φ+w
en
[1−δ−θ +Mn (δ−θ −τ −θ )]

(48)

Since τ > δ, then δ −θ > τ −θ , so that the left-hand

side is decreasing in M and increasing in w.
e This implies that if Mi > Mj then necessarily
w
ei > w
ej : larger countries have higher wages. In contrast, if τ = δ, then the left-hand side
is invariant to M and hence w
e must be common across countries.
To compare import shares across countries in a given equilibrium, note that domestic
trade shares are given by
λnn =

1 + (Mn − 1) δ −θ
.
Φw
enθ + 1 − δ −θ + Mn δ −θ − τ −θ

59

Plugging (F) into (48) and rearranging yield
w
en1+θ

1−

1 − δ −θ + Mn δ −θ − τ −θ
1 + (Mn − 1) δ

−θ

!


λnn

= τ −θ Γ.

(49)

Since w
ei > w
ej when Mi > Mj ,
1 − δ −θ + Mi (δ −θ − τ −θ )
1 − δ −θ + Mj (δ −θ − τ −θ )
λ
>
λjj .
ii
1 − δ −θ + Mi δ −θ
1 − δ −θ + Mj δ −θ
But since

1−δ −θ +x(δ −θ −τ −θ )
1−δ −θ +xδ −θ

is decreasing in x, then Mi > Mj also implies that

1 − δ −θ + Mj (δ −θ − τ −θ )
1 − δ −θ + Mi (δ −θ − τ −θ )
<
,
1 − δ −θ + Mi δ −θ
1 − δ −θ + Mj δ −θ
and hence λii > λjj .
For price indices, note that
(µPen )−θ =

X

Mj w
ej−θ τ −θ
en−θ 1 − δ −θ + Mn δ −θ − τ −θ
nj = Φ + w



.

j

Hence, (48) implies that
µ−θ τ −θ Γ
.
(50)
Φ
Again, since w
ei > w
ej when Mi > Mj , then Pei < Pej . Combining the results for wages and
price indices, real wages are also increasing in size. Moreover, if τ = δ, then the result that
wages are the same across countries immediately follows from (50), which also implies
that the price index is the same across countries.
w
en1+θ Penθ =

G

Proof of Proposition 6

The result trivially follows from replacing assumptions A6, A6’, and A6”, subsequently,
into the expressions for real wages in (15), and trade flows and price indices in (8) and (9),
respectively. The nominal wage follows from multiplying real wages by the price index.

60

H

Equivalence with Melitz (2003) Model

Assume that productivity draws in each region zm are from a Pareto distribution with
P
eni ≡ P
shape parameter θ and lower bound bm . Replacing (1) into X
k∈Ωi Xmk , we
m∈Ωn
get
X X
π k Ll bθk wk−θ d−θ
mk
e
Xnl =
Xm .
P
−θ −θ
θ
k0 π k0 Ll bk0 wk0 dmk0
m∈Ωn k∈Ω
l

The equivalent of A1 here would be bm = bm0 = bn for all m, m0 ∈ Ωn . Replacing, we get
el−θ τ −θ
Ll bθl w
nl
e
e ,
Xnl = P
X
θ −θ −θ n
L
b
w
e
τ
j
j j
nj
j
for all n, l, and τ nn defined as in (14). Analogously to the results in Melitz (2003)’s, the
productivity cut-off for a region m ∈ Ωn is given by:


∗
zkm

= C0

fm
π m Ln

1/(σ−1)

wk dmk
,
Pm

where C0 is a constant. Turning to the price index, we get
1−σ X X
Z ∞
σ
1−σ
=
π k Ln (wk dmk )
z σ−1 bθk z −θ−1 dz
∗
σ−1
zkm
j k∈Ωj
XX
∗
= C1
π k Ln bθk (wk dmk )1−σ (zmk
)σ−1−θ


Pen1−σ

j

= C1

k∈Ωj

XX
j

π k Ln bθk (wk dmk )1−σ

k∈Ωj



fm
π m Ln

1/(σ−1)

wk dmk
Pm

!σ−1−θ
,

where C1 is a constant. Further, A1 in this case also implies that fm = fen . Hence, for
m ∈ Ωn , Pen = Pm . Replacing and after some algebra, we get
Pen−θ = C2

X

Lj bθj (w
ej τ nj )−θ

j6=n

= C2

fen
(Ln /Mn )

fen
Ln /Mn

θ
!1− σ−1

+ C2 (Ln /Mn )bθn w
en−θ

θ
!1− σ−1

X

Lj bθj (w
ej τ nj )−θ ,

j

61

fen
(Ln /Mn )

θ
!1− σ−1

(Mn − 1) δ −θ
n +1



where C2 is a constant. Thus,
X

Lj bθj (w
ej τ nj )−θ = C2−1 Pen−θ

j

and hence,
λnn =

fen
(Ln /Mn )

!−[1−θ/(σ−1)]
,

Ln bθn w
en−θ τ −θ
nn
,
θ
 e −(1− σ−1
)

C2−1 Pen−θ

fn
(Ln /Mn )

so that
fen
(Ln /Mn )

w
en
−1/θ
−1 −1/θ
= C2 L1/θ
n bn τ nn λnn
e
Pn

!1/θ−1/(σ−1)
,

and


w
en e
f
Pen n

1/θ−1/(σ−1)

w
en
−1/θ
−1 −1/θ 

= C2 L1/θ
n bn τ nn λnn
e
(Ln /Mn )
Pn
−1/θ

= C2

−1/θ e1/θ−1/(σ−1)
.
Mn1/θ (Ln /Mn )1/(σ−1) bn τ −1
nn λnn fn

Thus, if fen does not vary with Ln /Mn , the growth rate would be gL / (σ − 1). To have the
growth rate be gL /θ, we need to assume that fen scales up with Ln /Mm proportionally, or
θ ≈ σ − 1, in which case
w
en
−1 −1/θ
∼ L1/θ
n bn τ nn λnn .
e
Pn

I

Additional Table

62

Table 7: The Role of Domestic Frictions and Real Wages. General Model.

Scale Effects
(1)
Australia
Austria
Benelux
Canada
Switzerland
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
Great Britain
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Iceland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Norway
New Zealand
Poland
Portugal
Sweden
Turkey
United States

0.49
0.47
0.81
0.57
0.57
0.34
0.53
0.39
0.73
0.82
0.93
0.35
0.29
0.27
0.18
0.59
1.09
0.74
0.37
0.36
0.29
0.58
0.36
0.50
0.38
1.00

Real Wage
International Trade Domestic Frictions
(2)
(3)
0.49
0.49
0.82
0.58
0.58
0.37
0.53
0.42
0.74
0.83
0.94
0.36
0.31
0.30
0.22
0.60
1.09
0.75
0.37
0.39
0.29
0.59
0.37
0.51
0.39
1.00

0.65
0.60
0.78
0.71
0.64
0.69
0.62
0.79
0.80
0.85
0.89
0.54
0.58
0.54
0.36
0.64
1.15
0.86
0.38
0.73
0.58
0.61
0.52
0.68
0.42
1.00

Full Model
(4)

Data
(5)

0.66
0.72
0.89
0.76
0.78
0.81
0.69
0.89
0.88
0.92
0.95
0.61
0.68
0.68
0.56
0.69
1.14
0.88
0.40
0.83
0.59
0.68
0.61
0.78
0.46
1.00

0.97
1.11
1.16
0.86
0.88
0.94
1.14
0.84
1.07
1.00
0.92
0.90
0.65
1.32
1.17
1.20
0.71
0.63
0.78
1.11
0.74
0.50
0.97
0.81
0.61
1.00

Avg all
0.54
0.55
0.68
0.75
0.92
Avg 6 smallest
0.30
0.33
0.61
0.73
1.02
Avg 6 largest
0.86
0.86
0.89
0.93
0.98
Column 1 refers to the model with only scale effects, column 2 to the model with scale effects and
international trade, column 3 to the model with scale effects and domestic trade costs, and column
4 to the model with scale effects, international trade, and domestic trade costs. The real wage in
the data (column 5) is the real GDP (PPP-adjusted) per unit of equipped labor. All variables are
calculated relative to the United States. The six smallest countries (with respect to R&D-adjusted
size) are Iceland, Ireland, New Zealand, Finland, Norway, and Denmark, while the six largest
countries are Italy, France, Great Britain, Germany, Japan, and the United States.

63

