NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO CONSUMERS RESPOND TO MARGINAL OR AVERAGE PRICE? EVIDENCE
FROM NONLINEAR ELECTRICITY PRICING
Koichiro Ito
Working Paper 18533
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18533

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

I thank Michael Anderson, Maximilian Auffhammer, Peter Berck, Severin Borenstein, James Bushnell,
Howard Chong, Pascal Courty, Lucas Davis, Ahmad Faruqui, Meredith Fowlie, Michael Greenstone,
Michael Hanemann, Catie Hausman, David Molitor, Erica Myers, Hideyuki Nakagawa, Karen Notsund,
Paulina Oliva, Carla Peterman, Emmanuel Saez, James Sallee, Sofia Berto Villas-Boas, and Catherine
Wolfram for helpful conversations and suggestions. I also thank seminar participants at Boston University,
Cornell, International IO Conference, NBER, POWER Research Conference, Stanford, University
of Arizona, University of Calgary, UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UC San Diego, University
of Chicago, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, University of Maryland, University of Michigan,
University of Toronto for helpful comments. I thank the California Public Utility Commission, San
Diego Gas & Electric, and Southern California Edison for providing residential electricity data for
this study. Financial support from the California Energy Commission, Resources for the Future, the
University of California Energy Institute is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Koichiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from Nonlinear Electricity
Pricing
Koichiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 18533
November 2012
JEL No. L11,L51,L94,L98,Q41,Q48,Q58
ABSTRACT
Nonlinear pricing and taxation complicate economic decisions by creating multiple marginal prices
for the same good. This paper provides a framework to uncover consumers’ perceived price of nonlinear
price schedules. I exploit price variation at spatial discontinuities in electricity service areas, where
households in the same city experience substantially different nonlinear pricing. Using household-level
panel data from administrative records, I find strong evidence that consumers respond to average price
rather than marginal or expected marginal price. This sub-optimizing behavior makes nonlinear pricing
unsuccessful in achieving its policy goal of energy conservation and critically changes the welfare
implications of nonlinear pricing.

Koichiro Ito
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research
Stanford University
366 Galvez Street
Stanford, CA 94305-6015
koichiro.ito@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

A central assumption in economics is that firms and consumers optimize with marginal price.
For example, consider taxpayers faced with a nonlinear income tax schedule. The theory of
optimal taxation assumes that taxpayers respond to their marginal tax rate by making a
right connection between their income and nonlinear tax system (Mirrlees 1971, Atkinson
and Stiglitz 1976, and Diamond 1998). Likewise, empirical studies in economics generally
take this assumption as given when estimating key parameters in a variety of markets that
involve nonlinear price, subsidy, and tax schedules.1
However, evidence from many recent studies suggests that consumers may not respond
to nonlinear pricing as the standard theory predicts. Many surveys find that few people
understand the marginal rate of nonlinear price, subsidy, and tax schedules.2 Subjects in
laboratory experiments show cognitive difficulty in understanding nonlinear price systems
and respond to average price.3 While the response to nonlinear pricing a↵ects welfare implications of many economic policies, there is no clear evidence on the question: To what price
of nonlinear price schedules do consumers respond?
In this paper, I provide a framework to uncover consumers’ perceived price of nonlinear
price schedules. Economic theory provides at least three possibilities about the perceived
price. The standard model of nonlinear budget sets predicts that consumers respond to
marginal price. However, in the presence of uncertainty about consumption, rational consumers respond to expected marginal price (Saez 1999; Borenstein 2009). Alternatively,
1

For example, the market for cellular phone (Huang 2008), energy (Reiss and White 2005), labor (Hausman 1985), and water (Olmstead, Michael Hanemann, and Stavins 2007).
2
See Liebman (1998) and Fujii and Hawley (1988) on tax rates, Brown, Ho↵man, and Baxter (1975) on
electricity price, and Carter and Milon (2005) on water price.
3
For example, see de Bartolome (1995) for evidence from laboratory experiments.

1

consumers may use average price as an approximation of marginal price if the cognitive
cost of understanding complex pricing is substantial. This sub-optimization is described as
“schmeduling” by Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004).
My analysis exploits price variation at spatial discontinuities in California electricity
service areas. Because the territory border of two power companies lies within city limits,
households in the same city experience significantly di↵erent nonlinear pricing. This research
design addresses the long-discussed identification problems in the literature (Heckman 1996;
Blundell, Duncan, and Meghir 1998; Goolsbee 2000; Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz 2012) by
having nearly identical groups of households experiencing di↵erent price variation.
The access to the full administrative data on electricity billing records allow me to construct household-level monthly panel data for essentially all households in the study area
from 1999 to 2007. The sample period provides substantial cross-sectional and time-series
price variation because the two companies changed their price multiple times independently.
The billing data include customers’ nine-digit zip code, with which I match census data to
show that demographic and housing characteristics are balanced across the territory border
of the two power companies.
Results from my three empirical strategies provide strong evidence that consumers respond to average price rather than marginal or expected marginal price. First, I examine
whether there is bunching of consumers at the kink points of nonlinear price schedules. Such
bunching must be observed if consumers respond to marginal price (Heckman 1983; Saez
2010; Chetty et al. 2011). I find no bunching anywhere in the consumption distribution
despite the fact that the marginal price discontinuously increases by more than 80% at some
kink points. The absence of bunching implies either that 1) consumers respond to marginal

2

price with zero elasticity or 2) they respond to alternative price. To explore this point, I
use the encompassing test (Davidson and MacKinnon 1993) to examine whether consumers
respond to marginal, expected marginal, or average price. I find that average price has a
significant e↵ect on consumption, while the e↵ects of marginal price and expected marginal
price become statistically insignificant from zero once I control for the e↵ect of average price
in the regression. Finally, I propose a strategy that estimates the shape of the perceived price
directly. My model nests a wide range of potential perceived price by allowing consumers to
have di↵erent weights on each part of their nonlinear price schedule. I empirically estimate
the weights, from which I recover the shape of their perceived price. I find that the shape of
the resulting perceived price is nearly identical to the shape of average price.
This sub-optimizing behavior changes the policy implications of nonlinear pricing. First,
I show that the sub-optimal response makes nonlinear pricing unsuccessful in achieving its
policy goal of energy conservation. Many electric, natural gas, and water utilities in the US
adopted nonlinear pricing similar to California’s residential electricity pricing.4 Policy makers
often claim that higher marginal prices for excessive consumption can create an incentive for
conservation. Contrary to the policy objective, I show that nonlinear tari↵s may result in a
slight increase in aggregate consumption compared with an alternative flat marginal rate if
consumers respond to average price. Second, the sub-optimal response changes the efficiency
cost of nonlinear pricing. I show that it reduces the efficiency cost given a reasonable range of
assumptions on the private marginal cost of electricity. However, it increases the efficiency
cost when the social marginal cost of electricity is substantially high because of negative
environmental externalities from electricity generation.
4

BC Hydro (2008) conducts a survey of 61 U.S. utilities and finds that about one-third of them use
increasing block pricing for residential customers.

3

The findings also have important implications for US climate change legislation. In the
cap-and-trade program proposed in the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009,
about 30% of emission permits would be given to electric utilities for free. The proposal
explicitly prohibits distributing the value of the free allowance based on each customer’s
electricity consumption. Instead, it recommends providing a fixed credit on electricity bills.
The rationale behind the policy is to preserve the marginal incentive to conserve electricity. However, if customers respond to average price, the fixed credit to electricity bills still
discourages conservation and increases electricity consumption, suggesting that the compensation scheme may need to be reconsidered.5
Although the possibility of this sub-optimizing behavior has been long discussed in public finance, industrial organization, and environmental economics, previous studies provide
inconclusive results because of several empirical challenges.6 First, the access to extensive
individual-level data is necessary to examine the question but rarely available to researchers.7
Second, Heckman (1996) note that usual non-experimental data do not provide a clean control group because all comparable individuals usually face exactly the same nonlinear price
schedule. Third, many studies do not have sufficient exogenous price variation to statistically
distinguish the e↵ects of alternative forms of price. My analysis addresses the challenges by
exploiting substantial cross-sectional and time-series price variation at the spatial discontinuity of electricity service areas and provides robust empirical findings.
5

Use of allowances is described on page 901 of Congress (2009). Burtraw (2009) and Burtraw, Walls, and
Blonz (2010) note that distributing a fixed credit may not work in the desired way if residential customers
do not pay attention to the di↵erence between their marginal price of electricity and their electricity bill.
6
For example, see Shin (1985); Nieswiadomy and Molina (1991); Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004); Feldman
and Katuscak (2006); Borenstein (2009).
7
For example, the price and consumption data used in Shin (1985) are annual data aggregated by the
utility company level. Without having individual-level monthly data, it is not possible to identify each
consumer’s actual marginal and average price.

4

My findings are consistent with those in the literature that studies consumer inattention
to complex pricing.8 While many studies test the hypothesis that consumers misperceive
complex prices, the actual shape of perceived price is not explicitly examined and remains
unknown in most studies. My empirical strategy provides a way to nest a wide range of
potential shapes of perceived price, from which researchers can estimate the true shape of
perceived price by examining consumer behavior in response to price variation.

2

Theoretical Predictions

Economic theory provides three di↵erent predictions about consumers’ perceived price of
nonlinear price schedules. To characterize the predictions, consider a price schedule p(x)
in Figure 1. The marginal price of x equals p1 for x Æ k and p2 for x > k. This form of
nonlinear pricing is widely used in many economic policies. For example, p(x) can be seen
as an income tax schedule of annual income x (Moffitt 1990), an insurance price schedule of
utilization x (Aron-Dine et al. 2012), or a price schedule of monthly usage x of cell phone,
electricity, or water.
The standard model of nonlinear budget sets predicts that consumers optimize x based
on the true marginal price schedule p(x). That is, the perceived price is identical to p(x).
This response requires two implicit assumptions: 1) consumers have no uncertainty about x
and 2) they fully understand the structure of the nonlinear price schedule. Saez (1999) and
Borenstein (2009) relax the first assumption. In their uncertainty model, consumers take into
account of their uncertainty about x and respond to their expected marginal price. Aron-Dine
8

See DellaVigna (2009) for a comprehensive survey. Examples include Busse, Silva-Risso, and Zettelmeyer
(2006); Gabaix and Laibson (2006); Hossain and Morgan (2006); Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009); Finkelstein (2009); Brown, Hossain, and Morgan (2010); Gabaix (2011); Malmendier and Lee (2011); Chetty (2012).

5

et al. (2012) describe similar forward-looking behavior in a dynamic model. Finally, Liebman
and Zeckhauser (2004) relax the second assumption by allowing inattention to complex price
schedules. In the inattention model, consumers respond to the average price of their total
payment as an approximation of marginal price if the cognitive cost of understanding complex
pricing is substantial. In practice, the information required to calculate average price is
substantially less than marginal price. Total payment and quantity are sufficient information
and the knowledge of the nonlinearity of the price schedule is not necessary.
I consider a general form of perceived price that encompasses all of the three theoretical
predictions. Suppose that consumers care about p(x + ‘) for a range of ‘ because they
consider uncertainty about x or they have inattention to the price schedule. They construct
the perceived price p̃(x) by deciding relative weights w(‘) on p(x + ‘):

p̃(x) =

where

´

ˆ

p(x + ‘)w(‘)d‘,

(1)

w(‘)d‘ = 1. Panel B of Figure 1 shows the density functions w(‘) that convert p̃(x)

to marginal, expected marginal, and average prices. In the standard model, consumers care
about the price only at x. It implies that w(‘) = 1 for ‘ = 0 and thus p̃(x) = p(x). In
the uncertainty model, risk-neutral consumers replace w(‘) by the density function of their
uncertainty about x. The resulting p̃(x) is their expected marginal price. In the inattention
model, consumers replace w(‘) by the uniform distribution U[0, x].
Empirically, there are two ways to uncover p̃(x). The first approach is to assume a certain
shape of w(x) based on economic theory and test if it is consistent with data. The second
approach is to directly estimate w(‘) to find p̃(x). I use both approaches. Regardless of

6

which approach I use, there are two empirical challenges to identify p̃(x). First, it requires
sufficient exogenous price variation to distinguish competing predictions about the shape of
p̃(x). Second, it requires a well-identified control group to distinguish the e↵ect of price from
other factors that also a↵ect consumption. The next section describes how I address the two
challenges by exploiting spatial discontinuities in California electricity service areas.

3

Research Design and Data

This section describes two key features of my research design. First, households in the
same city experience di↵erent nonlinear pricing because the territory border of two power
companies lies within the city limits. Second, they experience substantially di↵erent price
variation because the power companies change the price schedules independently.

3.1

A Spatial Discontinuity in Electricity Service Areas

Southern California Edison (SCE) provides electricity for large part of southern California,
and San Diego Gas & Electric (SDG&E) provides electricity for most of San Diego County
and the southern part of Orange County (Figure A.1). California households are generally
not allowed to choose their retail electricity provider; it is determined by the address of their
residence. My study focuses on the territory border of SCE and SDG&E in Orange County
because this is the only border in populated areas that also does not correspond to city or
county boundaries.
Figure 2 shows the territory border in Orange County. Households in the same city are
served by di↵erent power companies because the border lies within city limits in six cities.

7

This border contrasts with typical territory borders of utility companies, which correspond
to city, county, or state boundaries. Why is the border in the city limits? In the 1940’s, SCE
and SDG&E connected their transmission lines in this area and established the territory
border (Crawford 1991; Myers 1983). The border does not correspond to the city limits
because the city limits in this area were established around the 1980’s.
Lee and Lemieux (2010) note that geographical discontinuity designs (Black, 1999) should
be used with careful investigation of potential sorting and omitted variables at the border.
My research design is unlikely to be confounded by such factors for several reasons. First,
time-invariant unobservable factors do not a↵ect my results because I use panel data with
household fixed e↵ects. Second, households in this area are not allowed to choose their
electricity provider. The only way to choose one provider or another is to live in its service
area. It is nearly impossible for households to sort based on their expected electricity bill
because the relative electricity price between SCE and SDG&E changes frequently; the price
is higher in SCE in some years while it is higher in SDG&E in other years as presented in the
next section. Third, the next section shows that demographic and housing characteristics
are balanced across the territory border, suggesting that the systematic sorting is unlikely to
have occurred. Finally, it would be a concern if households receive natural gas, a substitute
for electricity, from di↵erent providers. This is not the case in this area because all households
are served by the same natural gas provider, Southern California Gas Company.

3.2

Nonlinear Electricity Pricing and Price Variation

Figure 3 shows the standard residential tari↵ for SCE and SDG&E in 2002. The marginal
price is a step function of monthly consumption relative to a “baseline” consumption level.

8

The baseline di↵ers by climate regions in the utility territories. However, because households
in this study are in the same climate regions, the baseline is essentially the same for everyone.
The baseline is about 10 kWh/day with a slight di↵erence between summer and winter billing
months.9
Figure 4 shows that the cross-sectional price variation between SCE and SDG&E also
changes over time quite substantially. Until the summer of 2000, SCE and SDG&E had
nearly the same two-tier nonlinear price schedules. The first price shock occurred during
the California electricity crisis in the summer of 2000.10 The rates for SDG&E customers
started to increase in May in response to increases in wholesale electricity prices. In August,
the first and second tier rates increased to 22¢ and 25¢ per kWh. This increase translated
into a 100% rate increase for SDG&E customers relative to their rates in 1999. In contrast,
the rates for SCE customers stayed at 1999 levels because their retail prices were protected
from changes in wholesale price during this period. The second price shock happened in
2001, when SCE introduced a five-tier price schedule in June and SDG&E followed four
months later, although their rates were di↵erent. Afterwards, they changed the five-tier
rates di↵erently over time.
How are the rates determined and why are they di↵erent between SCE and SDG&E? Retail electricity price in California is regulated by the California Public Utility Commission.
When regulated utilities change their rates, they need to provide evidence of changes in cost
9

In summer billing months, both SCE and SDG&E customers in this area receive 10.2 kWh per day for
their baseline. In winter billing months, the baseline is 10.1 kWh per day for SCE customers and 10.8 kWh
per day for SDG&E customers. In the billing data, the monthly bills and price variables are calculated based
on the exact baseline of each individual bill.
10
By August of 2000, wholesale electricity prices had more than tripled from the end of 1999, which caused
large-scale blackouts, price spikes in retail electricity rates, financial losses to electric utilities in California.
Many cost factors and demand shocks contributed to this rise, but several studies have also found the market
power of suppliers to be significant throughout this period. See Joskow (2001), Borenstein, Bushnell, and
Wolak (2002), Bushnell and Mansur (2005), Puller (2007), and Reiss and White (2008) for more details.

9

to receive an approval. SCE and SDG&E have di↵erent rates because they have di↵erent
sources of electricity generation. Changes in input costs thus a↵ect their total costs di↵erently. They also have di↵erent cost structures for distributing electricity because they cover
quite di↵erent service areas in California (Figure A.1). Finally, they had di↵erent sunk losses
from the 2000-2001 California electricity crisis, required to be collected from ratepayers.
The price variation provides two advantages compared with previous studies. First, the
magnitude of the variation is substantial. Cross-sectionally, households have significantly
di↵erent nonlinear pricing and the variation changes over time substantially. Second, the
di↵erence in marginal price between SCE and SDG&E is often significantly di↵erent from
the di↵erence in average price between SCE and SDG&E. For example, consider consumers
in the fourth tier in Figure 3. While the marginal price is higher for SCE customers, the
average price is higher for SDG&E customers. This price variation is key to distinguish the
response to alternative forms of price in my estimation.

3.3

Data and Summary Statistics

Under a confidentiality agreement, SCE and SDG&E provided the household-level billing
history of essentially all residential customers from 1999 to 2007. Each monthly record includes a customer’s account ID, premise ID, billing start and end date, monthly consumption,
monthly bill, tari↵ type, climate zone, and nine-digit zip code. It does not include a customer’s name, address, and demographic information. To obtain demographic information,
I match each customer’s nine-digit zip code to a census block group in the 2000 U.S. Census.
In my sample, the mean number of households in a nine-digit zip code area is 4.9 and that
in a census block group is 217.3. The nine-digit zip code thus allows precise neighborhood

10

matching with census data.
My empirical analysis uses the samples that satisfy the following criteria. First, I focus on
customers that are on the default standard tari↵.11 Second, I focus on the six cities that have
the border of electricity service areas inside the city limits: Laguna Beach, Laguna Niguel,
Aliso Viejo, Laguna Hills, Mission Viejo, and Coto de Caza. Third, to be conservative about
potential sorting that could have occurred because of the price changes after 2000, my main
analysis focuses on the panel data of households that are at the same premise throughout
the sample period.12 This procedure results in a data set of 38,674 households.
Table 1 provides summary statistics. I show the means and standard errors for SCE
customers and SDG&E customers separately. The last column shows the di↵erence in the
means with the standard error of the di↵erence. I cluster standard errors at the census block
group level for the census data and at the customer level for the panel data of electricity billing
records. Between SCE and SDG&E customers, the demographic and housing characteristics
are balanced. The mean of electricity consumption during the sample period is about 23
kWh/day for SCE customers and 24 kWh/day for SDG&E customers. SCE and SDG&E had
nearly identical price schedules until 1999, before the first major price change in the summer
of 2000. The last row shows that the mean of log consumption in 1999 is not statistically
di↵erent between SCE and SDG&E customers.
11

Over 85% of households are on the standard tari↵. About 15% of households are on the California
Alternative Rate for Energy (CARE) program, a means-tested tari↵ for low-income households. About 5%
of households have other tari↵s such as time-of-use pricing.
12
I show that using unbalanced panel of all households does not change my results.

11

4

Empirical Analysis and Results

4.1

Bunching at Kink Points of Price Schedules

My first empirical strategy is to examine bunching of consumers at the kink points of nonlinear price schedules (Heckman 1983; Saez 2010; Chetty et al. 2011). In Figure 1, suppose
that preferences for electricity consumption are convex and smoothly distributed across the
kink point k. Then, if consumers respond to the true marginal price p(x), a disproportionate
share of demand curves intersect with the vertical part of the schedule. I thus expect a disproportionate share of consumers bunching around the kink point in the data. The amount
of bunching should be larger when 1) the discrete jump in marginal price at k is large and
2) the price elasticity of demand is large.
Bunching Analysis Results. In 1999, consumers faced an essentially flat marginal rate with
a small step between the first and second tier. Therefore, the distribution of consumption
in 1999 can provide a baseline case where there is no steep kink point in the price schedule.
Panel A of Figure 5 presents a histogram of consumption for SCE customers in 1999. I
use monthly consumption data from all 12 months in 1999. The histogram shows that the
consumption is smoothly distributed.
After 2001, SCE introduced a five-tier price schedule. With steep steps in the price
schedule, the consumption distribution should be di↵erent from the baseline case observed in
1999. Panel B shows a histogram of consumption for SCE customers in 2007, where SCE had
the steepest five-tier price schedule. It shows that the shape of the distribution is as smooth
as the histogram in 1999, and there is no bunching around the kink points. In particular,
there is no bunching even at the second kink, where the marginal price discontinuously

12

increases more than 80%. I find no bunching for any year of the data in SCE and SDG&E.
The absence of bunching implies two possibilities. First, consumers may respond to
marginal price with nearly zero elasticity. Saez (2010) and Chetty et al. (2011) provide
methods to estimate the price elasticity with respect to marginal price from the bunching
analysis. Both of the methods produce estimates of nearly zero price elasticity with tight
standard errors when I apply them to my SCE data in 2007.13 Second, consumers may
respond to alternative price. If consumers respond to any “smoothed” price such as average
price, the price has no more kink points. There can be thus no bunching even if consumers
have nonzero price elasticity. The next section examines these possibilities by exploiting
panel price variation in SCE and SDG&E.

4.2

Encompassing Tests of Alternative Prices

My second empirical strategy is to test whether consumers respond to marginal, expected
marginal, or average price by using the encompassing test (Davidson and MacKinnon 1993).
Let xit denote consumer i’s average daily electricity use during billing month t. Suppose
that they have quasi-linear utility for electricity consumption.14 I allow the possibility that
they may respond to marginal price or average price by characterizing their demand by
xit = ⁄i · mp—it1 · ap—it2 with the price elasticity with respect to marginal price (—1 ) and average
price (—2 ). Define —lnxit = lnxit ≠lnxit0 in which t0 is the previous year’s same billing month.
13

For example, the point estimate and standard error of the elasticity is -0.001(0.002) when I apply the
method in Saez (2010) for the largest kink point of SCE’s price schedule in 2007.
14
Quasilinear utility functions assume no income e↵ect. In the case of residential electricity demand,
income e↵ects are likely to be extremely small. In my sample, a median consumer pays $60 electricity bill
per month. A 30% change in all of five tiers would produce an income change of $18 per month, about
0.2% of monthly median household income in my sample. In the literature, the income elasticity estimates
of residential electricity demand is between 0.1 to 1.0. The income e↵ect of this price change thus would
result in a change in consumption between 0.02% to 0.2%.

13

This first-di↵erence eliminates household-by-month fixed e↵ects. Consider the estimating
equation:
—lnxit = —1 —lnmpit + —2 —lnapit + “ ct + ÷ it ,

(2)

with city-by-time fixed e↵ects “ ct and error term ÷ it = Áit ≠ Áit0 . An encompassing test
examines if one model encompasses an alternative model. For example, if consumers respond
to marginal price and do not respond to average price, one expects —ˆ2 = 0 because average
price should not a↵ect demand conditional on the e↵ect of marginal price.
A common identification problem of nonlinear pricing is that the price variables are
functions of consumption and hence correlated with unobserved demand shocks ÷ it . To address the endogeneity, previous studies use a policy-induced price change as an instrument:
—lnmpPit I = lnmpt (x̃it ) ≠ lnmpt0 (x̃it ). This instrument, also called a simulated instrument,
computes the predicted price change at a consumption level x̃it . The instrument thus captures the price change induced by the policy change in the nonlinear price schedule for a
consumption level x̃it . To be a valid instrument, x̃it has to be uncorrelated with ÷ it . Many
studies use the base year’s consumption xit0 for x̃it . However, xit0 is likely to be correlated
with ÷ it because the mean reversion of consumption creates a negative correlation between
Áit0 and ÷ it = Áit ≠ Áit0 . Blomquist and Selin (2010) and Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz (2012)
suggest that consumption in a period midway between t0 and t can be used to address the
mean reversion problem. Because my analysis use monthly consumption data, the middle
period and its consumption can be defined by tm = t ≠ 6 and xitm . Note that the instrument
based on xitm is not systematically a↵ected by the mean reversion problem because Áit and
Áit0 do not directly a↵ect xitm . If there is no serial correlation, Áitm and ÷ it = Áit ≠ Áit0 are
uncorrelated. Moreover, Blomquist and Selin (2010) show that even if there is serial corre14

lation, Cov(Áitm , ÷ it ) equals zero as long as the serial correlation depends only on the time
di↵erence between the error terms. This is because Áitm is equally spaced from Áit and Áit0
and thus would be correlated with Áit and Áit0 in the same manner.15
Even if the mean reversion problem is addressed, the instrument based on the level of
consumption can still be correlated with ÷ it if high and low electricity users have di↵erent
growth patterns in consumption. For example, if there is an underlying distributional change
in electricity consumption over time, I cannot expect a parallel trend between high and
low electricity users. This is exactly the same problem long discussed in the literature of
nonlinear taxation (Heckman 1996; Blundell, Duncan, and Meghir 1998; Goolsbee 2000;
Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz 2012). A usual quasi-experiment essentially compares the change
in income between lower and higher income households. Because all comparable households
usually face the same nonlinear tax schedule, there is no clean control group that can be used
to control for di↵erential underlying growth between lower and higher income households.
To address the problem, I exploit the spatial discontinuity in electricity service areas.
Because households in the same city experience di↵erent nonlinear pricing, I can use households on the other side of the border as a control group. My identification assumption is
that confounding factors such as underlying distributional changes in consumption are not
systematically di↵erent across the border. Consider the instrumental variable (IV) regression:
—lnxit = —1 —lnmpit + —2 —lnapit + ft (xitm ) + “ ct + ” bt + uit ,

(3)

with instruments, —lnmpPit I = lnmpt (xitm ) ≠ lnmpt0 (xitm ) and —lnapPit I = lnapt (xitm ) ≠
15

Another option for x̃it is household i’s consumption in 1999. If the serial correlation of Áit has minimal
impacts on the correlation between the error term in 1999 and the error term in t, the consumption in 1999
would not be systematically correlated with ÷ it = Áit ≠ Áit0 . I find that using this instrument produces
virtually the identical results to my main results.

15

lnapt0 (xitm ). The error term uit is uncorrelated with xitm as long as ft (xitm ) sufficiently
controls for confounding factors such as underlying distributional changes in consumption.
When all consumers face the same price schedule, flexible controls of xitm absorb all price
variation and destroy identification. In contrast, I can include any flexible controls of xitm
because households experience di↵erent nonlinear pricing.
There are many ways to define ft (xitm ). For example, I can include flexible polynomial
functions in xitm . To prevent a functional form assumption as much as possible, I take a nonparametric approach. For each percentile of consumption in tm , I define grouping dummy
variables by Gj,t = 1{xj,tm < xitm Æ xj+1,tm }, which equal one if xitm falls between j and
j + 1 percentiles. These dummy variables are percentile-by-time fixed e↵ects and control for
underlying changes in consumption for each part of the consumption distribution. Although
city-level economic shocks and weather shocks are absorbed by city-by-time fixed e↵ects “ ct ,
the weather impact can be slightly di↵erent between households with di↵erent billing cycles.
To control for the e↵ect, I include billing-cycle-by-time fixed e↵ects ” bt .
Encompassing Tests Results: Figure 6 provides a graphical illustration of the encompassing test. To show an example of year-to-year price variation, the figure uses January billing
months and households whose xitm is on the forth tier of the five-tier price schedule.16 The
squared-dashed line shows the di↵erence-in-di↵erences (DD) in the mean of log marginal
price (lnmpit ) for SDG&E customers relative to SCE customers. For each customer, I calculate the change in log marginal price from 1999. Then, I obtain the DD by subtracting
SCE’s mean from SDG&E’s mean. The DD estimate thus shows how SDG&E’s marginal
price evolved from 1999 relative to SCE. I call it the relative change in marginal price. In
16

The mean consumption in the data (23 kWh/day) is in the fourth tier of the five-tier price schedule.

16

the same way, I calculate the DD in the means of predicted log marginal price (lnmpPit I ), log
average price (lnapit ), predicated log average price (lnapPit I ), and log consumption (lnxit ).
Figure 6 provides several important insights before I proceed to regression analysis. First,
the predicted prices (the instruments) and the e↵ective prices are strongly correlated, which
implies a strong first-stage relationship. Second, the change in consumption from 1999 to
2000 provides a test for the parallel trend assumption between SDG&E and SCE customers.
If the parallel trend assumption holds, I expect no di↵erence in the change in consumption
between SDG&E and SCE from 1999 to 2000 because they have nearly the same price change.
The DD in consumption in 2000 verifies that this is in fact the case. Third, the relative change
in marginal price and the relative change in average price are substantially di↵erent in 2002,
2003, and 2007. SDG&E’s marginal price decreases more than SCE’s marginal price, but its
average price increases more than SCE’s average price. If consumers respond to marginal
price, SDG&E’s consumption should increase more than SCE’s consumption in these years.
However, the figure shows the opposite result: SDG&E’s consumption decreases more than
SCE’s consumption. Unless the price elasticity is positive, the relative change in consumption
is inconsistent with the relative change in marginal price. Rather, it is more consistent with
the relative change in average price, although formal econometric estimation is required to
discuss its statistical inference.
Now, I run the instrumental variable estimation in equation (3) by using all monthly
billing data from January 1999 to December 2007. Table 2 presents the regression results
that examine whether consumers respond to marginal or average price. I cluster the standard errors at the household level to correct for serial correlation. First, I include only the
marginal price of electricity as a price variable. Column 1 shows that the price elasticity

17

with respect to marginal price is -0.040. This result contradicts the result in the bunching
analysis, where I find nearly zero price elasticity with respect to marginal price. However,
the encompassing test in column 3 implies that the significant price elasticity in column 1
comes from spurious correlation. Column 3 includes both marginal and average price as
price variables. If consumers respond to marginal price as the standard theory predicts, I
expect that average price does not a↵ect demand conditional on the e↵ect of marginal price.
Column 3 reveals the opposite result. Once average price is included, adding marginal price
does not statistically change the e↵ect of average price. Moreover, the e↵ect of marginal
price becomes statistically insignificant from zero.
Because households receive electricity bills at the end of monthly billing periods, they
may respond to lagged price rather than contemporaneous price. Column 4 to 6 provide
the results with one-month lagged price. Using lagged price does not change the main
result. Households respond to lagged average price rather than lagged marginal price. The
price elasticity with respect to lagged price is larger than the elasticity with respect to
contemporaneous price, suggesting the possibility that consumers respond to lagged price
more than contemporaneous price. Table 2 investigates this point. Column 1 shows that
consumers respond to lagged prices and the e↵ect of contemporaneous price is statistically
insignificant from zero once the e↵ects of lagged prices are controlled. Usually, the most
policy-relevant price elasticity is the medium-long run elasticity that includes these lagged
responses. Column 2 to 4 include the average of one, two, three, and four-month lagged
average prices. The estimated elasticity thus shows the percent change in consumption when
consumers experience a persistent change in average price for one to four-month period. The
medium-long run price elasticity estimates are larger than the short-run elasticity estimate.

18

I find that lagged prices with more than four-month lags have negligible e↵ects and the
medium-long run elasticity estimates do not change when I include more than four-month
lags.
Next, I examine the possibility that consumers respond to expected marginal price. To
find the degree of uncertainty that typical consumers face in their monthly consumption, I
estimate the variance of lnxit conditional on household-by-month fixed e↵ects and one-month
lagged log consumption. The median of the root mean squared error is about 0.2, suggesting
that with this information the average consumer can predict his consumption with a standard
error of about 20%. Based on this estimate, I calculate expected marginal price by assuming
that consumers have errors with a standard deviation of 20% of their consumption. Table
4 shows evidence that consumers respond to average price rather than expected marginal
price. Column 3 shows that once average price is included, adding expected marginal price
does not statistically change the e↵ect of average price. Column 4 to 6 show that using
lagged price does not change the result.
The results in this section provide evidence that households respond to average price
among the three prices predicted by theory. Figure A.2 and Table A.1 in the appendix show
that the results are robust for 1) unbalanced panel data that include all households in my
sample period, 2) the samples restricted to households within a certain distance from the
border, and 3) alternative instruments. The encompassing test is simple and sufficient for
testing competing theoretical predictions. However, it cannot completely eliminate other
possibilities of the perceived price. For example, the previous analysis assumes that the
average consumer can predict his consumption with a standard error of about 20%. If
households have more or less information about their expected consumption, their expected

19

marginal price can be di↵erent from the assumed expected marginal price. To address this
point, the next section uses an approach that examines a general form of the perceived price
instead of starting with a particular prediction of perceived price.

4.3

Estimation of the Shape of Perceived Price

In the previous two sections, I begin with the particular forms of perceived price derived from
the theoretical predictions and examine which of the competing forms of the perceived price
is the most consistent with the data. I take a di↵erent approach in this section. Consider
that consumers have consumption xit and face a nonlinear price schedule p(xit ). I define a
series of surrounding consumption levels around xit by xk,it = (1 + k/100)xit . That is, xk,it
is the level of consumption that is k% away from xit . Let pk,it = p(xk,it ) denote the marginal
price for xk,it . Consumers may care about the surrounding marginal prices either because of
the uncertainty about their ex-post consumption or inattention to the true price schedule.
I consider that consumers construct their perceived price by deciding relative weights wk
on pk,it . Suppose that there is price variation in pk,it over time. Using the price variation,
I estimate wk by observing how consumers respond to changes in pk,it . Then, I can use the
estimates of wk to recover the shape of consumers’ perceived price. Suppose that consumers
may care about the surrounding marginal prices up to a range of 100% from xit . That is,
≠100 Æ k Æ 100. I model that the density function of wk has the following asymmetric

20

exponential functional form:

wk (–, ◊) =

Y
_
_
_
exp(≠k · ◊l )
_
_
–· q
_
_
_
exp(≠k · ◊l )
]

for k Æ 0

kÆ0

_
_
_
exp(k · ◊r )
_
_
_(1 ≠ –) · q
_
_
exp(k · ◊r )
[

(4)
for k > 0.

k>0

This density function can characterize various forms of perceived price. First, parameter –
describes the relative weight on pk,it between the left and right hand side of xit . For example,
– = 1 implies that consumers do not care about the price on the right side of xit in the price
schedule. Second, parameter ◊l and ◊r describe the slopes of the density function. The
exponential form is useful because it can capture nonlinear upward and downward slopes
with one parameter. The dashed lines in Figure 7 illustrate two examples of the weighting
functions. The first example shows the case with – = 0.5 and ◊l = ◊r = ≠0.1, where
consumers care about the price of the left and right of xit equally but put larger weights on
the price close to xit . The second example shows a similar case but consumers care about
the price further away from xit . Using the weighing function, I estimate:

—lnxit = —

100
ÿ

k=≠100

wk (–, ◊) · —lnpk,it + ft (xitm ) + “ ct + ” bt + uit .

(5)

This estimation is nonlinear only in parameters and linear in variables. I can thus run
nonlinear IV estimation without having additional identifying assumptions than the linear IV
estimation in the previous section (Amemiya, 1983).17 For the endogenous variable —lnpk,it ,
17

An alternative approach is to use a continuous density function for w. It makes the estimating equation
nonlinear both in parameters and variables, requiring stronger identifying assumptions for nonlinear IV
estimation. Because the marginal price pk,it is flat in most parts of the five-tier price schedule and does not
change with a slight change in k, the discrete approximation in equation (5) would not significantly deviate
from the continuous form of w.

21

I
I use the same form of the instrument used in the previous section, —lnpPk,it
= lnpt (xk,itm ) ≠

lnpt0 (xk,itm ).
The primary interests are the three weighing parameters, –, ◊l , and ◊r . If consumers
respond to expected marginal price, I expect that – = 0.5 and ◊l = ◊r regardless of the
actual degree of uncertainty in consumption that consumers face. The values of ◊l and ◊r
reflect the uncertainty but the density wk (–, ◊) should be symmetric. If consumers respond
to marginal price, I expect steep slopes in ◊l and ◊r . Finally, if consumers respond only to
average price, I expect that – = 1 because they would not care about the price above xit .
Elasticity parameter — is the overall price elasticity and — · wk (–, ◊) shows the price elasticity
with respect to the change in each of pk,it .
Perceived Price Estimation Results. Table 5 shows the estimation results. Column 1 uses
contemporaneous price as a price variable. The estimated – is 0.911. The last two rows show
that I reject – = 0.5 with 1% significance level and cannot reject – = 1. That is, I reject
that consumers have equal weights on the left and right side of xit and the estimated – is
not statistically di↵erent from 1. Although the estimates of ◊l and ◊r imply that the slopes
are asymmetric, both of them are not statistically di↵erent from 0. The solid line in Figure
7 plots the estimated weighting function. The shape is close to a uniform distribution and
it is statistically not di↵erent from a uniform distribution, U[0, xit ]. Column 2 and 3 present
similar findings for one-month lag price and the average of four-month lag prices.
The results provide several implications. First, the estimates of – imply that consumers
are unlikely to respond to expected marginal price. Second, the estimated shape of the
weighing function is consistent with the results in the previous section, and both strategies
find that consumers respond to average price rather than marginal or expected marginal

22

price. The next section examines the welfare and policy implications of this finding.

5

Welfare Analysis

5.1

Nonlinear Pricing and Energy Conservation

Many electric, natural gas, and water utilities in the US adopted nonlinear pricing similar
to California’s residential electricity pricing. Policy makers often claim that higher marginal
prices for excessive consumption can create an incentive for conservation. Note that the
retail price of utility companies is usually regulated and has a zero profit condition with a
rate of return. When utility companies switch from a flat marginal rate to multi-tier pricing,
they need to lower the marginal price for some tiers to raise the marginal price for other
tiers. The e↵ect on aggregate consumption is thus ambiguous because some customers see an
increase in price while others see a decrease in price. I use the data in my sample to examine
how nonlinear pricing changes consumption compared to a counterfactual flat marginal rate
for two scenarios: 1) customers respond to average price and 2) they respond to marginal
price.
I calculate counterfactual consumption by making the following assumptions. First, I
assume that consumers have a demand function xi = ⁄i ·pi — with a price elasticity — and fixed
e↵ects ⁄i . Second, based on my empirical findings, I assume that consumers are currently
responding to average price. This assumption implies that the observed consumption in
the data equals ⁄i · api — . When consumers face a counterfactual flat marginal rate, their
counterfactual consumption equals ⁄i · f lat— . Finally, I calculate counterfactual consumption
⁄i · mpi — by assuming that consumers respond to marginal price with price elasticity — when
23

they correctly perceive their true marginal price.18
When aggregate consumption changes in the counterfactual scenarios, the total revenue
and cost also change. To keep total consumption comparable between the observed and two
counterfactual cases, I assume that the utility company maintains a profit neutrality condition by adjusting the tari↵ in the following way. First, I assume that the long-run marginal
cost equals the average cost of electricity under the existing nonlinear tari↵. For example,
for SCE’s tari↵ in 2007, the marginal cost based on this assumption equals 16.73¢/kWh.19
Then, the alternative flat marginal rate tari↵ is simply a marginal rate of 16.73¢/kWh, which
produces the same profit as the existing five-tier tari↵. Second, I assume that the company
adjusts each of the five tier rate by the same proportion to keep the profit neutrality when
aggregate consumption changes.
Table 6 presents how nonlinear pricing changes aggregate consumption compared to a
counterfactual flat marginal rate. I use the data in SCE in 2007, where consumers had one of
the steepest five-tier price schedules.20 I include all SCE customers that have the standard
five-tier tari↵. I compute counterfactual consumption using the medium-long run price elasticity estimate -0.101. The aggregate consumption increases by 0.28% if consumers respond
to average price. The intuition behind this result is the following. When the price schedule
18

This assumption is plausible if I consider that consumers currently use their average price as an approximation of their true marginal price and the counterfactual consumption is obtained by informing them about
the true marginal price. However, there is possibility that their fundamental elasticity can be di↵erent for
marginal price, which cannot be tested in my data.
19
The marginal costs based on this assumption can be either lower or higher than the true long-run
marginal cost. It can be too low if, for example, the expansion of electricity supply is more costly due to
constraints on new transmission lines. It can be too high if, for instance, there are economies of scale in
electricity supply. However, for small elasticities, adjustments of alternative tari↵s are not very sensitive to
the assumption of marginal costs, because the marginal cost a↵ects only the net change in consumption. On
the other hand, the calculation of the deadweight is sensitive to assumptions on marginal costs, which I show
in the next section.
20
For other years, and also for San Diego Gas & Electric, I calculate the same statistics, and the results
are similar to the case for SCE in 2007.

24

is switched from a flat marginal rate to nonlinear pricing, lower electricity users increase
their consumption because they face lower price. Higher electricity users decrease consumption but only slightly because their average price does not increase much. In contrast, the
marginal price increases substantially. This is why the aggregate consumption decreases by
2.71% if consumers respond to marginal price. The results suggest that the nonlinear pricing
would be e↵ective in reducing aggregate consumption if consumers respond to marginal price.
However, if consumers respond to average price, it does not reduce aggregate consumption
compared with the counterfactual flat marginal rate pricing.

5.2

Efficiency Costs of Nonlinear Pricing

Multi-tier electricity pricing creates efficiency costs because it does not reflect the marginal
cost of electricity (Faruqui 2008).21 The marginal cost of electricity generally depends on the
timing of consumption. However, there is no evidence that the marginal cost depends on the
level of a customer’s monthly consumption. Among time-invariant electricity pricing, the
most efficient pricing is therefore likely to be the flat marginal rate that equals the marginal
cost of electricity.22 In multi-tier pricing, the marginal prices for lower tiers are too low and
those for higher tiers are too high compared to the efficient flat marginal rate. The deadweight
loss of price schedule p(x) for a consumer whose consumption equals xú can be calculated by
the integral between the efficient price and the price schedule, dwl(p(x)) =

´ xú
0

|p(x)≠mc|dx.

I again start with the assumption that the long-run marginal cost of electricity equals
the average cost of electricity under the existing five-tier tari↵, 16.73¢/kWh for SCE in
21

See Borenstein (2012) for the redistribution e↵ect of nonlinear electricity pricing.
Time-variant electricity pricing generally improves efficiency substantially. Such pricing is not applicable
for customers in my sample because their meters are read monthly.
22

25

2007. This marginal cost can be higher or lower than the social marginal cost depending on
the assumptions on environmental externalities from power generation. I thus calculate the
deadweight loss for a wide range of the possible social marginal cost of electricity.
Figure 8 shows the aggregate deadweight loss for various values of the social marginal
cost of electricity with the price elasticity of -0.101. For the social marginal cost less than
21.13¢/kWh, dwl(mp) is larger than dwl(ap). This is because when consumers respond to
marginal price, they consume too less on average compared to the efficient level of consumption. However, when the social marginal cost exceeds this value because of large environmental externalities from electricity generation for example, dwl(ap) is larger than dwl(mp).
This is because the optimal consumption level in the presence of the negative externalities
becomes closer to the quantity obtained with the marginal price response. The welfare impact of the sub-optimizing behavior in the case of electricity consumption thus depends on
the social marginal cost of electricity. This result is contrast to the welfare implication for the
labor supply response to a nonlinear income tax schedule (Liebman and Zeckhauser, 2004),
where the sub-optimal response always produces smaller deadweight loss because workers
are less discouraged to work when they misperceive their average tax rate as the true rate.

6

Conclusion and Discussion

This paper exploits price variation at spatial discontinuities in California electricity service
areas to examine whether consumers respond to marginal price or alternative forms of price
in response to nonlinear pricing. The evidence strongly suggests that consumers respond to
average price and do not respond to marginal or expected marginal price. I show that this
sub-optimizing behavior makes nonlinear pricing unsuccessful in achieving its policy goal of
26

energy conservation and substantially changes the efficiency cost of nonlinear pricing.
Why do consumers respond to average price rather than marginal price? Given the
information available to most residential electricity customers in my sample period, the
information cost of understanding the marginal price of electricity is likely to be substantial.
First, monthly utility bills are often complex and make it harder for consumers to understand
the nonlinear structure of their pricing. Second, it is difficult for most consumers to monitor
cumulative electricity consumption during a billing month without having an in-home display
that provides the information about their consumption. In contrast, such information is not
required to respond to average price. Consumers can simply use the total payment and
consumption on their monthly bill and do not have to understand the actual shape of their
price schedule. It can be therefore rational for most consumers to use average price as an
approximation of their true marginal price.
The discussion about the information cost lead to an important question for future research: Does information provision help consumers respond to their true marginal price?
For income tax schedules, Chetty and Saez (2009) conduct a randomized controlled trial, in
which a half of the taxpayers in their sample receive instructions about income tax schedules.
They find that the information provision indeed changes the labor supply response to the income tax rate. Similarly, Wolak (2011) and Jessoe and Rapson (2012) find that information
provision significantly changes the price elasticity in residential electricity demand. Recent
development of information technology in energy markets especially have the potential for
providing consumers better information and improve the efficiency of the markets.

References
Amemiya, T. 1983. “Nonlinear regression models.” Handbook of econometrics 1:333–389.
27

Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen. 2012. “Moral Hazard
in Health Insurance: How Important Is Forward Looking Behavior?” Working Paper
17802, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Atkinson, A. B and J. E Stiglitz. 1976. “The design of tax structure: direct versus indirect
taxation.” Journal of Public Economics 6 (1-2):55–75.
BC Hydro. 2008. “2008 Residential Inclining Block Rate Application.”
Black, Sandra E. 1999. “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary
Education.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (2):577–599.
Blomquist, S. and H. Selin. 2010. “Hourly wage rate and taxable labor income responsiveness
to changes in marginal tax rates.” Journal of Public Economics 94 (11):878–889.
Blundell, R., A. Duncan, and C. Meghir. 1998. “Estimating labor supply responses using tax
reforms.” Econometrica 66 (4):827–861.
Borenstein, S., J. B Bushnell, and F. A Wolak. 2002. “Measuring Market Inefficiencies in
Californias Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market.” The American Economic Review
92 (5):1376–1405.
Borenstein, Severin. 2009. “To What Electricity Price Do Consumers Respond? Residential
Demand Elasticity Under Increasing-Block Pricing.”
———. 2012. “The Redistributional Impact of Nonlinear Electricity Pricing.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (3):56–90.
Brown, F. L, L. Ho↵man, and J. D Baxter. 1975. “New Way to Measure Price Elasticity.”
Electrical World 184:52–54.
Brown, J., T. Hossain, and J. Morgan. 2010. “Shrouded Attributes and Information Suppression: Evidence from the Field*.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2):859–876.
Burtraw, Dallas. 2009. “Hearing on Climate Change Legislation: Allowance and Revenue
Distribution.” US Senate Committee on Finance .
Burtraw, Dallas, Margaret Walls, and Joshua A. Blonz. 2010. “Distributional Impacts of
Carbon Pricing Policies in the Electricity Sector.” U.S. Energy Taxes, Gilbert E.Metcalf
eds. American Tax Policy Institute .
Bushnell, James B. and Erin T. Mansur. 2005. “Consumption under Noisy Price Signals:
A Study of Electricity Retail Rate Deregulation in San Diego.” Journal of Industrial
Economics 53 (4):493–513.
Busse, M., J. Silva-Risso, and F. Zettelmeyer. 2006. “1,000 Cash Back: The Pass-Through
of Auto Manufacturer Promotions.” The American Economic Review 96 (4):1253–1270.
Carter, D. W and J. W Milon. 2005. “Price knowledge in household demand for utility
services.” Land Economics 81 (2):265.
28

Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft. 2009. “Salience and taxation: Theory and evidence.”
The American Economic Review 99 (4):1145–1177.
Chetty, Raj. 2012. “Bounds on Elasticities With Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of
Micro and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica 80 (3):969–1018.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. “Adjustment Costs,
Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish
Tax Records.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2):749–804.
Chetty, Raj and Emmanuel Saez. 2009. “Teaching the Tax Code: Earnings Responses to
an Experiment with EITC Recipients.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper Series No. 14836.
Congress, U. S. 2009. “The American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 (HR 2454).”
US House of Representative, Washington, DC .
Crawford, Kathleen. 1991. Reflections : a history of the San Diego Gas & Electric Company
1881-1991. San Diego CA: San Diego Historical Society.
Davidson, Russell and James G. MacKinnon. 1993. “Estimation and Inference in Econometrics.” OUP catalogue, Oxford University Press.
de Bartolome, Charles A. M. 1995. “Which tax rate do people use: Average or marginal?”
Journal of Public Economics 56 (1):79–96.
DellaVigna, S. 2009. “Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field.” Journal of
Economic Literature 47 (2):315–372.
Diamond, Peter A. 1998. “Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern
of Optimal Marginal Tax Rates.” The American Economic Review 88 (1):83–95.
Faruqui, Ahmad. 2008. “Inclining Toward Efficiency.” Public Utilities Fortnightly (August).
Feldman, Naomi E. and Peter Katuscak. 2006. “Should the Average Tax Rate Be Marginalized?” CERGE-EI Working Paper wp304, The Center for Economic Research and Graduate Education - Economic Institute, Prague.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2009. “E-ZTAX: Tax Salience and Tax Rates.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 124 (3):969–1010.
Fujii, Edwin T. and Cli↵ord B. Hawley. 1988. “On the Accuracy of Tax Perceptions.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics 70 (2):344–347.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2011. “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality.” NBER Working
Paper 16911, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and
Information Suppression in Competitive Markets.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
121 (2):505–540.
29

Goolsbee, Austan. 2000. “It’s not about the money: Why natural experiments don’t work on
the rich.” The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, J. Slemrod, ed. Russell Sage
Foundation and Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA .
Hausman, J. A. 1985.
53 (6):1255–1282.

“The econometrics of nonlinear budget sets.”

Econometrica

Heckman, James. 1983. “Comment on Stochastic Problems in the Simulation of Labor
Supply.” In M. Feldstein, ed., Behavioral Simulations in Tax Policy Analysis. University
of Chicago Press, 70–82.
———. 1996. “A Comment on Eissa.” Empirical foundations of household taxation, M.
Feldstein and J . Poterba, eds. University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. .
Hossain, T. and J. Morgan. 2006. “... plus shipping and handling: Revenue (non) equivalence
in field experiments on ebay.” The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 6 (2):3.
Huang, Ching-I. 2008. “Estimating demand for cellular phone service under nonlinear pricing.” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 6 (4):371–413.
Jessoe, Katrina and David Rapson. 2012. “Knowledge is (Less) Power: Experimental Evidence from Residential Energy Use.” Working Paper 18344, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Joskow, P. L. 2001. “California’s electricity crisis.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy
17 (3):365.
Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics.”
Journal of Economic Literature 48 (2):281–355.
Liebman, Je↵rey. 1998. “The impact of the earned income tax credit on incentives and
income distribution.” Tax policy and the economy :83–119.
Liebman, Je↵rey and Richard Zeckhauser. 2004. “Schmeduling.”
Malmendier, U. and Y. H. Lee. 2011. “The bidder’s curse.” The American Economic Review
101 (2):749–787.
Mirrlees, J. A. 1971. “An exploration into the theory of optimum income taxation.” Review
of Economic Studies 38 (114):175–208.
Moffitt, R. 1990. “The econometrics of kinked budget constraints.” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4 (2):119–139.
Myers, William. 1983. Iron men and copper wires : a centennial history of the Southern
California Edison Company. Glendale Calif.: Trans-Anglo Books.
Nieswiadomy, Michael L. and David J. Molina. 1991. “A Note on Price Perception in Water
Demand Models.” Land Economics 67 (3):352–359.
30

Olmstead, S. M, W. Michael Hanemann, and R. N Stavins. 2007. “Water demand under alternative price structures.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
54 (2):181–198.
Puller, Steven L. 2007. “Pricing and Firm Conduct in California’s Deregulated Electricity
Market.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (1):75–87.
Reiss, Peter C. and Matthew W. White. 2005. “Household electricity demand, revisited.”
Review of Economic Studies 72 (3):853–883.
———. 2008. “What changes energy consumption? Prices and public pressures.” RAND
Journal of Economics 39 (3):636–663.
Saez, E., J. Slemrod, and S. H. Giertz. 2012. “The elasticity of taxable income with respect
to marginal tax rates: A critical review.” Journal of Economic Literature 50 (1):3–50.
Saez, Emmanuel. 1999. “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper Series No. 7366.
———. 2010. “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (3):180–212.
Shin, Jeong-Shik. 1985. “Perception of Price When Price Information Is Costly: Evidence
from Residential Electricity Demand.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 67 (4):591–
98.
Wolak, F. A. 2011. “Do Residential Customers Respond to Hourly Prices? Evidence from a
Dynamic Pricing Experiment.” The American Economic Review 101 (3):83–87.

31

Figure 1: Theoretical Predictions about Consumers’ Perceived Price
Panel A. Three theoretical predictions
Price

P(x)

Demand

Marginal Price

Expected Marginal Price

Average Price
Consumption

Panel B. The shape of density functions of w(‘) that convert p̃(x) to the three prices
Weight
Marginal Price
Expected Marginal Price
Average Price

x

x+ε

Notes: Panel A uses a simple example of nonlinear price schedules to describe three theoretical predictions
about consumers’ perceived price. Panel B shows the density functions of w(‘) that convert p̃(x) to the three
corresponding prices presented in Panel (A).

32

Figure 2: A Spatial Discontinuity in Electric Utility Service Areas in Orange
County, California

Figure 2: Border of Electricity Service Areas in Orange County, California

Rancho
Santa
Margarita

Mission
Viejo

Laguna Woods

Laguna
Hills

Cote
de
Coto
Coza
de

Las
Flores

Aliso
Viejo

0

Laguna
Beach
Laguna
Niguel

1

Caza

2

3

4

5 mile

Border of Electric Utility Service Areas
City Limits

Notes: The border
electricity
service
lies border
withinof the
city California
limits inEdison
six cities.
SCE serves the north
Notes:ofThe
bold line shows
the areas
service area
Southern
and
side of the border
servesSCE
the provides
south side
of the
San and
DiegoSDG&E
Gas & Electric.
electricity
forborder.
the north side of the border
and SDG&E covers the south side. The map also presents city limits. The utility
border exists inside the city limits in Laguna Beach, Laguna Niguel, Aliso Viejo,
Laguna Hills, Mission Viejo, and Coto de Caza.

Figure 3: An Example of Cross-Sectional Price Variation in Nonlinear Pricing
25

51

Cents Per kWh

20

15

SDG&E

SCE
10
0

100

200

300

400

500

Monthly Consumption as Percent of Baseline (%)

Notes: To show an example of cross-sectional price variation, this figure presents the marginal price (solid)
and the average price (dashed) for SCE and SDG&E in 2002.

33

Figure 4: Time-Series Price Variation in Nonlinear Electricity Pricing
Panel A. Southern California Edison (SCE)
35

30

Tier 5

Cents Per kWh

25

Tier 4
20

15

Tier 3

Tier 2
Tier 1

10

5
01jan1999 01jan2000 01jan2001 01jan2002 01jan2003 01jan2004 01jan2005 01jan2006 01jan2007 01jan2008 01jan2009

Billing Date

Panel B. San Diego Gas & Electric (SDG&E)
35

Tier 4

30

Tier 5

Tier 3

Cents Per kWh

25

20

15

Tier 2

10
Tier 1
5
01jan1999 01jan2000 01jan2001 01jan2002 01jan2003 01jan2004 01jan2005 01jan2006 01jan2007 01jan2008 01jan2009

Billing Date

Notes: The figure shows how residential electricity prices changed over time in Southern California Edison
and San Diego Gas & Electric. Each of the five tier rates corresponds to the tier rates in the five-tier
increasing block price schedules presented in Figure 3. The third, fourth, and fifth tiers did not exist before
2001. The fifth tier did not exist between 2004 and 2006 in SCE, and after 2008 in SDG&E.

34

Figure 5: Consumption Distributions and Nonlinear Price Schedules
Panel A. 1999

20

10

Marginal price per kWh

Consumption density

30

0
0

100
200
300
400
Monthly consumption relative to baseline (%)
Density

500

Marginal price

Panel B. 2007

20

10

Marginal price per kWh

Consumption density

30

0
0

100
200
300
400
Monthly consumption relative to baseline (%)
Density

500

Marginal price

Notes: The figure shows the histogram of household-level monthly electricity consumption for Southern
California Edison in 1999 (Panel A) and 2007 (Panel B). The figure also shows the nonlinear price schedule
for each year. The vertical solid lines show the kink points of the nonlinear price schedule.

35

−.3

Difference−in−Differences in Log Price
−.2
−.1
0
.1
.2

.3

−.03 −.02 −.01
0
.01
.02
.03
Difference−in−Differences in Log Consumption

Figure 6: Di↵erence-in-Di↵erences in Price and Consumption

1999

2000

2001

Marginal price
Average price(IV)

2002

2003

2004

Marginal price (IV)
Consumption

2005

2006

2007

Average price

Notes: The figure shows the di↵erence-in-di↵erences in price and consumption of January billing months
relative to year 1999 for customers whose consumption is in the forth tier of the five-tier price schedule. For
example, the plot of marginal price presents how SDG&E’s log marginal price evolved from 1999 relative to
SCE. First, for each side of the border, I calculate the mean log change in price and consumption. Then, I
calculate di↵erence-in-di↵erences by subtracting the mean log change of SCE customers from the mean log
change of SDG&E customers.

36

Figure 7: Shape of Weighting Functions: Examples and Estimation Results
0.050 !

0.040 !

(Example 1)
α=0.5
θl=θr=-0.1!

Weight!

0.030 !

0.020 !

(Estimation result)
α=0.91
θl=0.008
θr=-0.005!
(Example 2
α=0.5
θl=θr=-0.03!

0.010 !

0.000 !
-100! -90!

-80!

-70!

-60!

-50!

-40!

-30!

-20!

-10!

0!

10!

20!

30!

40!

50!

60!

70!

80!

90!

100!

Distance from the actual consumption (%)!

Notes: The dashed lines illustrate two examples of the weighting functions of equation (5). The first example
shows the case with – = 0.5 and ◊l = ◊r = −0.1, in which consumers care about the price of the left and
right of xit equally but put larger weights on the price close to xit . The second example shows a similar
case but consumers care about the price further away from xit . The solid line shows the estimation result of
w(–, ◊) that is shown in Table 5.

37

Figure 8: Efficiency Costs of Nonlinear Pricing

DWL when consumers respond to MP
DWL when consumers respond to AP

Deadweight Loss (million dollors)

200

DWL(AP)
150

100

50

DWL(MP)

0
10

15
20
25
Social Marginal Cost of Electricity (cents/kWh)

30

Notes: This figure presents the deadweight loss from the five-tier tari↵s in Southern California Edison in
2007 for di↵erent assumptions on the social marginal cost of electricity as well as on how consumers respond
to nonlinear pricing. The deadweight loss is calculated with the price elasticity of -0.101. The solid line
shows the deadweight loss when consumers respond to their average price. The dashed line displays a
counterfactual deadweight loss when consumers respond to their marginal price. The deadweight loss is
larger for the marginal price response when the social marginal cost is less than 21.13¢/kWh and becomes
smaller when the social marginal cost exceeds the cuto↵ value.

38

Table 1: Summary Statistics and Di↵erences in Means
SCE
Mean (S.E)

SDG&E
Mean (S.E)

41121 (1655)

40926 (1623)

Difference
Mean (S.E)

Data from Census 2000
Income per capita ($)
Median home value ($)
Median rent ($)
Average household size

398937 (20576) 405911 (19671)
1,366 (42)

1,388 (63)

-195 (2303)
6974 (28275)
22 (75)

2.71 (0.07)

2.82 (0.05)

0.10 (0.09)

Median age

47.40 (1.06)

45.75 (0.55)

-1.64 (1.19)

% owner occupied housing

81.44 (1.65)

84.48 (1.91)

3.05 (2.51)

% employment of males

75.39 (1.87)

78.71 (1.14)

3.31 (2.19)

% employment of females

58.26 (1.63)

58.51 (1.22)

0.24 (2.02)

% colleage degree

50.77 (1.25)

53.10 (1.21)

2.33 (1.73)

% high school degree

34.77 (1.01)

32.23 (0.93)

-2.54 (1.37)*

4.20 (0.28)

4.02 (0.32)

-0.18 (0.43)

85.51 (0.86)

83.77 (0.95)

-1.74 (1.28)

% hispanics

9.33 (0.57)

9.59 (0.72)

0.26 (0.91)

% asian

6.94 (0.61)

8.27 (0.67)

1.32 (0.90)

% black

1.19 (0.15)

0.86 (0.16)

-0.33 (0.22)

22.96 (0.12)

24.00 (0.13)

% no high school degree
% white

Electricity Billing Data
Electricity use (kWh/day)

1.04 (0.18)***

ln(Electricity use)

2.94 (0.004)

2.96 (0.005)

0.013 (0.006)*

ln(Electricity use) in 1999

2.89 (0.004)

2.88 (0.005) -0.006 (0.007)

Notes: For each variable, I show the mean and standard error for SCE customers and SDG&E customers
in the six cities that have the territory border of SCE and SDG&E within the city limits. The last column
shows the di↵erence in the mean with the standard error of the di↵erence. I cluster standard errors at the
census block group level for the Census data and at the customer level for the electricity billing data. *, **,
and *** show 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance.

39

Table 2: Encompassing Tests: Marginal Price vs. Average Price
Δln(Marginal Pricet)

(1)
-0.040
(0.004)

(2)

-0.055
(0.005)

Δln(Average Pricet )

(3)
0.005
(0.011)
-0.061
(0.014)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.075
(0.005)

0.003
(0.012)
-0.079
(0.014)

-0.052
(0.004)

Δln(Marginal Pricet-1 )
Δln(Average Pricet-1)

Notes: This table shows the results of the IV regression in equation (3) with fixed e↵ects and control variables
specified in the equation. The unit of observation is household-level monthly electricity bill. The dependent
variable is the log change in electricity consumption in billing period t from billing period t ≠ 12. The sample
period is from January 1999 to December 2007 and the sample size is 3,712,704 for columns 1 to 3 and
3,674,030 for columns 4 to 6. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the household level to adjust
for serial correlation.

Table 3: Lagged Responses and Medium-Long Run Price Elasticity

Δln(Average Pricet )
Δln(Average Pricet-1)
Δln(Average Pricet-2)
Δln(Average Pricet-3)
Δln(Average of Lag
Average Prices)

(1)
0.002
(0.006)
-0.045
(0.008)
-0.036
(0.007)
-0.013
(0.006)

Medium-Long Run Reponses
1 month 2 month 3 month 4 month
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

-0.075
(0.005)

-0.093
(0.005)

-0.099
(0.005)

-0.101
(0.005)

Notes: See notes in Table 3. The dependent variable is the log change in electricity consumption in billing
period t from billing period t ≠ 12. Because the four-month lag price is unknown for the first four months of
the sample period, I include monthly bills from May 1999 to December 2007 and the sample size is 3,558,008.
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the household level to adjust for serial correlation.

40

Table 4: Encompassing Tests: Expected Marginal Price vs. Average Price
Δln(Expected Marginal Pricet)

(1)
-0.043
(0.004)

Δln(Average Pricet )
Δln(Expected Marginal Pricet-1 )

(2)
-0.009
(0.011)
-0.057
(0.014)

(3)

(4)

-0.055
(0.004)

0.005
(0.011)
-0.083
(0.014)

Δln(Average Pricet-1)

Notes: See notes in Table 3. This table shows the results of the IV regression in equation (3) but include
expected marginal price instead of marginal price. The dependent variable is the log change in electricity
consumption in billing period t from billing period t ≠ 12. The data include monthly bills from January
1999 to December 2007 and the sample size is 3,712,704 for columns 1 to 2 and 3,674,030 for columns 3 to
4. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the household level to adjust for serial correlation.

Table 5: Estimation of the Shape of Perceived Price

Weighting parameter α
Slope parameter θ l
Slope parameter θ r
Elasticity parameter β
p-value for H0: α = 0.5
p-value for H0: α = 1

Current month
(1)
0.911
(0.082)
0.008
(0.008)
-0.005
(0.015)
-0.059
(0.005)
0.00
0.28

Price Variable
One-month lag Four-month average
(2)
(3)
0.896
0.883
(0.083)
(0.087)
0.013
0.015
(0.009)
(0.010)
-0.009
0.001
(0.015)
(0.017)
-0.086
-0.114
(0.006)
(0.006)
0.00
0.00
0.21
0.18

Notes: See notes in Table 3. This table shows the results of the nonlinear IV regression in equation (5).
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the household level to adjust for serial correlation. Column 1
uses the contemporaneous price, column 2 uses the one-month lagged price, and column 3 uses the average
of one, two, three, and four-month lagged prices as a price variable in the regression.

41

Table 6: The E↵ect of Nonlinear Pricing on Energy Conservation
Assumption on Consumers' Perceived Price
(A) Consumption under

Average Pirce

Marginal Price

20,611

19,995

20,553

20,553

0.28%

-2.71%

(0.05%)

(0.43%)

Five-tier Nonlinear Pricing
(B) Consumption under
Counterfactual Flat Rate
% Change from (B) to (A)

Notes: The table shows how nonlinear pricing changes aggregate consumption compared to a counterfactual
flat marginal rate for two scenarios: 1) customers respond to average price and 2) customers respond to
marginal price. This table uses the data in SCE in 2007, where consumers had one of the steepest five-tier
price schedules. Note that the main results do not change when I use the data in other years or in SDG&E.
Asymptotic standard errors are calculated by the delta method based on the standard errors of the estimated
price elasticity.

42

Appendix
Figure A.1: Service Territories of California’s Investor-Owned Electric Utilities

Southern
California
Edison

Focus Area
of This Study
San Diego Gas & Electric

Notes: This figure shows a service territory map of California’s investor-owned electric utilities. The original
map is provided by the California Energy Commission. Blank areas indicate that these areas are served by
electric utilities that are not investor-owned. In this study, I use two electric utilities: Southern California
Edison (SCE) and San Diego Gas & Electric (SDG&E). SCE provides electricity for a large part of southern
California, whereas SDG&E covers a major part of San Diego County and the southern part of Orange
County. This study particularly focuses on the territory border of SCE and SDG&E in Orange County,
which is shown in Figure 2.

43

Figure A.2: Changes in Consumption from 1999 to 2000 by Distance from the Utility Border
Panel A. Changes in Consumption from July 1999 to July 2000

Changes in Consumption (%)

5

0

−5

−10

−15
−1.5

−1

−.5
0
.5
Distance from the utility border (mile)

1

1.5

Panel B. Changes in Consumption from August 1999 to August 2000

Changes in Consumption (%)

5

0

−5

−10

−15
−1.5

−1

−.5
0
.5
Distance from the utility border (mile)

1

1.5

Notes: The figure provides evidence of the validity of the spatial regression discontinuity design and suggests
that using samples further close to the utility border does not a↵ect my estimation results, which I show
in Table A.1. The horizontal axis shows miles from the border using negative values for SCE territory and
positive values for SDG&E territory. The left hand side of the vertical line represents the distance from
the border for SCE customers and the right hand side represents the distance from the border for SDG&E
customers. The dots show the mean percent change in consumption from a billing month in 1999 to the same
billing month in 2000 in a 0.25 mile bandwidth. City-by-time fixed e↵ects and billing-cycle-by-time fixed
e↵ects are subtracted to control for weather and other factors. The range bar shows the 95% confidence
intervals. Consumption between SCE and SDG&E customers are not systematically di↵erent before the
utility companies had di↵erent price changes in the summer of 2000, and it is systematically di↵erent after
the price change.

44

Table A.1: Robustness Checks
Main Result

Unbalanced
Panel

Δln(Marginal Pricet-1 )
Δln(Average Pricet-1)
N

IV based on

Samples in

Samples in

consumption 2 miles from 1 mile from
in 1999

the border

the border

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.003

0.006

-0.003

0.013

0.009

(0.012)

(0.009)

(0.015)

(0.013)

(0.019)

-0.079

-0.084

-0.074

-0.082

-0.084

(0.014)

(0.012)

(0.020)

(0.017)

(0.025)

3,674,030

6,876,201

3,674,030

2,706,455

1,367,050

Notes: This table shows the results of the IV regression in equation (3) with fixed e↵ects and control variables
specified in the equation for di↵erent samples and alternative instruments. See notes in Table 3. Column
1 shows the main result that is presented in Table 3. Column 2 uses unbalanced panel data that include
all households who open and close their electricity account during my sample period, from January 1999 to
December 2007. Column 3 uses alternative instrument. I calculate the mean consumption in 1999 for each
customer. Then, I calculate the policy-induced price change by using this value. Column 4 and 5 limit my
sample to households within a certain distance from the territory border of SCE and SDG&E. Standard
errors in parentheses are clustered at the household level to adjust for serial correlation.

45

