NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEWS FROM THE U.S. AND JAPAN:
WHICH MOVES THE YEN/DOLLAR EXCHANGE RATE?

Takatoshi Ito

V. Vance Roley

Working Paper No. 1853

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1986

The authors are thankful to J. Frenkel, J. Huizinga, S. Ozier, C.
Pigott, J. Poterba, C. Sims and L. Summers for helpful discussions.
The authors also benefitted from the comments received from participants of seminars at the Japanese Ministry of Finance, the Bank
of Japan, the University of Chicago, and the University of
Minnesota. K. Ohno performed outstanding research assistance.
Financial assistance From the Hoover Institution (National
Fellowship to the first author), the National Science Foundation
(Grant No. SES—8408503 to the second author), the National
Institute for Research Advancement in Tokyo, and the National
Bureau of Eocnomic Research in Cambridge, MA is gratefully
acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the NBER'S
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Workina Paper #1853
March 1986
News from the U.S. and Japan:
Which Moves the Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate?

ABSTRACT

Intra—daily

movements in the yen/dollar exchange rate were examined

in four non—overlapping segments within each business day from January

1980 to September 1985. The empirical results yielded several conclusions. First, most depreciation of the yen (appreciation of the dollar) from
late 1982 to early 1984 occurred in the New York market. The direction
of the yen was mostly neutral in the Tokyo market. Also, the volatility of

the exchange rate decreased considerably in the Tokyo market. The volatility in the New York market, on the other hand, did not decrease until

very recently. Second, market efficiency was examined in terms of the
random—walk behavior of short—run movements in the yen/dollar rate.

Information on the preceding segments within a day was sometimes signi-

ficant in predicting the exchange rate movement in a market. Third, there
is evidence of the "profit—taking" behavior, or overshooting, in that a
large jump (more than 3 absolute yen) in any market tends to be reversed

by a fifth of the jump during the same day in the next market. Finally,
the relative effects of news from the U.S. and Japan were examined explicitly both with respect to possible major events behind large jumps and
the response of the yen/dollar rate to particular economic announcements

in both countries. Over the entire sample period, news concerning the U.S.
money stock had the only significant effects.

Takatoshi Ito
tpartitent of Economics

University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455

V. Vance P1ey

tpartnent of Finance

Graduate School of

1)3-10

Business

Administration
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

I.

INTRODUCTION

The pre—eminence of the efficient markets hypothesis has led to

a number of studies on the effect of news on asset prices. Many of
these studies further employ finely observed data, usually a change in

an asset's price during a 24—hour period containing major "news." In
this context, "news" refers to an unexpected change in a fundamental

variable relevant to the asset's price determination. By examining the
response to news, different hypotheses about an asset's price behavior

can be evaluated. In contrast, the expected part of the announcement
or development should not influence the asset's price since it is already
taken into account before the announcement in an efficient market.

Among the recent studies examining the effect of news, the
response of foreign exchange rates has received considerable attention.

The response to the Federal Reserve's weekly money announcements is
investigated by Cornell (1982, 1983), Frankel and Hardouvelis (1985),

Engel and Frankel (1984), Hardouvelis (1984), and Roley (1985b), among

others. Most of the evidence is consistent with the so—called policy—
anticipations (or Keynesian) hypothesis in that a positive money announce-

ment surprise causes dollar appreciation. Under this hypothesis, the
observed positive response of U.S. interest rates to positive money
announcement surprises represents a real interest—rate response, lead-

ing to an appreciation of the dollar in foreign exchange markets. The
real rate rises due to the expectation of future tightening by the Federal Reserve as a reaction to the unanticipated increase in money.-'
The response of exchange rates to other economic announcements

also has been considered. Batten and Thornton (1984) examine the

—2—
response to U.S. discount rate changes. They conclude that unexpected
discount rate changes implemented with international considerations,

most notably on November 1, 1978, are significant in explaining exchange

rate movements. Hakkio and Pearce (1986) consider the response of
exchange rates to U.S. announcements of inflation, industrial production,
and the unemployment rate, in addition to weekly money announcements.

Their results suggest that only money surprises affect exchange rates
significantly.

While

not

focusing on economic announcements, Nussa (1979), Dorn—

busch (1980), and Frenkel (1981) also consider the effect of unantici-

pated changes in economic variables on exchange rates. Edwards (1982,
1983, 1984) and Longworth (1984) further attempt to formalize a method
to explain the deviations between the forward rate and the realized spot
rate using the unanticipated components of money, interest rates, and

output. Since their data consist of monthly changes, the immediate
responses of exchange rates to news announcements are not measured. A
novelty of their approach, however, is to take into account foreign (non—
U.S.) news as well as domestic (U.S.) news.

As is recognized in the literature on the response of asset prices
to economic announcements, it is desirable to take the shortest interval
possible around potential news since other shocks may dilute the esti-

mated effect over one month. However, Edward's idea that exchange rates
should respond to not only U.S. news but foreign news, implying correl-

ated error terms in the various currency equations, is well taken. This
point leads to the question of how to measure exchange rate responses to

foreign (non—U.S.) news. Since an exchange rate is the relative price

—3—
of two assets (i.e., currencies), it is important to recognize that the

rate could respond to domestic and/or foreign news. However, if exchange
rate responses to domestic and foreign news are to be separated, a 24—hour
segment, not to mention one month, as a data unit is not fine enough since
it involves reactions to both domestic and foreign news.

Most studies investigating the effects of announcements measure
the change in exchange rates over 24 hours (e.g., a change from a close

to a close). In contrast, Hakkio and Pearce (1986) examine exchange rate
responses in the New York market over two sub—intervals, but they do not

consider exchange rate movements in the rest of the world. As noted above,
it is important to recognize that not only domestic but also foreign news
is very relevant in the determination of the exchange rate, and that the
foreign exchange market is open almost continually somewhere in the world.
Therefore, news analysis of the exchange rate needs to be carried out with
respect to the other countryts news as well as U.S. news.
This paper distinguishes itself in several aspects from the other

studies mentioned above. Most advantages come from the data set, which
consists of the opening and closing quotes of the yen/dollar exchange
rate in the Tokyo market and the 9 A.M., noon, and 4:30 P.M. quotes in the
New York market for each business day from January 1980 through September

l98. In addition, announcements of the money supply, industrial production, and wholesale (producers) prices are collected both for the U.S. and
Japan.

The short time intervals between exchange rate observations along
with the use of both foreign and domestic economic data allow a better
understanding of the behavior of the yen/dollar rate for several reasons.

—4—
First, the responses of the exchange rate to U.S. and Japanese economic

news can be differentiated. Because of the 14—hour (13—hour during daylight saving time) time difference between Tokyo and New York, the busi-

ness hours of the two markets do not overlap. (See Appendix 1 for data
sources and timing.) Since currency, as opposed to the U.S. Treasury
bills or U.S. equities, is traded almost continuously around the clock
somewhere in the world, any development in world news will be immediately
reflected in the exchange rate.
Second, it can be assumed as a first approximation that U.S.—ori—

ented news —— such as economic announcements, and political developments
——

mainly

hit the market during its business hours, and similarly for

Japanese news. Because of non—overlapping business hours, exchange rate
changes in the New York market (9 A.M. —

4:30 P.M.) can be regarded as

responses to U.S. news, and the changes in the Tokyo market (9 A.M. —

3:30 P.M.) as responses to Japanese news. Since the exchange rate should
reflect not only U.S. news but also Japanese news, it is very interesting, for example, to consider how Japanese money announcements compare
with U.S. money announcements with respect to the exchange rate response.
Third, economic news in addition to money announcements is considered; namely, industrial production and wholesale (producers, in the U.S.)

price index announcements every month. These announcements are decomposed into surprise and expected parts and tested against the efficient

markets hypothesis. Using these data, the relative efficiency of the New
York—Tokyo markets also can be compared.
Finally, the features of this investigation outlined above are

extremely useful in addressing recent policy issues. By identifying

—5—

whether Japanese news or U.S. news influences the exchange rate more,
and also by identifying what kind of news in each market moves the
exchange rate, this analysis sheds light from a new angle on the con-

troversy of the cause of the "overvalued dollar in the l980s." If the
"cause" of the strong dollar is tight monetary policy of the U.S., the
exchange rate should exhibit relatively large responses to U.S. money

announcement surprises. Alternatively, if the dollar's strength, particularly since 1982, is a reflection of the strength of the U.S. economy relative to that of Japan, then other kinds of news such as industrial production announcements in both countries should have signif 1—

cant effects on the exchange rate.
To analyze the effects of changes in policy and deregulation further, several possible break points are considered within the 1980—1985

sample. First, December 1980 should be noted for the sweeping deregulation that occurred with respect to Japanese capital controls both into
and Out of Japan.--" Second, in October 1982, the Federal Reserve
announced the abandonment of its previous monetary—control procedure and
also indicated that targets for the narrowly—defined money stock (Ml)

would be de—emphasized. Third, in February 1984, the Federal Reserve
adopted a different reserve requirement system, and as a consequence the

behavior of money and interest rates in the U.S. may have changed.'
Following this introductory section, the second section examines
the relative volatility of the yen/dollar rate in the New York and

Tokyo markets. The relative contributions of these markets in determining longer—run movements also are considered. In the third section, the
random—walk behavior of the yen/dollar rate is tested both within and

across markets. The possibility of inertia over short intervals also

—6—

is

tested. The role of news in explaining large exchange—rate movements

is considered in the fourth section, along with tests of profit—taking

behavior or "corrections" following large jumps. In the fifth section,
the response of the yen/dollar rate to economic news announcements in

both the U.S. and Japan is estimated. The main conclusions are summarized in the final section.

II.

TREND AND VOLATILITY ANALYSIS

To compare movements of the yen/dollar exchange rate in different
markets throughout the world, four major segments are considered within

each day. (The timing of different markets is explained further in
Appendix 1). First, exchange rate movements from the opening (9 A.M.),
TKO, to the close (3:30 P.M.), TKC, of the Tokyo market mainly reflect

traders' responses to news originating in Japan. Both the London and
New York markets are closed during business hours in Tokyo. This seg-

ment is denoted as the "Tokyo" segment of the day. Second, from the
close of Tokyo market to the opening of the New York market, news and
actions in the European markets are thought to be responsible for the
changes in the yen/dollar exchange rate through cross arbitrage with

European

currencies. This segment is referred to as "Europe." Third,

changes of the yen/dollar rate from 9

A.M.,

NYO, to 4:30

P.M., NYC, in

the New York market mainly reflect the effects of U.S. news, although
the London market is still open concurrently at the very beginning hours

of New York market trading. This segment is denoted as "New York." The
fourth segment of the day differs from the others. In particular, there
is no major market between New York and Tokyo. For 3½ hours (2½ during

—7—

daylight saving time), most of the Japanese, American and European market

participants are not trading. For convenience, this period is referred
to as the "Pacific" market.

A summary of yenldollar exchange rate movements for each market is

presented in Table 1. This table indicates which market was most influential in determining exchange rate changes and volatility. Several
stylized facts are apparent in this table. First, the exchange rate at
the end of the sample, September 20, 1985, happened to be about the same

as that of the start of the sample period, January 1, 1980. That is, total
net changes summed over all markets for the entire sample period are less

than one yen. However, when they are decomposed into separate markets,

differences are apparent. In particular, accumulated changes in the New
York market during the second subperiod reflect yen depreciation, and those
for Europe in the first, second, and third subperiods reflect yen apprecia-

tion. The drift of the exchange rate in the Tokyo market appears to be

"trendless" except for a mild depreciation in the second subperiod. The
data suggest that U.S. economic activity and policies led toward an "over-

valued" dollar, while the European markets recorded opposite effects. This
finding is consistent with the assertion that the U.S. fiscal and monetary
policy mix in 1981-1982 caused "surprisingly" high real interest rates,
considering the on—going recession, which in turn attracted foreign (Japan-

ese especially) capital into the U.S. In turn, the exchange rate responded
to the capital account movement rather than the current account. Moreover,
this effect was sufficiently strong such that counter measures (keeping the
interest rate higher than expected) by European countries could not overturn the tide.

—8--

Since theory often predicts that asset prices exhibit a random walk
property, it is of interest to examine whether an expected daily change
was statistically different from zero in any market during any subperiod.
As indicated in Table 1, the daily exchange rate movement in the New York
market during the subperiod II (464 observations) was not a random walk in
the sense that the hypothesis that the expected change is equal to zero is

rejected at the 1 percent significance level. Similarly, in the European

market during the subperiods I and III, daily movements were predictable
at the 5 percent significance level. However, the mean change is slightly
more than 1/10 of one yen. Considering the bid—ask spread, which is about
1/20 to 1/10 of one yen, the statistical "predictability" does not mean

that there were unexploited profit opportunities in the market. The conditional prediction depending on movements in the preceding markets are
examined in section III.

The volatility of the exchange rate measured by variances and mean

absolute changes also is reported in Table 1. The Pacific market consistently had low volatility, about a half to a third that of any other market

in terms of mean absolute changes. As is shown below, this result is
robust even when correcting for the different number of hours in the segments.

The volatilities of the Tokyo and New York markets changed signif i—

cantly over the sample. In the first subperiod, the Tokyo market was
slightly more volatile than both the New York and European markets. However, the New York market was most volatile from the second to the fourth

subperiods. Since October 1982, the New York market has been about twice
as volatile as the Tokyo market in terms of the variances, due mainly to

—9—

the major decline in the Tokyo market's volatility. In terms of variances,
the volatility of the third subperiod is a half of the first period in the

Tokyo market, and the fourth period's volatility is again half that of the
third period.

The decline in the volatility in the Tokyo market can be explained

by two factors: news and institutions.-' First, the Japanese economy was
highly volatile after the second oil crisis in 1980. The Bank of Japan
was attempting to avoid both inflation and yen depreciation in the spring,
and then trying to stimulate the economy after the suniiner. For example,

the official discount rate was raised from 6.25 to 7.25 percent in Febru-

ary and again to 9 percent in March. The rate was decreased to 8.25 percent in August and to 7.25 percent in November. Some of the actions taken

by the Bank most likely added to the uncertainty in the market.' Second,
most of the capital controls on flows into and out of Japan were elimin-

ated on December 1, 1980. In addition, the so—called "real demand principle" was eliminated on April 1, 1984. Prior to that date, positions in the
for-ward market without "real demands" were prohibited. Both measures contributed to the broadening of the Tokyo market, which in turn may have
increased its stability.

The above explanations are not entirely free from criticism. For
example, U.S. interest rates rose in the spring of 1980 and then declined
during the summer and fall, similar to Japan, but with a larger magnitude.

Despite the similar interest rate patterns, the volatility of the exchange
rate differed in the two markets.

A. Volatility Per Hour
In the preceding subsection, the difference in the number of

hours for different segments was ignored. If one segment is longer than

—10—

another, its apparent volatility may

be artificially high. To correct

for the difference in segment hours, "per hour" variances are calculated

below.-' The market hours in Tokyo and New York are constant for all
observations. The hours between two markets, however, vary depending on
whether the U.S. is on the daylight saving time. In addition, the Pacific
segment, hours from New York closing to Tokyo opening, includes a weekend
(an extra 48 hours) once every five observations.
Table 2 shows per hour variances calculated from the volatility

measures reported in Table 1. Even on a per hour basis, the volatility
ranking between Tokyo and New York does not change. The Tokyo market was
more volatile in 1980, while the New York market was more volatile than
Tokyo beginning in the second subperiod.
Turning to the Pacific segment, volatility per hour is expected to
be very small since all major markets in the world are closed during

these hours. Moreover, if this segment contains a weekend, it extends more
than 50 hours without trading activities. As indicated in Table 2, the
per hour variance of the weekday Pacific segment is a third to a half
that of its New York counterpart as expected.—'
The low per hour volatility of the Pacific market may be inter-

preted as evidence for the lack of news. To examine this hypothesis further, the Pacific segment of the day can be compared to the most "active"
segment of the day, namely 9 A.M. — 12 Noon in the New York market. The
London market is still open during some part of the New York morning ses-

sion. The three hours which would reflect New York and European news are
obviously more volatile than the comparable hours in the Pacific segment

of the day."

—11--

An alternative explanation of the lower volatility during the

Pacific segment could be its lack of "self—generating" trading rather than

the lack of news. French and Roll (1984) propose that trades self—generate volatility based on evidence that when the stock market is closed during regular business hours, the volatility between closing and opening

quotes is significantly less than during other times. Unfortunately,
because the foreign exchange market is almost always (except the Pacific
segment) open somewhere in the world and ready to process relevant news,

the maintained hypothesis that it is news which determines volatility cannot be differentiated from an alternative hypothesis that the mere existence of trading generates the volatility.
III.

RANDOM WALK HYPOTHESIS
In this section, the random walk hypothesis that changes in the

exchange rate are unpredictable is tested. Under this hypothesis, all
information concerning the exchange rate is processed instantly. The
New York closing rate, for example, should be the expected level of the

Tokyo opening. Similarly, the expected closing rate in the New York
market as of 9:01 A.M. should be the opening (9 A.M.) rate in the New

York market. The random walk hypothesis is tested by regressing a change
in a segment's rate on the aggregated change during the three preceding
segments:
(3.1)

TKO —

(3.2)

TKCt — TKOt

(3.3)

NY

(3.4)

NYCt —

—

NYCi

TKCt

NY0

a + bi(NYC

i

—

TKOt

a + bi(TKO — TKCt1)

i + e

+e

= a + bi(TKC —

NY0_i) + e

= a + bi(NY0

NYCi)

—

+e

—12—

where the random error term in each equation is represented by e for
simplicity. The random walk hypothesis is that b1 = 0 in each equation.-'
The above equations can be generalized slightly to consider additional alternative hypotheses. The movement in European markets, for

example, captured by (NYO —

TKC),

may have an "inertia" effect on the

within—the-market change in New York. This hypothesis may not be refuted
by equation (3.4) if the movement in European markets is dominated by the

movement in the rest of the world. In general, the following equations
allow tests of whether any of the preceding three segments of the day has
a special effect on the change during the upcoming segment:
(3.5)

TKO — NYCt

= a + bi(NYC
-

(3.6)

TKCt — TKOt

—
i NY0i) + b2(NY0i TKCi)

b3(TKC

= a + bi(TKO —

—

—

TK0i) + e

NYCi) + b2(NYC — NYO1)

+ b3(NYO — TKCi)
— TKC

= a +

+
(3.8) NYCt — NYOt

+e

bi(TKC — TKO) + b2(TKO —
b3(NYC

= a + bi(NY0 —

+ b3(TKO —

—

NYOi)

TKC)
NYC

NYCi)

+e

+ b2(TKC —

TK0)

+e

The random walk hypothesis is described as b1 =

b2

=

b3

0.

The estimation and test results of equations (3.1) —

(3.8)

are

summarized in Table 3. The equations are estimated over the entire sample and selected subsamples corresponding to possible policy regimes and

deregulation)' In two of the first four equations, (3.2) and (3.3), the
random—walk hypothesis can be rejected at the 5 percent level for the

entire sample period. The results indicate that the opening Tokyo quote

—13—

is not an unbiased predictor of the closing Tokyo quote, and similarly
that the closing Tokyo quote is biased in forecasting the opening New

York yen/dollar rate. In contrast, the closing New York rate in the
previous day is an unbiased predictor of the opening rate in Tokyo, and
the opening and closing rates in New York do not exhibit any significant

bias. On the basis of these results, the rationality of the closing
quote in Tokyo may be questioned.

For the entire sample period, the random walk hypothesis cannot
be rejected in equations (3.1) and (3.5), indicating that the exchange

rate movement in the Pacific market is indeed a random walk. The movements in the preceding three segments of the day, whether aggregated or
separate, do not contribute in predicting the change in the Pacific mar-

ket. In contrast, equation (3.8) shows that the movement in the New York
market is predictable using changes in the three preceding segments, but
it is not predictable when these segments are aggregated.

The rejection of the random walk hypothesis is most definite in

the second subperiod. The number of rejections decreases in the third

subperiod and again in the fourth subperiod)" One explanation is based
on the notion that "large jumps" and "small trembles" are caused by different factors and that a large jump in one period would predict move-

ments in the following segments. As large jumps become less frequent in
later periods (as will be evident in Table 4), it may become difficult to

reject the random walk hypothesis. Alternatively, the results may be
interpreted as support for the assertion that as the market becomes large
and more traders (speculators) participate in it, the price movement follows the theoretically—predicted random walk behavior.

—14—

The rejection of the random walk hypothesis does not necessarily

mean an unexploited profit opportunity. In fact, the typical size of
the predicted change in a segment is typically well under the bid—ask

spread.2i Nevertheless, important insights about the conditional predictability of intra—daily movements of the exchange rate are apparent
13/

in the table.—

IV.

NEWS ANALYSIS AND PROFIT—TAKING BEHAVIOR
In the previous section, the random walk hypothesis was analyzed

in the sense that information about yen/dollar rate movements during
the past 24 hours should not be helpful in predicting the current segment's
rate. The estimation procedure implicitly asstrned that each day in the

sample is qualitatively the same. However, newspaper headings are constantly encountered such as the price (exchange rate) declined because
of "profit—taking'1 after a sharp rise. There seems to be a view, at
least in the news media, that any large change in an asset's price is

followed by a movement in the opposite direction. There also is a view,
which is not mutually exclusive, that sharp changes in the price reflect
the last stage of a bubble (or a bandwagon effect) in which the bubble

bursts. These views predict that days of large price changes should be
treated separately from other days and be tested for predictability of
subsequent price movements.

A large change by itself is not evidence of a bubble. It may be
reflecting some major news in the world, a sudden death of a political

leader, or an initiation of war in the Middle East. If all large changes

—15—

are attributable to major news, factors which traders think are most
important in the determination of the yen/dollar exchange rate can

potentially be ascertained. If many large changes occur without any
apparent major news items, the existence of a bubble or a bandwagon
effect in the market may be suspected.

To examine these hypotheses,

a set of selected days with large jumps is used.

A. Is There Always Major News Behind a Large Jump in the Rate?
Days in which a large change in the exchange rate occurred

are examined closely below. Table 4 lists the number of days in which
the yen jumped by more than 3 absolute yen. From Table 1, a change of
three yen is more than two standard deviations. This classification
scheme reconfirms the findings in Section II about which market was more

volatile. By selecting the infrequent days with jumps of more than 3
yen, special characteristics are examined.

A jump in the exchange rate is supposedly triggered by some econo-

mic or political news. Newspapers relevant to the days of large changes
(more than 3 absolute yen per segment) were examined in an attempt to

identify major news items. This exercise is summarized in Appendix 2.
After possible causes for large jumps were reviewed, it appears that not
all jumps can be associated with major news.

B. Tests of Bubbles and Profit—Taking
Since news responsible for all large jumps could not be

identified, an alternative hypothesis is considered. In particular, suppose that the exchange rate could deviate from an otherwise stationary

stochastic process for a short period of time. A "rational" bubble could

—16—

then emerge and burst occasionally. That is, this bubble hypothesis for
a large change within a day is that the jump is caused by the final

stage of a bubble or a bandwagon effect. A large jump can then be interpreted as a sudden correction to the "natural" (equilibrium) level from

an exploding bubble process. This interpretation predicts that the large
jump is preceded by a significant change in the opposite direction.
Formally,
(4.1)

Jump = a + b(change in the previous segment) +

e,

b <

0.

In addition, it can be loosely hypothesized that a large jump (3

yen or more) is followed by profit—taking behavior. Under this hypothesis, the subsequent movement if not necessarily large, but it is in the

opposite direction regardless of the reason for the jump. This behavior
can be represented as
(4.2)

(Change in the subsequent segment) = a + b(Jump) + e, b < 0.

The empirical results for days with large jumps are summarized in

the bottom part of Table 4. The results for equation (4.1) indicate that
there is no evidence that large jumps are preceded by changes in the oppo—
14/

site direction Large jumps, therefore, cannot be identified as the popping of a bubble. In contrast, there is clear evidence that "profit—tak-

ing" occurred after a large jump'For a positive jump of 3 yen, for example, the results indicate that during the next segment of the day the yen!

dollar rate falls by 0.5 yen. In an efficient market, it is difficult to
rationalize such behavior.

—17—

V.

RESPONSES TO ECONOMIC NS ANNOUNCEMENTS

In

this section, the response of the yen/dollar exchange rate to

announcements of important economic news is examined. Announcements of
the money supply, industrial production, and producers (wholesale, in

Japan) prices are considered for both the U.S. and Japan. Previous
research in this area is extended in at least two ways. First, by considering foreign exchange trading each day in several segments throughout the world, competing hypotheses about factors which determine the
exchange rate (critical fundamentals) can be better differentiated.
Second, Japanese announcements are analyzed in parallel with U.S. announce-

ments. Since the exchange rate could be influenced by either economy,

parallel effects from Japanese news announcements might be expected. However, due to the differences in monetary policy rules, regulations, institutions, and economic structures, announcement effects may not be symmetric between the two countries.

The usual efficient markets model is used to estimate the response

of the yen/dollar exchange rate to economic news announcements. This
model may be represented as

a(k)

+ b1(k) . SA +

EA

+e

(5.1)

X(k) =

where

th
X(k) = change in the yen/dollar rate in the k segment

b2(k)

.

after the announcement
SA =

surprise

part of the announcement

EA = expected part of the announcement.

Under the null hypothesis of market efficiency, both the coefficient on
the expected announced value, b2(k), and the constant should equal zero.
Moreover, if the market incorporates news rapidly, the coefficient on

—18—

the surprise component of the announcement, b1(k), should equal zero in

segments following that of the announcement (k=l,2,...). Alternatively,
if one segment of the market either over—or—under—reacts to news, subsequent segments may exhibit significant responses.

The announcement data are defined in Appendix 1. Expected values
of announcements differ depending on the country. For the U.S., expected
announced values are constructed using the survey compiled by Money Market Services, Inc. In general, these survey data exhibit desirable properties in terms of their conformance with rational expectations (e.g., Pearce

and Roley, 1985). For Japan, a similar survey is not available. As an
alternative, a rolling vector autoregression is used, including money,
industrial production, wholesale prices, and the Gensaki interest rate.

The announcement surprises generated by this model are confirmed to have
means insignificantly different from zero and no significant serial correlation

A.

Money Announcements

The estimated response of the yen/dollar exchange rate to

weekly U.S. money announcement surprises is reported in Table 5. The
response is estimated over the entire 1980—85 sample as well as several
subsamples corresponding to possible changes in policy regimes in both

the U.S. and Japan. In all cases, the response is estimated using equation (5.1) despite the absence of both estimated intercepts and the

effects of expected money in the table. While similar estimates of the
initial response in the New York market (k=0) are reported elsewhere,
the results in Table 5 are obtained both for a more recent sample and
for more highly disaggregated segments within a 24—hour period.

—19—

The initial response to U.S. money announcement surprises in the
New York market is positive and statistically significant at the 5 percent level for the overall sample and in two of the four subsamples. In
these instances, the response is consistent with the expectation of
higher real interest rates in the U.S., f or example, as the Federal

Reserve attempts to offset a positive money surprise. The estimated
response is not significant at even the 10 percent level in the February

1984 — September 1985 period, corresponding to the adoption of contempor-

aneous reserve requirements by the Federal Reserve. Roley (1985a) finds
that the response of the 3—month Treasury bill yield also is insignifi-

cantly different from zero in the post—February 1984 period. As a consequence, it is not surprising that the response of the yen/dollar exchange
rate is insignificant.

Similar to the response in the New York market, the response in the

Pacific segment is statistically significant in two subsamples. These
results, which have not been reported previously, indicate that the yen!
dollar exchange rate does not adjust fully by 4:30 P.M. New York time to

the 4:10 P.M. announcement. Instead, a response of almost equal magnitude
is incorporated in the opening Tokyo quote as reflected by the response in

the Pacific segment. U.S. money announcement surprises have no further
effects in the subsequent Tokyo and Europe segments.

As a whole, these results suggest that U.S. monetary information has

affected the yen/dollar exchange rate significantly. News from U.S. money
announcements also is incorporated within three to four hours following an
announcement. Moreover, constant terms are uniformly insignificant in the
estimated equations, and expected money is statistically significant at the

5 percent level in only one equation. Thus, the results are broadly consistent with market efficiency.

—20—

If the Bank of Japan operates under the same policy rule as the

Federal Reserve, a symmetric effect to Japanese money announcements would

be expected. However, it is widely suspected that the Bank of Japan does
not emphasize the money supply as its policy target. Thus, Japanese
money announcements may influence the exchange rate differently.
In contrast to the U.S., money announcements are made monthly in

Japan. In particular, the Bank of Japan announces every month the growth
rate of the money supply for 12 months ending in the month preceding the

announcement. The monthly average of M2 + CD is used for the definition
of money supply.
The response of the yen/dollar exchange rate to Japanese money
announcement surprises is summarized in the right—hand side of Table 5.
Similar to the estimates for U.S. money announcements, intercepts and the
effects of expected money are insignificant in all but one instance, con-

sistent with efficient markets. A further question of interest is whether
the coefficient on the surprise part of announcement is significant as is

the case for the U.S. As is apparent in the table, a significant response

of the exchange rate after the money announcement is not detected. The
results therefore suggest that money announcements in Japan do not have
any information value for traders about the future course of the economy

or economic policies. Traders must believe that the Bank of Japan does not
respond to any surprise increase or decrease in the money supply (growth

rate). Thus, the money supply is apparently not a primary or intermediate target of the Bank of Japan.

B. Industrial Production Announcements
The unanticipated component of Industrial production announce-

ments could affect exchange rates through at least two channels. First,

—21—

the announcement may embody information about the future course of the

economy. A surprise increase in industrial production, for example, may
indicate that the future growth of the economy will be stronger than pre-

viously expected. In turn, expectations about real interest rates and
capital inflows will be revised upward. As a consequence, the surprise
increase would induce an appreciation of this country's currency. Moreover, the monetary or fiscal authorities may react to the industrial pro-

duction surprise by implementing countercyclical policies. Under these
circumstances, the effect on the exchange rate would be reinforced.

Second, a surprise increase in industrial production may imply
higher future inflation which should have a depreciating effect on a

country's currency. If traders think this scenario is possible, the
exchange rate should depreciate at the time of the announcement.
The estimated response of the yen/dollar exchange rate to U.S.
industrial production announcement surprises is exhibited on the left—

hand side of Table

The response again is estimated using equation

(5.1). Because U.S. industrial production announcements were made at
either 8:30 or 9:00 A.M., the segments differ somewhat from those

reported for money announcements. In particular, the initial segment
in the New York market (k=0) is measured from the closing quote in the

Tokyo market to the 12:00 Noon quote in the New York market. The second
segment (k=l) allows for any further response in the New York market

from 12:00 Noon to 4:30 P.M. The other segments are as defined previously.

During the segment in which the US, announcement is made, the
estimated response is insignificantly different from zero at the 5 per-

cent level. In the afternoon following the announcement, however, there

—22—

is some evidence that the dollar depreciates in response to a positive
surprise, perhaps reflecting traders' assessments of increased infla-

tion. The estimated response since February 1984 contributes signif i—

cantly to this result. Nevertheless, combining the point estimates for
both segments in the New York market (k0,l), the overall response is
not statistically significant. It is somewhat disconcerting, however,
that the only significant response occurs at least three hours after
the announcement.

Turning to industrial production announcements in Japan, the estimated response of the yen/dollar exchange rate is reported on the right—

hand side of Table 6. The yen appreciates significantly in response to
positive industrial production surprises in one subsample. This estimated response is consistent with traders' assessments of a stronger
economy and higher real interest rates, which leads to appreciation of

the yen. This behavior appears to be reasonable given the popular belief
in Japan that the economic growth rate is an important policy target. The
expected part of the announcement is uniformly insignificant.

C. Inflation Announcements
As was the case for money announcements, these are two main
competing hypotheses concerning the response of exchange rates to a surprise in an inflation announcement.

Suppose that traders believe that

a surprise increase in prices is a signal of future inflation, then it
has a depreciating effect on the exchange rate through Purchasing Power

Parity. Alternatively, if traders think that the central bank will
tighten its policy in response to a surprise price increase, the exchange
rate could appreciate due to higher real interest rates and an increased
inflow of capital.

—23—

The response of the yen/dollar exchange rate to inflation surprises
is exhibited in Table 7.

Results using producer (wholesale) prices are

reported for both the U.S. and Japan in the table. Movements in producer
prices are generally considered to provide more relevant information

about future inflation than observed movements in consumer prices. The
estimation results as a whole are broadly consistent with the efficient
markets hypothesis, as the expected announced value of producer prices
is significant in only one regression.

For surprises in U.S. producer prices, which again are announced
at either 8:30 or 9:00 A.M., the response of the yen/dollar rate is sig-

nificant at the 5 percent level in one case. In particular, the response
is significantly positive in the post—February 1984 sample. it is interesting to note that this period is unique in that U.S. industrial production surprises also have significant effects, while the response to

U.S. money announcement surprises is insignificant. The results suggest
that both the Federal Reserve and traders shifted their focus away from the
money supply and toward measures of inflation and economic activity.
For surprises in Japanese producer prices, the response of the
yen/dollar rate is uniformly insignificant at the 5 percent level. This
non—reaction is possible if traders think that the Bank of Japan tries

to target real interest rates and/or the exchange rate. The Bank of
Japan in fact appears to be more sensitive to the level of the exchange

rate than the Federal Reserve. Japanese officials state quite frequently that they closely monitor the level of the yen in the foreign

exchange market. The lack of response of the yen/dollar rate to money
or inflation announcements therefore appears to be plausible.

—24—

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

VI.

This paper examined yen/dollar exchange rate movements from a new

perspective. In particular, movements in the yen/dollar rate were
examined in four disaggregated segments within each business day from

1980 through 1985. This disaggregation allowed within—day movements in
New York and Tokyo to be considered separately. In investigating the
behavior of the yen/dollar rate during these segments, several factors

were considered. First, both the volatility of the markets and the contributions of the respective markets in determining longer—run exchange

rate movements were compared. Second, market efficiency was examined
in

terms of the random—walk behavior of very short—run movements in the

yen/dollar rate. The behavior of the exchange rate immediately before
and after large jumps also was investigated. Third, the relative effects
of news from the U.S. and Japan were examined explicitly both with
respect to possible major events behind large jumps and the response of
the yen/dollar rate to particular economic announcements in both countries.

The empirical results yielded several conclusions. First, in
terms of the general characteristics of daily yen/dollar movements, the
data indicated that the New York market was typically more volatile,

perhaps reflecting a greater presence of relevant news. Moreover, the
volatility in the Tokyo market has been dramatically decreasing. Also,
in the first half of the 1980s, the dollar tended to appreciate in the
New York market and depreciate in the European market (Tokyo close to

New York opening). In three of the four subperiods considered, the Tokyo
market made

virtually

no contribution to annual yen/dollar rate movements.

—25—

Second, the random—walk hypothesis could be rejected in most cases.

Moreover, contrary to a related hypothesis also based on efficient markets,
large jumps of three yen or more were followed by significant movements in
the opposite direction, indicating the presence of so—called profit—taking

behavior or overshooting. Large jumps additionally could not be related to
major news items in many cases.
Finally, among the economic announcements considered, U.S. money
announcement surprises had the most consistent effects, at least prior to

February 1984. Positive surprises were found to result in dollar appreciation. Other U.S. announcements had effects only in the post—February 1984
period, which could coincide with a change in emphasis by both traders and

policymakers from money to inflation and economic activity. For Japanese
economic announcements, only industrial production announcements in one
subperiod exhibited significant effects on the yen/dollar rate.

As a whole, the results indicate that the source of the dollar's
strength relative to the yen during the 1980—1984 period eminated from the

New York market. In turn, information related to U.S. monetary policy
appears to be a significant factor. European markets, however, tended to
reverse the longer—run effects originating in New York. The evidence is
nevertheless suggestive that U.S. economic policies and the behavior of the
U.S. economy were largely responsible for the behavior of the yen/dollar
rate over this period.

APPENDIX 1
Data Definitions and Sources

A.

Exchange Rate Quotes

TKO = 9 A.M. quote in the Tokyo foreign exchange market

TKC = 3:30 P.M. quote in the Tokyo foreign exchange market

NYO = 9 A.M. quote in the New York foreign exchange market

NYN = 12 Noon quote in the New York foreign exchange market

4:30 P.M. quote in the New York foreign exchange market

NYC =

All quotes are in yen/dollar. Tokyo quotes were collected from
a daily newspaper, Nihon Keizai Shinbun. New York quotes were obtained
from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Data Timing

B.

____

Tokyo

New York

Time

EST

EDT

T

9:00 A.M.(opening),TKO

T—l

7:00 P.M. (closed)

8:00 P.M. (closed)

T

3:30 P.M. (closing), TKC

T

1:30 A.M.(closed)

2:30 A.N.(closed)
9:00 A.M.(opening), NYO

T

10:00 P.M.(closed)

T

8:00 A.M.(closed)

T

11:00 P.M. (closed)

T

9:00 A.M.(opening),NYO 10:00 A.M.(open)

T+l

5:30 A.M.(closed)

T

3:30 P.M.(open)

4:30 P.M.(closing), NYC

T+1

6:30 A.}1.(closed)

T

4:30 P.M.(closing),NYC

5:30 P.M.(closed)

T+l

9:00 A.M.(opening), TKO

T

7:00 P.M. (closed)

8:00 P.M. (closed)

Appendix 1 (continued)

The New York foreign exchange market, unlike its Tokyo counterpart,
does riot have well—defined business hours. Therefore, 9 A.M. and 4:30 P.M.
quotes are only approximations of the opening and closing rates for the day.
The number of hours between opening (0) and closing (C) quotes is
the following:

Tokyo (0) — Tokyo (C): 6.5 hours (with 1.5 hour lunch break)

C.

Tokyo (C) —

N.Y.

(0): 7.5 hours (EST)/6.5 hours (EDT)

N.Y.

(0) —

N.Y.

(C): 7.5 hours

N.Y.

(C) — Tokyo (0): 2.5 hours (EST)/3.5 hours (EDT)

Japanese Announcement and Surprise Data
M2 + CD:

growth rate of the monthly average of M2 + CD over
the past 12 months ending two months before the

announcement month. The announcement is usually
made on Tuesday or Friday of the first or second

week. (Source: Bank of Japan, reported in Nihon
Keizai Shinbun)
IP:

percentage change in the industrial production
index, seasonally adjusted, for one month before

the announcement month. The announcement is usually made sometime toward the end of the month.

(Source: Ministry of Industry and International
Trade, reported in Nihon Keizai Shinbun)
WPI:

percentage change in the wholesale price index, seasonally adjusted, for one month before the announce-

ment month. The announcement is made during the

second or third week. (Source: Bank of Japan,
reported in Nihon Keizai Shinbun)

Appendix 1 (continued)

The base year for WPI and IP changed during the sample period. Announced
values during the old base year samples are deflated by the ratio of the new
series to the old series.

Expected Values
A rolling vector autoregression model, including M2 + CD, I?, and WPI
and the end of month Gensaki interest rate (3—month repurchase agreement) is

used to create one—step (month) ahead predictions (expected values). The
information set contains a constant and three lagged endogenous values which

are available at the time of prediction. The deviations of expected values
from realized values are confirmed to have zero means and no serial correlation.

D.

U.S. Announcement and Surprise Data
Ml:

weekly

change in the narrowly defined money stock, season-

ally adjusted, in billions of dollars. The data are for
the statement week ended about 1½ weeks previously. Each
week's announcement was typically made on a Thursday or

Friday. (Source: Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, H.6.)
IP:

percentage change in the industrial production index, seasonally adjusted, for the month before the announcement

month. (Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, the Federal Reserve Bulletin.)

Appendix 1 (continued)
PPI:

percentage change in the producer price index, seasonally
adjusted, for the month before the announcement month.

(Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.)

Expected Values
Expectations are measured using the medians of the weekly market sur-

vey conducted by Money Market Services, Inc. The change in the 3—month
Treasury bill yield during the five business days prior to an announcement

is used to update the survey measure. See Roley (1983, 1985b).

APPENDIX 2

Days of Large Changes

Change

Date

Market

Explanations Civen in Newspapers

(Yen/dollar)

1980
4/1

Tokyo

+3.6

Feeling of too strong yen compared
with European currencies.

4/9

Europe

-.6.6

Sharp decline in the dollar due to
the anticipation of the peak of the
U.S. interest rate.

4/10

New York

—3.8

Anticipation of the interest rate
peak in the U.S. BundesBank is
rumored to tighten monetary policy.

4/11

Tokyo

4/16

New York

—3.8

Chase Manhattan lowered the prime.

4/23

New York

—3.9

Chase Manhattan lowered the prime
rate, again.

5/6

Tokyo

—3.2

Declines in the interest rates in

3.5

?

the U.S.

5/12

Europe

—3.7

5/16

Europe

4.1

Ohira Cabinet, Vote of non—confidence passed in the Diet.

5/28

Tokyo

3.1

The Eurodollar interest rate bottomed. The U.S. trade deficit
shrank.

12/30

Europe

—3.3

Prime rate declined in the U.S.

3/2

New York

—3.05

Reagan's tight budget address.

3/2

Pacific

8/4

Tokyo

1981

3.35
—4.3

(profit—taking) ??

Reaction to the strengthening dollar
in recent days due to an expectation
of continued high U.S. interest rates.
Intervention by the Bank of Japan.

Appendix 2 (continued)

Date

Market

Change
(Yen/dollar)

Explanations Given in Newspapers

1981
3.2

8/4

Europe

8/7

New York

—3.2

8/17

New York

—3.15

12/11

Pacific

(profit—taking) ??

Unexpected increase in the U.S. Money
Supply. Uncertainty about the future
of the U.S. interest rate.
Bank of Japan lowered the official
discount rate. (However, the announcement came on 12/10 in the Tokyo market.) This change is over the weekend
(12/11 NYC to 12/14 TYO) after the
announcement. It takes 4 days to have
an effect?

1982
7/16

New York

8/18

New York

3.25

Reaction (profit—taking) to the yen
appreciation in the Tokyo market (+2.7)
and Europe market (+2.6)? Increased
likelihood of Mexican default.

8/27

Europe

4.9

Cross—arbitrage with a strengthening
D. Mark.

10/7

New York

—4.4

Federal Reserve announces the relaxation of monetary policy. The monetary
regime change.

11/16

Europe

—4.25

The OPEC countries investment in yen.

—3.2

U.S. interest rates declined further.
Ml announcement was lower than
expected.

1983
1/11

New York

4.0

The "Chicago speculators" sold yen.

1/24

Tokyo

3.0

Expectation about further easing of
U.S. monetary policy is not material—
izing. (?)

Appendix 2 (continued)

Date

Market

Change
(Yen/dollar)

Explanations Given in Newspapers

1983

—3.0

1/26

Tokyo

2/8

New York

3.05

2/22

New York

3.3

New York

—4.5

The OPEC meeting could not produce
a result (oil price increase).

Nigeria decreased its oil price
more than expected. (Oil price
decrease usually works as yen appreciation. Why depreciation ?)

1984
3/2

1985
2/18

Europe

3/19

New York

3/19

Pacific

5.15
—4.55
3.30

Ohio banking crisis
(Profit—taking)??

Footnotes

1.

For discussions of both the policy anticipations and expected inflation hypotheses, see Urich and Wachtel (1981), Cornell (1983), and
Roley and Walsh (1985).

2.

See Ito (1986) for the effect of the December 1980 changes on
covered interest parity.

3.

The effects of these changes in Federal Reserve policy are considered
in detail by Roley (l985a). The response of interest rates to money
announcement surprises is found to change significantly over the different regimes.

4.

Three more reasons for the volatility differences have been suggested
to us by the Japanese traders. First, Japanese traders are on salaries, while U.S. traders are on commissions. This, however, does not
explain why Japanese volatility has been decreasing. Second, the Tokyo
market has a higher proportion of "real demands" than the New York market. The buy and sell orders based on real demands, that is leads and
lags, may occur with the change in the level and be stabilizing, while
speculative demands could be destabilizing. This explanation is at
odds with the fact that the volatility has been decreasing since the
abolition of the "real demand principle" in the forward market. Third,
traders have self—fulfilling expectations that Tokyo is stable and New
York is volatile. If the market is thought to be stable, profit—taking
(and squaring the position) occurs with a small change, and loss—taking
(and squaring the position) does not occur until the change becomes
large. Both actions would stabilize the market. This explanation cannot, however, account for the changes which occurred over time in both
of the markets.

5.

This was the first time that the Japanese official discount rate was
changed in February. Changes in the rate in January or February had
been avoided because the budget for the next fiscal year is being f or—
mulated, and the change in the rate would jeopardize the government
budget calculation.

6.

French and Roll (1984) discuss the use of "per hour" volatility in
the context of stock prices.

7.

In fact, the variance before the per—hour correction is similar for
the weekday and weekend segments. The per hour variance of the weekend segment is, therefore, about 15 to 20 times less than that of
the weekday segment.

8.

Since both segments extend about three hours, the comparison is
immune from a possible bias from per hour correction.

9.

This test is actually somewhat weaker than that implied by the random walk hypothesis in that the test does not include a = 0.

10.

Observations involving national holidays in each country are deleted,
but observations spanning weekends are included.

11.

It might be noted that the random walk hypothesis is rejected in the
Pacific market in the third and fourth subperiods, when the other markets become random walks. Combining this with the observation that
the Pacific market is a random walk over the entire sample period, the
result is somewhat puzzling. However, the rejection in the Pacific
market in the fourth subperiod is a result of one particular outlier:
March 19, 1985, when a large yen appreciation (4.55 yen) in the New
York market was reversed in the Pacific market (a depreciation of 3.30
yen). (See Appendix 2.) Without this outlier, the random walk hypothesis is not rejected in the Pacific market.

12.

The typical size of a predicted change can be calculated from Tables
1 and 3. Substituting the sample mean or absolute mean (Table 1) for
the right—hand side variables in each of the equations (3.5) to (3.8),
and using the estimated b1, b2, and b3. (Table 3), the predicted
changes can be calculated. The largest predicted change is —.143 for
equation (3.6) in subperiod 1, using mean absolute changes.

13.

The interest rate differential could be an additional factor in predicting exchange rate movements. Under the hypothesis of uncovered
interest parity, the interest differential predicts the future spot
rate. See Ito (1984) for the support of uncovered interest parity
for the case of yen. The three—month dollar—denominated and yen—denominated interest rates were most disparate in mid—1981, at 12 percent. At
a level of 230 yen, which was the case then, the interest differential
predicts 0.0756 yen appreciation each day, or 0.019 yen per one segment
of the day. This does not appear to be a large factor in explaining
the mean absolute change of 0.7 in the second subperiod.

14.

Additional segments also were included in the tests, and the same
result emerged.

15.

This could also be viewed as evidence of "overshooting" or "overreaction"
in the market within a day.

16.

Results reported in Tables 5 through 7 are robust with respect to
several modifications in the data set: a change in lag length, the
deletion of the Gensaki rate, or the addition of the exchange rate.

17.

For both the U.S. and Japan, surprises in industrial production and
producer (wholesale) prices are calculated from announced percentage
changes.

References

Batten, Douglas S., and Daniel L. Thornton, "Discount Rate Changes and
the Foreign Exchange Market," Journal of International Money and
Finance, 3 (December 1984), 279—92.
Cornell, Bradford, "Money Supply Announcements, Interest Rates, and
Foreign Exchange," Journal of International Money and Finance,
1 (August 1982), 201—8.

Cornell, Bradford, "The Money Supply Announcements Puzzle: Review and
Interpretation," American Economic Review, 73 (September 1983),
644—57.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Exchange Rate Economics: Where Do We Stand?"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (No. 1, 1980), 143—85.
Edwards, Sebastian, "Exchange Rates and 'News': A Multi—Currency
Approach," Journal of International Money and Finance, 1 (December
1982), 211—24.
Edwards, Sebastian, "Floating Exchange Rates, Expectations and New Inf or—
mation," Journal of Monetary Economics, 11 (May 1983), 321—36.

Edwards, Sebastian, "Exchange Rates and 'News': Reply," Journal of
national Money and Finance, 3 (April 1984), 123—6.
Engel, Charles, and Jeffrey Frankel, "Why Interest Rates React to Money
Announcements: An Explanation from the Foreign Exchange Market,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 13 (January 1984), 31—9.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Gikas A. Bardouvelis, "Commodity Prices, Money
Surprises, and Fed Credibility," Journal of Money, Credit and Bank—
17 (November 1985), 425—38.

4,

French, Kenneth R., and Richard Roll, "Is Trading Self—Generating?"
University of Chicago, Working Paper No. 121, 1984.
Frenkel, Jacob A., "Flexible Exchange Rates, Prices and the Role of
"News": Lessons from the 1970s," Journal of Political Economy,
89 (August 1981), 665—705.
Grossman, Jacob, "The Rationality of Money Supply Expectations and the
Short—Run Response of Interest Rates to Monetary Surprises,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 13 (November 1981), 409—24.

}Lakkio, Craig S., and Douglas K. Pearce, "The Reaction of Exchange Rates
to Economic News," Economic Inquiry, forthcoming, 1986.

Hardouvelis, Gikas A., "Market Perceptions of Federal Reserve Policy and
the Weekly Monetary Announcements," Journal of Monetary Economics,
14 (September 1984), 225—40.
Ito, Takatoshi, "Use of (Time—Domain) Vector Autoregressions to Test
Uncovered Interest Parity," National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper No. 1493, 1984.
Ito, Takatoshi, "Capital Controls and Covered Interest Parity," Economic
Studies Quarterly, forthcoming, 1986.

Longworth, D., "Exchange Rates and 'News': A Comment," Journal of
national Money and Finance, 3 (April 1984), 119—21.
Mussa, Michael L., "Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange
Rates and Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market," Carnegie—Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 11 (Autumn 1979), 9—57.
Pearce, Douglas K., and V. Vance Roley, "Stock Prices and Economic News,"
Journal of Business, 58 (January 1985), 49—67.
Roley, V. Vance, "Weekly Money Supply Announcements and the Volatility of
Short—Term Interest Rates," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
Economic Review, 67 (April 1982), 3—15.
Roley, V. Vance, "The Response of Short—Term Interest Rates to Weekly
Money Announcements," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 15
(August 1983), 344—54.
Roley, V. Vance, "The Response of Interest Rates to Money Announcements
Under Alternative Operating Procedures and Reserve Requirement Systems," University of Washington, mimeo, l985a.
Roley, V. Vance, "U.S. Monetary Policy Regimes and tJ.S.—Japan Financial
Relationships," University of Washington, mimeo, 1985b.

Roley, V. Vance, and Carl E. Walsh, "Monetary Policy Regimes, Expected
Inflation, and the Response of Interest Rates to Money Announcements,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100 (Supplement, 1985), 1011—39.
Urich, Thomas J., and Paul Wachtel, "Market Responses to the Weekly Money
Supply Announcements in the l970s," Journal of Finance, 36 (December
1981), 1063—72.

TABLE 1
Summary of YenIDollar Exchange Rate Movements in Four Markets
Entire Sample: January 1, 1980 — September 20, 1985

Tokyo
Accumulated Change
Me an

Variance
Mean Absolute Change
Standard Error (Mean)
t—statistic (Mean=0)

14.16
0.00992
0.63625
0.55923
0.02111
0.47

Europe
—72.12

— 0.05447
0.70969
0.59154
0.02269

— 2.40*

New York

Pacific

70.92

—4.65
—0.00338
0.16079
0.25552
0.01082
—0.31

0.04946
0.96987
0.72035
0.02601
1.90

Total
0.60

Period I: January 1, 1980 — November 30, 1980

Accumulated Change
Me an

Variance
Mean Absolute Change
Standard Error (Mean)
t—statistic (Mean=0)

—3.40
—0.01504
1.01821
0.71584
0.06712
—0.22

—29.41

— 0.13553
0.88533
0.61544
0.06387

— 2.12*

1.75
0.00764
0.85011
0.62450
0.06093
0.12

10.06
0.04615
0.11837
0.23670
0.02330
1.98*

—21.40

Period II: December 1, 1980 — October 4, 1982

Accumulated Change
Me an

Variance
Mean Absolute Change
Standard Error (Mean)
t—statistic (MeanO)

20.42
0.04430
0.88640
0.71037
0.04385
1.01

—21.81

— 0.04879
0.85735
0.68387
0.04380

— 1.11

60.69
0.13079
1.15799
0.84356
0.04996
2.62**

Period III: October 5, 1982 —

Accumulated Change
Mean
Variance
Mean Absolute Change
Standard Error (Mean)
t—statistic (Mean=0)

—2.89
—0.00878
0.50246
0.50009
0.03908
—0.22

—32.47

— 0.10211
0.64401
0.59223
0.04500
2.27*

—4.05
—0.00910
0.17612
0.25638
0.01989
—0.46

56.95

January 31, 1984

4.33
0.01304
1.17537
0.80883
0.05950
0.22

0.13
0.00041
0.17180
0.26912
0.02395
0.02

—39.60

Period IV: February 1, 1984 — September 20, 1985

Accumulated Change
Mean
Variance
Mean Absolute Change
Standard Error (Mean)
t—statistic (Mean=0)
Notes:

*

0.03
0.00007
0.25656
0.35143
0.02495
0.00

8.57
0.02159
0.49428
0.47408
0.03529
0.61

4.15
0.01015
0.65259
0.56242
0.03994
0.25

—10.79
0.02739
0.14925
0.25404
0.01946
—1.41

4.35

—

Accumulated changes are sums of all observed daily changes in the respective markets for the specified period. Because of occasional missing observations due to
holidays in both countries, accumulated changes for the four markets do not necessarily add up to the total changes. If one market is closed because of a holiday,
then not only that market but also the adjacent markets become missing observations. For the same reason, the numbers of observations in each segment are different even for the same subperiod. The number of observations can be calculated
by dividing the accumulated change by the mean for a particular market for a particular sub—period.
** Significant at the 1 percent level.
Significant at the 5 percent level.

TABLE 2
Volatility Per Hour

Market

New York
all day
9—12 only

Pacific
weekend
weekday

Period

Tokyo

Europe

Jan. 1, 1980 —

0.1476

0.1212

0.1119

0.1828

0.0519

0.0039

eec. 1, 1980 —
Oct. 4, 1982

0.1364

0.1201

0.1553

0.2063

0.0397

0.0087

Oct. 5, 1982 —
Jan. 31, 1984

0.0780

0.0952

0.1579

0.1813

0.0543

0.0073

Feb. 1, 1984 —
ept. 20, 1985

0.0396

0.0716

0.0873

0.0919

0.0474

0.0036

ov. 30, 1980

Notes:

Variances divided by the number of hours of the respective market. The
number of hours for both Europe and Pacific is different from the last
Sunday in April to the last Sunday in October due to daylight savings
time in the New York market. (See Appendix 1.) The reported numbers
are adjusted for the difference due to daylight savings time by taking
a weighted average, with the weights being the number of observations
for the summer and winter, respectively.

TABLE 3
Random Walk Hypothesis

Entire Sample: January 1, 1980 — September 20, 1985
Equation
(3.1)
(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)
(3.5)
(3.6)

(3.7)
(3.8)

a

—0.0084

—0.0050

(—0.755)

(—0.707)

0.0156

—0.0497

(0.725)

(—2.985)

—0.0596

0.1027

(—2.593)

(5.411)

0.0359

0.0036

(1.325)

(0.162)

—0.0080

—0.0221

(—0.718)

(—1.930)

(3.2)
(3.3)
(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)
(3.7)
(3.8)

b2

b3

F/p—value
0.499
(0.480)

8.912
(0.003)**
29.282

(.1x106)**
0.026
(0.871)

—0.0097

—0.0212

(—0.0731)

(1.513)

0.0227

—0.2395

—0.1086

0.0722

(1.070)

(—4.577)

(—5.025)

(2.879)

1.866
(0.1334)

18.475

(.1x10'°)**

—0.0634

0.0558

—0.1105

0.1564

(—2.780)

(1.914)

(—1.936)

(6.720)

(.4x10)**
14.294
(.4x10_8)**

0.0297

—0.0958

0.1508

—0.2339

(1.112)

(—2.871)

(4.486)

(—3.510)

Period I:
(3.1)

b1

17.427

January 1, 1980 — November 30, 1980

0.0371

—0.1915

(1.542)

(—1.465)

—0.0053

—0.0648

(—0.078)

(—1.166)

2.145
(0.145)

1.359
(0.245)

—0.1425

0.1925

(—2.214)

(3.537)

0.0108

0.1131

(0.169)

(2.553)

0.0356
(1.501)
0.0269
(0.385)

—0.0958
(—3.457)
—0.3846
(—1.966)

—0.1372
(—2.120)
—0.0015
(—0.025)

0.1455
(2.181)

—0.0398
(—1.566)
—0.2128
(—2.900)
—0.0365
(—0.191)

—0.1502
(—2.411)

0.3776
(6.293)

12.507
(0.00l)**
6.518
(0.Oll)*

0.0526
(2.048)

0.0870
(1.223)
0.2632
(3.597)
—0.2084
(—1.210)

4.4734
(0.005)**
4.4765
(0.005)**
5.3737
(0.001)**
15.3692

(.5x10)**

Period II: December 1, 1980 — October 4, 1982
0.0371
(3.026)

9.157
(O.003)**

(1.204)

—0.0685
(—2.204)

4.858
(O.028)*

(3.3)

—0.0643
(—1.447)

0.0845
(2.644)

6.993
(0.009)**

(3.4)

0.1082
(2.102)

—0.0790
(—2.078)

4.321
(0.038)*

(3.1)

—0.0188
(0.923)

(3.2)

(3.5)

(3.6)
(3.7)
(3.8)

0.0542

—0.0153

0.0285

0.0708

0.0204

(—0.749)

(1.497)

(3.229)

(0.957)

0.0684

—0.1302

(1.523)

(—1.220)

—0.0734
(—1 .658)

0.0300

—0.1418
(—3.373)
—0.1161

(0.635)

(—1 .113)

0.0479
(0.981)
0.1549
(3.796)

0.0971
(1.910)

—0.1432

(—2.600)

0.0363
(0.675)

—0.4294
(—3.552)

Period

(3.1)
(3.2)
(3.3)

—0.0066

—0.0260

(—0.269)
—0.0029
(—0.073)
—0.0982
(—2.181)

(—1.673)
—0.0445
(—1.544)

(3.4)

0.0051
(0.084)

(3.5)

—0.0159
(—0.653)

(3.6)
(3.7)

(3.8)

III: October 5, 1982

—

January 31, 1984

0.1102

(3.180)
0.0298

(0.528)
0.0086
(0.383)

4.208

(O.006)**
5.046
(0 .002)**
5.082
(O.002)**
6.486
(O.0003)**

—0.1163
(—3.849)

—0.0018
(—0.053)

2.800
(0.095)
2.382
(0.124)
10.113
(0.002)**
0.279
(0.598)
5.025
(0.002)**

0.0058

—0.3153

—0.0604

0.0500

(0.150)

(—3.443)

(—1.709)

(1.020)

—0.1023

0.0062

—0.1645

0.1784

(—2.302)

(0.098)

(—1.558)

(4.374)

0.0054
(0.089)

—0.0107

0.1363

—0.2143

1.939

(0.141)

(1.577)

(—1.487)

(0.123)

6.157
(0.0004)**
7.161
(0.0001)**

Period IV: February 1, 1984 — September 20, 1985
(3.1)

(3.2)

(3.3)
(3.4)

(3.5)
(3.6)
(3.7)

(—2.641)

—0.0011
(—0.044)

(—0.410)

0.0219

0.0608

(0.601)

(1.488)

—0.0426

6.975
(0.009)**

—0.0100

0.168

(0.682)
2.213
(0.138)

0.0006

0.0255

0.310

(0.014)

(0.556)

(0.578)

—0.0307
(—1.573)

—0.1112

—0.0210

0.0620

(—4.524)

(—0.758)

(1.617)

—0.0116
(—0.460)

—0.2467

—0.0602

0.0869

(—3.725)

(—1.864)

(2.430)

0.0754

—0.0804

0.0676

(1.027)

(—0.818)

(1.435)

(0.194)
1.191
(0.313)

0.0177
(0.485)

(3.8)

Notes:

—0.0299
(—1.508)

0.0014

—0.0336

0.1542

0.0135

(0.034)

(—0.567)

(1.822)

(0.122)

7.328

(0.0001)**
7.233

(0.0001)**
1.578

Equation numbers correspond to those in the text. Numbers in parentheses below the coefficient estimates are t—statistics.
*
**
F =

Significant
Significant
F—statistic,

at 5 percent level.
at 10 percent level.
H0 : b1 = b2

b3 =

0.

TABLE 4
Jumps, Bubbles, and Profit—Taking

of

Number

Days with More than 3 yen Absolute Change

Tokyo

Europe

New York

Pacific

Jan. 1, 1980 —
Sept. 20, 1985

7

8

14

3

Jan. 1, 1980 —
Nov. 30, 1980

4

3

3

0

Dec. 1, 1980 —
Oct. 4, 1984

1

3

5

2

Oct. 5, 1984 —
Jan. 31, 1984

2

1

4

0

Feb. 1, 1984 —
Sept. 20, 1985

0

1

2

1

Estimation Results
Coefficient Estimates

a

b

R2

SER

DW

—0.566

—0.422

0.003

3.87

2.53

(—0.790)

(0.950)
.221

1.16

1.90

Equation
(4.1)

(4.2)

0.143
(0.691)

Notes:

Summary Statistics

_O.169**
(—3.128)

See the notes in Table 3.

DW = Durbin—Watson statistic.
SER =
=

standard

multiple

error.

correlation coefficient corrected for
degrees of freedom.

TABLE 5

Response to Money Announcement Surprises
Response Coefficient b1(k) Estimates
U.S.

Sample

k=0
New York

80:1 —
85:9

0.11*

0.08*

(6.22)

(5.05)

80:1 —
80:11

0.05
(1.57)

80:12—
82:10

0.14*
(4.93)

0.12*
(4.07)

82:10—

k=1
Pacific

Japan
k=2
Tokyo

k—3
Europe

k=0
Tokyo

Europe

k=2
New York

k=1

k=3

Pacific

0.01

—0.02

0.05

—0.06

0.02

(0.23)

(—0.82)

(0.35)

(—0.33)

(0.11)

0.02

0.06

0.08

—0.22

0.59

0.30

(0.50)

(0.78)

(1.31)

(0.61)

(1.02)

0.01

—0.04

(0.18) (—1.01)

—0.77

(—1.01) (—0.34)
0.12

—0.10

(0.77) (—0.38)

—0.03
(—0.23)

—0.12

—0.08

(—0.44)

(—0.82)

0.14*

0.10*

—0.03

—0.09

1.14

0.19

0.84

—0.44

84:1

(3.22)

(3.04)

(—0.61)

(—1.48)

(1.65)

(0.24)

(0.82)

(—0.52)

84:2 —
85:9

0.05

0.01

—0.00

—0.00

—0.52

—0.21

(1.49)

(0.67)

—0.38
(—0.82)

(1.13)

Notes:

(—0.02) (—0.09) (—1.00) (—0.31)

0.45

See the notes in Table 3. Equation (5.1) is used to obtain response
coefficient estimates. For U.S. money announcements, the response in
the New York market is measured from 12:00 Noon to 4:30 P.M. For
Japanese money announcements, the response in the New York market is
measured from 9:00 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.

TABLE 6
Response to Industrial Production Announcement Surprises

Response Coefficient b1(k) Estimates
U.S.

k=0
Sample

k=1

k=2

k=2

k=3
Tokyo

k=4
Europe

0.18

0.14

—0.05

0.01

0.07

0.06

(1.43)

(0.62)

0.63
(1.93

(—0.79)

(0.11)

(0.62)

(1.93)

0.02

—0.09

—0.02

—0.04

New York New York Pacific

0.50

Japan
k=0
Tokyo

k=1

k=3

Europe New York Pacific

80:1 —
85:9

(1.37)

80:1 —
80:11

—0.80

—0.04

0.00

0.60

(—1.14)

(—0.13)

(0.00)

(1.27)

(0.05) (—0.60) (—0.17) (—0.29)

0.71
(1.47)

—0.43
(—1.45)

0.13

(1.34)

0.04
(0.11)

0.73*
(2.40)

0.04
(0.28)

0.16
(0.61)

0.28
(1.28)

0.05
(0.90)

0.21
(0.18)

0.11
(0.24)

0.58
(1.29)

—0.05
(—0.12)

0.04

—0.31

—0.01

0.07
(0.23)

0.15
(1.74)

1.14

_1.36*

0.06

0.61

1.47

0.09

0.02

(0.21)

(1.29)

(1.20)

(0.48)

(0.21)

80:12—

82:10
82:10—

84:1
84:2 —
85:9

Notes:

(1.25)

_0.40*
(—2.18)

(—3.08)

See the notes

(0.05) (_3.33)* (—0.04)
—0.03
(0.65) (—0.29)
0.09

0.06

(1.95)

in Table 3. Equation (5.1) is used to obtain response coefficient
estimates. For U.S. announcements, the initial response in the New York market
(k=0) is measured from the closing quote in Tokyo to the 12:00 Noon quote in
New York. The response in the subsequent segment (k1) is measured from 12:00
Noon to 4:30 P.M. in New York. For Japanese announcements, the response in the
New York market is measured from 9:00 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.

TABLE 7
Response to Inflation Announcement Surprises

Response Coefficient b1(k) Estimates
U.S.

k=0
Sample

80:1 —
85:9

80:1 —

80:11

k=1

k=2

New York New York Pacific

Japan
k=3

Tokyo

0.21

—0.24

0.09

0.45

(0.48)

(—0.87)

(0.49)

(1.47)

0.07

0.03
(0.08)

0.15
(0.65)

0.11
(0.17)

(0.11)

k=4
Europe

—0.00

k=0
Tokyo

—0.58

k=1

—0.37

0.42

—0.14

—0.27

0.31

0.32

0.12

0.49

0.30

(0.60)

(0.23)

(0.74)

(0.28)

0.15
—0.41
(0.45) (—1.44)

82:10—

—0.86

—1.00

0.08

—1.80

—0.03

(—0.86)

(—1.24)

(0.27)

1.38*

—0.42
(—0.94)

0.04
(0.09)

84:2 —

85:9

Notes:

(1.98)

See the notes in Table 6.

1.27

k=3

—0.96

—1.00
(—0.74)

—0.15

0.04
(0.33)

—0.37

—0.42

(1.68) (—0.41) (—0.95) (—0.93)

(0.30)

84:1

—0.07

(—0.00) (—0.46) (—1.79) (—0.35)

82:10

80:12—

k=2

Europe New York Pacific

(—0.65) (—1.08)
—0.02

—0.13

(1.33) (—1.23) (—0.12) (—1.53) (—0.03) (—0.48)
0.23

—0.51

—0.12

—0.62

—0.01

(0.58) (—0.35) (—0.31) (—0.67) (—0.02)

0.42
(1.03)

