                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MONETARY RULES FOR COMMODITY TRADERS

                                               Luis Catão
                                              Roberto Chang

                                          Working Paper 18536
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18536


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      November 2012




We thank Marola Castillo for assistance beyond the call of duty. We are also indebted to Oliver Blanchard,
Pierre Olivier Gourinchas, two anonymous referees, participants of the IMF Review - Central Bank
of Turkey Conference on Policy Responses to Commodity Price Movements, Istanbul, April 2012,
and especially our discussant Stefan Laséen for extensive and useful comments and suggestions. Of
course, any error is only ours. The views expressed in this paper are the authors' alone and do not necessarily
reflect those of the IMF or IMF policy, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Luis Catão and Roberto Chang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Monetary Rules for Commodity Traders
Luis Catão and Roberto Chang
NBER Working Paper No. 18536
November 2012
JEL No. E52,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a dynamic model of a small open economy that trades commodities whose world prices
are subject to realistic random fluctuations, and study the implications of monetary policy alternatives.
The model is much more flexible than those of previous studies, especially in allowing to compare
perfect risk sharing against financial autarky. In each case we show how to derive analytically optimal
Ramsey allocations and flexible price allocations, and hence to examine the crucial role of behavioral
elasticities, production structure, and capital mobility in determining the welfare properties of different
monetary choices. Applying these insights to a calibrated example, we find that the impulse responses
associated with PPI targeting track flexible price allocations closely, but can diverge greatly from the
Ramsey allocations, especially when risk sharing is perfect and the elasticity of demand for exports
of a home aggregate is high. In those cases, policies that stabilize the real exchange rate more than
PPI targeting, such as targeting expected inflation, deliver higher welfare. But PPI targeting is the
clear winner under portfolio autarky.


Luis Catão
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street
Washington DC 20431
and Inter-American Development Bank
lcatao@imf.org

Roberto Chang
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
chang@econ.rutgers.edu
1     Introduction

In recent years, many central banks around the world have embraced inflation targeting (IT),
thus tying monetary policy to the attainment of an explicit and preannounced quantitative
target for a measure of inflation. That measure has frequently been the one most directly asso-
ciated with the welfare of households, such as the consumer price index (CPI). But such a choice
has been questioned on at least two grounds. First, the currently dominant academic literat-
ure on monetary economics, based on the New Keynesian paradigm summarized by Woodford
(2003) and Gali (2008), justifies IT but finds that it is often superior to target not the CPI but
a producer price index (PPI), the intuition being that that indicator is more closely tied than
the CPI to the underlying distortions, such as price dispersion, associated with nominal rigidit-
ies. While Woodford, Gali, and others developed the argument in closed economy settings, the
intuition is strong enough that Gali and Monacelli (2005) showed that PPI targeting is indeed
optimal in open economies under some special conditions on fundamental parameters, while
Di Paoli (2009), Faia and Monacelli (2007), and others found that PPI targeting is still nearly
optimal even if those conditions fail, as long as parameters are calibrated realistically.
    A second motivation for reconsidering monetary choices has been the increased volatility
of commodity prices over the past few years, which has complicated monetary management in
several ways. For countries that import basic commodities such as oil and food, the large price
swings for those commodities can aﬀect the CPI directly as well as costs of domestic production,
to the extent that those commodities represent a large share of consumption baskets and/or
production inputs. For countries that export commodities, such as metals, volatile export prices
has led to volatile exchange rates, prompting calls for the monetary authority to try to stabilize
the exchange rate or export prices.
    In order to shed light on these issues, this paper analyzes monetary policy choices in a
dynamic open economy framework of the New Keynesian type. We extend basic open economy
models, such as those of Gali and Monacelli (2005) and Di Paoli (2009), in several directions
intended to capture the complex and diverse reality of emerging economies and, in particular,

                                                2
their exposure to commodity price shocks. Accordingly, we allow our model economy to both
export and import commodities with variable world relative prices; we allow for imports to
be used as an input in domestic production, which makes our framework applicable to study
the implications of oil price fluctuation; and we include an "enclave" export sector, which may
approximate the reality of countries whose exports are dominated by metals. Finally, the model
is studied under two polar assumptions on international capital mobility: perfect risk sharing
and portfolio autarky. This extension is, in fact, a significant departure from much of the
existing literature, which assumes perfect risk sharing.1
      The many departures of our model relative to others not only help accommodate salient fea-
tures of commodity traders but also raise the question of whether the main policy prescriptions
of the existing literature, especially the desirability of PPI targeting, survive in our context.
If they do not, one would also like to know what features of the economy account for the dif-
ference. While one might have feared that the relative complexity of our model might make
its solution intractable, we present and discuss a very intuitive closed form characterization of
optimal (or Ramsey) policy and of flexible price (natural) equilibria, which is quite useful if
only because PPI targeting often replicates the latter. Our discussion emphasizes that optimal
policy in must balance the correction of distortions associated with domestic nominal rigidities
against allocational gains that emerge because monetary policy can aﬀect the world relative
price of domestic output (this is sometimes called the terms of trade externality). This point
has, of course, been made previously by others, most prominently by Corsetti and Pesenti
(2001), Benigno and Benigno (2003), Gali and Monacelli (2005), Faia and Monacelli (2007),
and recently Monacelli (2012). Our treatment here is, however, simpler and more direct, which
adds intuition and allows for the analysis of more complicated cases, including financial autarky.
Thus our discussion identifies how changes in behavioral parameters, production structure, and
financial market structure aﬀect the discrepancy between optimal allocations and flexible price
allocations, and hence the relative merits of policies that emphasize stabilizing the PPI vis a
  1
      A notable excepion is Blanchard and Gali (2007).



                                                         3
vis the exchange rate.
   To translate our theoretical results into concrete and also hopefully realistic policy implic-
ations, we calibrate the parameters of the model in the usual way and study the dynamic and
welfare implications of a set of monetary rules selected because of their prominence in the lit-
erature. Our set of rules naturally includes PPI and CPI inflation targeting but, in another
novelty of our contribution, it also includes a CPI forecast targeting rule as well as the targeting
of the commodity export price index (EPT) advocated by Frankel (2010), neither of which has
been previously considered in the small open economy policy literature. Given each rule, we
compute impulse responses and compare them against optimal Ramsey responses and natural
responses. In addition, we compute a second order approximation to the resulting welfare,
which allows us to compare each rule against each other and identify which one is best in any
given case of our model.
   The calibrated exercise yields several novel findings. The relative desirability of the diﬀerent
rules depends on both behavioral parameters, especially elasticities of substitution in demand,
the structure of production, and on the degree of international risk sharing. If risk sharing
across countries is perfect, then PPI is welfare superior to the other rules when elasticities of
substitution are not too diﬀerent from one, a case often emphasized in the literature. But if
those elasticities are large, which is plausible for the world demand for manufacturing exports
from emerging economies, PPI is dominated by expected CPI targeting or EPT. The reason, as
our discussion emphasizes, is that optimal allocations prescribe more exchange rate stabilization
and thus heavier reliance on the terms of trade externality than flexible price allocations; PPI
targeting tends to implement the latter, while expected CPI targeting and EPT are closer ap-
proximations to the former. Perfect capital mobility turns out to be crucial for the comparison:
PPI targeting emerges as a clear winner under portfolio autarky.
   This paper follows previous contributions that extend the basic New Keynesian model to
small open economies, including Gali and Monacelli (2005), Gali (2008), Di Paoli (2009), and
Faia and Monacelli (2007). As mentioned, those papers study optimal monetary policy under


                                                 4
more restrictive assumptions on parameters and production structure than we allow for here,
and in addition assume only perfect international sharing. Our discussion of optimal monetary
policy is inspired by and has some overlap with Gali and Monacelli (2005) and Faia and Mon-
acelli (2007). But our approach is simpler and more intuitive, which allows us to extend the
analysis to our much more complicated settings, and to the case of financial autarky.
      In spite of the recent prominence of the issue, studies of open economies subject to relative
price shocks are relatively scarce. The notable exception is a large and influential literature
concerned with the macroeconomic eﬀects of oil price shocks, which includes Blanchard and
Gali (2007), Bodenstein, Erceg and Guerrieri (2008), and Kilian (2009).2 By and large, PPI
stabilization emerges as the clear policy prescription of studies in this group. In contrast, we
show when and why that prescription needs qualification in our framework.
      Finally, Catao and Chang (2010) and Hevia and Nicolini (2012) have recently studied op-
timal monetary policy in open economies that, like the ones in this paper, trade commodities
whose world relative prices are subject to exogenous shocks. The present paper extends our
previous one in several directions, such as including a competitive exports sector, assuming
imports can be used as productive inputs and, more significantly, deriving optimal allocations
for all cases under consideration. Hevia and Nicolini (2012) characterize optimal allocations
and argue that complete PPI stabilization is always optimal. Their result, however, hinges on
the assumption that monetary policy is complemented by the active management of a very
wide set of taxes and transfers. We instead stick to the usual assumption that fiscal policy
is fixed when studying monetary policy. Nevertheless, our theoretical discussion clarifies what
can happen when fiscal instruments are as flexible as Hevia and Nicolini assume, and hence
identifies the source of the diﬀerences between our results and theirs. It must also be remarked
that Hevia and Nicolini characterized Ramsey allocations only under perfect risk sharing, while
we can describe and interpret them also under portfolio autarky.
      The paper proceeds as follows: section 2 describes the model under consideration. Section
  2
      See also IMF (2011) and the various references therein.



                                                        5
3 discusses the general problem of optimal monetary policy in small open economies of the
type studied here, and provides analytical characterizations of Ramsey allocations and flexible
price allocations under both perfect risk sharing and financial autarky. Section 4 describes
the calibration of the model and the set of monetary rules to be evaluated, and then presents
and discusses implications for the dynamics of the model under diﬀerent scenarios and policies.
Section 5 describes the implications of the diﬀerent rules for welfare. Concluding remarks are
gathered in section 6. For ease of exposition, some technical material is delayed to an Appendix.



2     The Model

Catao and Chang (2010, henceforth CC) developed a small open economy whose residents
consumed two kinds of commodities: an imported commodity, whose world price was subject
to exogenous shocks; and an aggregate of monopolistically competitive diﬀerentiated goods
produced at home. Here we extend CC to allow for the imported commodity to be used as
an input to home production. We also add an export good produced and sold competitively.
This framework is suﬃciently flexible to accommodate several cases of practical interest. On
the other hand, since many of the basic features of the model are borrowed from the current
New Keynesian literature on small open economies, the description below is brief.


2.1    Households

The economy has a representative household with preferences:

                                        X
                                        ∞
                                               [( ) − ( )]
                                        =0


where 0    1,  denotes consumption,  labor eﬀort, () is the expectations operator,

                                           1−            1+
                                () =            () =
                                         (1 − )          1+


                                                    6
and   and  are parameters.
      Consumption is a C.E.S. aggregate of a home good  and imports  :

                                 h                                    i(−1)
                                              (−1)         (−1)
                              = (1 − )1       + 1 


where  is the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods, and  measures the
degree of openness.3
      We will see later that  is an aggregate of varieties of a diﬀerentiated good produced at
home. Our formulation of preferences is the same as in CC but, departing from that paper,
here we assume that imports can be used as inputs to home production as well as consumed.
This extension allows us to interpret imports as (possibly an aggregate of) oil or food.
      For the representative agent, however, the above details are irrelevant: he just assumes he
can purchase any quantities of  and  at their prevailing market prices. The minimum cost
of a unit of consumption, or CPI, expressed in domestic currency, is then

                                       £        1−     1− ¤1(1−)
                                    = (1 − )  +                                      (1)


where  and  denote the domestic currency prices of the home consumption aggregate and
imports ( will also be called the PPI ). Also, optimal demands for imports and home goods
are given by   =  (  )−  and

                                                          µ   ¶−
                                                      
                                         = (1 − )                                        (2)
                                                      

      Note that, if  =  =  ,  equals the fraction of all consumption that is imported. In
this sense,  is a measure of openness. The case   12 is often associated with "home bias".
      The representative agent chooses consumption and labor eﬀort taking prices and wages as
given. The agent owns all domestic firms and receives their profits (dividends) as well as any
  3
      We have assumed  6= 1 If  = 1  (and  below) are Cobb Douglas.



                                                      7
transfer from the government.
      The resulting maximization problem is well known. If  is the nominal wage, optimal
labor supply is given as usual by:

                                              0 ( )          
                                                       =   =                                               (3)
                                             0 ( )             

      In order to study the role of financial imperfections in this economy, we allow for two polar
scenarios with respect to the menu of foreign assets available to domestic residents. The first
scenario is one of complete markets and frictionless international risk sharing which, as well
known, implies that the growth rates of marginal rates of substitution in consumption at home
and abroad are equal up to a real exchange rate correction. With CRRA utility4 this implies,
in turn, that for some constant 
                                                                  1
                                                   =  ∗                                                  (4)

where ∗ is an index of world consumption and  is the real exchange rate (the ratio of the
price of world consumption to the domestic CPI, both measured in a common currency).
      The second scenario assumes that home agents are excluded from international financial
markets, so that the trade balance must be zero at all times:   =   where  denotes
domestic value added in nominal terms, to be defined shortly.
      We assume, however, that domestic agents can trade a full set of contingent securities among
themselves. Then any domestic security can be priced observing that the stochastic discount
factor at  for domestic currency payoﬀs at  +  is given by

                                                         µ          ¶− µ          ¶
                                                            +            
                                        Ξ+ = 
                                                                          +
  4
      That is, assuming that the marginal utility of consumption in the rest of the world is proportional to ∗− 




                                                              8
   In particular, the domestic safe interest rate is given by
                                                      "µ          ¶−          #
                            1                              +1          
                                 =  Ξ+1 =                                            (5)
                          1 +                                       +1


2.2    Prices

For simplicity, we assume that the world price of imports is given exogenously in terms of
a world currency. Using asterisks to denote prices denominated in the world currency, the
                                                     ∗
domestic currency price of imports is then  =    where  is the nominal exchange rate
(domestic currency per foreign currency). So, there is full pass through from world prices to
the price of domestic imports.
   Likewise, we assume that the world currency price of the world consumption aggregate is
exogenous. Denoting it by ∗  the real exchange rate is then:


                                          =  ∗ 


   It is useful also to define the domestic price of imports relative to the price of the home
consumption aggregate, or consumption terms of trade, by

                                                       ∗
                                                 
                                       =       =                                           (6)
                                                 

   Several recent models (e.g. Gali and Monacelli 2005) imply that there is a one to one relation
between the real exchange rate and the consumption terms of trade. In fact, those models imply
that  and  always move in the same direction. In this model, however, fluctuations in the
relative world price of imports weakens that link, with potentially important consequences for
welfare and optimal policy, as discussed later.
   To see this more precisely, use the definitions of  and  to rewrite 1 as:

                                         µ        ¶1−
                                         
                             1 = (1 − )                 + 1− ∗1−                     (7)
                                         

                                                  9
where ∗ = 
             ∗
                ∗ is the world’s relative price of imports, which we take as exogenous.
   From (1), an improvement in the terms of trade (a fall in  ) requires an increase in the
relative price of domestic output (  ). Given ∗  7 then implies that  must fall (a real
appreciation). Hence  and  would always move in the same direction in the absence of
shocks to ∗ , as in other models. But it is clear that here  and  can move in opposite
directions when ∗ moves.


2.3     Domestic Production

As mentioned, the economy produces two kinds of goods: varieties of a diﬀerentiated good,
which can be assembled to obtain an aggregate that can be consumed or exported; and a
perfectly competitive, homogenous export, which is sold only to the world market at exogenous
world prices. We describe each production sector in turn.


2.3.1   The imperfectly competitive sector

The first consumption-export good, which we will refer to as the domestic aggregate is just a
conventional Dixit-Stiglitz aggregate of diﬀerentiated goods. The total quantity of the domestic
aggregate, denoted by  , the PPI   and the demand for each variety   (), can then be
defined in the usual fashion.
   Each variety  in turn, is produced by a single firm using labor  () and imports  ()
according to
                                    () =   ()1−κ  ()κ                             (8)

where  is a common (country-wide) productivity shock, κ is the commodity share in produc-
tion, and  = [κ κ (1 − κ)1−κ ]−1 is an irrelevant constant.
   Variety producers take input prices and wages as given. We allow for the existence of
a subsidy to employment in this sector at constant rate  Cost minimization requires each




                                                10
variety producer to choose inputs such that

                                   ()       κ  (1 − )
                                         =    =                                               (9)
                                   ()      1−κ   

where the first equality emphasizes that all variety firms choose the same relative input mix,
                          Z1                   Z1
and we have defined  =  () and  =  ()
                            0                        0
   Nominal marginal cost is therefore the same for all variety firms and given by


                                            κ
                                      Ψ =  ((1 − ) )1−κ                           (10)


   Variety producers are monopolistic competitors and set prices in domestic currency as in
Calvo (1983): each individual producer is allowed change nominal prices with probability (1−).
As is now well known, all variety producers with the opportunity to reset prices in period  will
choose the same price, say ̄  which satisfies:

                           X
                           ∞         ∙                                 ¸
                                                             
                                   Ξ+ +| (̄ −       Ψ+ ) = 0                 (11)
                           =0
                                                             −1

where  denotes the elasticity of substitution between domestic intermediate varieties and +|
is the demand in period  +  for a producer that last set her price in period  Also, the price
of the home aggregate is given by:

                                      £                        ¤
                                                         1− 1(1−)
                                  = (1 − )̄1− + −1                              (12)


2.3.2   The Competitive Exports Sector

As mentioned, we extend CC by allowing for a competitive export sector, modeled after "en-
claves" often found in developing countries. Firms in that sector use labor to produce a good
sold in the world market at exogenous prices




                                                    11
      The production function in the competitive export sector is Cobb Douglas:


                                                     =  


where 0 ≤  ≤ 1 ,  is the amount of labor input in the sector, and  a sectoral productivity
shock. Note that the case  = 0 reduces to the assumption that homogenous exports are given
by an exogenous endowment, a case that has received attention in the literature (e.g. Bodenstein
and Guerrieri 2011).
      Profit maximization then requires:

                                                                1
                                       −1
                                             =            ∗
                                                               =        ∗
                                                                                                         (13)
                                                              

       ∗
where  is the export’s world relative price. Note that we have assumed that the wage is not
subsidized, in contrast with the diﬀerentiated goods sector.


2.4       Equilibrium

We assume that the foreign demand for the domestic aggregate is given by a function of its
price relative to ∗ and the index ∗ of world consumption. Hence market clearing for the
home good requires:

                                µ       ¶−                    µ     ¶−         µ         ¶−
                                                                             
                 =  +                  ∗   = (1 − )               +                 ∗     (14)
                               ∗                                             ∗

where the second equality follows from 2,  is a constant and  is the price elasticity of the
foreign demand for the domestic aggregate. Note that we allow the home and foreign elasticities
of demand for home goods,  and  to diﬀer.5
      Equilibrium also requires that the supply of labor equal the demand for labor:
  5
      In the case  = 0 , the home aggregate is a nontraded good. We do not explore that case here, however.




                                                         12
                                                      =  +                                   (15)

        Finally in equilibrium, value added in home production must be:


                                    ∗
                  =   +                             ∗
                                        −   =   +      − ∗      (16)


        The description of the model is complete once a monetary policy rule is specified. Before
stating the class of rules we will be concerned with, however, the next section motivates and
justifies our choice with a discussion of analytical aspects of monetary policy.



3         Monetary Policy Choices: Conceptual Issues

Dominant New Keynesian models of closed economies often imply that optimal policy must
completely stabilize the PPI. In those models, as discussed by Woodford (2003), Gali (2008),
and others, this suﬃces to correct the distortions associated with nominal rigidities. While this
prescription has been qualified in various ways 6 , its practical implication has been that studies
of closed economies usually focus on monetary rules that target the PPI.
        In extensions of New Keynesian models to the small open economy, the ability of the mon-
etary authorities to aﬀect international relative prices introduces a second consideration, some-
times called terms of trade externality. This is well known to imply that PPI stabilization
does not generally deliver optimal allocations (Corsetti and Pesenti 2001, Benigno and Benigno
2003). But Gali and Monacelli (2005) identified a special case where it does, while Faia and
Monacelli (2007) and De Paoli (2009) found that, for many other plausible parametrizations of
the models, PPI targeting is almost optimal. Likewise, Hevia and Nicolini (2012) argue that
PPI stabilization is in fact optimal if complemented appropriately by tax policy.
        All of these results suggest that one should restrict attention to PPI targeting even in a
    6
        For instance, if there are cost push shocks or real rigidities.



                                                            13
model like ours. However, our model has many features that distinguish it from others, such
as a variable world price of imports, as well as alternative assumptions about international risk
sharing.7 To understand why and how these model features aﬀect the monetary policy problem,
this section lays out that problem in some detail.8


3.1       The Social Planner’s Tradeoﬀs

Suppose that the economy has a social planner that maximizes the welfare of the representative
agent. Our first task is to identify the planner’s tradeoﬀs.
       For simplicity, in this section we assume that there are no competitive exports and that
imports do not enter the domestic production function; the general case is delayed to the
Appendix. We also normalize here on  to 1. One implication is that the aggregate production
function is linear:  =   =    Then, using 7, the market clearing condition for home
goods, 14, can be written as:


                                = (1 − )(  )  +  (  ) ∗                              (17)

where we have expressed   a function of the real exchange rate and the price of imported
food:
                                                     ½                      ¾1(−1)
                                                       1 − (  )1−
                                   = (  ) =                                                              (18)
                                                           1−

       Equation 17 expresses a crucial aspect of the planner’s tradeoﬀ between consumption and
leisure, given the real exchange rate. It must hold at all times, i.e. under any scenario and
assumption made here.
       The description of the relevant planner’s tradeoﬀs is completed with one of our assumptions
   7
      All of the studies cited in the previous paragraph assume perfect risk sharing, with the exception of Corsetti
and Pesenti (2001). But in the latter international asset markets play no role.
    8
      Some of the material in this section overlaps with Faia and Monacelli (2007) and the recent piece by Monacelli
(2012). However, we clarify, and simplify the logic in several ways, which helps unifying the discussion and extend
it to the many variants of our model. Perhaps most importantly, while Faia and Monaceli (2007) and Monaceli
(2012) restricted analysis to the case of perfect risk sharing, we show how to deal with the case of portfolio
autarky.



                                                         14
on financial markets, perfect risk sharing versus portfolio autarky. We take up each case in
turn.


3.2     Policy With Perfect Risk Sharing

If there is perfect international risk sharing, 4 holds at all times. Together with 17, it summarizes
the key restrictions on the planner’s choice of     and  
   Since both restrictions are static, the Ramsey planner’s problem is static too: at any  and
given any value of the exogenous shocks, the planner must choose    and  to maximize
current utility ( ) − ( ) subject to 4 and 17. To analyze this choice, it is convenient to use
4 to rewrite 17 as:
                                          = ∗ Θ(   )                                 (19)

where
                         Θ( ) = (1 − )()  1 +   ()

   This and 4 summarize the planner’s constraints. Consider, specifically, a marginal depreci-
ation of the real exchange rate (an increase in  ). By the risk sharing condition 4, this raises
home consumption with elasticity 1. On the other hand, it increases demand for the home
good, and hence labor eﬀort, with elasticity equal to the elasticity of Θ with respect to  
Note that the latter depends on the diﬀerent parameters of the model as well as the shock  .
   It is then not too surprising that the first order optimality condition is:

                                        1 1−1  0 ( )
                                0 ( )     =          Θ1 (   )                         (20)
                                                   

where Θ1 denotes the partial derivative of Θ with respect to its first argument 
   The LHS is the utility benefit of a marginal depreciation, while the RHS is the cost of the
labor associated with the resulting increase in demand.
   The optimal Ramsey allocation is now completely characterized by 4, 19, and 20. Several



                                                  15
points are noteworthy. The optimal solution (     ) is generally stochastic and depends
on the shocks  and   In particular, the ratio of the marginal rate of substitution between
labor eﬀort and consumption,  0 ( )0 ( ) to the marginal product of labor,   is equal to
  1−1
          Θ1 (   ) which is constant only in special cases. In other words, optimality does
not require stabilizing the MRS/MPN ratio.9
         It is instructive to express the optimality condition in terms of elasticities. Letting  Θ
denote the elasticity of Θ with respect to 10 and using 4 and 19 20 can be rewritten as

                                           1
                                              0 ( ) = 0 ( )  Θ
                                           

This just says that the planner equates the marginal benefit of a one percent real depreciation
to its cost. By perfect risk sharing, a one percent increase in  raises  by 1 percent, or
  units of consumption. So the LHS is the utility benefit of a one percent depreciation. A
one percent depreciation raises world demand Θ and, therefore, the demand for labor, by  Θ
percent, or   Θ units, so the RHS is the utility cost of the additional demand for labor
implied by the depreciation.
         The last expression emphasizes that openness, production and consumption structure, etc.
aﬀect the planner’s problem to the extent that they influence the equilibrium elasticity of world
demand Θ with respect to the real exchange rate,  Θ. Intuitively, this is because it is
that elasticity which determines the incentives for the planner to exploit the "terms of trade
externality".
         To see whether the planning allocation can be implemented in a market equilibrium, assume
that prices are flexible. Then, in any market equilibrium, monopolistic competition implies that
     9
   Note that this contrasts with Monacelli (2012, section 2).
  10
   It is easiest to define elasticities sequentially. Letting the elasticity of  be denoted by   =
(  )1− (1 − (  )1− ) , then
                                                 1
                              (1 − )(  )                   1     (  )
                     Θ =                            [  +     ]+                 [ +  ]
                                       Θ                                      Θ
  Note that the elasticities are time varying, in general.



                                                           16
prices are a markup over marginal cost,  =  = (1 − )  = (1 − )   And
since   =  0 ( )0 ( ) we get:

                                      0 ( )0 ( )          1
                                                        =                                                      (21)
                                                        (1 − )(  )

The flexible price market equilibrium (or natural) outcome is therefore pinned down by 4, 19,
and 21.
       Clearly 21 generally diﬀers from 20, so the flex price natural outcome will diﬀer from the
Ramsey planner’s outcome. This is the case even if (1 − ) = 1 that is, even if the wage
subsidy is chosen to eliminate the monopolistic competition distortion, as often assumed in
the literature. The discrepancy, in fact, is solely due to the terms of trade externality alluded
           11
above.
       Since complete PPI stabilization results in the flexible price market equilibrium, our analysis
identifies why and how PPI targeting may be suboptimal. Conversely, it gives the conditions
under which PPI stabilization can be in fact optimal (a case often called divine coincidence).
Thus, for example, if  =  = 1 it is not hard to show that 20 and 21 coincide exactly
provided that
                                              1−         1
                                                      =
                                           (1 − ) +  (1 − )

       Under the additional assumption  =  this is Gali and Monacelli’s (2005) condition for
PPI stabilization to be optimal. Our analysis generalizes theirs a little but also indicates that
that case is quite special.
       Likewise, suppose that the wage subsidy is not constant but time varying instead. Then 20
  11
    To see this point more clearly, suppose that, in fact, (1 − ) = 1 Then the market flex price outcome
                     0
would be 0 ( ) =  ( )
                        
                             (  ) which can be regarded as the optimality condition for a planner that does not
exploit the terms of trade margin, that is, a planner that takes world prices as given, and that is also subject
to a balanced trade constraint. The LHS would be the utility cost of an additional unit of consumption: for
such a "price taking " planner, that unit would require producing   = (  ) units of home output, at
labor cost (  )  The RHS would be the utility cost of the additional output required to pay for the unit
of consumption.




                                                         17
and 21 coincide if
                                                Θ1 (   )   1−1
                                 (1 −   ) =                 
                                                (  )

where the RHS is computed at the optimal allocation, that is, derived from 4, 19, and 20. This
says that the flexible price allocation is optimal if the wage subsidy is chosen appropriately.
   In eﬀect, the latter explains why Hevia and Nicolini (2012) find that PPI stabilization is
optimal in a model quite similar to ours: they assume that fiscal instruments are "suﬃciently
flexible", which means in our context that the wage subsidy is chosen as given in the previous
expression. We proceed, however, under the traditional (and perhaps more realistic) assump-
tion that fiscal instruments are fixed exogenously and separate from the relative evaluation of
alternative monetary policies.


3.3       Policy Under Financial Autarky

Now assume financial autarky,   =   which under the assumptions of this section can
be written as:
                                       (  ) =                                     (22)

   To get a sense of the resulting planner’s "budget constraint ", use the last expression in 17
to get:
                                                    
                        = (1 − )(  )             +  (  ) ∗
                                                  (  )

   This reflects the underlying tradeoﬀ: as before, a real depreciation increases demand via
expenditure switching. But it also reduces the purchasing power value of home output, hence
leads to lower consumption, which in turn tempers the impact on total demand for output and
the demand for labor.
   Hence the incompleteness of financial markets changes the terms of the tradeoﬀ for the
planner. Optimal policy must then change accordingly.
   The Ramsey problem is to choose     and  to maximize ( ) − ( ) subject to 17
and 22. For a sharp characterization, let  denote the RHS of 17, that is, world demand

                                                   18
for home goods; note that it is a function of    as well as shocks. Then the first order
optimality condition can be written as:

                        0 ()
                               [  −   ] = 0 ()[  −  ]                   (23)
                           

                                                         12
where   is the elasticity of  wrt  etc.
      The condition is again quite intuitive: the Ramsey planner equates the welfare cost, in
terms of labor, of a real exchange depreciation with utility benefit from increased consumption.
Consider a one percent real depreciation. The LHS term in brackets is the total percent increase
in demand for the home aggregate (the direct eﬀect on demand plus the indirect eﬀect via home
consumption). So the LHS product is the utility cost of the additional labor resulting from the
increased demand due to the depreciation. In the RHS, the term in brackets is the percentage
increase in consumption, equal to the diﬀerence between increased production and the fall in the
relative price of domestic output. The RHS product is, then, the increase in utility associated
with the additional consumption resulting from the one percent depreciation, as claimed.
      The preceding condition together with 17 and 22 characterize the Ramsey optimal solution
under financial autarky. On the other hand, the flex price market outcome, and a fortiori also
the result of complete PPI stabilization, is given by 17, 21, and 22. Note that the last equation
is the only diﬀerence relative to the perfect risk sharing case.
      Inspection of these systems of equations reveals that the planner’s solution will be, in general,
diﬀerent from the flex price market outcome, as in the perfect risk sharing case. But the
equations tell us more precisely the way in which diﬀerent assumptions about international risk
sharing aﬀect the optimal allocations and the way PPI stabilization may not be optimal. In
fact, finding cases in which PPI stabilization is optimal (which reduces to the equality of 21
and 22) appears analytically intractable.
 12
      Here,   = (1 − )(  )   and

                               (1 − )(  )             (  ) ∗
                       =                          +                     ( +  )
                                                                   



                                                        19
3.4    Summary

Our analysis in this section clarifies conditions under which the flexible price allocation and
PPI stabilization coincide with the Ramsey planner’s allocation. We have stressed that such
conditions are quite stringent, which means that there is room for other rules to "beat" PPI
stabilization in terms of welfare. We have also seen that some features of the economy, such
as openness and production structure, aﬀect the monetary policy problem by changing the
relevant elasticities that determine the strength of the terms of trade externality. Assumptions
about international risk sharing, in contrast, aﬀect the problem more drastically, by changing
the structure of the systems of equations that determine the planning solution and the flex
price solution. At this level of generality there is little more than we can say. But we can now
make much more progress by looking at parameterized cases. We now turn to those.



4     Parametrization and Dynamics

4.1    Calibration

Table 1 reports on the parameter values we have used for calibrating the model. Many of
our choices are standard, including the values for the discount factor, the frequency of price
adjustments, and the elasticity of substitution across domestic goods. Since the response of
consumption to the real exchange rate is crucial in our model and, under perfect risk sharing,
depends on the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion, we allow for that coeﬃcient to vary between
2 and 6 Regarding the elasticity of labor supply (1), the range of estimates found in the
literature is wide, varying between close to zero to well above one. A unitary labor supply
elasticity seems to be a plausible compromise for macro studies (see e.g. Heckman 1993), so we
stick to that baseline value.
    We set the share of imports in the CPI at 25 percent following Gali and Monacelli (2005)
and de Paoli (2009). More critical for our results, as seen below, is the parametrization of the



                                              20
price elasticity of foreign demand for the home aggregate, . Previous studies have assumed
that  =  although there is no compelling reason to impose the equality. To preserve compar-
ability, we present results when the model is indeed calibrated with  =  though letting  span
a reasonably wide range, from 0.75 to 513 . But also provide results allowing  to diﬀer from  .
This may be particularly important in the context of specialization, allowing for the possibility,
for instance, that our model economy produces and exports fix-price goods with high export
price elasticity (e.g. lightly processed manufacturing goods) while it imports essential com-
modities (food and oil) that cannot be easily substituted away in consumption or production.
That raises the question of what values of  to consider. Using aggregate data from advanced
economies, Hooper, Johnson and Marquez (2000) reported estimates around one. However, the
relevant elasticity in our model is that of a sticky price sector; if that sector is manufacturing
in an emerging economy, it is likely to produce less complex/diﬀerentiated varieties than in
advanced countries, arguably facing a much flatter world demand schedule.14 Cross-country
econometric studies report estimates of the price elasticity of manufacturing goods of around 5
(Lai and Trefler 2002, Harrigan 1993). Given these considerations, we take  = 5 as a sensible
baseline.
       Still regarding imports, but turning to their role in production, we follow Arseneau and
Leduc (2012) by calibrating the share of imported inputs in domestic production, κ to ten
percent. Blanchard and Gali (2007) used a much lower share (two percent) for the U.S. But
we regard the imported input in our model as a composite not limited to oil. And even if we
restrict attention to oil, emerging market economies are probably much less energy eﬃcient
than the U.S. So ten percent seems a reasonable compromise for a benchmark. To check for
  13
     The rationale for a low  is that when the share of imported consumption is made up of food and or oil,
goods with a low price elasticity of demand, it seems sensible to consider values  below one. In fact, using food
price data from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators and from the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Anand and Prasad (2012) estimate a median price elasticity of about 0.25 for food, which is also used in Catao
and Chang (2010). But the consumption basket in our model may contain non-food imported items with greater
scope for substitutability, so we settle on 0.75 as the lower bound for that range.
  14
     Indeed, it seems likely that lightly processed manufactures exported by many emerging countries are much
more easily substitutable in world markets than, say, complex hardware and software equipment, optical and
machine tool parts, and other items exported by, say, the US, Germany, and Japan.



                                                       21
robustness below, we also examine what happens when κ = 0.
   The inclusion of an "enclave" export sector is a main novelty of our model relative to others.
We think of the enclave sector as comprising highly capital intensive industries, such as mining,
in which the labor share in output is small but the value of the output can be substantial.
Available United Nations data for Chile and Peru suggest that employment in enclave sectors
is about one percent of total employment while the value of the sector’s output is about ten
percent of total value added. We set the parameters of the sector’s production function, 
and , at fifteen percent and ten percent respectively to roughly match these facts.
   In our computations, we assume that ∗ is constant, and then set  and  ∗ to one (this can
be shown to be just a normalization). And following the literature, we set the wage subsidy
 equal to the inverse of (1 − κ) which is the value consistent with the elimination of the
monopolistic distortion in the diﬀerentiated goods sector.
   Finally, we turn to the calibration of the stochastic processes for the diﬀerent shocks in
the model. We set the quarterly standard deviation of shocks to world prices of competitive
exports,  ∗  at seven percent, and its autorregresive coeﬃcient, ∗  at 0.75. These values are
consistent with Arseneau and Leduc (2012) as well as our own estimations based on the IMF
commodity price indices for non-food and non-oil commodities. To calibrate the process for the
world relative price of imports, we borrow our own estimates (from CC) and set baseline values
of the world import price volatility, ∗ , at five percent, with an AR(1) coeﬃcient of 0.75. We
also examine the implications of alternative (lower) values for these AR(1) process.
   We based our calibration of non-price shocks on estimates from Chile, a prototype small
open emerging economy for which there is reasonably long quarterly data of good quality.
Accordingly, we set the standard deviation of productivity shocks at 1.2 percent per quarter
and the AR(1) coeﬃcient for productivity at 0.7. The latter is very similar to that of Gali
and Monacelli (2005) assumed based on Canadian data. The same paper reported standard
deviations of Canadian TFP shocks of 0.7 percent, which is consistent with the fact that Chile’s
output has been about twice more volatile Canada’s.


                                                 22
4.2       Monetary Rules

Given that our theoretical discussion has emphasized that PPI targeting may not deliver optimal
outcomes in our model, the rest of the paper discusses dynamics and welfare under alternative
policy rules that have featured prominently in central bank practices and/or recent debates on
monetary policy.
      Two of those are standard Taylor rules with a target of actual inflation. The first follows
the usual prescription from the theoretical literature in setting the policy interest rate as a
function of realized PPI inflation and possibly the output gap:


                        log(1 +  ) = − log  +   +  (log  − log  ) +                    (24)


where  = ( −1 ) − 1 denotes the rate of domestic inflation and  denotes natural
output. The alternative, widely practiced by central banks around the globe, targets the broad
consumer price index (CPI) inflation:


                        log(1 +  ) = − log  +    +  (log  − log  ) +                    (25)

      In these and other cases,  is a conventional monetary shock, assumed to follow a first order
autorregresive process calibrated as discussed in the previous section.
      We also consider two other rules that have featured in recent policy discussions but have not
been studied in the literature reviewed in the introduction. One of them, usually called CPI
inflation forecast targeting, targets expected CPI inflation over a given horizon. In practice,
this typically involves a complex macro forecast apparatus by central banks (as discussed e.g.
in Laxton et al. 2009) and a choice of the relevant forecast horizon during which inflation is
targeted. As discussed recently in central bank inflation reports around the world, the targeting
horizon choice involves non-trivial trade-oﬀs that have been mostly influenced by developments
in global commodity markets.15 While an analysis of targeting horizons is beyond the scope
 15
      See, for instance, http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/infrep.aspx.    In-


                                                      23
of this paper, our setting does allow to implement forecast targeting rules in a model-based
forecasting structure that takes into account the underlying stochastic processes of commodity
price shocks. To the best of our knowledge, this is novel in the small open economy New
Keynesian literature.
   We implement the CPI forecast targeting rule — which we henceforth label expected CPI
targeting — by replacing realized inflation by one-period ahead expected CPI inflation as a
target in an otherwise conventional rule:


                                                                                
                log(1 +  ) = − log  +    +1 +   (log +1 − log +1 ) +           (26)

   In order to calibrate each of these Taylor rules, we computed "optimal" coeﬃcients on
inflation and the output gap as follows. Using a baseline calibration for other parameters
described above (with  = 5 and  = 2 but letting  vary) we computed discounted utility
values resulting from varying the coeﬃcients of the PPI and the CPI rules over a grid, spanning
from 1.5 to 5 (with 025 increments) for the coeﬃcient on inflation ( ) and from 0 to 0.5 (with
0125 increments)f or the coeﬃcient on the output gap ( ). We did so for PPI and CPI rules.
For the PPI rule, a non-zero weight on the output gap consistently delivered higher welfare than
zero weight (the so-called "strict IT"); values of  between 1.5 to 2.5 were found to optimize
the rule when  =025. For the (conventional) CPI rule, the optimizing coeﬃcient on inflation
was a little lower, around  = 15. Accordingly, in what follows we set  = 20 for the PPI
rule and  = 15 for the CPI rule, with  =0.25 for both rules. For the expected CPI rule, the
calibration was not as smooth due to convergence problems when the inflation coeﬃcient rose
above 3. Hence we simply set  to 2 as with the PPI rule, and hence a bit more agressive
relative to the current CPI rule.
   Lastly, we consider a version of the so-called "export price targeting" (EPT) rule, proposed
by Frankel (2010, 2011). Frankel’s proposal was for monetary policy to stabilize the domestic
deed, the recent attractiveness of such a forecast targeting rule in the wake of commodity price boom and
bust of 2006-09 lies in its potentially more accommodative stance towards commodity price shocks than the
standard Taylor rules with either PPI or CPI targeting.


                                                   24
price of commodity exports. However, as discussed in Catão (2011), strict implementation of
such a price level-based rule in countries with export price indices of rapidly changing com-
position, and with individual components that are highly volatile and hard to forecast at high
frequencies, poses formidable challenges, not the least for reserve management policies. A
milder and more easily implemented version of that rule is that of stabilizing domestic export
price inflation. Thus we implement this variant of the EPT rule by replacing the previous
Taylor rules by the following exchange rate setting equation:

                                                     ∗
                                          ∗     −1
                                               ∗
                                                  =    ∗
                                                                                                (27)
                                        −1 −1    

   Note that for trivial levels of world inflation (i.e., ∗ = −1
                                                                  ∗
                                                                     ) and in the absence of relative
                                        ∗
shocks to the world export price, i.e.  constant this rule coincides with an exchange rate
peg.


4.3    Dynamics

The dynamics of our model can be glanced from studying its responses to diﬀerent shocks, in
particular shocks to relative world prices. Figure 1 displays impulse responses of key variables
(in logs) to a one standard deviation positive shock to the world price of imports. The figure
assumes a strict PPI targeting rule with  = 15 and perfect international risk sharing. In
order to highlight the crucial impact of elasticities of world demand, we examine two values,
 = 075 and  = 5 for the elasticity of world demand for the home aggregate. In contrast,  is
kept at 075 Finally, the figure assumes that the share of imported inputs in home production
of diﬀerentiated goods, κ is ten percent.
   Focus first on the case  =  = 075 (solid line). The responses in the first row can be
interpreted readily with reference to CC. CC show that, in the absence of nominal rigidities, a
positive shock to the price of imports must be accommodated with a terms of trade deterioration
and a real exchange rate appreciation. Figure 1 then shows that, in the present model, the



                                                25
terms of trade and the real exchange rate follow their natural counterparts. Note that the two
variables move in opposite directions, as stressed by CC.
   Because of perfect risk sharing, consumption falls as it tracks the behavior of the real
exchange rate. Correspondingly, consumption growth increases, which implies that the real
interest rate goes up.
   The response of output and employment shows that there are significant diﬀerences between
CC and the present model. In CC, the condition   1 , as assumed for Figure 1, implies
that natural output must increase in response to a positive  ∗ shock. But Figure 1 shows that
natural output falls in the present model. The diﬀerence is due to the fact that imports are
assumed to be an input to production. Since the relative price of imports has increased, real
marginal cost goes up in the diﬀerentiated goods sector. On the other hand, the real wage goes
down on impact, reflecting both the increase in the relative price of imports and the fall in
consumption, the latter leading to an increase in the supply of labor. The net implication of
these eﬀects in that output falls but employment increases in the diﬀerentiated goods sector.
   While output of the home aggregate falls, it does not fall as much as natural output. As
a consequence, the output gap becomes positive and PPI inflation picks up. The monetary
response is to increase the nominal interest rate. CPI inflation, on the other hand, increases on
impact, but falls afterwards. This reflects the combined impact of the increase in the price of
imports and exchange rate appreciation.
   Figure 1 shows that employment in the homogeneous exports sector falls in response to the
imports price shock. This reflects that the product wage increases in that sector: recall that,
                                                         ∗               ∗
in terms of the homogeneous export good, the wage is  = ( )(1 ) As Figure
1 reveals, while  falls, the real exchange rate falls by more, and hence the product wage
increases.
   For the parameters of Figure 1, the employment increase in the diﬀerentiated goods sector
dominates the fall of employment in the homogeneous exports sector. Hence total employment
goes up. Falling consumption and rising labor eﬀort mean a fall in welfare, as shown by the


                                               26
last panel in Figure 1.
   The dashed line in Figure 1 shows the implications of a higher , which emphasizes the
crucial role of elasticities of demand in the model. The first row of responses shows that the
responses of the real exchange rate, the terms of trade, and consumption are about the same as
when  = 075 but that natural output falls by much more. This happens because, with a higher
, the same response of relative prices to the  ∗ shock now results in a much bigger reduction
in the world demand for the home aggregate. Accordingly, output in the diﬀerentiated goods
sector falls much much more and labor employment in the sector increases by much less than
when  = 075 The fall in the real wage is steeper also, which cushions the fall in employment
in the homogeneous exports sector. All in all, total employment increases by much less when
 = 5 than with  = 075 and, since consumption is about the same, welfare falls by less.
   In the same case as in Figure 1, Figure 2 displays responses to a one standard deviation
(seven percent) shock to the world price of exports. All of the responses are quantitatively
insignificant except for that of employment in the homogeneous exports sector, which increases
by about eight percent. To understand this, suppose for a moment that  had been zero, that
is, that the competitive export had been just a pure endowment. In that case, perfect risk
sharing implies that a favorable export price shock would have no impact whatsoever on home
variables, since any windfall gain or loss from export price fluctuations would have been insured
away. In our case,  is not zero but small. Hence an eﬃcient response to the favorable export
price shock involves an increase in labor employment in the homogeneous export sector; the
magnitude of the increase is essentially equal to 1(1 − ) = 109 times the size of the shock.
This is transmitted to the rest of the economy via the labor market, as the real wage increases
to accommodate increased employment. This explains the rest of the responses, in particular
the contraction of employment and labor in the diﬀerentiated goods sector. That contraction,
the diﬀerence between the solid and the dashed lines reveals, is more marked if  is high, since
the associated real exchange appreciation implies a stronger contraction in the world demand
for the home aggregate. However, the responses are quantitatively tiny regardless of the value


                                               27
of . Note that welfare falls, if only a tiny amount, reflecting increased labor eﬀort.
   In order to assess the role of capital mobility, Figure 3 compares impulse responses to an
imports price shock under perfect international risk sharing (solid line) and financial autarky
(dotted line). The figure assumes that  =  = 075 and otherwise the same parameters as
in Figure 1. Consequently, the solid line in Figure 3 is the same as the solid line in Figure 1.
Responses under financial autarky, however, are markedly diﬀerent. The increase in the world
price of imports leads to a larger terms of trade deterioration and smaller real appreciation
than under perfect risk sharing. This, in turn, leads to a large reduction in real value added
and, hence, of consumption. Lower consumption exacerbates the fall in the real wage, which
leads to a significant expansion in labor employment and output in all sectors. This leads to
a larger increase in the output gap and PPI inflation than under perfect risk sharing, and a
larger interest rate response. Finally, welfare falls more steeply than under perfect risk sharing,
reflecting the stronger responses of both consumption and labor eﬀort.
   Figure 4 compares responses to a favorable exports price shock under perfect risk sharing and
financial autarky. Again, the solid lines correspond to perfect risk sharing and are, accordingly,
the same as the solid lines in Figure 3. The diﬀerence with the dotted lines reveal that the
responses under financial autarky are diﬀerent and much bigger. Under financial autarky, the
favorable shock to the price of homogeneous exports increase real value added directly, leading
to a large increase in consumption. There is a large real appreciation and improved terms
of trade, and a large increase in the real wage. Accordingly, employment and output in the
diﬀerentiated goods sector fall, leading to a fall in PPI inflation which is followed by a lower
nominal interest rate. Employment in the competitive export sector increases but not by as
much as under perfect risk sharing, reflecting the opposite eﬀects of higher export prices against
a higher real wage. Total employment falls which, together with increased consumption, implies
that welfare increases, in contrast with the perfect risk sharing case.
   Figures 1 to 4 assume that a Taylor monetary rule of strict PPI targeting, and help establish-
ing that responses to shocks depend in a very sensitive way on parameters such as elasticities of


                                                28
demand, as well as on assumptions about international risk sharing. Our theoretical discussion
on monetary choices then suggests at least two conjectures: first, that rules other than PPI
targeting may attain higher welfare; and second, that whether a competing rule can or cannot
beat PPI targeting may depend on the parameters of the model and on the completeness of
international financial markets. We examine both conjectures fully in the next section. But
before turning to that section, Figures 5 to 8 oﬀer some additional impulse responses that can
add intuition on monetary choices.
   Specifically, Figure 5 compares consumption, labor, and real exchange rate responses to a
one standard deviation shock to import prices assuming PPI targeting (dotted green lines) vis a
vis expected CPI targeting (thick dashed blue). In addition, the figure displays the responses of
the natural (flex price) corresponding variables (thin solid blue), as well as the optimal Ramsey
allocations (thick solid red), computed as indicated in the Appendix. The parametrization is
the same as in Figures 1-4, with  = 075 and  = 5 to enhance contrast.
   The figure reveals, not too surprisingly, that PPI targeting approximates the flex price
allocation. But it also shows that there are quantitatively significant diﬀerences between those
responses and the Ramsey optimal response. An optimal response requires, in particular, a
smaller appreciation of the real exchange rate (about one percent, as opposed to more than
1.5 percent for PPI targeting and flex prices), which results in a smaller fall of consumption
(0.6 percent as opposed to more than 0.8 percent). The Ramsey allocation also results in
a small increase in labor eﬀort, while PPI targeting/flex prices leave labor eﬀort essentially
unaﬀected in response to the imports price shock. Essentially, these responses reflect that the
planner exploits more heavily the "terms of trade externality" than PPI targeting to cushion
the impact of the shock.
   Figure 5 also tells us that the targeting expected CPI delivers exchange rate and consump-
tion responses that are closer to the optimal ones than targeting PPI. This is intuitive, since
stabilizing expected CPI is bound to have stabilizing eﬀects on exchange rates. On the other
hand, expected CPI targeting exacerbates the response of labor beyond the planner’s. The


                                               29
labor responses are quite small, however, which suggests that expected CPI targeting should
deliver higher welfare than PPI targeting if imports prices are more volatile and there is perfect
capital mobility.
   Figure 6 conducts the same experiment for shocks to exports prices. Two aspects of the
figure are revealing: both PPI targeting and expected CPI targeting lead to similar responses,
which are quite close to the responses under flexible prices; and all three responses are quite
diﬀerent from the Ramsey response, although quantitatively the diﬀerence is small.
   Taken together, Figures 5 and 6 suggest that expected CPI targeting is welfare superior to
PPI targeting if imports prices are dominant, while there is little advantage to one or the other
if exports prices are the main source of shocks.
   The importance of capital mobility for the comparison, however, is highlighted by Figures 7
and 8, which ask the same questions assuming portfolio autarky. The figures suggest that PPI
targeting approximates flex price responses quite well, and both sets of responses are not too
far from the Ramsey responses. On the other hand, expected CPI targeting delivers responses
that seem decidedly out of line with the others. The suggestion, then, is that PPI targeting is
likely to beat expected CPI targeting under portfolio autarky.
   Summarizing: impulse response analysis highlights that the tradeoﬀs of the monetary au-
thority depend sensitively on elasticities and international risk sharing. Under perfect risk
sharing, Ramsey allocations may prescribe more real exchange rate stability than flexible price
allocations, suggesting that PPI targeting is probably dominated by other monetary rules. Un-
der portfolio autarky, PPI targeting appears less likely to be defeated. A final comparison of
the diﬀerent rules, however, requires computing the welfare values associated with each rule.
The next section does exactly that.




                                               30
5       Welfare Implications of Alternative Rules

Having parameterized the model, we use the numerical procedures and programs of Schmitt
Grohe and Uribe (2004), as implemented via DYNARE, to compute a second order approxima-
tion of the equilibrium and the welfare level associated with each policy under study. We follow
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2007) in comparing welfare values "conditional" on the same starting
point which, as in these previous studies, is the non-stochastic steady state. Besides the obvious
theoretical appeal of this metric, it also simplifies the computational burden considerably.16
      As standard, we express welfare losses in each case as the percentage of nonstochastic steady
state consumption that the representative home agent would be willing to give up to live in the
resulting steady state. For PPI, for instance, the relevant formula is:

                                                 ∙                     ¸
                                                                    1+ 1(1−)
                                  (1 − )1(1−)                   
                          =1−                  (1 − ) + 
                                                                1+

where  is the welfare level associated with the PPI rule, and  and  are the steady
state values of consumption and labor eﬀort.


5.1      Comparison Across Rules

Table 2 reports the various welfare gaps between policy rules when commodity price shocks
are all set to zero. The table assumes full international risk sharing and, therefore, reduces to
the case usually considered in previous work, giving a useful benchmark against which one can
gauge the role of commodity price shocks in altering the welfare rankings. The table allows 
and  to take diﬀerent values and assumes that  =  Otherwise the parametrization is the
baseline one. Each of the top six panels compares two rules for the various configurations of 
and ; entries in, say, the PPI-CPI panel reports  −  , so that a positive number means
that the PPI rule entails lower welfare losses (again, always measured relative to steady state
consumption) than its CPI counterpart. The bottom panel in the table identifies the "winning"
 16
      This has been emphasized by Wang (2006).



                                                   31
rule for each  −  configuration.
          Several aspects of Table 2 are noteworthy. PPI dominates if  is suﬃciently low, but not for
higher values of  This is consistent with previous studies, such as Cova and Sondegaard (2004)
and de Paoli (2009). Cova and Sondegaard (2004) and de Paoli (2009) find that a rule that
pegs the nominal exchange rate often entails lower welfare losses relative to both PPI targeting
and CPI targeting when  =  is high enough. This in fact is confirmed by Table 2, since EPT
becomes a nominal exchange rate peg when shocks to export prices are shut oﬀ, as mentioned
earlier. A novelty in Table 2 is that, when expected CPI targeting is included in the set of
alternative rules, it wins out at the upper range of  values even when commodity price shocks
are trivial.17 As usual, Table 2 also shows that the welfare gaps are typically small, accounting
for less (and often much less) than 0.1 percent of steady state consumption.
          Turning now to the main case of our model, Table 3a report results when both export and
import price shocks are turned on, maintaining the other assumptions of Table 2, including full
international risk sharing. Three features of Table 3 are then notable. First, for   5 PPI still
wins out. Second, for higher  values (and  ≥ 2), Frankel’s EPT rule beats all others. Third,
the EPT rule is, however, typically welfare inferior to both PPI and CPI rules for lower =.
18
      In separate calibrations (not shown here to conserve on space), we also find that the same
welfare ranking obtains if shocks to the relative price of imports are turned oﬀ. This suggests
that, in spite of the export sector’s low share in total employment, the combination of highly
volatile export prices and domestic labor mobility ensures that exogenous shocks to the world
price of exports can significantly aﬀect welfare and the relative desirability of alternative policy
rules. Recall, however, that import price volatility imparts an extra welfare wedge between
PPI and the other rules relative to the social planner’s allocation (cf. Figure 5), thus further
accounting for diﬀerences in welfare rankings between Tables 2 and 3a.
     17
     Consistent with the analytical results discussed in section 3, when all elasticities equal and unitary, the
numerical results show PPI dominance across the board. The case of  = 1 is not reported to save space but
available from the authors upon request.
  18
     Given that pegging the nominal exchange rate is widely regarded an inferior rule for commodity exporters
(cf. Cashin et al, 2004; Frankel, 2010, 2011) and to keep the table presentation concise, we do not report results
for the peg rule. However, they are available from the authors upon request.


                                                       32
   In order to evaluate the influence of international capital mobility, Table 3b reports results
under the same parametrization but assuming portfolio autarky. The main result is not only
that that the PPI rule becomes generally more dominant but also that it delivers much large
welfare gains relative to the competing rules. A few times these gains approach one percent
of steady state consumption, and even more for the extreme cases involving EPT comparisons
and high  = . In short, financial autarky generally reinforces the welfare-dominance of
PPI targeting over all rules, EPT included. Indeed, as just noted, the EPT rule becomes less
desirable relative to all other rules as  grows larger. The clear dominance of the PPI rule
under financial autarky is consistent with the evidence presented in Figures 7 and 8 of section
4, showing that PPI delivers responses for consumption and employment that are quite close
to the social planner’s optimum.
   Tables 2, 3a, and 3b assume that  =  which is common in the literature. However, there
seems to be no obvious reason to impose such equality. In fact, cases in which    may
be particularly relevant, as many small open economies (as well large and less open emerging
market economies) have a relatively large domestic manufacturing sector but, at the same time,
are also heavy importers and/or exporters of commodities. For such economies, domestic sticky
price producers face an elastic demand curve for their exports, so  can easily be higher than
. To examine this possibility, Tables 4a and 4b report results for  = 5
   Table 4a assumes perfect risk sharing. For the Ramsey planner, this means that the benefit
of depreciating the real exchange rate, in terms of increased consumption, will need to be
balanced against the loss associated with higher employment. If the export price elasticity is
high enough, this can potentially lower the ratio of consumption to employment by enough to
lower welfare. So, a rule that exploits the terms of externality by appreciating the real exchange
rate may have an edge: even though consumption will fall, employment can potentially fall by
much more, raising utility. In addition, with greater import penetration of the home-good
varieties in the CPI basket, the impact of the domestic price stickiness distortion on consumer
choice is mitigated and, the higher  the smaller the impact of the real appreciation on overall


                                               33
consumption.
       Consistent with this intuition, Table 4a shows that, under full risk sharing, PPI targeting
loses much of its lustre unless both  and  are low enough. In particular, for intermediate
values of  and , the dominant rule is expected CPI targeting. Figure 5 in section 4 indicates
why this is so: under complete markets, when  is high (= 5 in this case) and import price
shocks are non-trivial, the expected CPI rule does a better job in stabilizing the real exchange
rate and consumption, getting these two variables closer to the social planner’s allocation than
the PPI rule. True, while Figure 5 also shows that the expected CPI rule raises employment
beyond what the social planner optimum, the PPI rule flattens employment too much below
that what planner’s solutions deems optimal, so on both fronts expected CPI wins out. If  is
high enough, however, Table 4a shows that EPT turns out to have an edge over the expected
CPI rule, while both dominate PPI. It is interesting to notice that even current CPI targeting
also beats PPI when   1 and   2 and more broadly when  ≥ 6 (see the first panel of
Figure 4a).
       Table 4b assumes financial autarky and corroborates earlier results: PPI wins out hand-
ily. This is completely consistent with our discussion and our analysis of impulse responses,
specifically Figure 7 and 8.
       Overall, these simulation exercises bring to bear an important policy implication: when
a commodity trading country faces a suﬃciently high export price elasticity for its exports,
it stands to gain by stabilizing expected CPI inflation or, if  is high enough, the relative
price of exports via the EPT rule. Yet, this is so only if it faces complete (or near complete)
international financial markets. Otherwise, targeting overall PPI is likely to deliver higher
aggregate welfare.19
  19
    Further sensitivity analysis undertaken by us suggest that these results — and in particular the expected CPI
dominance for intermediate values of  and  under complete markets — are broadly robust to some non-trivial
(but not unrealistic) reduction in the persistence of commodity price shocks. As one might expect, however, if
the persistence of commodity price is set to trivial values [say AR(1) for  ∗ and ∗ well below 0.5 on a quartely
basis], expected CPI targeting loses its welfare dominance. But such scenario would be highly unrealistic, as
commodity price shocks are well known to be highly persistent.




                                                        34
6        Final Remarks

Recent swings in world commodity prices have posed considerable challenges to central banks
in their mandate to stabilize headline CPI inflation around an explicit and pre-announced
quantitative annual target. Such challenges have been particularly taxing for small economies
that export and/or import mainly primary commodities. Facing sharp commodity price up-
swings and downswings, many of these countries have undergone significant deviations from
pre-announced targets.20 These failings have fueled growing debate on the de facto suitability
of CPI inflation targeting, particularly among commodity trading economies, and on new pro-
posals for alternative monetary rules. Yet, there has been a dearth of model-based analyses on
both the specifics of the relevant commodity price transmission mechanism and the attendant
welfare implications of monetary policy choices in this context.
       This paper extends our previous framework in Catão and Chang (2010) to an economy that
is small in world commodity markets, thus facing exogenous world commodity price shocks, but
that is also a commodity exporter and uses commodity imports as input to production. Relative
to the literature, a key contribution of this paper has been to undertake a welfare-based assess-
ment of competing monetary rules for the distinct contexts of complete international financial
markets and portfolio autarky. Unlike previous work, Ramsey allocations are fully character-
ized and compared to those implied by alternative policy rules under either full international
risk sharing and financial autarky. Another main contribution has been the computation of
welfare gaps for a fuller menu of alternative rules and on the basis of extensive and empirically
driven model-based calibrations, with particular attention to the underlying stochastic process
driving actual commodity price shocks. While other recent work (Hevia and Nicolini 2012)
has also characterized Ramsey allocations for the commodity importing economy and assessed
welfare implications of both monetary and fiscal policies in this context, it has been limited to
the full risk sharing case and relied on special and perhaps unrealistic assumptions about the
  20
   See Catão and Chang (2011) for cross-country evidence on such deviations from targeted inflation in the
wake of commodity price shocks and their relation to structural breaks in Taylor rules.



                                                   35
availability of fiscal instruments.
   We show that the welfare ranking of the diﬀerent rules depends crucially on the international
financial structure and on intra-temporal substitution elasticities, notably the export price
elasticity. If risks are fully shared internationally and commodity price shocks are smoothed
out eﬃciently, PPI inflation targeting delivers the highest welfare among the rules considered
when commodity price volatility is high and intra-temporal elasticities are low. Conversely,
when the export price elasticity is high — a realistic scenario for many small economies that
import commodities and export mainly manufacturing goods — expected CPI targeting often
delivers welfare levels closer to the Ramsey allocation. Further, when the country has an enclave
exporting commodity sector, an export-price targeting rule tends to deliver superior welfare
when the export price elasticity is high enough (two or above in our calibrations); but export
price targeting fares much worse than other rules under other parametrizations. Crucially,
welfare rankings change drastically under portfolio financial autarky: the PPI rule appears
superior to over current and expected CPI targeting as well as over export price targeting.




                                               36
                                     Appendix
    This Appendix shows how the analysis of section 3 can be extended to the full model,
allowing for imported inputs and the homogeneous exports sector. The key is to recognize that
the Ramsey planner must choose imported inputs and competitive exports eﬃciently. Hence,
in particular, the planner will choose labor eﬀort in the competitive export sector so as to
equate marginal product in that sector to the implicit real wage, given by the marginal rate of
substitution between labor eﬀort and consumption:

                                                        0 ()
                                      −1 =
                                                        0 ()

that is,
                         ∙                 ¸1(1− )
                                    0 ()
                      =     0                ≡ (  ) say                   (28)
                                     ()

where for convenience we have suppressed time subscripts and the dependence of  on exogen-
ous shocks.
    Likewise, the planner will choose the imported input  eﬃciently so

                                         κ  0 () 1
                                      =
                                       1 − κ 0 () 

which implies that  = (  ), where

                                                   ½               ¾κ
                                           1            0 () 1
                             (  ) =                                                 (29)
                                          1−κ          0 () 


A      Perfect Risk Sharing

If risk sharing is perfect, the planner’s problem is to choose      and  to maximize
() − () subject to the risk sharing constraint 4, the labor supply constraint 15, eﬃcient




                                              37
choice of labor input in the homogenous exports sector:


                                            = (  )                                     (30)


and equilibrium in the market for the home aggregate


                                       (  ) =  ∗ Θ()


   Some tedious but straightforward derivations yield the optimality condition

                ∙                     ¸
                             
                 1 +   −       0 ()                                                 (31)
                             
                       ∙ µ                           ¶                   ¸
                   0                                         
              =  ( )        − (  −  Θ) +      −  
                                                               

where   denotes the partial elasticity of  with respect to , etc.
   This generalizes 20 and, as the reader can check, it coincides with it if κ = 0 and  = 0.
This and the four constraints completely characterize the Ramsey allocation. The optimality
condition is interpreted in a similar way as in the simpler case.
   Expressing the elasticities in full,the expression simplifies drastically and I get:

                                   1 0            0 () Θ
                                      () =    ³                 ´
                                             1 +  κ +  1−
                                                               1
                                                                     
                                                                 




    The LHS is, as before, the utility increase due to a one percent real depreciation. This
increases the demand for the home aggregate by  Θ, but the overall increase in the demand
for labor is less because the associated cost in the implicit real wage induces substitution towards
                         
imported inputs (the     
                           κ    term) and a reduction in employment in the homogeneous exports
               1
sector (the    1−
                       term).




                                                   38
B      Financial Autarky

To express the financial autarky constraint   =   note that optimality requires (  )  −
(  ) = (1−κ)    and that   =    Then one can define real value added
as (suppressing time subscripts):

                                         (1 − κ)(  )
                   = (     ) =                     +    
                                                ()

    The planner’s problem is to choose      and  to maximize () − () subject to
the labor supply constraint 15, eﬃcient choice of labor input in the homogenous exports sector
(30), the financial autarky constraint:


                                      (     ) = 


and equilibrium in the market for the home aggregate


                                    (  ) = ( )


where ( ) is the RHS of 17, as defined in section 3.
    After some tedious work, the optimality condition can be expressed as follows:

              ½                                                                  ¾
        1                                                
               ( )(   −  ) + 1 −   + Υ[   − (  −  )]
      0 ()                                             
                                                µ                   ¶
        1                                       
    =         {  + (1 +    )  − ( )        −  
      0 ()                                    
          ∙                            ¸
                            
      +Υ   + (1 +      )−      }
                              

where Υ is an auxiliary variable defined by:

                                      ¡                  ¢
                               ( )    −   −  
                            Υ=
                                      −   −   


                                                 39
   Note that the elasticities are functions of stochastic variables, and hence will be generally
                                                     1                      1                  1
time varying. Indeed one can show that   =     1−
                                                        (−)     = − 1− 
                                                                                   =   1−
                                                                                                  
  = κ,   = κ,   = −κ while


                                     = Λ  = Λκ


                                     = Λ  = Λκ

               = Λ(  −  ) + (1 − Λ) = Λ(−κ −  ) + (1 − Λ)

                                            = Λ

                                       =  (1 − Λ)

where
                                      (1 − κ)(  )
                                 Λ=
                                           ()()




References

 [1] Arseneau, David and Sylvan Leduc, 2012, Commodity Price Movements in a General
    Equilibrium Model of Storage, IMF Review, Forthcoming.

 [2] Benigno and Benigno, 2003, Price Stability in Open Economies, Review of Economic Stud-
    ies 70, 743-764.

 [3] Blanchard, O. and J. Gali, "The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Oil Price Shocks, " in: In-
    ternational Dimensions of Monetary Policy, M. Gertler and J. Gali editors, University of
    Chicago, 2009.




                                              40
 [4] Bodenstein, Martin, Christopher Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri, 2008, "Optimal Monetary
    Policy with Distinct Core and Headline Inflation Rates", Journal of Monetary Economics
    55, pp.518-533.

 [5] Cashin, Paul & Cespedes, Luis F. & Sahay, Ratna, 2004. "Commodity currencies and the
    real exchange rate," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 75(1), pages 239-268

 [6] Catão, L., 2011, "Comments on Jeﬀrey Frankel’s ’A Comparison of Product Price Target-
    ing and Other Monetary Anchor Options for Commodity Exporters in Latin America’”,
    Economía, 12(1), Fall 2011.

 [7] Catão, L. and R. Chang, 2010, "World Food Prices and Monetary Policy, " NBER Working
    Paper 16563

 [8] Catão, L. and R. Chang, 2011, "The Threat of Rising Food Prices", VOX, January 27.

 [9] Corsetti, G. and P. Pesenti, 2001 Welfare and Macroeconomic Independence, Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 116, 421-445.

[10] Cova, P., Sondergaard, J., 2004. When should monetary policy target the exchange rate?
    Royal Economic Society Annual Conference, Paper Number 51.

[11] De Paoli, Bianca, 2009. Monetary policy and welfare in a small open economy. Journal of
    International Economics 77 (2009) 11—22.

[12] Faia, E. and T. Monacelli, 2008, "Optimal Monetary Policy in a Small Open Economy
    with Home Bias, " Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40, 4

[13] Galí, Jordi and Tommaso Monacelli, 2005. Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility
    in a Small Open Economy. Review of Economic Studies (2005) 72, 707-734.

[14] Gali, J. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle. MIT Press, 2008.




                                             41
[15] Harrigan, James, 1993, OECD Imports and Trade Barriers in 1983, Journal of International
    Economics.

[16] Heckman, James, 1993, What Has been Learned about the Labor Supply in the Past
    Twenty Years? American Economic Review, 83, pp.116-121.

[17] Hevia, C. and J. P. Nicolini, "Optimal Devaluations, " unpublished, 2012

[18] Hooper, Peter, Karen Johnson, and Jaime Marquez, 2000, Trade Elasticities for the G-7
    Countries, Princeton Studies in International Finance

[19] Lai, H. and D. Trefler, 2002, The Gains from Trade with Monopolistic Competition: Spe-
    cification, Estimation, and Mis-Specification, NBER working paper 9169

[20] Jacks, David, Kevin O’Rourke, and Jeﬀrey Williamson, 2009, Commodity Price Volatility
    and World Market Integration since 1700, NBER working paper 14748

[21] Kilian, Lutz, 2009, "Not All Price Shocks are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply
    Shocks in the Crude Oil Market," American Economic Review, 99(3), pp.1053-69.

[22] Laxton, Douglas, D. Rose and A. Scott, 2009, "Developing a Structured Forecasting and
    Policy Analysis System to Support Inflation-Forecast Targeting (IFT)", IMF working paper
    WP/09/65.

[23] Monacelli, T. "Is Monetary Policy in an Open Economy Fundamentally Diﬀerent? ",
    unpublished, August 2012

[24] Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Martin Uribe, 2004. Solving dynamic general equilibrium models
    using a second-order approximation to the policy function. Journal of Economic Dynamics
    & Control 28 (2004) 755 — 775

[25] Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Martin Uribe, 2007, "Optimal Simple and Implementable Mon-
    etary and Fiscal Rules", Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1702-1725.


                                             42
[26] Sutherland, A, 2005, Incomplete Pass-through and welfare eﬀects of exchange rate variab-
    ility, Journal of International Economics, 65, pp.375-399.

[27] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
    Princeton University Press, 2003.




                                              43
Figure 1: Responses to Imports Price Shock, PPI Rule, Perfect Risk Sharing
Figure 2: Responses to Exports Price Shock, PPI Rule, Perfect Risk Sharing
Figure 3: Responses to Imports Price Shock, PPI Rule, Full Capital Mobility vs Financial Autarky
Figure 4: Responses to Exports Price Shock, PPI Rule, Full Capital Mobility vs Financial Autarky
Figure 5: Responses to Imports Price Shock, PPI Rule Versus Expected CPI Rule, Full Capital Mobility
Figure 6: Responses to Exports Price Shock, PPI Rule Versus Expected CPI Rule, Full Capital Mobility
Figure 7: Responses to Imports Price Shock, PPI Rule Versus Expected CPI Rule, Financial Autarky
Figure 8: Responses to Exports Price Shock, PPI Rule Versus Expected CPI Rule, Financial Autarky
                                   Table 1: Model Calibration
Discount Factor                                                                         0.99
Coe¢ cient of risk aversion                                                             [2,6]
Inverse of elasticity of labor supply                                                    1
Degree of Openness                                                                      0.25
Average period between price adjustments                                                0.66
Coe¢ cient on in‡ation in Taylor Rule                                                 [1.5,5.0]
Coe¢ cient on output gap in Taylor Rule                                               [0,0.5]
Persistence parameter associated with productivity shocks                               0.7
Persistence parameter associated with monetary policy shocks                            0.6
Persistence parameter associated with export and import price shocks                 [0.5,0.85]
Elasticity of substitution between varieties produced within any given country            6
Elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods                          [0.5,5]
Ratio of initial home to foreign consumption                                              1
Weight of labor in utility                                                               1
Share of imported inputs in production                                           {     [0,0.1]
Share of Labor in Export Sector                                                         0.1
Relative Size (TFP) coe¢ cient on Export Sector                                       0.15
Price Elasticity of Foreign Demand for the home goods                                  [0.5,5]
Standard Deviation associated with monetary policy shock                               0.006
Standard Deviation associated with relative import price shock                        [0,0,05]
Standard Deviation associated with relative export price shock                         0.07
Standard Deviation associated with productivity shock                                  0.012
Table 2. Welfare Gaps: Complete Markets with no Commodity Shocks
                          in % of Steady State Consumption

                         PPI‐CPI
           sigma/eta        0.75          1           2             5
               2             0.0205      0.0167      0.0076        ‐0.0041
               4             0.0182      0.0144       0.005         ‐0.006
               6             0.0173      0.0137      0.0041        ‐0.0067

                         CPI‐Expected CPI
           sigma/eta        0.75           1          2            5
               2            ‐0.0181      ‐0.0152    ‐0.0076        0.0049
               4            ‐0.0167      ‐0.0133    ‐0.0051        0.0073
               6            ‐0.0162      ‐0.0127    ‐0.0042        0.0081

                         CPI‐EPT
           sigma/eta        0.75          1           2             5
               2             0.0219      0.0188      0.0093        ‐0.0066
               4             0.0192      0.0158      0.0063        ‐0.0093
               6             0.0181      0.0145      0.0051        ‐0.0103

                         PPI‐EPT
           sigma/eta        0.75          1          2             5
               2             0.0024      0.0016           0        0.0008
               4             0.0011      0.0011     ‐0.0001        0.0013
               6             0.0005      0.0009     ‐0.0001        0.0014

                         PPI‐Expected CPI
           sigma/eta        0.75           1          2             5
               2             0.0424       0.0355     0.0169        ‐0.0107
               4             0.0373       0.0302     0.0113        ‐0.0153
               6             0.0354       0.0282     0.0092        ‐0.0169

                         PEG‐Expected CPI
           sigma/eta        0.75          1           2             5
               2                0.04      0.034      0.0168        ‐0.0115
               4             0.0359      0.0291      0.0114        ‐0.0165
               6             0.0343      0.0273      0.0093        ‐0.0183

                         Ranking matrix
           sigma/eta        0.75         1           2            5
               2            PPI         PPI         PPI        EXP(CPI)
               4            PPI         PPI         EPT        EXP(CPI)
               6            PPI         PPI         EPT        EXP(CPI)
Table 3a. Welfare Gaps: Complete Markets with All Shocks
                    in % of Steady State Consumption

                   PPI‐CPI
    sigma/eta        0.75          1          2              5
         2            0.0786      0.0677     0.0376        ‐0.0016
         4            0.0716      0.0593     0.0262        ‐0.0143
         6            0.0687      0.0558     0.0218         ‐0.019

                   CPI‐EPT
    sigma/eta        0.75          1          2              5
         2            0.6105      0.5783     0.3936        ‐0.4659
         4            0.4532      0.4211     0.2318        ‐0.6404
         6            0.4036      0.3713     0.1794        ‐0.6937

                   CPI‐Expected CPI
      sigma/eta      0.75         1           2              5
          2           0.0823     0.0676      0.0199        ‐0.0699
          4            0.072     0.0561      0.0079        ‐0.0748
          6           0.0679     0.0517      0.0037        ‐0.0763

                   PPI‐EPT
      sigma/eta      0.75          1          2              5
          2           0.6901      0.6468     0.4316        ‐0.4675
          4           0.5262      0.4814     0.2583        ‐0.6544
          6            0.474      0.4283     0.2014        ‐0.7119

                   PPI‐Expected CPI
      sigma/eta      0.75         1           2              5
          2            0.161     0.1353      0.0575        ‐0.0715
          4           0.1438     0.1155      0.0342        ‐0.0891
          6           0.1368     0.1077      0.0255        ‐0.0952

                   EPT‐Expected CPI
      sigma/eta      0.75         1           2             5
          2          ‐0.5219    ‐0.5049     ‐0.3709        0.3997
          4          ‐0.3745    ‐0.3589     ‐0.2218        0.5804
          6          ‐0.3278    ‐0.3126     ‐0.1739        0.6442

                   Ranking matrix
      sigma/eta      0.75          1           2            5
          2           PPI         PPI         PPI          EPT
          4           PPI         PPI         PPI          EPT
          6           PPI         PPI         PPI          EPT
Table 3b. Welfare Gaps: Financial Autarky with All Shocks
                  in % of Steady State Consumption

                  PPI‐CPI
    sigma/eta       0.75         1           2           5
        2             0.214     0.1742      0.1213      0.0972
        4            0.4096      0.289      0.1726      0.1289
        6            0.5474     0.3588      0.1999      0.1448

                  CPI‐EPT
    sigma/eta        0.75        1           2           5
        2           ‐0.0502     0.2448      1.5332      4.7647
        4           ‐0.2731     0.1274      1.6441      5.1442
        6           ‐0.4125     0.0603      1.7261      5.5167

                  CPI‐Expected CPI
    sigma/eta       0.75         1           2           5
        2            0.3383     0.1794      0.0805      0.0535
        4            0.4729     0.2244      0.0927      0.0596
        6            0.5477     0.2467      0.0982      0.0622

                  PPI‐EPT
    sigma/eta       0.75         1           2           5
        2            0.1636     0.4199      1.6582      4.8714
        4             0.132     0.4178      1.8283      5.3019
        6            0.1213     0.4204      1.9477      5.7168

                  PPI‐Expected CPI
    sigma/eta       0.75         1           2           5
        2            0.5538     0.3542       0.202      0.1508
        4            0.8904     0.5159      0.2659      0.1889
        6            1.1136     0.6108      0.2992      0.2076

                  EPT‐Expected CPI
    sigma/eta       0.75         1           2           5
        2           0.3889     ‐0.0651     ‐1.4095     ‐4.3012
        4           0.7543      0.0965     ‐1.4555     ‐4.2155
        6           0.9849      0.1857     ‐1.4747     ‐4.0926

                  Ranking matrix
    sigma/eta       0.75          1          2           5
        2            PPI         PPI        PPI         PPI
        4            PPI         PPI        PPI         PPI
        6            PPI         PPI        PPI         PPI
Table 4a. Welfare Gaps: Complete Markets with All Shocks
       and Fixed Export Price Elasticity = 5

              PPI‐CPI
 sigma/eta      0.75           1          2           5
      2          0.0112       0.0104     0.0073    ‐0.0016
      4           0.001            0    ‐0.0037    ‐0.0143
      6         ‐0.0029      ‐0.0039    ‐0.0077     ‐0.019

              CPI‐EPT
 sigma/eta      0.75          1           2           5
      2          0.2809      0.2392      0.0751    ‐0.4659
      4          0.0943      0.0526     ‐0.1108    ‐0.6404
      6          0.0315        ‐0.01    ‐0.1725    ‐0.6937

              CPI‐Expected CPI
 sigma/eta      0.75          1           2           5
      2         ‐0.0102     ‐0.0145     ‐0.0301    ‐0.0699
      4         ‐0.0223     ‐0.0261     ‐0.0403    ‐0.0748
      6         ‐0.0263     ‐0.0301     ‐0.0437    ‐0.0763

              PPI‐EPT
 sigma/eta      0.75           1          2           5
      2          0.2921       0.2496     0.0824    ‐0.4675
      4          0.0953       0.0526    ‐0.1145    ‐0.6544
      6          0.0286      ‐0.0139    ‐0.1802    ‐0.7119

              PPI‐Expected CPI
 sigma/eta      0.75          1           2           5
      2           0.001     ‐0.0041     ‐0.0228    ‐0.0715
      4         ‐0.0212     ‐0.0261     ‐0.0439    ‐0.0891
      6         ‐0.0292      ‐0.034     ‐0.0514    ‐0.0952

              EPT‐Expected CPI
 sigma/eta      0.75          1           2           5
      2         ‐0.2894     ‐0.2525     ‐0.1051     0.3997
      4         ‐0.1161     ‐0.0786      0.0709     0.5804
      6         ‐0.0577     ‐0.0201      0.1302     0.6442

              Ranking matrix
 sigma/eta       0.75        1            2          5
      2          PPI      EXP(CPI)     EXP(CPI)     EPT
      4        EXP(CPI)   EXP(CPI)       EPT        EPT
      6        EXP(CPI)   EXP(CPI)       EPT        EPT
Table 4b. Welfare Gaps: Financial Autarky with All Shocks
     and Fixed Export Price Elasticity = 5

              PPI‐CPI
sigma/eta        0.5         1           2           5
     2           0.1813     0.1718      0.1433      0.0972
     4           0.2474     0.2338      0.1933      0.1289
     6           0.2811     0.2654      0.2187      0.1448

              CPI‐EPT
sigma/eta        0.5         1           2           5
     2           2.6466     2.7702       3.256      4.7647
     4           2.8418     2.9757      3.5036      5.1442
     6           3.0006     3.1444      3.7151      5.5167

              CPI‐Expected CPI
sigma/eta        0.5         1           2           5
     2           0.1133      0.106      0.0849      0.0535
     4           0.1269     0.1188      0.0952      0.0596
     6           0.1321     0.1237      0.0992      0.0622

              PPI‐EPT
sigma/eta        0.5         1           2           5
     2           2.8377     2.9516      3.4088      4.8714
     4           3.1187     3.2387      3.7256      5.3019
     6           3.3368     3.4644      3.9877      5.7168

              PPI‐Expected CPI
sigma/eta        0.5         1           2           5
     2            0.295     0.2782      0.2285      0.1508
     4           0.3756     0.3537      0.2893      0.1889
     6           0.4155     0.3911      0.3192      0.2076

              EPT‐Expected CPI
sigma/eta        0.5         1           2           5
     2          ‐2.4059    ‐2.5242     ‐2.9771     ‐4.3012
     4          ‐2.4372    ‐2.5524     ‐2.9888     ‐4.2155
     6          ‐2.4292    ‐2.5395     ‐2.9545     ‐4.0926

              Ranking matrix
sigma/eta        0.5          1           2          5
     2           PPI         PPI         PPI        PPI
     4           PPI         PPI         PPI        PPI
     6           PPI         PPI         PPI        PPI
