NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FREE LUNCH ARBITRAGE OPPORTUNITIES IN THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE
MARKETS
Takatoshi Ito
Kenta Yamada
Misako Takayasu
Hideki Takayasu
Working Paper 18541
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18541

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

Ito gratefully acknowledges research supports by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS)
Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research (A) No. 20243014; and Center for Advanced Research on Finance
(CARF) at University of Tokyo. Misako Takayasu acknowledges research supports by the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research No. 22656025. The paper
was presented in the Japan Economic Association Meeting in June, 2012. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Takatoshi Ito, Kenta Yamada, Misako Takayasu, and Hideki Takayasu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Free Lunch Arbitrage Opportunities in the Foreign Exchange Markets
Takatoshi Ito, Kenta Yamada, Misako Takayasu, and Hideki Takayasu
NBER Working Paper No. 18541
November 2012
JEL No. F31,G12,G14,G15,G23,G24
ABSTRACT
Using the “firm” quotes obtained from the tick-by-tick EBS (electronic broking system that is a major
trading platform for foreign exchanges) data, it is found that risk-free arbitrage opportunities—free
lunch—do occur in the foreign exchange markets, but it typically last only a few seconds. “Free lunch”
is in the form of (a) negative spreads in a currency pair and (b) triangular arbitrage relationship involving
three currency pairs. The latter occur much more often than the former. Such arbitrage opportunities
tend to occur when the markets are active and volatile. Over the 12-year, tick-data samples, the number
of free lunch opportunities has dramatically declined and the probability of the opportunities disappearing
within one second has steadily increased. The size of expected profits is higher than transaction costs;
trades that simultaneously take place on both sides of ask and bid (or three currency trades in case
of triangular arbitrage) occur more often when free lunch appeared one second earlier than otherwise,
suggesting that free lunch opportunities are actively taken. The probability of its disappearance within
one second was less than 50% in 1999, but increased to about 90% by 2009. Less frequent occurrence
and quicker disappearance in recent years are attributable to changes in trading microstructure: an
introduction and proliferation of the Primary Customer system (weaker banks can use stronger banks’
credit lines) and of direct connection of traders’ programmed computers to the EBS computer.

Takatoshi Ito
Graduate School of Economics
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo 113-0033
JAPAN
and NBER
tito@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Kenta Yamada
Waseda Institute for Advanced Study
1-6-1 Nishi Waseda, Shinjuku-ku
Tokyo, 169-8050, Japan
yamada@aoni.waseda.jp

Misako Takayasu
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Department of Computational Intelligence
and System Sciences
4259-G3-52 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku
Yokohama, 226-8502, Japan
takayasu@dis.titech.ac.jp
Hideki Takayasu
Sony Computer Science Laboratories
3-14-13 Higashigotanda, Shinagawa-ku
Tokyo 141-0022, Japan
takayasu@csl.sony.co.jp

Takatoshi Ito, Kenta Yamada, Misako Takayasu, and Hideki Takayasu
“Free Lunch! Arbitrage Opportunities in the Foreign Exchange Markets”
Abstract:
Using the “firm” quotes obtained from the tick-by-tick EBS (electronic broking system
that is a major trading platform for foreign exchanges) data, it is found that risk-free
arbitrage opportunities—free lunch—do occur in the foreign exchange markets, but it
typically last only a few seconds. “Free lunch” is in the form of (a) negative spreads in a
currency pair and (b) triangular arbitrage relationship involving three currency pairs.
The latter occur much more often than the former. Such arbitrage opportunities tend to
occur when the markets are active and volatile. Over the 12-year, tick-data samples, the
number of free lunch opportunities has dramatically declined and the probability of the
opportunities disappearing within one second has steadily increased. The size of
expected profits is higher than transaction costs; trades that simultaneously take place
on both sides of ask and bid (or three currency trades in case of triangular arbitrage)
occur more often when free lunch appeared one second earlier than otherwise,
suggesting that free lunch opportunities are actively taken. The probability of its
disappearance within one second was less than 50% in 1999, but increased to about
90% by 2009. Less frequent occurrence and quicker disappearance in recent years are
attributable to changes in trading microstructure: an introduction and proliferation of the
Primary Customer system (weaker banks can use stronger banks’ credit lines) and of
direct connection of traders’ programmed computers to the EBS computer.
Keywords: Market microstructure, High frequency data, Arbitrage, Negative spread,
Triangular arbitrage, Free lunch, Electronic Broking System, Yen, US dollar, Euro,
Acknowledgment:
Ito gratefully acknowledges research supports by the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research (A) No. 20243014; and Center for
Advanced Research on Finance (CARF) at University of Tokyo. Misako Takayasu
acknowledges research supports by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS) Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research No. 22656025. The paper was presented in
the Japan Economic Association Meeting in June, 2012.
JEL, F31, G12, G14, G15, G23, G24

2

1. Introduction
The foreign exchange market is one of the largest financial markets in terms of
volumes of transactions and the number of market participants, who reside all over the
world. The market is open 24 hours a day, (almost) seven days a week. The average
daily transaction volume is estimated at 4 trillion dollars a day (BIS (2010)).1

The

market, especially for major currency pairs, is considered to be deep and liquid for
virtually any hour of any business day.
As it is one of the most deep and liquid markets, the foreign exchange market
is often assumed to be “efficient” in both theoretical and empirical literature. In an
“efficient” market, all the risk-free arbitrage opportunities—free lunch—would not be
observed.2 “No free lunch” means that the bid (price of buyer’s limit order) should
always be lower than ask (price of seller’s limit order). Thus, the negative spread is one
form of free lunch. Among the three currency pairs, simultaneous transactions
exchanging the yen (JPY) into the US dollar (USD), from the US dollar to Euro (EUR),
and Euro back to the yen should not produce profits. Hence, bids and asks of the three
pairs, USD/JPY, EUR/USD, and EUR/JPY, should satisfy certain inequality relationship.
A theoretical model is commonly based on a “no free lunch” assumption and
observations that suggest free lunch in data are most regarded as outliers and discarded.
In the real world, however, any high-frequency currency trader would know
that the free lunch situation do occur rather frequently.

Of course the magnitude of

profits is rather small and the duration of opportunities is short. In fact, the opportunity,
if it exists, is said to disappear in the matter of seconds. In fact, large financial
institutions invest heavily into a real-time trading system, which would not only spot
such arbitrage opportunities but also take long or short positions with a bet on the

1

According to the BIS Triennial Survey, the size of the global foreign exchange market in April
2010 was the turnover of 3.98 trillion US dollars a day, of which spot transactions accounted 1.49
trillion US dollars (37%). With respect to currency pairs, the USD/EUR accounted 28%; USD/JPY
14%; and EUR/JPY 3%.
2 There is a standard joke about the efficient market hypothesis believer: An efficient market
believer and his friend are walking on the sidewalk. The friend says, “Look, there is a $100 bill on
the sidewalk.” The believer says, “It should be a counterfeit bill. If it is a genuine bill, someone
should have picked it up already.” The evidence in this paper can be interpreted as follows. Time to
time, people do drop a $100 bill unknowingly. But, it does not take much time before someone finds
it and picks it up, because people do check out whether the bill is genuine or counterfeit. So most of
the time, you do not see $100 bill on the street.
3

direction of the exchange rate.3
In order to examine whether and how often free lunch opportunities arise and
how quickly they disappear, high frequency data of an actual trading platform is needed.
The major inter-bank trading platform for spot exchange rates is electronic broking
services, which are dominated by the EBS (owned by ICAP) and Reuters 3000 Xtra
(owned by Thomson Reuter). In the currency pairs involving USD, JPY, and EUR, the
trading system by EBS has a strong market share. We are going to use the EBS data set,
which record all quotes, actual deal prices and volumes at one-second time slice, so that
all quotes are firm and reliable.4
Until the mid-1990s, human traders who have access to EBS data feed on
screen, have to react to free lunch opportunities by hitting keys for buy and sell.
However, in recent years, banks’ computers are permitted to be connected directly to the
trading network. Thus, it has become easy for banks to search for and take advantage of
every profit opportunity within seconds, if and when such opportunities do arise.
The literature on negative spread is not large, as such an arbitrage is often
“assumed” to be non-existent. It is known that negative spread occurs in the data with
indicative quotes, such as the Olsen data, but researchers routinely “clean” them on the
assumption that the data must reflect stale quotes. Negative quotes in the EBS data are
real, since there is no stale quote. The triangular arbitrage has attracted more attention,
since the violation to the efficient market hypothesis is not so obvious. Aiba, Hatano,
Takayasu, Marumo, and Shimizu (2002), examined the data for two months in 1999
detecting triangular arbitrage among the yen, the dollar, and the euro. They claim that
triangular arbitrage opportunities existed for 6.4% of total time. They constructed a
time-series model in which triangular arbitrage opportunities may emerge and disappear
when the three currency markets are independently moving with interaction to bring
back to the arbitrage relations once the arbitrage opportunities arose. They simulated
through a theoretical model the emergence and disappearance of the triangular arbitrage
3

The latter, the bet on the direction, assumes that the exchange rate does not always follow a
random walk process. See Hashimoto, et al. (2012) on this theme.
4 The EBS data set is a proprietary data set that is commercially available. The data set from 1999 to
2010 was purchased by research grants at the University of Tokyo. The data set is proprietary
information belonging to EBS. The usage of the data set purchased at the University of Tokyo is
restricted to those who are affiliated at the University of Tokyo.
4

opportunities. Aiba, Hatano, Takayasu, Marumo, and Shimuzu (2003) and Aiba and
Hatano (2004) also explored some theoretical implications of triangular arbitrage.
However, the euro market was still in its infancy and the data set was different and very
short. Moreover, in the data set, deal prices were not recorded and bid and ask were not
necessarily firm quotes. Aiba and Hatano (2006) constructed an agent-based model to
simulate the situation. Parameters were matched to replicate the observed distribution of
arbitrage profits from Aiba, et al. (2002). However, these papers do not examine how
observed arbitrage opportunities are related to market volatility, time of the day, and a
long-run trend of technology adoption, which is the focus of this paper.
The advantage of using “firm” quotes, as opposed to “indicative” quotes, have
been emphasized in Goodhart, Ito and Payne (1996), Goodhart and O’Hara (1997), and
Goodhart and Payne (1996). Then, the EBS data set has been used to establish details of
intra-day pattern in Ito and Hashimoto (2006); to show order flows have predictable
power in Berger et al. (2006) and Ito and Hashimoto (2008). The data have been used
quite successfully in the exchange rate reaction to macroeconomic statistical
announcements in the US, Chaboud, Chernenko, Howorka, Iyer, Liu and Wright (2004)
and Hashimoto and Ito (2010). Evidence on momentum trading is shown in Hashimoto,
Ito, Ohnishi, M. Takayasu, H. Takayasu, and Watanabe (2012). Akram and Sarno (2008)
investigated arbitrage opportunities in covered interest parity relationship, with Reuter
tick-by-tick data from February 2004 to September 2004. Since the covered interest
parity involves swap (interest rate differentials), the type of arbitrage relationship is
different from our investigation, although the spirit of finding violation to risk-free
arbitrage relationship is the same.
Policy makers are now concerned with a possibility that algorithmic
trading—computers sending buy and sell orders directly to the EBS machine—may
influence liquidity and volatility of the market. This has been examined by BIS (2011)
and Chaboud, Chiquioine, Hjalmarsson, and Loretan (2007). The impact of the
increasing use of algorithm trading was the focus of Chaboud, et al. (2009). They
compared the computer-generated quotes and human-generated quotes, based on
confidential data of EBS. They showed, among others, “despite the apparent correlation
of algorithmic trades, there is no evident causal relationship between algorithmic trading
5

and increased exchange rate volatility. If anything, the presence of more algorithmic
trading is associated with lower volatility.”
Marshall, Treepongkaruna, and Young (2008) investigated triangular arbitrage
opportunities among the three sets of currencies, USD/CHE/EUR; GBP/EUR/USD; and
USD/JPY/EUR, for the EBS data from January 1, 2005 to December 31, 2005. They
found triangular arbitrage opportunities arise throughout the day. The main difference of
our paper is that we cover much longer time series, with description of changes in
occurrence and disappearance over time. Our paper also covers negative spread of
bilateral exchange rate as well as triangular arbitrage opportunities.
The questions to be posed and answered in this paper are summarized as
follows. The first question is to find out how often “free lunch” existed in the past.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, we find many risk-free arbitrage opportunities in the
data. Since our data are directly taken from the transaction platform, the profit
opportunities are real. However, not surprisingly, the free lunch opportunities do not last
long. In a matter of a few seconds, a free lunch tends to disappear.
The second question is whether the frequency of free lunch occurrence has
changed over time, and if so, why. It is found that, in recent years, free lunch
opportunities emerged less often, and, when they occur, they tended to disappear
quicker than before. The probability of its disappearance within one second was less
than 50% in 1999, but increased to about 90% by 2009. We show that these changes
were due to heavier use of algorithmic (program) trading and direct connection of banks’
computers to the trading platform as well as a wide-spread usage of Primary Customer
system, in which less-credit-worthy banks can borrow, with fees, the name of
high-credit-worthy banks that have better trading opportunities with tighter bid-ask
spread.
We will show the negative correlation between the connection of banks’ trading
computers with the EBS computer and the occurrence and durability of arbitrage profit
opportunities. The arbitrage opportunities, once they appear, may disappear in the next
second, due to self-correction of bid-side or offer-side pricing by banks without
transaction, or due to actual transaction, which takes out orders, making profits out of
trades on the both sides of the negative spread. In the former case, the opportunities
6

arose, but disappeared without someone taking advantage of them. Thus, the third
question of the paper is whether the emergence of a profit opportunity is followed by
transactions that suggest that someone took advantage of risk-free profit opportunities.
It will be shown that, within one second after free lunch opportunity emerges, it is likely
that trading occur on both sides of bid and ask, controlling for other factors.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the EBS
trading system and our data. Evidence and analysis of negative spread is presented in
Section 3, and that of triangular arbitrage opportunity is presented in Section 4. Both
sections depict the emergence and disappearance of such “free lunch” opportunities.
Section 5 concludes the paper with thoughts on efficiency in the foreign exchange
market.

2. Data
2.1. EBS
The foreign exchange market for major currencies is open and liquid around the clock,
from the early morning on Monday at the Tokyo time to the late afternoon of the Friday
at the New York time. There are patterns of up and down during 24 hours of the day,
that is called the intra-day seasonality by Ito and Hashimoto, 2006. Although transaction
volumes are relatively low in certain days, such as national holidays in one of the major
markets, quotes are continuously available in the EBS system. The EBS offers a
trade-platform data, whose accuracy and transactability of quotes is highly reliable.
The EBS (owned by ICAP company) is a provider of trading platforms. Traders
(traditionally banks) can submit “firm” quotes (limit order), and “firm” quotes (best bid
and best ask) are shown in the screen worldwide. Other traders can “hit” the bid or ask
as they desire to make trade. The EBS has a strong market share in the USD/JPY
(dollar/yen), EUR/USD (euro/dollar) and EUR/JPY (euro/yen) markets. It is said to
cover more than 90% of the dollar/yen and euro/dollar trade.5 Therefore, it is safe to
assume that almost all electronically brokered spot deals of these two currencies are
represented in the data set.
The EBS system facilitates, as part of the dealing rules, each institution to
5

The Reuters trading system, Reuter Xtra, has significant market shares in exchanged related to
sterling, Canadian dollar, and Australian dollars.
7

control its bilateral credit lines with counterparties. Namely, each EBS-linked institution
sets credit lines (including zero) against all other potential counter-parties in the system.
Therefore, an institution faces a restriction of tradable bid, offer, or deal from other
institutions. When bid and offer quotes are posted for the system, they are not
necessarily available to all participants of the EBS system. The EBS-registered trader’s
screen shows the best bid and best offer of the market as well as those for this trader. In
normal times, the best bid of the market is lower than the best offer of the market.
As part of facilitating an orderly market, EBS requires any newly linked
institution to secure a sufficient number of other banks that are willing to open credit
lines with the new comer. A smaller or regional bank may have fewer credit-approved
trading relationships. In such a case, the best bid and ask for a relatively minor
institution may be much wider than those for larger institutions.

2.2. The EBS Data Set
We have purchased the EBS data set containing the price data set and the trade volume
data set at a frequency of one second, from January 1, 1999 to December 31, 2010. It
contains information relating to, among other things, best bid and best ask every second
and deal prices done on the bid side (lowest given) and deal prices done on the ask side
(highest paid) during the one-second duration.6

The EBS price history shows whether

the deal is done on the bid side (the bid was taken) or the ask side (the offer was taken).
The EBS global system consists of three regional computer sites, based in Tokyo,
London, and New York, and it matches orders either within the site or across different
sites. Each region covers Europe, North America, and Asia, respectively.
In order to give definitions, the following notation will be used in the rest of
the paper:
The currency pair is denoted by j, where j=USD/JPY, EUR/USD, or EUR/JPY,
: the firm quote of the (market best of) ask (offer) rate of j at period t,
: the firm quote of the (market best of ) bid rate of j at period t,
6

The deal (on either side) recorded at zz second includes those that took place between zz-1 second
to zz second. When there are multiple trades within one second, “lowest given price” and “highest
paid price” will be shown. A highest paid deal means the highest price hit (done) on the ask side
within one second and the lowest given deal means the lowest price hit (done) on the bid side within
one second.
8

: the mid point of the best quotes for j at period t,

+

is the bid-ask spread defined as

: the deal price that occurred on the ask (offer) side of j at time (tick) n;
: the deal price that occurred on the bid side of j at period n,
: the mid-point of the deal prices for j at period n,

+

For a volatility measure, the average absolute change of the mid-deal price
from one transaction to another is defined and used.
(j=USD/JPY

or

EUR/JPY),

(j=EUR/USD).
The change of the deal price at period n

And the volatility of the j-th currency pair

is defined by:

is defined by

denotes the number of deals for the j-th currency pair. Then the volatility of the
three currency pairs for the month,

, is defined by

In case of USD/JPY, the unit is the Japanese yen per US Dollar, so that the ask
rate is the rate that a trader is ready to sell USD at the quoted rate and the bid rate is the
rate that a trader is ready to buy USD at the quoted rate. In normal times, the seller’s
offer price is higher than buyer’s bid price, thus,
The settlement of foreign exchange transaction is globally set to be 2 business
days later. However, if a national holiday takes place on the business day within or
two business days within transaction, the complicated formula of interest rate
differential arises. Counterparty and Herstatt risks also increase with differential in
9

settlement days of the two currencies involved. Hence, duration of negative spread and
triangular arbitrage opportunities tend to increase, unnaturally, on days that will be
followed by a (non-weekend) national holiday of countries of currency pair(s). We omit
observations on (i) weekend days; (ii) days with the number of transactions lower than
the threshold; and (iii) days that are followed within two days by a national holiday in at
least one of the three countries, the US, Japan and the UK.7 The definition of weekend
is from 6 am on Saturday to 6 am on Monday, Japan time. The threshold of low
transaction is defined as one third of the average daily transaction of the year.

2.3. Negative Spread
The negative spread means that the seller’s offer price is lower than the buyer’s
bid price, namely, the negative spread is defined to be a situation

, for

j=USD/JPY, EUR/USD, or EUR/JPY, at period t.
Since risk-free profits can be generated for someone simultaneously hitting
seller’s price to buy the currency at that rate as well as hitting buyer’s price to sell the
currency at that rate, it would be surprising to find such an opportunity observed in the
market. However, there are several reasons why negative spreads may emerge. First, it
could be simply a mistake. A bank quotes too high an offer price that exceeds a current
bid, which will be hit by the bid side. But this is a very unlikely scenario. Second, the
negative spread may occur due to an old firm quote, which was several pips behind the
best offer and was left alive for some time. The market somehow moves very quickly
without hitting all limit-order quotes for transactions in the process, and the old quote
becomes exposed as one side of the negative spread. If this is true, negative spreads
should tend to occur in volatile hours. Again, this is a possibility, but we do not think
this is very likely. The most likely scenario is related to an institutional detail of the
trading platform. When a bank joins the network, the bank must open credit lines with a
certain number of counterparty banks. If a bank is relatively financially weak, then not

7

Without national holidays, settlement of interbank foreign exchange transactions takes place two
business days within the transaction date. If a country of one of the currency pair has a national
holiday on the following day or two days later, then the settlement day will be three business days
later. An exception to this rule of delay is that if New York has a banking holiday on the day within
transactions but not on two days later, then settlement will take place two days within transaction (as
described in Tokyo Foreign Exchange Market Committee (2008: p.21)).
10

many banks would like to hold credit lines with the bank. A weak bank that maintains
credit lines with relatively few banks may not be able to transact with banks that post
the system-wide best bid and best offer. Suppose a situation where a small bank
desperately wants to transact to cover customers’ positions. It cannot hit the best bid or
ask due to a lack of credit line with those banks that post the best. The weak bank may
post a quote that may show a negative spread (say an offer higher than a bid) in an
attempt to attract a relatively strong bank that will hit the quote immediately. The newly
submitted quote (say, offer) will then constitute a part of the negative spread with the
existing quote on the other side (bid). In this case, the negative spread may not be
exploited by the two banks that form the bid and offer of the negative spread. However,
this does not prevent another bank that has credit lines with both banks of negative
spreads from taking advantage of profit opportunities. If this is the case, we predict that
if financially weak banks become somehow stronger with many credit lines, negative
spreads occur less often.

2.4. Market Microstructure
The EBS foreign exchange market went through several structural changes
with regard to trading technology in the last ten years. In 2003, the “Ai trader” system
was introduced. Ai traders are those banks that are allowed to plug their computers,
which are loaded with algorithmic trading programs, directly to the EBS trading system
computer. Prior to this innovation, humans have to execute orders based on bank
computers buy and sell signals.8 Computers are good at finding arbitrage opportunities
and taking advantage of them—so it is expected to contribute to shortening the duration
of both negative spread and triangular arbitrage opportunities.
Also in 2003, the “primary customer (PC)” system started. Under the PC
system, smaller banks with manual trading (where humans are judging and hitting the
button to order) can make a contract to receive the service of large banks as primary
brokers. The PC banks can make orders under the name of primary broker to the EBS
system, so that the primary broker collects fees, and primary customers can have better
trading chances with narrower bid-ask spread. The introduction of PC is expected to
8

Human ability to recognize opportunities and hit a button for execution takes one to two seconds,
while the computer can do it in a fraction of a second.
11

narrow the bid-ask spread, because, under the PC agreement, small PC banks obtain
access to trading with a wider set of counterparties (primary broker bank’s credit-line
linked counterparties), they do not have to hit the behind-the-best quote, or to post a
negative spread, in order to expect trading in the subsequent second or so.9
As more banks face better spreads under the PC system, the credit line
problem becomes less severe. This contributes to reducing the number of negative
spreads occurrence, because a weak, non-primary broker bank can use and execute
under a large bank’s name and credit line.

But it is not clear whether the PC system

actually reduce occurrence and duration of both negative spreads and triangular
arbitrage.
In 2004, another innovation in the market micro structure took place. The
Professional Trading Community (PTC) was introduced. PTC is a category of players
including hedge funds, commodity trading advisers (CTA), proprietary trading houses,
and other non-bank financial institutions, almost all of which rely heavily on
algorithmic trading. Starting December 2004, these non-banks were allowed to connect
their computers directly to the EBS trading system.
Computer trading, both Ai and PTC, will make it possible to find arbitrage
opportunities and take advantage of them. Computers can discover profit opportunities
much faster than humans, and then execute orders to take advantage of the opportunities,
for example, hitting with orders on both sides of negative spread. So, it is expected to
contribute to shortening the duration of both negative spread and triangular arbitrage
opportunities. We will sum the number of “Ai traders” and the number of “PTC traders”
and treat it as a proxy for computer trading.

2.5. Triangular Arbitrage
A negative spread in one currency pair is a very obvious arbitrage opportunity
9

The following example explains why an introduction of PC is expected to make negative spread a
rarer event. Suppose that a non-Primary broker bank become very eager to buy the currency (say,
USD/JPY) quickly, either for their proprietary trading account or for the purpose of executing a
customer’s order, they may post the bid (say, 100.10 yen for a dollar) higher than the current
market-best ask (say 100.00 yen for a dollar), where the best ask is not available to the bank due to a
lack of credit line. The EBS system then shows the negative bid-ask as the best prevailing in the
market. Suppose that the non-primary broker bank holds a contract with a Primary broker bank and
become eligible to use the primary broker’s credit-line to hit the market-best ask (100.00).
12

and an obvious violation to the efficiency of the market. However, even if there is no
negative spread in each of the three currency pairs, USD/JPY, EUR/USD, and EUR/JPY,
arbitrage opportunities may arise with transacting three currency pairs simultaneously.
When one currency pair is out of line with other two currencies, that is, violating an
arbitrage condition of three currency pairs, the arbitrage opportunity may exist.
The three currency pairs with each having positive bid-ask spread is denoted as
follows:
For USD/JPY:

>

For EUR/USD:

, with mid-point of
>

, with mid-point of

>

, with mid-point of

Now, the three currency arbitrage condition using the mid-point is:
(1)

However, even if this condition is not met, it does not mean that there is an
arbitrage profit opportunity, because buying and selling take place at particular side of
the bids and quotes. Suppose a series of transactions that take the yen to the US dollar,
to Euro, and back to the yen. First the buying the US dollar takes at the ask side (quoted
price of USD seller); then buying the euro with the US dollar takes place at the ask side
(quoted price of Euro seller); and finally exchanging the euro back to the yen should be
on the bid side of the EUR/JPY. Thus, the triangular arbitrage, TA, considering the
bid-ask, in the three transactions of JPY USD EUR JPY is defined as
TA(JPY/USD/EUR/JPY) =
Similarly, the amount of yen within the three transactions of JPY
EURUSD JPY is denoted as follows:
TA(JPY/EUR/USD /JPY) =

TA making positive profits is the value of TA(*) being more than 1, and would
not make profit if the value of TA (*) is equal or less than one, where * is the order of
13

the three sequential trading of currency pairs. It is easy to show that the mid-point
arbitrage (eq. (1)) is holding the triangular arbitrage would not make profits, namely,
(TA(*)) <1.

Example (1): In order to illustrate the point, suppose that the mid-point
exchange rates are 100 yen per US dollar (JPY/USD=100); 1.1 US dollar per Euro
(EUR/USD=1.1); and 110 yen per Euro (JPY/EUR=110), and the bid-ask spreads are 2
pips, each:
= 100.01;
=1.1001;

=1.0999

=110.01;
Then, the mid-point arbitrage is perfectly holding, and triangular arbitrage in either
direction would not yield profit. Then suppose that the EUR/JPY jumps by 0.1 yen,
namely,

=110.11;

The exact mid-point arbitrage

condition is violated:
(2)
Calculating the triangular arbitrate condition of JPY USD EUR  JPY
reveals that the triangular arbitrage condition is also violated:
Then TA(JPY/USD/EUR/JPY) = 1.000627 > 1
Three transactions in the other direction would not yield profits, as it can be
calculated, TA(JPY/EUR/USD/JPY) = 0.998810.

Suppose that the midpoint is the same but the bid-ask spread widens to 8 pips:
= 100.04;
=1.1004;

=1.0996

=110.14;
The (not-exact) mid-point arbitrage condition (2) stays the same. But in this
case, either direction of TA(*) does not produce profits.
TA(JPY/USD/EUR/JPY)=0.999782; and TA(JPY/EUR/USD/JPY)=0.997966.
This illustrates the general point that TA is more likely to be violated when the bid-ask
14

spread is narrower, given that the degree of a deviation in mid-point arbitrage condition.

Example (2).

Let us show a real world example of TA. At June 10, 1999,

06:49:02GMT, the following set of quotes are observed in the market.
= 118.50
=1.0515

=1.0514;
=124.45;

At this point,
TA(JPY/USD/EUR/JPY)=0.998353; and TA(JPY/EUR/USD/JPY)=1.000328

These examples show two facts with respect to triangular arbitrage. First, the
violation to the mid-point arbitrage condition does not necessarily mean that there is a
triangular arbitrage opportunity, because of bid-ask spreads can be wide enough to make
the three transactions would not yield profits. Second, given that the mid-point
triangular arbitrage condition is not holding, the wider bid-ask spreads make it less
likely that the triangular arbitrage profit opportunity arises.

3. Negative spread, empirical results
3.1. How often did opportunities emerge?
Contrary to any prediction derived from the efficient market hypothesis,
negative bid-ask spread, occurs from time to time. This is well-known among market
participants and researchers handling tick-by-tick data. However, almost all researchers
have “cleaned the data,” discarding such observations, on an implicit assumption that
they must be stale quotes or misquote of the market conditions. The assumption was
realistic when researchers can obtain only the data set with indicative (not necessarily
transactable) quotes, such as the Olsen data set. As the EBS data have become available,
it is no longer appropriate for researchers to disregard those quotes as unreliable.
First, how often the negative spreads are observed in the data set is calculated
in terms of average ratio (probability) of negative spreads. The ratio is defined as the
cumulative duration (total number of seconds) of negative spreads divided by the total
sample duration (seconds) in that month. The monthly probability is then shown as a
15

time series from 1999 to 2010. Figure 1 (Panel A for USD/JPY, Panel B for EUR/USD,
and Panel C for EUR/JPY) shows the time series of such monthly ratios. For example,
in the USD/JPY market, in 1999, negative spreads were observed about 0.5 percent of
time. The probability declined to around 0.1 percent for the period from 2000 to 2004.
The ratio then began a downward trend. In 2010, negative spreads were observed only
0.001 percent of time. The ratio was relatively higher, above the trend, from 2007 to
mid-2008, most likely due to the volatile currency market in the midst of Global
Financial Crisis. The magnitude of the ratio of negative spread is similar in the
EUR/USD market. From 1999 to 2005, the negative spread in the EUR/USD market
was observed at around 0.1 percent, but it declined to 0.001 percent by end 2010. There
was a spike in late 2008, most likely reflecting the market turmoil in the wake of the
Lehman Brothers failure. The EUR/JPY market shows the similar pattern to the
USD/JPY market.
The total duration of a negative spread can be expressed as the number of
occurrences times the average duration per occurrence (incidence). Even if a negative
spread occurs often, if it disappears quickly, by dealers taking advantage of profit
opportunities, then a normal condition, or efficiency, is restored very quickly. When
dealers find a negative spread that is profitable even within transaction costs are paid,
they have to hit both sides of bid and ask to realize profits. Hence, increased probability
of observing deals on the both sides of ask and bid (double deals) one second within the
negative spread (contributing to the disappearance of negative spread) is another
evidence that negative spreads as free lunch are real and can be taken advantage of by
dealers with quick hands or, more likely these days, by computer algorithm.
In the next subsection, we investigate when negative deals are likely to occur
and in the subsection 3.3, the probability of double deals is analyzed.

3.2. Occurrence of negative spreads: Factors and Market Conditions
When are negative spreads likely to be observed? Would they occur in a thin
market when not many participants are awake (for example, between the close of New
York market to the open of the Tokyo market), or would they occur more likely in very
active market when the prices are volatile?
16

The following monthly statistics are constructed for the period from 1999 to
2010 for each currency pair, j: The number of negative spread occurrence per day,

;

the probability of disappearance within one second (i.e., the ratio of the disappeared
within one second to total occurrence of negative spread), the number of average deals
per day, and the volatility (the daily average of absolute change in terms of “pips” of the
deal price (mid of deal prices on the bid and ask sides).

Figure 2 (panels A

(USD/JPY), B (EUR/USD) and C (EUR/JPY)) shows these statistics.
In Figure 2, it is striking that the number of occurrence per day declined
steadily in all three currency pairs. In case of EUR/USD, negative spreads were
observed about twenty times a day from 1999 to 2001, followed by a declining trend. It
became very close to zero by 2010. From late 2009 to 2008 there was a prominent spike
in the probability of occurrences. During the period of the Global Financial Crisis,
especially within the Lehman Brothers failure, the market became very volatile
(volatility in the figure became record high at the time), and the number of deals were
also very high. Hence, as a first step toward a rigorous analysis, we have a hypothesis
that negative spreads tend to occur in an active and volatile market rather than an
inactive market. Any analysis of other factors, we need to control for activity levels of
the market.
Table 1 (Panels A, B, and C) is the annual average of the same statistics, the
occurrence of negative spread, with breakdown by the size of negative spreads, 1-pip,
2-pip, 3-pip sizes. N denotes the number of negative spread occurrence of x-pip or more,
per day, yearly average; P denotes the probability of disappearance at one second later
of negative spread of x-pip or more; D is the number of deals (either ask side or bid
side), per day, yearly average, and the volatility, V, is defined by the average absolute
pip change in the mid-deal price (from a deal is done to the next deal), yearly average.
For USD/JPY in 1999, a negative spread with at least 1 pip magnitude,
occurred 150 times a day, and they disappear within one second 46% of the time. The
occurrence of negative spread with 2-pip (3-pip) magnitude is much rarer, with 45 (16,
respectively) times a day, and the disappearance-within-one-second probability was
53% (57%, respectively). For USD/JPY in 2007, the negative spread with 1 pip; 2 pip; 3
pip magnitude occurred 11 times; 1.3 times; 0.3 times, respectively. The disappearance
17

probability was 85%; 87%; 89%, respectively.
Extending these observations, with help of Figure 2 and Table 1, we can derive
the following conclusion. The number of occurrences of a negative spread has been on
the declining trend for all currency pairs, with an exceptional upward spike immediately
after the failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. The timing coincided with a
huge increase in volatility in all three currency pairs. The probability of disappearance
within one second is on the increasing trend. However, in 2009/10, it becomes unstable.
This is due to the relatively small sample days in 2009/10.

For each currency, the

number of deals was relatively stable until the beginning of 2007 and then rose sharply
toward the end of 2008; and volatility had been on the declining trend from 1999 to
mid-2007, and then it started to increase from mid-2007 to end-2008. Even in 2009/10,
the level of volatility remained much higher than previous normal years (2000-2007).
The raised level of volatility is more remarkable in EUR/USD and EUR/JPY. The
volatility of USE/JPY has been declining since the beginning of 2009 to end-2010.
From Figure 2 and Table 1, it is not clear whether the decline of the occurrence
of negative spreads and the increase of the disappearance probability within one second
can be explained solely by the number of deals, which may be a proxy for the market
depth, and high volatility, which may be relevant, particularly for the measurement of
occurrences.
As explained earlier, the occurrence and probability of disappearance may be
closely related to innovations in microstructure of the EBS system, namely the
advancement of computer algorithm technology and the connection of bank computers
with the EBS computer.
We have observed above that the occurrence of negative spread has declined
significantly by the beginning of 2010.10 The sample period is chosen to be from 1999
to 2009, because samples of negative spreads became too small to be reliable for a
regression analysis in 2010.
The log of number of negative spread occurrence in the month t for each

It is said that due to upgrading of a matching engine at the EBS, sometime in 2009,
execution of matching (deal) became faster. Hence, it is possible that negative spread
had occurred but been eliminated in a fraction of a second, so that our data that are on
the one-second slice did not detect the existence.
10

18

currency pair, j is denoted by (
number of PC (

). This is regressed on the deals (

), volatility (

), and the number of the sum of Ai and PTC traders (

),

).

(3)
Table 2 shows the regression results for all three currency pairs. Results of
estimates by both Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and Generalized Methods of Moments
(GMM) are shown.11 Coefficients of all variables have expected signs with statistical
significance, except a few in the GMM regressions that are noted below. The occurrence
of negative spread increases with volatility and the number of deals, both the indication
of higher market activities. (For USD/JPY and EUR/USD in GMM, the number of deals
is not significant.) Controlling for those market conditions, the number of observed
negative spread decreases with the widespread use of both the computer trading
(Ai+PTC) and primary customers (PC) institutions. The results show that in all three
currency pair, a wide-spread use of direct connection of bank computers with the EBS
computer reduced the occurrence of negative spread. Since it is much easier for a
computer than a human to spot the negative spread and take advantage of it in the
fraction of a second, the statistically significant negative coefficient of Ai+PTC makes
sense. The negative coefficient of PC implies that when not-so-strong banks started to
use the name and credit lines of large banks, a chance of negative spread is reduced.

12

Without the PC contract, not-so-strong banks sometimes may be forced to post a quote
that implies a negative-spread in the market due to a lack of credit lines. Widespread use
of PC contracts, this possibility disappeared. (For USD/JPY, a coefficient for PC is not
statistically significant in GMM, although the expected negative sign is obtained.)
Next, we investigate determinants of how quickly the negative spread will
disappear. For each month, the probability of disappearance of negative spread of
currency pair j is calculated as the ratio of the disappeared negative spread within one
second to the total number of negative spread,

11

. Recall that the time series of the

GMM was conducted since standard errors in the OLS regressions may not be accurate due to
suspected autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity, while GMM may suffer from a (relatively) small
sample data set, as all regressions are conducted in monthly frequency.
12
The number of PC is not significant in USD/JPY with GMM estimation.
19

probability is shown in Figure 2. The logistic regression, estimating the probability,
, is estimated with the number of deals, volatility, and the number of the sum of Ai
and PTC.

(4)

Table 3 shows the results. Almost all the variables were estimated with
respectively expected signs and with statistical significance of 1 percent. The exception
was the volatility variable of USD/JPY, with P-value of 0.24 in case of GMM. In all
three currency pairs the within-one-second disappearance probability tends to decrease,
as the level of volatility in the market increases. The number of deals, as a proxy for
market activities, contributes to increase the probability of disappearance within one
second.

Even controlling for these market variables, the change in market

microstructure may affect the probability of within-one-second disappearance. The sum
of Ai and PTC traders, a good proxy for the widespread use of computer trading with
computers connected to the EBS computer has the statistically significant coefficient. In
all three currency pairs, it contributes to disappearance of negative spread. The
introduction of machines trading with the order-matching machine significantly
increased the probability of very quick disappearance of negative spread. This makes
perfect sense, as one thing a machine can do best is to exploit arbitrage opportunities
without any human judgment.

3.3. Double Deals
We have established that negative spreads do appear time to time, but they
disappear very quickly within a few seconds.

If the disappearance occurs due to

correction of a bid or an offer without actual transactions, we expect that the number of
deals one second within the emergence of negative spread should not necessarily
increase. On the other hand, if disappearance is due to some bank taking advantage of
negative spreads, then we expect an increase in deals on both the bid side and offer side
at one second within the appearance of negative spread. So, comparing to other times, if
the probability of simultaneous deals on the both sides (double deals) is higher at one
20

second within the appearance of negative spread, then we take it as evidence that some
dealers with quick hands detect the profit opportunities and take actions to exploit the
opportunities.
Figure Panel 3-j for currency pair j shows two lines. The dotted
(lower) line shows the probability of double deals for all seconds,

, that is the ratio

of the number of seconds with double deals to the number of total sample seconds. The
solid (higher) line shows the probability of double deals conditional on negative spread
at one second earlier, that is the ratio of the number of seconds with double deals that
took place one second within negative spreads to the number of seconds with negative
spreads,

. The probabilities (ratios) are calculated monthly. The tight range of

error bar (confidence interval of 1 sigma) at each month on either line shows the
standard error of Bernoulli process for that month.
Several observations are obtained. First, in each figure, both lines show an
increasing trend. What is remarkable is the large difference between conditional
probability and unconditional probability lines. This implies that negative spreads do
prompt double deals one second within such an appearance. When there is a negative
spread, it is very likely to stimulate deals on both sides of ask and bid one second later.
This is consistent with a scenario that when traders see negative spread, they actively
trade to exploit the opportunity. This also is an empirical proof that the expected profits,
conditional on both trades hitting, exceeds the transaction costs.
Second, the probability of double deals one second within negative spread
occurrence has steadily increased faster than unconditional double deals throughout
sample years. The probability became almost unity at around 2006 for EUR/USD (panel
3-B). Big dips in the probability in 2008 and 2009 are due to the extreme market
volatility (and failure to exploit the profit opportunity) and the small number occurrence
(denominator).
Similarly, All panels 3-A, 3-B and 3-C show the same trend and characteristics.
But, conditional probability of double deals is slightly lower in USD/JPY and EUR/JPY
than EUR/USD. It suggests that the free lunch opportunities are detected and taken
advantage of by execution of double deals.
Table 4 shows the regression results of the probability of double deals for all
21

samples (that corresponds to lower line in Figure 3),
samples (that corresponds to higher line in Figure 3),

, and that for negative spread
.

(5)
(6)

The coefficients of the constant term are significantly different in each currency pair.
The difference of the constant terms roughly corresponds to the vertical difference of
two lines in Figure 3. In addition, the introduction of the machines connected to the
EBS system (AiPTC) has made a measurable difference in the probability of double
deals. Without being conditional on the appearance of a negative spread, the more
computers connected to the system implies more double deals. However, the increase in
probability of double deals conditional on the negative spreads once second earlier is
much more pronounced when the number of machines in the system becomes higher.

4. Triangular Arbitrage
In this section, we describe and analyze how often the triangular arbitrage
opportunities have emerged in our sample; how quickly they have disappeared; and
whether disappearance is correlated with simultaneous triangular transactions one
second later. Investigation methods in this section parallel with the preceding section on
negative spread.
As explained in Section 2, the triangular arbitrage opportunities may occur in
the direction of either JPY USD  EUR  JPY; or JPY EUR USD  JPY.
When an arbitrage opportunity arises in either direction, we count it as one event of
triangular arbitrage (TA) opportunity. As explained in Section 2.5., TA opportunity
cannot simultaneously emerge in both directions.
First, Table 5 shows how often TA opportunities emerged, by counting the
number of occurrence, which is defined by one continuous occurrence of the TA
opportunities, however many seconds it continued. The unit is the yearly average of TA

22

(measured in the number of occurrence) per day.13 In the table, arbitrage opportunities
are counted by the size of potential profits: “N_0”, “N_10” and “N_30” corresponds to
“more than break-even,” “more than $10,” and “more than $30” per one million dollar
contract (minimum unit of transaction),” respectively.
The probability of disappearance is calculated for each of the profit size: “P_0”,
“P_10” and “P_30” correspond to probability of “N_0”, “N_10” and “N_30”,
respectively. The $6 is approximate transaction costs for three currency pair trades
(JPY/USD, EUR/USD, EUR/JPY) for large-volume banks; and the $22.5 is
approximate transaction costs for three currency trades for small-volume banks. 14
Hence, N_10 and N_30 show the numbers of potential profits opportunities that
emerged for large-volume financial institutions and small-volume financial institutions,
respectively, net of transaction costs.
Table 5 shows that on average, N_10 of TA (more than $10 gain) opportunities
emerged about 480 times a (sample) day in 1999 and 2000, but spiked up to 524 in 2001.
The number gradually decreased to about 350 in 2008. The number sharply declined to
123 in 2009, and then to less than 50 times in 2010. The spike up in 2001 may be
related to the introduction of EURO cash (paper currency) in January 2001, and
increased transaction and volatility in the EURO rates. The larger profit opportunity,
namely the $30 or more profit opportunities (N_30) was much rarer an event. In 2001,
the number was 390 times per day, but by 2008, it declined to 184. It sharply declined to
68 in 2009, and to 24 in 2010. The number for N_30 in each of 2008-10 was about one
half of the number for N_10.
The probability of disappearance one second within emergence of such a TA
opportunity (P_10) rose from 0.36 in 1999 to 0.87 in both 2009 and 2010. The same
statistics for larger profit opportunities (P_30) has been slightly higher than that of P_10,
rising from 0.38 in 1999 to 0.90 in 2009 and slightly declined to 0.88 in 2010. In the
first half of the 2000s, there were significant differences between the probability of
13

As explained in Section 2.1., data on days with very low number of deals are not included, and
days that are two-day prior to a national holiday are not used. If they are included, the probability
increases slightly, since there used to be occasions of prolonged TA opportunities during a holiday
season.
14
This estimate is based on our interpretation of and interview on the transaction fees charged by
EBS on financial institutions.
23

disappearance between small and large profit opportunities, that is, between P_0 and
P_10; and between P_10 and P_30. This is consistent with our presumption that market
participants reacted much faster to larger potential profit opportunities. But, the
differences narrowed to a few percentage points by 2008. It should be noted that the
occurrence itself became much fewer and the probability may have reached its practical
ceiling for all profit sizes.
It is also remarkable that TA opportunities have emerged much more often than
negative spread. By comparing 1-pip negative spread in Table 1 (panels A, B, and C)
and small-profit TA opportunity (N_10) in Table 5, we observe that the number of TA
opportunities are typically more than ten times of the number of negative spread in any
of the three currency pairs (N_1pip). For example, the number of negative spread for the
three currency pairs ranged from 19 to 150 in 1999, but the number for TA opportunity
was 477. In 2010, the number of negative spread for the three currency pairs was down
to the range of 0.9 to 1.1, while the number for TA opportunity declined to 47.
The reason that TA opportunities emerge more often than negative spread may
be due to its difficulty in being detected and taken advantage of, at least for humans,
relative to negative spread. Similarly, the increase in the probability of disappearance
within one second was much faster for negative spread than TA opportunities. The
disappearance probability of negative spread reached 85% by 2006, while that of TA
opportunities reached 85% for all profit sizes only in 2009. But, by 2010, the
disappearance probabilities of negative spreads and of TA became much similar.
The last two columns of Table 5 show the number of deals and volatility in the
three currency markets. The sum of the numbers of USD/JPY deals, EUR/USD deals,
and EUR/JPY deals per day is shown as “deals”. The number of the deals rose from
about 29,000 in 2001 to 42,000 in 2010. This is a reflection of the expansion of the
global foreign exchange market transactions. The volatility measure is the average
absolute value of pip changes of three currencies, one second after deals were recorded.
The unconditional probability of triangular arbitrage for a month is defined as
“the number of seconds when triangular arbitrage opportunities existed” divided by “the
number of total seconds in sample.”15 If triangular arbitrage opportunities existed 2
15

How certain days are omitted from the sample was explained in Section 2.2.
24

seconds, then both seconds are counted toward the calculation, that is, the numerator, in
the calculation of probability. This definition is thus duration-sensitive, unlike
“occurrence” in Table 5.
Figure 4 shows the probability of triangular opportunities (the number of
seconds with TA divided by the total number of seconds in sample) calculated monthly,
from 1999 to 2010. Three lines show the different profit sizes, $0, $10, and $30. The
probability was at around 2% in 1999, gradually decreasing to 1% by 2007.16 The
probability shows a sharp decline from 2008 to 2009 and, then again from 2009 to 2010.
By 2010, the probability was at around 0.1%.
Figure 5 shows the monthly movements of the number of TA opportunities; the
probability of disappearance one second within its emergence, the number of
simultaneous three currency deals; and the volatility measure. For the first two pieces of
information, we draw three lines. The lowest line (>1.00000) is a TA opportunity with
any positive arbitrage value; the middle line (>1.00001) is a TA opportunity with more
than 0.001% profit ($10 per 1 million USD contract); and the top line is a TA
(>1.00003) opportunity with more than 0.003% ($30 per 1 million USD contract) profit.
The larger the potential TA profits, the quicker it disappears within one second.
Volatility had gradually declined from 1999 to 2007, but then rose sharply in mid-2007,
and even more sharply in late-2008, with a much smaller spike in the spring of 2010,
which reflect the US sub-prime crisis, the Lehman Brothers collapse and its impact, and
the Euro sovereign debt crisis, respectively. These periods correspond to spikes in the
number of TA opportunities. TA opportunities seem to increase, ceteris paribus, with
volatility and the number of deals being transacted.
The top panel of Figure 5 shows the daily average of the number of triangular
arbitrage opportunities for that month. There are three lines for positive arbitrage
opportunity (more than break even); for the size of opportunities that exceeds $10 per
$1 million contract; and for the size of opportunities that exceeds $30 per $1 contract.
The second panel of Figure 5 shows the probability of disappearance within

16

Aiba, Hatano, Takayasu, Marumo, and Shimizu (2002) claimed that they observed triangular
arbitrage for 6.4% of total time in January – March 1999. However, our results show it was around 2
to 2.5% at in months. The difference is due to the data set (ours is the actual transaction platform and
theirs is not) and our screening of the data.
25

one second for each of the three sizes of profit opportunities. Between 2004 and 2008,
there are significant differences among the three lines, the bigger the expected profits,
the higher the probability of differences.
In terms of daily average number, TA opportunities (Table 5; N_0) occur
typically 50 times more often than negative spread of 3 currency pairs (measured in
Table 1-A, B, and C) in 2010.

The negative spreads (of more than 1 pip) hardly occur

any longer, that is, on average, less than once in a day for any of the three currency pairs,
while the TA opportunities (of 0.001%, or more) do occur. This reflects the technical
difficulty, even for computers, to avoid or take advantage of profit opportunities. It is
more difficult to detect TA opportunity than negative spread, and it takes three
transactions, rather than two, to take profit from such a position. However, with
advancement of the transmission speed of electronic order execution and computer
calculation speed, the number of such profit opportunities will continue to decline.
In sum, over the years, the TA opportunities have become less frequent events,
and once they appear, they disappear with increasing speed. Fluctuations in the number
of TA opportunities seem to be correlated with the volatility of the market.
Below we concentrate in the case of potential arbitrage opportunities of at least
0.001% profits (>1.00001). We have observed that the number of TA profit
opportunities has declined significantly by the beginning of 2010. Hence, in the
regression analysis below, we terminate samples at the end of 2009.
We investigate the impact of the microstructure innovation on TA opportunities,
controlling for the number of deals and volatility, using a regression analysis.

(7)

Table 6 shows the results. Estimates are all statistically significant (except
N_PC in GMM), and imply that more deals (market activities) lead to an environment
where it is more likely that a TA opportunity emerges. 17 It is not true that TA
17

Marshall, Treepongkaruna, and Young (2008) found that triangular arbitrage opportunities emerge
constantly and more often when quote activities are high. The finding in our paper that volatility is
positively correlated with occurrence of triangular arbitrage opportunities is consistent with their
explanation, since volatility in the mid-point revisions occurs when new quotes come in to the
market.
26

opportunity occurs in times where the market is thin, but it happens in times with more
active trading. Second, higher volatility tends to be associated with more TA
opportunities. The very high volatility of prices is likely to produce not-exact mid-point
triangular arbitrage condition, since one currency pair may move first, while there may
be a delay in other currency pairs to catch up to recover the exact triangular arbitrage
condition.
The institutions do matter. The introduction and proliferation of the Primary
Customer system may mean narrower bid-ask spread (Sec 2.3). The narrower spread
meant that it is more likely to observe a TA opportunity, given the jump in the mid-point
of one currency pair, holding other currency pairs constant (Sec. 2.4.). Hence, the
coefficient of the number of primary customers (PC) is expected to be positive, and this
is indeed the case in Panel of OLS, but not in GMM. The more computer trading
institutions there are, the less likely are the opportunities of TA, but it is not statistically
significant (in GMM).
It is clear that the introduction of computer trading contributes to declining
occurrence of TA opportunities, because computers can revise bid and ask prices to
restore the mid-point arbitrage condition (eq. (1)), by adjusting the other two currency
pairs at the time of changing one currency pair. Alternatively, if a computer quickly
discovers a particular TA opportunity and carries out trades to take profits within one
second (say, 250 millisecond), then it does not show up in our sample which is based on
one-second slice. The increase in computer trading is expected to strongly contribute to
the decline in the number of TA opportunity.
Next, we investigate the probability of TA opportunity disappearance one
second within it emerges (

), aggregated monthly, as a logistic regression.

(8)

The regression is to explain the probability of TA opportunity to emerge by the
number of deals, the volatility measure and the number of computer trading connected
to the EBS system (AiPTC). The estimation results are shown in Table 7.
Table 7 shows that the probability of TA opportunity disappears one second
27

within it emerges increases as the volatility is lower and the number of deals is higher.
Controlling for those factors, an increase in bank computers being connected to the EBS
computer increases the probability of disappearance within one second. This is expected
that TA opportunities would be more difficult to spot by human eyes than by computer
algorithm.18
Next, we investigate whether the disappearance is associated with actual deals,
in this case the simultaneous triple deals in the three currency pairs. Figure 6 shows two
sets of line. The three top lines show the probability of triple deals conditional on the
existence of triangular arbitrage opportunity one second earlier. The three probability
lines correspond to potential profit sizes of $30 or more, $10 or more, and $0 or more.
The lower line shows the probability of simultaneous triple deals for all seconds. As was
the case for the negative spread, a big difference between the two lines is consistent
with the proposition that the TA opportunities prompt triple deals in order to take profits
out of the opportunities.
The unconditional probability of triple deals,

, is first calculated monthly,

and then estimated as a logistic regression with Deals, Volatility and the number of
computers connected to EBS. Similarly, the probability of triple deals conditional of the
TA opportunity one second earlier

is calculated monthly and tested with a

logistic regression.

(9)
(10)

The results are shown in Table 8. The difference in the constant terms
corresponds with the vertical difference of the two lines of Figure 4. The constant term
The same point is stated without evidence in Chaboud, et al. (2009): “Interestingly, the difference
in price impact in the cross-rate, the euro-yen exchange rate, is very small. In this market, computers
have a clear advantage over humans in detecting and reacting more quickly to triangular arbitrage
opportunities so that a large proportion of algorithmic trading contributes to more efficient price
discovery. It is then not so surprising that in this market, computers and humans, on average, appear
to be equally informed.”
18

28

is higher in the conditional (TA opportunity) equation (lower panel), compared to the
unconditional equation (upper panel). The sensitivity to the number of trading
computers connected to the EBS system (AiPTC) is also different between the two
regressions.

In sum, the findings are consistent with a view that the TA opportunities

increase the probability of triple deals conducted one second later, controlling for the
volatility and the number of deals. Hence, the connection of banks’ computers to the
EBS system made it much faster to take advantage of TA profit opportunities, resulting
in the disappearance of the opportunities within one second.

5. Concluding Remarks
This paper shows that free lunch—risk-free arbitrage opportunities—does exist,
but only for a very brief period, that is, in the matter of a few seconds. The probability
of occurrence has declined and the probability of disappearance within one second has
increased in the past ten years.19 Changes in market microstructure have contributed to
disappearing free lunch. Since the mid-2000s, an increasing number of banks’
computers are allowed to be directly connected to the EBS computer. The machines
undoubtedly are faster than humans in detecting and taking advantage of free lunch
opportunities. The power of computer (algorithmic) trading is shown in this paper as a
primary cause for this change. Evidence shows that machines have made the market
more efficient by almost eliminating negative spreads and triangular arbitrage
opportunities. The probability of negative spread disappearing within one second was
less than 50% in 1999, but increased to about 90% by 2009.
Details of major innovation and finding this paper can be summarized as
follows. First, in order to recreate the real trading situation, the EBS data set that
includes “firm” (transactable) quotes and transactions is used. The electronic broking
system is a major trading platform for the yen/dollar, dollar/euro and yen/euro foreign
exchange markets. Second, risk-free profitable arbitrage opportunities—free lunch—are
defined as a negative spread in any currency pair and triangular arbitrage conditions
involving three currency pairs, net of transaction cost. Contrary to almost all theoretical
19

In the analogy of mistakenly dropping a genuine $100 bill on the street, it has become less
frequent that someone drops the bill onto the street, and it has become much faster that the money is
picked up by someone else, once it is dropped.
29

predictions, risk-free arbitrage opportunities are found to emerge time to time. Arbitrage
opportunities tend to occur when the markets are active with large transaction volumes
and high volatility. Third, over the 12-year sample period, the frequency of free lunch
has declined and the probability of its disappearance within one second has increased.
Fourth, The number of trades simultaneously on both ask and bid sides increases in one
second within an arbitrage opportunity emerges (controlling for time of the day, and
volatilities in preceding seconds), suggesting the free lunch opportunities, when occur,
prompt actual trades in an attempt of taking advantage of free lunch. Fifth, during the
period, market microstructure has changed. Starting 2003, major banks were allowed to
connect their computers with algorithm trading programs directly to the EBS system.
The direct connections have quickly spread to other banks. Starting December 2004,
non-bank financial institutions, all of them being algorithmic traders, were also allowed
to have a direct connection. Sixth, econometric analysis suggests that an increase in
algorithmic trading contributed to declining occurrence of free lunch and increasing
probability of its disappearance within one second. Seventh, the Primary Customer
system introduced in 2003 allowed weaker banks with limited credit line counterparts to
trade under the name of the primary broker banks. This led to a decrease the number of
negative spread events, but increased the number of triangular arbitrage opportunities.
The latter may be counterintuitive, but this can be understood as follows. The Primary
Customer system contributed to narrowing the bid-ask spread, one of the efficient
market criteria. But narrower spreads made it easier for the triangular arbitrage
relationship to be violated in a volatile market.
Broader implications of the study extend from theory to business implications.
First, assumptions in finance theory, with regard to no free lunch, are much more
realistic now than ten years ago, thanks to algorithmic trading. Second, cross rates
–exchange rates that do not involve US dollar—are deeper but more volatile now since
computers are adjusting the rates to maintain arbitrage conditions. Third, algorithmic
trading seems to have reached almost its maximum potential in the area of taking
advantage of free lunch—negative spread and triangular arbitrage—by now. Unless the
machine beats the competitor machines in its calculation and communication speed
somehow, in the order of nano-seconds, a new entrant may not expect easy profits.
30

Fourth, once the algorithm to detect and take advantage of free lunch is written, it can
be applied to any currency. Although it is not verified in this paper, we conjecture that
other non-major currencies do satisfy arbitrage conditions, without experiencing the
period of big opportunities.

31

References:
Aiba, Yukihiro and Naomichi Hatano, (2004), “Triangular Arbitrage in the Foreign
Exchange Market,” Physica A 344 (2004) 174–177.
Aiba, Yukihiro and Naomichi Hatano, (2006), “A microscopic model of triangular
arbitrage” Physica A 371 (2006) 572–584.
Aiba, Yukihiro; Naomichi Hatano; Hideki Takayasu; Kouhei Marumo; and Tokiko
Shimizu, (2002), “Triangular arbitrage as an interaction among Foreign exchange rates,”
Physica A 310 (2002) 467 – 479.
Aiba, Yukihiro; Naomichi Hatano; Hideki Takayasu; Kouhei Marumo; and Tokiko
Shimizu, (2003) “Triangular arbitrage and Negative Auto-correlation of Foreign
Exchange Rates,” Physica A 314 (2003) 253 – 257.
Akram, Farooq and Lucio Sarno, (2008), "Arbitrage in the Foreign Exchange Market:
Turning on the Microscope", Journal of International Economics, vol. 76, 2008, pp.
237-253.
Bank of International Settlements, (2010), Triennial Central Bank Survey: Report on
global foreign exchange market Activity in 2010, December.
Bank of International Settlements, (2011), “High-frequency trading in the foreign
exchange market,” Study Group established by the Markets Committee, September.
Berger, David W.; Alain P. Chaboud; Sergey V. Chernenko; Edward Howorka; and
Jonathan H. Wright, (2006). “Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics in Electronic
Brokerage System Data,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
International Finance Discussion Papers, Number 830r, April 2005, Revised September.
Chaboud, Alain P.; Sergey V. Chernenko; Edward Howorka; Raj S. Krishnasami Iyer;
David Liu; and Jonathan H. Wright, (2004), “The High-Frequency Effects of U.S.
Macroeconomic Data Releases on Prices and Trading Activity in the Global Interdealer
Foreign Exchange Market,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
International Finance Discussion Papers, Number 823, November 2004.
32

Chaboud, A., B. Chiquoine, E. Hjalmarsson, and M. Loretan, 2007. Frequency of
Observation and the Estimation of Integrated Volatility in Deep and Liquid Markets,
Journal of Empirical Finance, Forthcoming.
Chaboud, Alain; Benjamin Chiquoine; Erik Hjalmarsson; and Clara Vega, (2009). “Rise
of the Machines: Algorithmic Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market,” Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers,
Number 980, October 2009.
Goodhart, Charles, Ito, Takatoshi, and Payne, Richard, 1996. One day in June 1993: a
study of the working of the reuters 2000-2 electronic foreign exchange trading system.
In: Frankel, J.A., Galli, G., Giovannini, A. (Eds.), The Microstructure of Foreign
Exchange Markets. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 107–179.
Goodhart, C.A.E. and O’Hara, M., (1997), “High frequency data in financial markets:
Issues and applications.” Journal of Empirical Finance, 1997, 4, 73–114.
Goodhart, Charles, Payne, Richard, 1996. Microstructural dynamics in a foreign
exchange electronic broking system. Journal of International Money and Finance 15
(6), 829–85.
Hashimoto, Yuko and Takatoshi Ito, (2010), “Effects of Japanese Macroeconomic
Announcements on the Dollar/Yen Exchange Rate: High-Resolution Picture,” Journal
of the Japanese and International Economies vol. 24, 2010: 334-354.
Hashimoto, Yuko; Takatoshi Ito; Takaaki Ohnishi; Misako Takayasu; Hideki Takayasu,
and Tsutomu Watanabe, (2012), “Random Walk or a Run—Market Microstructure
Analysis of the Foreign Exchange Rate Movements based on Conditional
Probability—”, Quantitative Finance, vol. 12, no. 6, June: 893-905.
Ito, Takatoshi and Yuko Hashimoto, (2006), “Intra-day Seasonality in Activities of the
Foreign Exchange Markets: Evidence from the Electronic Broking System” Journal of
the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 20, no. 4, December 2006: 637-664.
Ito, Takatoshi and Yuko Hashimoto (2008). “Price Impacts of Deals and Predictability
33

of the Exchange Rate Movements,” in T. Ito and A. Rose (eds.) International Financial
Issues in the Pacific Rim, NBER East Asia Seminar on Economics, Volume 17,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008: 177-215.
Marshall, Ben R., Treepongkaruna, Sirimon and Young, Martin R., (2008). “What Level
of Compensation is Available to Arbitrageurs in the Foreign Exchange Market?”. AFA
2008 New Orleans Meetings Paper. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=970410
Tokyo Foreign Exchange Market Committee, (2008). “Code of Conduct,” 2008 Edition,
http://www.fxcomtky.com/index_e.html.

34

Table 1.

Negative spread: Annual summary of per-day occurrence and
disappearance probability

Panel 1-A. USD/JPY
The number of occurrence by the
size of negative spread
Year

N_1PIP

N_2PIP

N_3PIP

Probability of disappearance within
1 second by the size of negative
spread
P_1PIP

P_2PIP

# of deals

Volatility

P_3PIP

1999

149.52

45.02

16.43

0.46

0.53

0.57

11184.18

0.46

2000

68.35

15.26

4.86

0.44

0.51

0.53

8725.24

0.36

2001

67.81

14.54

4.62

0.47

0.53

0.55

9506.25

0.38

2002

61.71

11.63

3.80

0.52

0.56

0.54

10592.55

0.36

2003

50.38

8.95

3.07

0.52

0.59

0.60

9854.52

0.32

2004

42.86

7.32

2.11

0.54

0.61

0.65

10597.00

0.32

2005

21.82

2.18

0.63

0.71

0.76

0.72

11609.93

0.28

2006

13.94

1.30

0.32

0.85

0.89

0.90

12889.79

0.27

2007

10.64

1.37

0.34

0.85

0.87

0.89

16315.07

0.29

2008

13.88

2.90

1.02

0.88

0.88

0.89

20075.77

0.43

2009

4.50

0.54

0.14

0.94

0.96

0.90

12563.88

0.43

2010

1.08

0.19

0.06

0.85

0.85

0.93

11651.96

0.34

(Panel 1-B, 1-C, to continue next page)

35

Panel 1-B. EUR/USD
The number of occurrence by the
size of negative spread
Year

N_1PIP

Probability of disappearance within
1 second by the size of negative
spread

N_2PIP

N_3PIP

P_1PIP

P_2PIP

# of deals

Volatility

P_3PIP

1999

71.15

11.35

3.54

0.47

0.56

0.59

13532.38

0.27

2000

89.07

14.80

4.33

0.50

0.56

0.61

15774.50

0.28

2001

64.16

9.54

2.44

0.54

0.60

0.64

14977.65

0.25

2002

42.75

5.03

1.22

0.55

0.61

0.57

14648.50

0.21

2003

62.95

7.88

2.14

0.59

0.63

0.65

18940.71

0.25

2004

53.16

6.81

1.93

0.62

0.68

0.70

20065.75

0.27

2005

24.29

2.27

0.62

0.73

0.76

0.73

19563.42

0.23

2006

9.16

0.88

0.26

0.81

0.80

0.77

18320.78

0.21

2007

4.59

0.43

0.12

0.85

0.85

0.89

17582.78

0.20

2008

17.16

2.57

0.81

0.91

0.89

0.89

27073.84

0.41

2009

8.43

0.91

0.25

0.94

0.89

0.84

23453.63

0.44

2010

2.31

0.37

0.14

0.91

0.81

0.77

24080.97

0.38

Panel 1-C. EUR/JPY
The number of occurrence by the
size of negative spread
Year

N_1PIP

Probability of disappearance within
1 second by the size of negative
spread

N_2PIP

N_3PIP

P_1PIP

P_2PIP

# of deals

Volatility

P_3PIP

1999

18.52

8.52

4.61

0.42

0.48

0.51

2147.72

1.05

2000

18.68

6.81

2.89

0.44

0.49

0.50

2705.94

0.86

2001

20.41

6.67

2.69

0.46

0.50

0.50

3228.39

0.74

2002

13.65

3.64

1.36

0.45

0.49

0.46

2840.32

0.61

2003

12.64

3.16

1.40

0.47

0.54

0.55

3176.54

0.62

2004

9.86

2.78

1.30

0.52

0.56

0.53

3474.76

0.68

2005

5.28

0.89

0.38

0.71

0.76

0.74

4138.71

0.51

2006

3.24

0.50

0.19

0.83

0.76

0.79

4718.20

0.46

2007

6.31

1.20

0.50

0.86

0.86

0.84

8749.50

0.56

2008

7.36

2.27

1.08

0.90

0.90

0.91

9138.94

0.97

2009

2.53

0.74

0.28

0.94

0.94

0.95

5990.26

1.04

2010

0.92

0.21

0.09

0.91

0.84

0.75

5452.19

0.92

Source: ICAP, EBS data mine. Level 2 (one-second slice), 1999-2010
Note:
Authors’ calculation

36

Table 2. Factors of occurrence of negative spread, (equation (3))
2-OLS
USD/JPY
Equation (3)

Coeff

EUR/USD

s.e.

P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

EUR/JPY
P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

1.41***

0.12

0.000

1.60***

0.113157

0.000

1.01***

0.12

0.000

Volatility

5.74***

0.40

0.000

7.73***

0.528806

0.000

1.42***

0.15

0.000

7.03 E-05***

9.06 E-06

0.000

3.48 E-05***

7.96 E-06

0.000

2.23 E-04***

1.58 E-05

0.000

N_PC

-4.97 E-03***

7.12 E-04

0.000

-5.99 E-03***

0.000632

0.000

-7.57 E-03***

7.73 E-04

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

-4.11 E-03***

4.12 E-04

0.000

-4.22 E-03***

0.000453

0.000

-1.99 E-03***

4.72 E-05

0.000

N_Deal

Adj R-squared

0.95

0.94

0.89

DW

1.41

0.78

1.52

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

NOB

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

2-GMM
USD/JPY
Equation (3)

Coeff

EUR/USD

s.e.

P-stat

Coeff

EUR/JPY

s.e.

P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

1.55 ***

0.43

0.000

1.713963 ***

0.26249

0.000

0.87764***

0.210283

0.000

Volatility

7.12 ***

1.06

0.000

7.622008 ***

1.277365

0.000

1.703904***

0.242737

0.000

4.01 E-06

1.96 E-05

0.838

2.95 E-05

1.87 E-05

0.116

0.000194***

2.68 E-05

0.000

N_PC

-1.70 E-03

1.18 E-03

0.155

-0.005991 ***

0.001261

0.000

-0.006136***

0.001136

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

-5.43 E-03 ***

8.06 E-04

0.000

-0.00411 ***

0.001029

0.000

-0.002738***

0.000902

0.003

N_Deal

Adj R-squared

0.93

0.94

0.89

DW

1.64

0.76

1.59

NOB

Note:

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

(1) Panel OLS is estimated with Ordinary Least-Squares methods; Panel GMM is estimated with Generalized Methods of Moments.
(2) Significance level is indicated with *** for 1 percent; ** for 5 percent; and * for 10 percent.

37

Table 3. Probability of disappearance of negative spread within one second (equation (4))
3-OLS
USD/JPY
Equation (4)

Coeff

EUR/USD

s.e.

P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

EUR/JPY
P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

0.72***

0.19

0.000

0.31**

2.09

0.038

0.79***

0.173850

0.000

-2.96***

0.47

0.000

-3.22***

-5.93

0.000

-1.40***

0.196145

0.000

N_Deal

4.06 E-05***

1.11 E-05

0.000

4.54 E-05***

5.01

0.000

7.58 E-05***

2.40 E-05

0.002

N_AI+N_PTC

5.47 E-03***

2.53 E-04

0.000

5.82 E-03***

23.5

0.000

5.71 E-03***

0.000424

0.000

C
Volatility

Adj R-squared

0.86

0.88

0.81

DW

0.99

1.21

0.97

NOB

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

129 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

3-GMM
USD/JPY
Equation (4)

Coeff

s.e.

EUR/USD
P-stat

Coeff

EUR/JPY

s.e.

P-stat

Coeff

0.42

s.e.

P-stat

0.321049

0.189

C

-0.04

0.37

0.917

-0.26

0.205853

0.203

Volatility

-2.38**

1.05

0.024

-3.93***

1.177295

0.001

-1.23***

0.290292

0.000

N_Deal

9.18 E-05***

2.32 E-05

0.000

8.83 E-05***

1.83E-05

0.000

1.47 E-04***

5.56 E-05

0.009

N_AI+N_PTC

4.77 E-03***

4.72 E-04

0.000

5.33 E-03***

0.000366

0.000

4.75 E-03***

0.000629

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.83

0.85

0.80

DW

1.14

1.39

1.04

NOB

Note:

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

128 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

(1) Panel OLS is estimated with Ordinary Least-Squares methods; Panel GMM is estimated with Generalized Methods of Moments.
(2) Significance level is indicated with *** for 1 percent; ** for 5 percent; and * for 10 percent.

38

Table 4.

Regression of Double Deals probabilities on Microstructure (Equations (5) and (6))

4-OLS
USD/JPY (unconditional)
Equation (5)

Coeff

s.e.

EUR/USD (unconditional)
P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

EUR/JPY (unconditional)

P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

-5.89 ***

0.08

0.000

-5.18***

0.08

0.000

-7.22***

0.09

0.000

Volatility

-0.61 ***

0.19

0.002

-0.50*

0.28

0.079

-1.33***

0.11

0.000

N_Deal

9.71 E-05 ***

4.59 E-06

0.000

6.92 E-05***

4.70 E-06

0.000

2.48 E-04***

1.24 E-05

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

1.59 E-03 ***

1.05 E-04

0.000

1.00 E-03***

1.28 E-04

0.000

3.78 E-03***

2.06 E-04

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.92

0.85

0.95

DW

1.32

1.25

1.21

NOB

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

USD/JPY (conditional on negative spread) EUR/USD (Conditional on negative spread) EUR/JPY (conditional on negative spread)
Equation (6)

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

-0.78 ***

0.24

0.001

-1.21***

0.21

0.000

-0.77***

0.252746

0.003

Volatility

-5.96 ***

0.60

0.000

-7.21***

0.78

0.000

-4.20***

0.287384

0.000

N_Deal

8.97 E-05 ***

1.42 E-05

0.000

1.04 E-04***

1.30 E-05

0.000

1.57 E-04***

3.33 E-05

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

6.13 E-03 ***

3.25 E-04

0.000

6.30 E-03***

3.55 E-04

0.000

9.12 E-03***

0.000556

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.85

0.82

0.86

DW

0.77

1.00

0.71

NOB

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

39

(Table 4 continued)

4-GMM
USD/JPY (unconditional)
Equation (5)

Coeff

s.e.

EUR/USD (unconditional)
P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

EUR/JPY (unconditional)

P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

-6.15 ***

0.14

0.000

-5.63 ***

0.14523

0.000

-7.44***

0.21

0.000

Volatility

-0.67 ***

0.24

0.007

-1.44 ***

0.378881

0.000

-1.26***

0.21

0.000

N_Deal

1.22 E-04 ***

1.00 E-05

0.000

1.08 E-04 ***

1.12 E-05

0.000

2.99 E-04***

3.11 E-05

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

1.29 E-03 ***

1.62 E-04

0.000

6.34 E-04 ***

2.12 E-04

0.003

3.21 E-03***

3.33 E-04

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.90

0.79

0.94

DW

1.57

1.78

1.33

NOB

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

USD/JPY (conditional on negative spread) EUR/USD (conditional on negative spread) EUR/JPY (conditional on
Equation (6)

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

Coeff

negative spread)

s.e.

P-stat

C

-1.27 *

0.74

0.089

-2.40 ***

0.37

0.000

-1.04

0.88

0.240

Volatility

-6.13 ***

1.61

0.000

-9.15 ***

1.81

0.000

-4.14***

0.88

0.000

N_Deal

1.39 E-04 ***

4.01 E-05

0.001

2.00 E-04 ***

2.90 E-05

0.000

2.25 E-04*

1.18 E-04

0.058

N_AI+N_PTC

5.55 E-03 ***

6.74 E-04

0.000

5.32 E-03 ***

6.58 E-04

0.000

8.37 E-03***

1.19 E-03

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.83

0.73

0.85

DW

0.88

1.46

0.74

NOB

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

Note: (1) Panel OLS is estimated with Ordinary Least-Squares methods; Panel GMM is estimated with Generalized Methods of Moments.
(2) Significance level is indicated with *** for 1 percent; ** for 5 percent; and * for 10 percent.

40

Table 5. Triangular arbitrage opportunities: Occurrence and disappearance
The number of occurrence by the size of
potential profits

Probability of disappearance within 1 second by
the size of potential profits

P_0

P_10

deals

Volatility

Year

N_0

N_10

N_30

1999

538.90

477.14

370.75

0.35

0.36

0.38

28625.80

0.41

2000

546.56

481.71

371.27

0.38

0.39

0.41

27936.83

0.37

2001

605.69

524.42

390.36

0.39

0.41

0.44

28528.60

0.35

2002

512.67

427.97

294.83

0.42

0.43

0.47

28977.71

0.31

2003

624.71

518.33

351.40

0.43

0.45

0.49

32634.79

0.31

2004

649.81

533.80

362.48

0.51

0.55

0.59

34875.77

0.33

2005

574.88

445.06

264.23

0.62

0.67

0.75

35867.23

0.28

2006

521.88

372.09

187.02

0.68

0.75

0.86

36641.93

0.27

2007

552.49

373.58

163.13

0.73

0.79

0.88

42446.70

0.29

2008

486.24

357.17

184.20

0.81

0.84

0.89

56424.41

0.50

2009

167.59

122.94

67.96

0.85

0.87

0.90

42694.76

0.52

2010

67.17

46.66

24.38

0.84

0.87

0.88

41629.64

0.44

Source: ICAP, EBS data mine. Level 2 (one-second slice), 1999-2010.
Note:
Authors’ calculation.

41

P_30

Table 6. Triangular arbitrage opportunity: Factors for Occurrence
Equation (7)
6-OLS
Equation (7)

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

5.00***

0.07

0.000

Volatility

1.19***

0.22

0.000

N_Deal

2.56 E-05***

2.17 E-06

0.000

N_PC

1.22 E-03***

3.92 E-04

0.002

-4.41 E-03***

2.53 E-04

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC
Adj R-squared

0.91

DW

1.16

NOB

132 (Jan 1999 – Feb 2009)

6-GMM
Equation (7)

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

4.93***

0.14

0.000

Volatility

0.65

0.44

0.140

N_Deal

3.43 E-05***

4.59 E-06

0.000

N_PC

3.83 E-04

7.99 E-04

0.632

-4.11 E-03***

5.92 E-04

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC
Adj R-squared

0.90

DW

1.39

NOB

131 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

Note: (1) Panel OLS is estimated with Ordinary Least-Squares methods; Panel GMM is estimated with
Generalized Methods of Moments.
(2) Significance level is indicated with *** for 1 percent; ** for 5 percent; and * for 10 percent.

42

Table 7. Triangular Arbitrage Opportunities: Probability of Disappearance
within 1 second, Equation (8)
7-OLS
Equation (8)

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

-0.15

-1.03

0.306

Volatility

-2.62***

-7.27

0.000

N_Deal

2.92 E-05***

7.73

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

4.29 E-03***

18.0

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.86

DW

0.57

NOB

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

7-GMM
Equation (8)

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

-0.99***

0.40

0.001

Volatility

-2.42***

0.79

0.002

N_Deal

5.41 E-05***

8.86 E-06

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

3.23 E-03***

1.29 E-03

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.81

DW

0.99

NOB

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

Note: (1) Panel OLS is estimated with Least-Squares methods; Panel GMM is estimated with Generalized
Methods of Moments.
(2) Significance level is indicated with *** for 1 percent; ** for 5 percent; and * for 10 percent.

43

Table 8.

Regression, Probability of triple deals, Equations (9) and (10)

8-OLS
Eq. (9): Unconditional

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

-7.87***

0.19

0.000

Volatility

-5.80***

0.49

0.000

N_Deal

7.85 E-05***

5.09 E-06

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

3.71 E-03***

3.2 E-04

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.86

DW

0.97

NOB
Eq. (10): Conditional on TA

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)
Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

-3.24***

0.39

0.000

Volatility

-11.7***

0.97

0.000

N_Deal

1.04 E-04***

1.02 E-05

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

7.44 E-03***

6.39 E-04

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.79

DW

0.60

NOB

132 (Jan 1999 – Dec 2009)

8-GMM
Eq. (9): Unconditional

Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

-8.96***

0.34

0.000

Volatility

-6.20***

0.82

0.000

N_Deal

1.17 E-04***

1.12 E-05

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

2.32 E-03***

5.84 E-03

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.79

DW

1.45

NOB
Eq. (10): Conditional of TA

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)
Coeff

s.e.

P-stat

C

-5.30***

0.78

0.000

Volatility

-11.8***

2.01

0.000

N_Deal

1.71 E-04***

2.64 E-05

0.000

N_AI+N_PTC

4.84 E-03***

1.15 E-03

0.000

Adj R-squared

0.71

DW

1.05

NOB

131 (Feb 1999 – Dec 2009)

Note: (1) Panel OLS is estimated with Ordinary Least-Squares methods; Panel GMM is estimated with
Generalized Methods of Moments.
(2) Significance level is indicated with *** for 1 percent; ** for 5 percent; and * for 10 percent.

44

Figure 1. Probability of negative spreads duration
Panel 1-A. USD/JPY

Panel 1-B. EUR/USD

45

Panel 1-C. EUR/JPY

46

Figure 2. Negative Spread, Emergence and disappearance
Panel 2-A. USD/JPY

47

Panel 2-B. EUR/USD

Figure 2-C. EUR/JPY

48

Figure 3. Probability of double deals
Panel 3-A. USD/JPY

One second within negative spread

Unconditional

Panel 3-B. EUR/USD

49

Panel 3-C. EUR/JPY

50

Figure 4. Probability of Triangular Arbitrage Opportunities: defined by duration

51

Figure 5. Triangular Arbitrage Opportunities

52

Figure 6. Probability of Triple deals

53

