                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               REPO AND SECURITIES LENDING

                                            Tobias Adrian
                                            Brian Begalle
                                           Adam Copeland
                                           Antoine Martin

                                        Working Paper 18549
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18549


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




This paper was prepared for the NBER Systemic Risk Measurement Initiative meeting on October
27, 2010. The authors thank Markus Brunnermeier, Michael Fleming, Ken Garbade, Frank Keane,
Jamie McAndrews, and Arvind Krishnamurthy for constructive comments on earlier versions of this
paper. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Tobias Adrian, Brian Begalle, Adam Copeland, and Antoine Martin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Repo and Securities Lending
Tobias Adrian, Brian Begalle, Adam Copeland, and Antoine Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 18549
November 2012
JEL No. G18,G23,G28,G38

                                              ABSTRACT

We provide an overview of the data required to monitor repo and securities lending markets for the
purposes of informing policymakers and researchers about firm-level and systemic risk. We start by
explaining the functioning of these markets and argue that it is crucial to understand the institutional
arrangements. Data collection is currently incomplete. A comprehensive collection would include,
at a minimum, six characteristics of repo and securities lending trades at the firm level: principal amount,
interest rate, collateral type, haircut, tenor, and counterparty.


Tobias Adrian                                        Adam Copeland
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                     Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Capital Market Research                              adam.copeland@gmail.com
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045                                   Antoine Martin
tobias.adrian@ny.frb.org                             Federal Reserve Bank of New York
                                                     Antoine.Martin@ny.frb.org
Brian Begalle
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
brian.begalle@ny.frb.org
Introduction
The markets for repurchase agreements (repos) and securities lending (sec lending) are part of
the collateralized U.S.-dollar-denominated money markets. The markets for repos and sec
lending are crucial for the trading of fixed-income securities and equities.3 Repos are especially
important for allowing arbitrage in the Treasury, agency, and agency mortgage-backed securities
markets, thus enhancing price discovery and market liquidity. Securities lending markets play
key roles in allowing shorting, both in fixed-income and equity markets. Given the essential role
of these markets to the functioning and efficiency of the financial system, it is important to better
understand and monitor repo and sec lending.
        The key question addressed in this paper is, what are the data requirements for
monitoring repo and sec lending markets so as to inform policymakers and researchers about
firm-level and systemic risk?
        One conclusion emerging from the paper is the need to better understand the institutional
arrangements in these markets. To that end, we find that existing data sources are incomplete.
More comprehensive data collection would both deepen our understanding of the repo and sec
lending markets and facilitate monitoring firm-level and systemic risk in these markets.
Specifically, we argue that, at a minimum, six shared characteristics of repo and sec lending
trades would need to be collected at the firm level: 1) principal amount, 2) interest rate (or
lending fee for certain securities loan transactions), 3) collateral type, 4) haircut, 5) tenor, and 6)
counterparty.
        In addition, we believe there would be value in collecting data at the firm level on the
instruments in which securities lending cash collateral is invested. The reinvestment of cash
collateral as practiced by securities lending agents potentially introduces a source of risk in
addition to the “run” risk that also exists in repo markets.
        These data would create a complete picture of the repo and sec lending trades in the
market, allowing for a deeper understanding of the institutional arrangements in these markets
and for accurate measurement of firm-level risk. Further, these data would allow for measures of
the interconnectedness of the repo and sec lending markets, which would allow for better gauges



3
 Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2011) offer a detailed comparison of these collateralized money
markets. See Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009) for an excellent overview of the market for asset-backed
commercial paper, which constitutes another important secured money market.
                                                   1
of the systemic risk in these markets. The involvements of custodians, sec lending agents, and
tri-party repo banks contribute to the riskiness of each transaction.


Background on Repurchase Agreements and Securities Lending
A repurchase agreement is the sale of securities coupled with an agreement to repurchase the
securities, at a specified price, at a later date (see Duffie (1996) and Garbade (2006)). Securities
lending agreements are economically similar to repo agreements.4 Both agreements resemble a
collateralized loan, but their treatment under the U.S. bankruptcy law is more beneficial to cash
lenders: In the event of bankruptcy, cash lenders can typically sell their collateral, rather than be
subject to an automatic stay as would be the case for a collateralized loan.
        A repo or sec lending trade consists of six key variables: the size of the transaction, the
interest rate, the type of eligible collateral, the haircut, the maturity date, and the counterparties.
The haircut corresponds to the difference between the value of the cash and the value of the
collateral and is generally expressed as a percentage. For example, if $100 of securities
collateralizes a loan of $98, the haircut is 2 percent. The level of haircut will typically reflect the
quality of the collateral but may also vary by counterparty, reflecting the collateral provider’s
creditworthiness. The haircut can thus limit the counterparty credit risk exposure in secured
borrowing transactions.
        Repo and sec lending trades are conducted in over-the-counter markets that intermediate
between borrowers and lenders, facilitating the exchange of securities and cash.5 Given that these
are collateralized money markets, each transaction features a collateral provider and a cash
lender. The motivation behind a specific repo or sec lending transaction can be either cash or
security driven. A cash-driven transaction is one where the collateral provider is seeking to
borrow cash, while a security-driven transaction is one where the cash lender is seeking to
borrow securities.
        Among the financial intermediaries that participate in repo and sec lending markets, two
sets of institutions are crucial. First, clearing banks and custodial agents are primarily involved in


4
  For a detailed comparison of repo and sec lending agreements from a legal perspective, see Ruchin
(2011). In practice, repos are used more often to finance fixed-income securities, while securities lending
is used more often to obtain equities.
5
  Sec lending agreements can accommodate the exchange of securities for securities. In the United States,
however, most sec lending transactions exchange securities and cash. This article focuses on this more
common case.
                                                     2
the operations of the repo and sec lending markets. Second, security dealers are both lenders and
borrowers owing to their role as market makers. In contrast to the repo market, custodians play a
unique role in sec lending transactions.


                                     Figure 1: U.S. Repo Markets




          Source: Copeland, Duffie, Martin, and McLaughlin (forthcoming).

          Note: MMFs are money market mutual funds and PB is prime brokerage.


          A schematic of the U.S. repo markets, provided in Figure 1,6 illustrates the extensive
intermediation role played by securities dealers. For example, securities dealers intermediate
between financial institutions that are long in cash, such as money market mutual funds,
corporate treasuries, and custodial agents, and those institutions that are short in cash, such as
hedge funds and other dealers. Repo markets are also used to reallocate securities both among
securities dealers (e.g., the GCF repo market) and between securities dealers and hedge funds,
asset managers, and other financial institutions. The role of the clearing banks is hidden in Figure
1—they provide the operational support for the tri-party repo market (see the following section
for details on that market).


6
    See also Copeland, Davis, LeSueur, and Martin (2012).
                                                    3
          Securities dealers also intermediate in the sec lending markets. In these markets,
securities dealers are often borrowing securities from custodial agents and lending these same
securities to hedge funds and other financial institutions. Part of the cash collateral that custodial
agents acquire in the sec lending market is typically invested in the repo markets, creating an
important link between the two markets. The custodial business is fairly concentrated: A few
large players dominate the market as suppliers of general collateral and specific securities.
Consequently, custodial agents are also large cash lenders in the market for repos.
          While repo and securities loans may be open or term, most sec lending transactions are
open. An open loan has an overnight tenor, but continues until one of the counterparties decides
to cancel it. In particular, if the borrower returns the securities, the lender must return the cash
collateral.



The U.S. Repo Markets
Overview
It is useful to separate two broad classes of repos, distinguished by the way they are settled:
bilateral and tri-party. Bilateral repos are repurchase agreements between two institutions where
settlement typically occurs on a “delivery versus payment” basis. More specifically, the transfer
of the collateral to the cash lender occurs simultaneously with the transfer of the cash to the
collateral provider. Hence, the cash lender must have back-office capabilities to receive, track,
value, and account for the securities.7
          In a tri-party repo transaction, a third party provides a suite of collateral management and
settlement services, such as settling the repos on its book, valuing the collateral, and making sure
that the collateral adheres to the lender’s eligibility requirements. Because settlement occurs on
the books of a third party to whom collateral management has been outsourced, the cash lender
does not need the back-office capability to take possession of the collateral. Currently, the U.S.
tri-party repo market is set up to facilitate cash-driven repos. In contrast, bilateral repos are used
to obtain both specific securities and cash. In addition, the tri-party repo market is currently
exposed to intraday credit risk by the clearing banks, while the bilateral repo market does not
have such exposures.


7
    The cash lender can also hire its custodial bank to perform these services.
                                                        4
The Bilateral Repo Market
The bilateral repo market provides for the exchange of cash and securities directly between
collateral and cash providers. Use of this market may be preferable to other repo markets when
two parties want to interact directly with each other, rather than through an agent, or if specific
collateral is desired. Dealers use bilateral repos to provide cash to hedge funds, real estate
investment trusts, banks, and other institutions, primarily through their prime brokerage
activities. The collateral that dealers obtain in this fashion can in some cases be rehypothecated
in other repo markets, notably the tri-party repo market. Bilateral repos are also common in the
interdealer market, either as a source of funding or as a way to obtain specific securities.
          Dealers often serve as the custodian for their prime brokerage clients. In such cases, they
settle bilateral repos through which they provide cash to these clients on their books. Interdealer
bilateral repos are typically settled on the Fedwire Securities Service or through the Fixed
Income Clearing Corporation (FICC).8 One of the benefits of settling with FICC is that the
settlement of a dealer’s repos, reverse repos, buy-sell transactions, and auction awards are netted
(see Garbade and Ingber (2005)).


The Tri-party Repo Market
The U.S. tri-party repo market is set up to facilitate cash-driven transactions and serves as a key
source of funding for securities dealers. Hence, the main collateral providers in the tri-party repo
market are securities dealers—in particular, primary dealers. Some large hedge funds and other
institutions with large portfolios of securities also borrow in the tri-party repo market, but they
represent a small share of the total volume.
          The cash lenders are more numerous and diverse than collateral providers. More than
4,000 individual firms are active as cash lenders. However, despite this large number, there is
some concentration among cash lender types as money market mutual funds represent between a
quarter and a third of the cash invested in the tri-party repo market and securities lenders
represent an additional quarter of cash invested. Securities lenders use the tri-party repo market
to reinvest some of the cash collateral received from lending securities.




8
    For more information on the FICC, see http://www.dtcc.com/about/subs/ficc.php.
                                                    5
In the United States, the role of the third party is played by the two government securities
clearing banks: JPMorgan Chase and the Bank of New York Mellon, which we also call tri-party
agents.
          In addition to the responsibilities described above, current tri-party market practice
results in the need for the clearing banks to finance the dealers’ securities during the day. The
intraday credit exposure results in high concentration risk of the clearing banks vis-à-vis tri-party
repo borrowers. Specifically, clearing banks “unwind” the tri-party repo trades each day. The
unwind consists of sending cash back to the lenders’ cash accounts and the securities back to the
collateral providers’ securities accounts, respectively, on the balance sheet of the clearing bank
very early each day. This exchange results in the clearing banks extending intraday credit to the
collateral providers, since the securities are no longer financed by the tri-party cash lenders. 9 The
unwind facilitates the settlement of repos at the end of the day (Copeland, Duffie, Martin, and
McLaughlin (2012)).


The GCF Repo® Market
The GCF repo® market is a blind-brokered interdealer market for Fedwire-eligible securities.
This is the market where most interdealer repo transactions occur.10 Fleming and Garbade (2003)
provide an overview of the GCF repo market, which is part of the tri-party repo market because
it settles on the books of the clearing banks. FICC guarantees settlement as soon as it receives the
data from the broker and compares the transaction.
          To participate, dealers must be netting members of FICC’s Government Securities
Division. The GCF Repo service enables dealers to trade general collateral repos, based on rate,
term, and underlying product, throughout the day without requiring intraday, trade-for-trade
settlement on a delivery-versus-payment basis, which shifts settlement risk to the FICC netting
members in aggregate.




9
  Reforms are currently under way to reduce or eliminate this intraday exposure. See
http://www.newyorkfed.org/banking/tpr_infr_reform.html.
10
   For further information, see http://www.dtcc.com/products/fi/fixed_income_gsd/gcf_repo.php.
                                                    6
The U.S Securities Lending Market11
Overview
In U.S. equity markets, securities lending is driven primarily by the prohibition on “naked” short
selling, which is a short sale by an institution that does not hold the security and therefore cannot
complete delivery.12 The ban on naked short selling creates a role for securities lending, which
allows an institution that wants to sell a security short to borrow it.
        In U.S. fixed-income markets, securities lending is used not only for short selling, but
also for other borrowing transactions such as security-for-security arrangements. An institution
may also want to borrow a security to hedge risk through the use of derivatives or to avoid
“failing” on a delivery. Institutions also borrow securities to trade the repo rate itself; that is, if a
Treasury security is trading special and a participant expects it to gain more specialness value, it
will borrow that collateral for term and lend it overnight, hoping that the average overnight
special repo rate is more attractive (lower) than the special repo rate it pays to borrow the
security for term.
        In the United States, most securities lending is done against cash collateral. Typically, the
lender of a security pays an interest rate to the borrower for the cash collateral. The scarcer the
security, the lower the interest rate paid by the securities lender. In addition to the return
potentially generated through the lending transaction, lenders of securities seek to earn an
additional return by investing the cash collateral. It should be noted that yield enhancement
strategies embedded in the sec lending markets tend to be fundamentally different from plain
repo transactions. In the sec lending markets, cash collateral is frequently invested in assets with
characteristics that are very different from GC repo collateral, thus creating potential liquidity
risk exposures.
        The main lenders of securities are beneficial asset holders, such as pension plans, mutual
funds, hedge funds, or insurance companies. These institutions typically own the securities
outright and view sec lending as a way to enhance the yield of their security portfolios. Because
the borrowing of securities is mainly for short selling, derivative hedging, or avoiding fails, the
main borrowers are hedge funds, asset managers, option traders, and market makers.



11
   Lipson, Sabel, and Keane (1990a,b) provide a comprehensive overview of the securities lending
market.
12
   For SEC regulation SHO, see http://www.sec.gov/divisions/marketreg/mrfaqregsho1204.htm.
                                                    7
          Custodian banks typically provide securities lending services (lending of securities as
well as cash collateral reinvestment) to their clients, although some large beneficial asset holders
may conduct these activities themselves. There are also some non-custodian third-party
providers of these services. Prime brokers usually facilitate transactions for borrowers of
securities.


Crises in the Repurchase and Securities Lending Markets
During the recent financial crisis, both the repo and sec lending markets experienced runs. This
section describes what is known about these runs, highlighting the additional data required to
better understand them.


U.S. Repo Markets
Both the bilateral and tri-party repo markets experienced runs, but they were different in nature.
In a repo market, an increase in haircuts can force a borrower to de-lever because a smaller
amount of cash is raised with the same amount of securities. Hence, a repo market can
experience a run if haircuts for all collateral classes increase by a large amount.13 Similarly, an
asset class can experience a run if the haircuts for that particular asset class increase. A run on
one or several asset classes seems to have happened in some bilateral repo markets during the
crisis.
          A different kind of run can occur in a repo market if haircuts do not increase. An
institution that relies on a repo market for its funding may be forced into bankruptcy if its
creditors refuse to extend repo financing. This seems to have happened to Bear Stearns and
Lehman Brothers in the tri-party repo market during the crisis, as lenders reacted to the perceived
creditworthiness of the counterparty as opposed to the quality of the collateral.
          Our knowledge of the events in these markets comes from recent empirical studies:
Gorton and Metrick (2012) analyze haircuts in the bilateral market, while Copeland, Martin, and
Walker (2010) and Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2011) focus on the haircuts in the tri-party
repo market.
          These studies suggest that haircuts in the bilateral and tri-party markets behaved
differently during the crisis. In the bilateral market, Gorton and Metrick show that haircuts

13
  In addition, Adrian and Shin (2009), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and Ashcraft, Garleanu, and
Pedersen (2010) suggest that haircuts are state variables for aggregate economic activity.
                                                   8
increased rapidly and reached high levels.14 Hence, these authors argue that there was a
generalized “run” on this repo market that reduced the amount of cash that could be raised by
borrowers. Corroborating evidence for Gorton and Metrick’s hypothesis is the high number of
hedge fund failures due to margin calls. On July 31, 2007, two hedge funds operated by Bear
Stearns filed for bankruptcy protection. Both were highly levered mortgage funds that were
funded primarily in the repo markets. A closely related bankruptcy occurred on March 5, 2008,
when Carlyle Capital Corporation failed to meet margin calls as a result of increases in repo
haircuts. In the fall of 2008, many more hedge funds and shadow banks failed when they were
unable to meet margin calls. These instances are labeled “repo runs” by Gorton and Metrick,
though one could alternatively view them as forced de-leveraging.15
        In contrast, haircuts barely moved in the tri-party repo market, as documented in
Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2010). The difference between the haircuts in the bilateral and
tri-party repo markets increased during the fall of 2008, peaked sometime in the first half of
2009, and fell back close to the level of July 2008 by the beginning of 2010.
        This evidence suggests no generalized run on the tri-party repo market, although
Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2011) argue that there was a run on repo backed by non-
agency MBS/ABS collateral. However, it appears that Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers did
experience runs, and the loss of funding in the tri-party repo market contributed to their
difficulties. So in the case of the tri-party repo market, stress seemed to affect specific
counterparties rather than the broad collateral classes, except perhaps the non-agency MBS/ABS.
        Understanding the differences in behavior between the bilateral and the tri-party repo
markets is important. Rising haircuts, while problematic in their own right, can be viewed as an
equilibrating phenomenon (Martin, Skeie, and von Thadden (2010)). Indeed, increasing haircuts
reduce the amount of funding borrowers can obtain, but this does not shut them out of the market
altogether. In addition, if the increase in margins is gradual, it may give institutions time to adapt
or find other sources of funding. In the tri-party repo market, the reduction in funding was
precipitous, leaving little time for the firms to adapt.



14
   Different counterparties may have faced different haircuts in this market, but data are not available to
support this view.
15
   Adrian and Shin (2010) show that there is generally a close connection between repos and leverage of
broker-dealers. The increase of haircuts in the bilateral market thus maps into the deleveraging of the
broker-dealer sector following the Lehman bankruptcy and the concurrent decline of outstanding repos.
                                                     9
        Another difference between the bilateral and tri-party repo markets during this time was
the creation of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) by the Federal Reserve following the
Bear Stearns crisis of March 13, 2008 (see Adrian, Burke, and McAndrews (2009)). The PDCF
was created to backstop the tri-party repo market, and the set of eligible collateral was broadened
over time. The PDCF may have prevented some runs on securities dealers, although it could not
prevent the trouble experienced by Lehman. While the PDCF is designed to provide liquidity, it
cannot prevent credit events due to solvency problems.
        While the empirical studies discussed above present compelling evidence of the variety
of behavior that occurs in repo markets, they also highlight the lack of comprehensive data.
Gorton and Metrick (forthcoming) analyze data on one firm’s activities in one repo market
segment, and Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2010) describe quantity and haircut data on the tri-
party repo market. Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2011) have collected firm-level data on all
six elements of the repo transactions, but, as they explain later in their paper, these data are
limited by their scope and frequency. This lack of data hinders a deep understanding of the
drivers behind the different run dynamics observed in repo markets. Furthermore, the lack of
data makes it much more difficult to evaluate the effectiveness of policy actions, such as the
PDCF.


U.S. Securities Lending Markets
As in the repo markets, aspects of the securities lending market behaved differently during the
recent crisis. A broad deleveraging took place, creating liquidity stress and, in some cases, losses
for securities lenders as they were forced to return the cash collateral to the borrowers of the
securities. The liquidity stress and the losses were typically commensurate with the degrees of
credit risk and liquidity transformation associated with the investment of cash collateral.
Excessive speculation in cash reinvestment created extreme asset-liability mismatches, in what
could have been a boring and safe activity (that is, investing only in Treasury GC repo).
        The crisis surrounding AIG offers an example. Like many other large insurance
companies, AIG engaged in securities lending. Before the financial crisis, its loans were mostly
open and its pool of cash collateral was invested in particularly long-term and illiquid assets.
This meant that AIG was performing considerable liquidity transformation, which can result in
liquidity stress. This investment strategy yielded high returns before the crisis; however, it
contributed to AIG’s liquidity squeeze during the crisis. The firm experienced something similar
                                               10
to a run as borrowers of its securities sought to return them as part of the general market
deleveraging that took place. The need to liquidate some illiquid assets to accommodate this
return of securities contributed to a sizable share of AIG’s losses. Maiden Lane II LLC was
created to alleviate capital and liquidity pressures on AIG associated with the securities lending
portfolios of several regulated U.S. insurance subsidiaries of AIG.16


The Economics of Collateralized Short-Term Lending and Data Needs
The runs described in the previous sections suggest that understanding the fragility of repo and
securities lending markets requires a good understanding of the institutional arrangements under
which these contracts are traded. This means that disaggregated data are particularly useful to
understand market participants’ reactions under stress.
          Liquidity transformation is one of the key functions of financial intermediation. In
general, intermediaries tend to be funded with short-term debt and tend to hold longer-term,
relatively illiquid assets. This liquidity mismatch can give rise to fragility, as pointed out in the
seminal contribution by Diamond and Dybvig (1983). However, the inefficiencies arising in this
simple setup can be solved with a variety of policies or financial innovations. More recently, a
rapidly growing literature has been focusing on fragility that is due to rollover risk (see Acharya,
Gale, and Yorulmazer (forthcoming), Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2010), and He and Xiong
(forthcoming)).
          The key concerns related to the repos and securities loans described in our examples are
associated with the possibility of runs, which arise from liquidity transformation, and their
potential spillover, which can occur when institutions are interconnected. This suggests that data
on the degree of liquidity transformation being performed, notably the tenor of repos and
securities loans, are particularly important. The tenor of instruments in which cash collateral is
reinvested is of additional importance, as is information about the interconnectedness of the
participants engaged in these markets.
          In addition to providing insights about the amount of maturity transformation,
information about the tenor of an institution’s funding can serve as an early warning system.
Difficulty in renewing long-term funding typically signals that an institution is under stress.
Longer-term funding gives the institution more time to find alternative sources of funding or to


16
     See http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/maidenlane.html for more details.
                                                   11
take other measures to improve its odds of survival. A longer-duration maturity profile also gives
regulators more time to prepare for a potential rescue of the firm or an orderly unwind.
       Repos are an important part, but not the only source, of funding for dealers. Getting a
better picture of the various sources of dealer funding and how dealers are passing this funding
on is important for our understanding of the sources of dealer fragility. For example, Duffie
(2010) suggests three potential sources of “runs” on dealers: OTC derivative counterparties
trying to reduce their exposure to dealers, loss of prime brokerage business, and a run on secured
financing, including repo. Disclosure of cash management holdings could mitigate the potential
for creating hidden vulnerabilities in the securities lending markets.
       It is helpful to gauge the availability of different funding sources in times of stress and to
know the extent to which different funding source are substitutable. Understanding the
differences in behavior between bilateral and tri-party repos contributes to that knowledge. In
addition, understanding the extent to which financial market participants are interconnected can
help us draw conclusions about the possible propagation of stress throughout the financial
system.
       Another potentially interesting source of data is the type of collateral being financed in
repo markets. This information may provide some insights into the risk appetite of the
institutions that fund dealers. Changes in the type of assets serving as collateral, or the
introduction of new asset classes, can offer insights into the evolution of funding markets.
       In addition to these data, information about rates and haircuts would also be useful—
particularly information about interest rates and haircuts faced by dealers, given the critical
intermediating role they play. Owing to the behavioral differences between the tri-party repo
market and the bilateral repo market, interpreting those data could be difficult. Nevertheless, the
data could help us understand these markets better and also provide interesting cross-sectional
information about different dealers. Making cross-sectional data public, however, could raise
disclosure issues.


Existing Data and Data Gaps
Both repo and securities lending transactions can be characterized by six pieces of information:
principal, interest rate, collateral, haircut, tenor, and counterparty. For regulatory purposes, all
six pieces of information are crucial for properly gauging systemic and firm-level risk. For
example, in response to a rise in the perceived risk of a dealer seeking to finance its securities,
                                                 12
cash lenders might ask for higher interest rates, higher-quality collateral, increased haircuts,
shorter maturities, or all of the above. Because they are heterogeneous, there is no standard
response by cash lenders when faced with increased counterparty risk. As such, knowing a
financial institution’s counterparties is essential to understanding that firm’s risk level.
        Furthermore, counterparty information would allow regulators and researchers to
measure the interconnectedness of a repo or securities lending market. An important goal for
regulators is to understand how difficulties arising in a firm will impact other firms in the
market, but this cannot be accomplished without information on counterparties. In addition,
information about the cash reinvestment strategies of sec lending cash lenders is an important
ingredient for assessing the riskiness of these transactions. This is in contrast to GC repo
transactions, where counterparty information is less relevant owing to the liquidity of the
collateral.
        A number of data sources provide information on the six characteristics of repo and sec
lending trades described above. Below, we review which types of data on these characteristics
are generally available to the public and discuss which additional data would need to be
collected.


Interest Rates
A number of sources offer average interest rates on repo or sec lending transactions, conditional
on the type of collateral offered and the tenor of the trade. Bloomberg, for example, provides
daily averages of interest rates by tenor and collateral type for general collateral repo trades. Data
Explorer offers similar average interest rate data based on sec lending transactions.
        These public sources report interest rate data at the aggregate level and therefore do not
provide the rates paid by individual firms. But interest rates often reflect the perceived risk level
of the financial institution borrowing the cash. As such, we argue that collecting interest rate data
for repo and sec lending trades at the firm level is important to understanding the risks in these
markets.
        A source of firm-level interest rate data is the SEC N-Q report filed by publicly traded
money market mutual funds (MMFs). Although these data are not reported in a standardized
form, MMFs generally report, by type, the total value of securities they have accepted as
collateral for repo transactions, as well as information on haircuts, maturity, interest rates, and
counterparties. Hence, these data provide a fairly detailed snapshot of MMF repo activities.
                                                 13
Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2011) have started to collect and organize these data for the
larger MMFs, focusing on the years encompassing the recent financial crisis. These data are
promising because they provide firm-level information on all six characteristics of repo trades.
         Obtaining these data for all major repo and securities lending firms would provide
enough information to accurately measure firm-level and systemic risk in repo and sec lending
markets. Unfortunately, these data on MMFs are limited in their scope and frequency. MMFs are
a large source of cash in U.S. repo markets, but they are far from being a majority—for example,
they account for one-quarter to one-third of total cash invested in tri-party repo. The snapshots
of activity are also fairly infrequent, with new data on a MMF arriving semiannually.
Furthermore, these snapshots may not be representative of normal activity because these money
funds may take into account that their repo transactions will be included in their SEC reports (in
other words, these data may suffer from the window-dressing problem).


Principal and Collateral
There are a number of data sources on the value of securities used in repo and sec lending
transactions (i.e., the amount of collateral posted). Data Explorer offers a wealth of detailed
information on the daily quantity of securities lending trades. As with interest rates, these data
are available only at the market level, making it difficult to use them for monitoring individual
firms.
         Additional data on the value of securities used in repo and sec lending transactions are
available from regular balance-sheet filings with the SEC. Every publicly traded company has to
file quarterly 10-Q and annual 10-K reports. For financial institutions that participate in repo and
sec lending transactions, the 10-Ks and 10-Qs will report those transactions to the extent that
they occur on the balance sheet. While the 10-K and 10-Q reports contain balance-sheet data at
the consolidated holding company level, the SEC also collects balance-sheet data on the
subsidiaries of securities dealers. The U.S. flow of funds relies on these reports in aggregating
balance-sheet information on broker-dealers.
         In early 2010, the SEC required money market mutual funds to file N-MFP reports. The
data captured by this form contain, among other things, information on the securities an MMF
accepts as collateral for repo transactions—in particular, the name of the security’s issuer, the
maturity date of the security, the coupon or yield, and value of the security. The form also reports
haircuts (the ratio of the collateral value relative to the repo value), the maturity of the repo as
                                                   14
determined under rule 2a-7 (taking maturity-shortening provisions and maturity-date extensions
into account), and the interest rate of the repo.
       The N-MFP report collects its data in a standardized manner, and the report is filed in an
XML tagged data format. Consequently, it will be fairly straightforward going forward to collect
and analyze data on the collateral that MMFs are accepting in their repo transactions.
       Moreover, the Federal Reserve form FR2004 assembles information on market activity
from primary dealers.17 Primary dealers report the total value of securities purchased and sold
through repo transactions by asset class. While the dealer-level data are confidential, aggregated
information is made available to the public.
       A relatively new source of information is provided by the Tri-Party Repo Infrastructure
Reform website.18 This source reports, by asset class, the total value of securities that are posted
as collateral in the tri-party repo market on the seventh business day of each month. Also
reported is the total value of securities, by asset class, posted in the GCF repo market.
       The above data essentially provide snapshots of activity at the aggregate or firm level.
But although interesting, these data do not provide sufficient information to answer many
important questions about the repo and securities lending markets.


Haircuts
Information on haircuts is limited. Beyond the aforementioned SEC data on money market
mutual funds, there is only aggregate data on haircuts in the tri-party repo market. Specifically,
the Tri-Party Repo Infrastructure Reform website provides information on the distribution of
haircuts.


Tenor and Counterparty
As far as we know, the only public source of information on tenor and counterparties is the
aforementioned SEC N-Q report data filed by money market mutual funds.




17
   See http://www.federalreserve.gov/reportforms/reportdetail.cfm?WhichFormId=FR_2004. For more
information on primary dealers, see http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealers.html. Adrian and
Fleming (2005) provide an overview of the FR 2004 data.
18
   See http://www.newyorkfed.org/banking/tpr_infr_reform.html.
                                                    15
        In summary, a number of public data sources provide information on the interest rates
and values of securities used in repo and securities lending trades. Much less is known about
haircuts, tenor, and counterparties and the exact nature of cash reinvestment strategies in these
markets. Unfortunately, it is often difficult or impossible to piece together the information at the
firm level, and this is exactly the information needed to properly assess the risk level of a firm.
While the overall amount of repo and sec lending trades of a firm is informative, the term
structure of those trades is of first-order importance when assessing a firm’s risk level. Similarly,
counterparty, interest rate, and haircut information all significantly impact a firm’s risk level.
Consequently, it is important to collect this information at the firm level and in a comprehensive
fashion.
        In addition to the type of data described above, insight into the use of cash collateral
provides value. As previously mentioned, cash collateral is frequently provided against
securities lending transactions in the U.S. market and that cash is reinvested to earn an additional
return. Individual lenders determine the degree of reinvestment risk they desire; therefore
investments can be across a broad range of instruments of varying credit quality and tenor.
Collection of data related to instrument type, credit rating (if applicable), and tenor can help
identify the degree to which securities lending cash collateral is supporting other markets, as well
as the degree of associated risk.


Conclusion

In a September 2012 speech, “Implications of the Financial Crisis for Economics,” Federal
Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke distinguished between economic science, economic
engineering, and economic management:19
        Economic science concerns itself primarily with theoretical and empirical generalizations
        about the behavior of individuals, institutions, markets, and national economies. Most
        academic research falls in this category. Economic engineering is about the design and
        analysis of frameworks for achieving specific economic objectives. Examples of such
        frameworks are the risk management systems of financial institutions and the financial
        regulatory systems of the United States and other countries. Economic management
        involves the operation of economic frameworks in real time—for example, in the private

19
  The speech can be found at http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100924a.htm.
                                                  16
       sector, the management of complex financial institutions or, in the public sector, the day-
       to-day supervision of those institutions.
Chairman Bernanke goes on to add, “With that taxonomy in hand, I would argue that the recent
financial crisis was more a failure of economic engineering and economic management than of
what I have called economic science.”
       Our argument in this paper is consistent with the Fed Chairman’s view and suggests that
we need both better data and a better understanding of the institutional arrangements and the
economic engineering by which key economic actors operate. The two go hand in hand. Good
data help illuminate market functioning and can be useful for detecting changes in market
practices that could increase risk. A good understanding of institutional arrangements may be
necessary to make sense of the patterns identified by the data and can suggest the need for new
data as market infrastructure evolves.
       Better data are particularly important for understanding repo and securities lending
markets and monitoring developments that may indicate stress. Such early warning signals can
be the basis for policy decisions that aim at stabilizing the financial system. These are the money
markets at the heart of the market-based financial system. While repo markets primarily enhance
the efficiency of fixed-income markets, securities lending markets play central roles for both
fixed-income and equity markets. Repo and securities lending markets are especially important
for allowing arbitrage in the Treasury, agency, and agency MBS markets, thus enhancing price
discovery, efficiency, and market liquidity. Securities lending markets play crucial roles in the
shorting of securities. However, both markets also perform liquidity transformation roles and are
thus exposed to the drying up of liquidity.
        In the securities lending markets today, the degree of liquidity transformation is not
reported in any transparent or systematic fashion, even when transactions involve large amounts
of liquidity transformation. The repo market experienced liquidity shortages in the week prior to
the Bear Stearns crisis, and the securities lending portfolio in Maiden Lane II illustrates the risk
in liquidity mismatches of securities lending. The differences in behavior between the tri-party
repo market and the bilateral repo market underscore this point. In the bilateral market, stress
manifested itself in the form of a large and rapid increase in haircuts, creating a generalized run
on the market. In the tri-party repo market, haircuts barely moved but some firms experienced
dramatic decreases in the amount of financing they obtained in this market. Hence, the structure

                                                   17
of each market, and the nature of their participants, appears to have an impact on how stress
manifested itself. Understanding these differences remains important.




References

Acharya, V., D. Gale, and T. Yorulmazer (forthcoming) “Rollover Risk and Market Freezes,”
Journal of Finance.

Adrian, T., and M. Fleming (2005) “What Financing Data Reveal about Dealer Leverage,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 11 (3).

Adrian, T., C. Burke, and J. McAndrews (2009) “The Federal Reserve’s Primary Dealer Credit
Facility,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 15 (4).

Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2009) “Prices and Quantities in the Monetary Policy Transmission
Mechanism,” International Journal of Central Banking 5(4), pp. 131-142.

Adrian, T., and H. S. Shin (2010) “Liquidity and Leverage,” Journal of Financial Intermediation
19 (3).

Ashcraft, A., N. Garleanu, and L. H. Pedersen (2010). “Two monetary tools: Interest rates and
haircuts,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16337.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and L. H. Pedersen (2009). “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,”
Review of Financial Studies, 22(6), 2201-2238.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and M. Oehmke (2010) “The Maturity Rat Race,” Working Paper,
Princeton University.

Copeland A., I. Davis, E. LeSueur, and A. Martin (2012) “Mapping and Sizing the U.S. Repo
Market” Liberty Street Economics, June 25
(http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2012/06/mapping-and-sizing-the-us-repo-
market.html).

Copeland A., D. Duffie, A. Martin, and S. McLaughlin (2012) “Key Mechanics of the U.S. Tri-
Party Repo Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review.

Copeland A., A. Martin, and M. W. Walker (2010) “The Tri-party Repo Market Before the 2010
Reforms,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 477.
                                                18
Covitz, D., N. Liang, and G. A. Suarez (2009) “The Evolution of a Financial Crisis: Panic in the
Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2009-36.

Diamond, D., and P. Dybvig (1983) “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,”
Journal of Political Economy 91, 401–419.

Duffie, D. (1996) “Special Repo Rates,” Journal of Finance 51(2), 493–526.

Duffie, D. (2010) How Big Banks Fail and What to Do About It, Princeton University Press.

Fleming, M., and K. Garbade (2003) “The Repurchase Agreement Refined: GCF Repo®,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 9 (6).

Garbade, K. (2006) “The Evolution of Repo Contracting Conventions in the 1980s,” Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 12 (1).

Garbade, K., and J. F. Ingber (2005) “The Treasury Auction Process: Objectives, Structure,
and Recent Adaptations,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and
Finance 11 (2).

Gorton, G. B. and A. Metrick (2012) “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” Journal of
Financial Economics 104(3) pp. 425–451.

He, Z. and W. Xiong (forthcoming) “Rollover Risk and Credit Risk,” Journal of Finance.

Krishnamurthy, A., S. Nagel, and D. Orlov (2011) “Sizing up Repo,” Northwestern and Stanford
University Working Paper.

Lipson, P., B. Sabel, and F. Keane (1990a) “Securities Lending, Part 1: Basic Transactions and
Participants,” Journal of Commercial Bank Lending 6, 4–18.

Lipson, P., B. Sabel, and F. Keane (1990b) “Securities Lending, Part 2: Regulation, Pricing, and
Risks Borne by Participants,” Journal of Commercial Bank Lending 7, 18–31.

Martin, A., D. Skeie, and E.-L. von Thadden (2010) “Repo Runs,” Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Staff Reports 444.

Ruchin, Andre (2011) “Can Securities Lending Transactions Substitute for Repurchase
Agreement Transactions?” The Banking Law Journal 128 (5), 450–480.
                                               19
