                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      SPECULATIVE BETAS

                                            Harrison Hong
                                             David Sraer

                                        Working Paper 18548
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18548


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




Hong acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation through grant SES-0850404. Sraer
gratefully acknowledges support from the European Research Council (Grant No. FP7/2007-2013
- 249429) as well as the hospitality of the Toulouse School of Economics. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Harrison Hong and David Sraer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Speculative Betas
Harrison Hong and David Sraer
NBER Working Paper No. 18548
November 2012
JEL No. G02,G11,G12

                                             ABSTRACT

We provide a model for why high beta assets are more prone to speculative overpricing than low beta
ones. When investors disagree about the common factor of cash-flows, high beta assets are more sensitive
to this macro-disagreement and experience a greater divergence-of-opinion about their payoffs. Short-sales
constraints for some investors such as retail mutual funds result in high beta assets being over-priced.
When aggregate disagreement is low, expected return increases with beta due to risk-sharing. But
when it is large, expected return initially increases but then decreases with beta. High beta assets have
greater shorting from unconstrained arbitrageurs and more share turnover. Using measures of disagreement
about stock earnings and economic uncertainty, we verify these predictions. A calibration exercise
yields reasonable parameter values.


Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
hhong@princeton.edu

David Sraer
Princeton University
Bendheim Center for Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
dsraer@princeton.edu
1.     Introduction
There is compelling evidence that the risk and return trade-off, the cornerstone of modern
asset pricing theory, is often of the wrong sign. This literature, which dates back to Black
(1972) and Black et al. (1972), shows that low risk stocks, as measured by a stock’s co-
movement with the stock market or Sharpe (1964)’s Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
beta, have significantly outperformed high risk stocks over the last thirty years.1 For instance,
Figure 1, analogous to figure 1 c in Baker et al. (2011), shows that the cumulative performance
of stocks since January 1968 declines with beta.2 A dollar invested in a value-weighted
portfolio of the lowest quintile of beta stocks would have yielded $96.21 ($15.35 in real terms)
at the end of December 2010. A dollar invested in the highest quintile of beta stocks would
have yielded around $26.39 ($4.21 in real terms). This under-performance is as economically
significant as famous excess stock return predictability patterns such as the value-growth or
price momentum effects.3
    We provide a theory for this high-risk and low-return puzzle by allowing investors to
disagree about the market or common factor of firm cash flows and prohibiting some investors
from short-selling. First, there is substantial evidence of disagreement among professional
forecasters’ and households’ expectations about many macroeconomic state variables such as
market earnings, industrial production growth and inflation (Cukierman and Wachtel (1979),
Kandel and Pearson (1995), Mankiw et al. (2004), Lamont (2002)). Macro-disagreement
might emanate from many sources such as heterogeneous priors or cognitive biases such as
overconfidence.4 Second, short-sales constraints bind for some investors due to institutional
reasons as opposed to the physical cost of shorting.5 For instance, many investors in the stock
market such as retail mutual funds, which in 2010 have 20 trillion dollars under management,
are prohibited by charter from shorting directly (Almazan et al. (2004)) or indirectly through
the use of derivatives (Koski and Pontiff (1999)). Only a small subset of investors, such as
   1
      A non-exhaustive list of studies include Blitz and Vliet (2007), Cohen et al. (2005), and Frazzini and
Pedersen (2010).
    2
      See section 3.2 for details on the construction of our beta portfolios.
    3
      Baker et al. (2011) report that the value-growth effect (Fama and French (1992), Lakonishok et al.
(1994)), buying stocks with low price-to-fundamental ratios and shorting those with high ones, generates a
reward-to-risk or Sharpe (1964) ratio that is two-thirds of a zero-beta adjusted strategy of buying low beta
stocks and shorting high beta stocks. The corresponding figure for the momentum effect (Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993)), buying past year winning stocks and shorting past year losing ones, is roughly three-fourths
of the long low beta, short high beta strategy.
    4
      See Hong and Stein (2007) for a discussion of the various rationales. A large literature starting with
Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean (2001) argues that retail investors engage in excessive trading due to
overconfidence.
    5
      See Lamont (2004) for a discussion of the many rationales for the bias against shorting in financial
markets, including historical events such as the Great Depression in which short-sellers were blamed for the
Crash of 1929.


                                                     1
hedge funds with 1.8 trillion dollars in asset management, can and do short.
    We incorporate these two assumptions — disagreement and short-sales constraint —
into an otherwise standard CAPM framework, in which firms’ cash flows follow a one-factor
model. Investors only disagree about the mean of the macro-factor or common component
of cash flows. There are two groups of investors: buyers such as retail mutual funds who
cannot short and arbitrageurs such as hedge funds who can short. Our model is the multi-
asset extension of Chen et al. (2002)’s rendition of Miller (1977), who originally considered
how disagreement and short-sales constraints affects the pricing of a single stock. The key
result from these papers is that large divergence of opinion leads to over-pricing because price
reflects only the views of the optimists as pessimists are sidelined due to binding short-sales
constraints.6
    Our main result is that high beta assets are over-priced compared to low beta ones when
disagreement about the common factor is high. High beta stocks like retailers load more
on the macro-factor than low beta companies like utilities. If investors disagree about the
mean of the common factor, then their forecasts of the payoffs of high beta stocks will
naturally diverge much more than their forecasts of low beta ones. In other words, beta
amplifies disagreement about the macro-economy. Because of short-sales constraints, high
beta stocks, which are more sensitive to macro-disagreement than low beta ones, are only
held in equilibrium by optimists as pessimists are sidelined. This creates over-pricing of high
beta stocks compared to low beta ones. Arbitrageurs attempt to correct this mis-pricing but
their risk aversion results only in limited shorting leading to equilibrium over-pricing.7
    Our model yields the following key testable implication. When macro-disagreement is
low, all investors are long and short-sales constraints do not bind. The traditional risk-
sharing motive leads high beta assets to attract a lower price or higher expected return.
For high enough levels of aggregate disagreement, the relationship between risk and return
takes on an inverted U-shape. For assets with a beta below a certain cut-off, expected
returns are increasing in beta as there is little disagreement about these stock’s cash flows
and therefore short-selling constraints do not bind in equilibrium. But for assets with a beta
above an equilibrium cut-off, disagreement about the dividend becomes sufficiently large that
the pessimist investors are sidelined. This speculative over-pricing effect can dominate the
risk-sharing effect and the expected returns of high beta assets can actually be lower than
   6
     The consideration of a general disagreement structure about both means and covariances of asset returns
with short-sales restrictions in a CAPM setting is developed in Jarrow (1980), who shows that short-sales
restrictions in one asset might increase the prices of others. It turns out that a focus on a simpler one-
factor disagreement structure about common cash-flows yields closed form solutions and a host of testable
implications for the cross-section of asset prices that would otherwise not be possible.
   7
     High beta stocks might also be more difficult to arbitrage because of incentives for benchmarking and
other agency issues (Brennan (1993), Baker et al. (2011).)


                                                     2
those of low beta ones. As disagreement increases, the cut-off level for beta below which all
investors are long falls and the fraction of assets experiencing binding short-sales constraints
increases.8
    We test this prediction using monthly time-series of disagreement about market earnings
and economic uncertainty. Disagreement for a stock’s cash-flow is simply measured by the
standard deviation of its analysts’ long-term earnings growth forecasts, as in Diether et al.
(2002). The aggregate disagreement measure is a beta-weighted average of analyst earnings
forecast dispersion for all stocks, similar in spirit to Yu (2010). The weighting by beta in
our proxy for aggregate disagreement is suggested by our theory. After all, stocks with
very low beta have by definition almost no sensitivity to aggregate disagreement, and their
disagreement should mostly reflect idiosyncratic disagreement. As can be seen from Figure 5,
our time-series of aggregate disagreement is highly correlated with an economic uncertainty
series constructed by Bloom (2009) and Bloom et al. (2012), which is simply the cross-
sectional standard deviation of U.S. plants sales growth. Note that these measures can
be high during both down-markets, like the recessions of 1981-82 and 2007-2008, and up-
markets, like the dot-com boom of the late nineties.
    As shown in panel (c) of Figure 7, in the months with low aggregate disagreement or
uncertainty (defined as the bottom quartile of the disagreement distribution and denoted
by blue dots), expected 6-month excess returns are in fact increasing with beta. But in
months with high aggregate disagreement or uncertainty (defined as the top quartile of
the disagreement distribution and denoted by red dots), the risk-return relationship has an
inverted-U shape. For stocks in lowest and highest beta deciles, the average excess return net
of the risk-free rate is around 4%. For stocks in middle beta deciles, the average excess return
is around 6%. This inverted U-shape relationship is formally estimated in the context of a
standard Fama-MacBeth analysis where the concavity of the excess return/β relationship is
shown to be strictly increasing with aggregate disagreement.
    Our findings are consistent with Diether et al. (2002) and Yu (2010), who find that disper-
sion of earnings forecasts predicts low returns in the cross-section and for the market return
in the time-series respectively, consistent with the predictions of models with disagreement
and short-sales constraints. But our focus is on the theory and the empirics of the shape of
the Security Market Line as a function of aggregate disagreement, and in particular on its
concavity. Importantly, we show below that the inverted U-shape relationship observed in
the data is not simply a function of high beta stocks performing badly during down mar-
   8
    When aggregate disagreement is so large that pessimists are sidelined on all assets, the relationship
between risk and return is entirely downward sloping as the entire market becomes overpriced. We assume
that all assets in our model have a strictly positive loading on the aggregate factor. Thus, it is always
possible that pessimists want to be short an asset, provided aggregate disagreement is large enough.


                                                   3
kets nor is it a function of high disagreement stocks under-performing. We also show that
our finding is not driven by (and if anything made stronger after controlling for) existing
cross-sectional predictability patterns like size and value-growth effects in the data. In other
words, the inverted-U shaped relationship between beta and return and its dependence on
aggregate uncertainty is unique to our model and new to the literature.
    Our model also delivers three additional novel predictions, which we also confirm using
our aggregate disagreement measures. First, investors’ disagreement about the cash flows
of high beta assets increases during times of high uncertainty or disagreement about the
macro-factor. Second, high beta stocks are more likely to be shorted by arbitrageurs and
especially so when aggregate disagreement is high. Third, in an overlapping-generations
(OLG) extension of our static model, we show that in high aggregate disagreement states,
the share turnover gap between high and low beta assets is higher than in low aggregate
disagreement states. Investors anticipate that high beta assets are more likely to experience
binding short-sales constraints in the future and hence have a potentially higher resale price
than low beta ones relative to fundamentals (Harrison and Kreps (1978), Morris (1996),
Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) and Hong et al. (2006)). Since disagreement is persistent,
this pushes up the price of high beta assets in the high disagreement state. This overpricing
leads arbitrageurs to short high beta assets, thereby increasing the share turnover of these
stocks.
    We consider a calibration exercise using the OLG extension of our model and show that,
under reasonable parameter values, it can generate economically significant concavity in the
Security Market Line. Hence, our model provides an alternative to Black (1972)’s model for
the high risk and low return puzzle as emanating from leverage constraints. The inverted-U
shape between risk and return, predicted by our model and found in the data, is not found
in a model based solely on leverage constraints.
    Our model also naturally generates market segmentation in the sense that during high
uncertainty periods only optimists own high beta stocks. Hence, we deliver an analog to
Merton (1987)’s segmented CAPM due to clientele effects, except that volatility attracts
lower returns in our setting due to speculation as opposed to higher returns in his setting
due to risk absorption. Our insight that high beta assets are more speculative and have
higher turnover is related to Hong and Sraer (2011)’s analysis of credit bubbles. They point
out how debt, with a bounded upside, is less disagreement sensitive than equity and hence
less prone to speculative over-pricing and over-trading.
    More generally, our model generates predictions about the pricing of the cross-section
of stocks that are different from theories based on risk-sharing, liquidity or even behavioral
biases. In Delong et al. (1990), high noise trading risk yields high returns. In Campbell et


                                               4
al. (1993), high liquidity risk yields high expected return. In Barberis and Huang (2001),
mental accounting by investors still leads to a positive relationship between risk and return.
The exception is the model of overconfident investors and the cross-section of stock returns
in Daniel et al. (2001) that might yield a negative relationship as well but not an inverted
U-shape pattern with beta.
    Our paper proceeds as follows. We present the model in Section 2. We describe the data
in Section 3. We present the empirical analysis in Section 4. We conclude in Section 5. All
proofs are in Appendix A.


2.     Model
2.1.     Static Setting
We consider an economy populated with a continuum of investors of mass 1. There are two
periods, t = 0, 1. There are N risky assets and the risk-free rate is exogenously set at r.
Risky asset i delivers a dividend d˜i at date 1, which is given by:

                                   ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , N },   d˜i = bi z̃ + ˜i ,

where the systematic component is z̃ ∼ N (z̄, σz2 ), the idiosyncratic component is ˜i ∼
N (0, σ2 ) and Cov (z̃, ˜i ) = 0. bi is the cash-flow beta of asset i and is assumed to be strictly
positive. Each asset i is in supply N1 and we assume w.l.o.g. that:9

                                           b1 < b2 < · · · < bN .

Assets in the economy are indexed by their cash-flow betas, which are increasing in i. The
value-weighted average b in the economy is set to 1 ( N
                                                     P bi
                                                        i=1 N = 1).
    Investors are divided into two groups. A fraction α of them hold heterogenous beliefs
and cannot short. We call these buyers mutual funds (MF), who are in practice prohibited
from shorting by charter. These investors are divided in two groups of mass 21 , A and B, who
disagree about the mean value of the aggregate shock z̃. Group A believes that EA [z̃] = z̄ +λ
while group B believes that EB [z̃] = z̄ − λ. We assume w.l.o.g. that λ > 0 so that group A
are the optimists and B the pessimists.
    A fraction 1 − α of investors hold homogeneous and correct beliefs and are not subject
to the short-sales constraint. We index these investors by a (for ”arbitrageurs”). For con-
   9
   This normalization of supply to 1/N is without loss of generality. If asset i is in supply si , then what
matters is the ranking of assets along the sbii dimension. The rest of the analysis is then left unchanged


                                                      5
creteness, one might interpret these buyers as hedge funds (HF), who can generally short at
little cost.10 Investors maximize their date-1 wealth and have mean-variance preferences:

                                                                        1
                                    U (W̃ k ) = Ek [W̃ k ] −              V ar(W̃ k )
                                                                       2γ

where k ∈ {a, A, B} and γ is the investors’ risk tolerance. Investors in group A or B maximize
under the constraint that their holding of stocks have to be greater than 0.


2.2.     Equilibrium
The following theorem characterizes the equilibrium.
                             α
Theorem 1. Let θ = 1−2 α and let (ui )i∈[0,N +1] be a sequence such that uN +1 = 0,
                     P 2                    
                                   σz2 P      bj
ui = γN1 bi σ2 + σz2       b
                        j<i j
                              2
                                +  γ      j≥i N    for i ∈ [1, N ] and u0 = ∞. u is a strictly
decreasing sequence. Let ī = min {k ∈ [0, N + 1] | λ > uk }.
   Equilibrium asset prices are given by:
                                              σ2
                                                   
                               1
                      
                      
                       z̄bi −     bi σz2 +              for i < ī
                      
                      
                      
                              γ              N
                                                                         σz2 P
                      
                                                                                         
                                              σ2         θσ2   λγ − N       i≥ī bi
                                                   
         Pi (1 + r) =          1                                                             1               (1)
                       z̄bi −     bi σz2 +             +       bi            P       2
                                                                                          −  for i ≥ ī
                      
                      
                      
                      
                               γ              N             γ      σ2 + σz2    i<ī bi
                                                                                             N
                      
                                                         |                 {z                 }
                      
                                                                      π i =speculative premium


Assets with high cash-flow betas, i.e. i ≥ ī, are over-priced (relative to the benchmark with
no short-sales constraints or when α = 0) and the amount of over-pricing, defined as the
difference between the price and the benchmark price in the absence of short-sales constraints,
is increasing with disagreement λ and with the fraction of short-sales constrained investors
α.
    Group A investors are long all assets. Group B investors are long assets i < ī − 1 and
have 0 holdings of assets i ≥ ī. There exists λ̂ > 0 such that provided that λ > λ̂, there
exists ĩ ∈ [ī, N ] such that (1) group a investors short high cash-flow beta assets (i.e. i ≥ ĩ)
(2) the amount of shorting increases with aggregate disagreement λ and (3) the sensitivity
of shorting to aggregate disagreement is higher for high cash-flow beta assets.

Proof. We sketch the derivation of equilibrium prices and leave the remaining proof for the Appendix A.1.
We first posit an equilibrium structure and check ex-post that it is indeed an equilibrium. Let ī ∈ [2, N ].
Consider an equilibrium where group B investors are long on assets i < ī and hold no position (i.e. µB
                                                                                                      i = 0)

  10
    That these investors have homogenous beliefs is simply assumed for expositional convenience. Heteroge-
neous priors for unconstrained investors wash out in the aggregate and have thus no impact on equilibrium
asset prices.


                                                               6
for assets i ≥ ī and group A investors are long all assets i ∈ [1, N ]. Since group A investors are long, their
holdings satisfy the following first order conditions:

                                                                               N
                                                                                             !                     !
                                                             1                 X
                    ∀i ∈ [1, N ] : (z̄ + λ)bi − Pi (1 + r) =                         bk µA
                                                                                         k       bi σz2 + µA  2
                                                                                                           i σ
                                                             γ
                                                                               k=1


Since group B investors are long only on assets i < ī, their holdings for these assets must also satisfy the
following first order condition:

                                                                                ī−1
                                                                                               !                        !
                                                                   1            X
                  ∀i ∈ [1, ī − 1],      (z̄ − λ)bi − Pi (1 + r) =                     bk µB
                                                                                           k       bi σz2   +   µB  2
                                                                                                                 i σ
                                                                   γ
                                                                                k=1


For assets i ≥ ī, group B investors have 0 holdings and so µB  i = 0. For these assets, it must be the case
that the group B investors’ marginal utility of holding the asset, taken at the equilibrium holdings, is strictly
negative (otherwise, group B investors would have an incentive to increase their holdings). This is equivalent
to:                                                                         !     !
                                                                 ī−1
                                                           1     X
                                                                          B     2
                        ∀i ≥ ī, (z̄ − λ)bi − Pi (1 + r) −            bk µk bi σz < 0
                                                           γ
                                                                               k=1

Finally, since arbitrageurs are not short-sales constrained, their holdings always satisfy the following first-
order condition:                                                        !             !
                                                               N
                                                           1  X
                                                                      a     2    a 2
                        ∀i ∈ [1, N ] : z̄bi − Pi (1 + r) =        bk µk bi σz + µi σ
                                                           γ
                                                                          k=1

                                                                      µA   B
                                                                       i +µi
The market clearing condition for asset i is simply: α 2          + (1 − α)µai = N1 . We sum the first-order
conditions of investors a, A and B for assets i < ī, and of investors a and A only for assets i ≥ ī, weighting
the sum by the size of each investors group (i.e. α2 for group A and B and 1 − α for group a). This results
in the following equations:

                                            σ2
                                              
                                 1      2
              z̄b − Pi (1 + r) =    bi σz +       for i < ī
            
             i
            
                                 γ          N
            
            
                                                                        ī−1
                                                                                   !                                        (2)
                  α                      α       1        2 σ2 α 2 X         B
             1 − 2 (z̄bi − Pi (1 + r)) + 2 λbi = γ bi σz + N − 2 σz bi      bk µk   for i ≥ ī
            
            
            
                                                                                                 k=1

          Pī−1
Call S = i=1 bi µB i . S represents the exposure of group B investors to the aggregate factor z̃. We look for
an expression for S. We start by using the first order conditions of group B investors on assets i < ī and
plug in the equilibrium price of assets i < ī found in the first equation of system (2):

                                                                       σ2
                                 ∀i < ī,          − λγbi + bi σz2 +       = Sbi σz2 + µB  2
                                                                                        i σ
                                                                       N

We can now simply multiply the previous equation by bi for all i < ī and sum up the resulting equations for
i < ī, which results in:
                                                                                       
                                                                                      2
                                      X                    X               X        σ    X
                   Sσ2 = −λγ               b2k  − Sσz2   b2k  + σz2    b2k  +     bk                              (3)
                                                                                    N
                                      k<ī                 k<ī                 k<ī                        k≥ī




                                                                  7
From the previous expression, we can now derive S:
                                                      P            
                                                              bi
                                                                                                
                                                σ2                                         2
                                                                                P
                                                         i≥ī N         + λγ          i<ī bi
                                    S =1−                               P         2
                                                                                      
                                                        σ2 + σz2           i<ī bi

Now that we have a closed-form expression for S, we simply plug it into the second equation of system 2 for
assets i ≥ ī, allowing us to obtain the equilibrium price of assets i ≥ ī:
                                                                                            
                                           2                 2                2 X            2
                                            
                              1          σ                  σ              σ              σ
          Pi (1 + r) = z̄bi −    bi σz2 +  + θ bi 2        P      2
                                                                       λ − z       bk  −               (4)
                              γ          N         σ + σz2        b
                                                               i<ī i
                                                                            γN             γN
                                                                                k≥ī
                                               |                        {z                     }
                                                                              π i =speculative premium

            α
where θ = 1−2 α is a strictly increasing function of α. The first equation of system 2 provides us with a simple
              2
expression for the price of assets i < ī:

                                                                                 σ2
                                                                                   
                                                                   1
                                      Pi (1 + r) = z̄bi −                bi σz2 +                          (5)
                                                                   γ             N

The proposed equilibrium holds provided that group B investors have (1) strictly positive holdings of asset
ī − 1 and (2) negative marginal utility of holding asset ī at the equilibrium holding. We show in Appendix
A.1 that this is equivalent to ī = min {k ∈ [0, N + 1]|λ > uk } where (uk )k∈[0,N +1] is defined in Theorem 1.
The rest of the proof is provided in Appendix A.1.

The dividends of high bi assets are more sensitive to aggregate disagreement (λ). Thus there
is more disagreement among investors about the expected dividends of high bi assets relative
to low bi assets. Above a certain level of bi (bi ≥ bī ), investors sufficiently disagree that
group B would like to optimally short these stocks. However, this is impossible because of
the short-sales constraint. These stocks thus experience a speculative premium since their
price reflects only the belief of the optimistic group A. As aggregate disagreement grows, the
cash flow beta of the marginal asset — the asset above which group B investors are sidelined
— decreases, i.e. there is a larger fraction of assets experiencing over-pricing.
    When short-sales constraints are binding, i.e. for these assets i ≥ ī, the difference between
the unconstrained price and the constrained price is given by:

                                                              σz2                     !
                                                                        P                           !
                                 θσ 2                 λγ −     N            i≥ī bi          1
                             πi =         bi                           P         2
                                                                                          −            .
                                  γ                   σ2 +   σz2           i<ī bi
                                                                                             N

This term, which we call the speculative premium, captures the degree of over-pricing due to
the short-sales constraints. This speculative premium is strictly increasing with θ, i.e. with
the fraction of short-sales constrained investors α. For a fixed bi , the larger is the divergence
of opinion λ, the greater the over-pricing.
    The final result in Theorem 1 looks at the amount of shorting in equilibrium and how it

                                                              8
is impacted by aggregate disagreement. Intuitively, HFs (i.e. group a investors) short assets
with large mispricing, i.e. high b assets. As aggregate disagreement increases, mispricing
increases, so that HFs end up shorting more. However, an increase in aggregate disagreement
leads to a larger increase in mispricing of high b stocks, so that the corresponding increase
in shorting is larger for high b stocks as well. In other words, there is in general a weakly
increasing relationship between shorting by HFs and b. Provided that λ is large enough, this
relationship becomes strictly steeper as aggregate disagreement increases.


2.3.       Risk and Expected Return
We now restate equilibrium prices in terms of expected excess returns and relate them to
the familiar market β from the CAPM. Define excess returns as R̃i = bi z̃ − (1 + r)Pi . Define
                                                                                 2 P
                                                                                σz
                  Cov(R̃i ,R˜M )  ˜   PN R̃i                            σ2 λγ− N ( i≥ī bi )
βi such that βi = V ar(R ˜ ) and RM = i=1 N . Finally, define κ(λ) = σ2 σ2 +σ2 P b2 > 0.
                           M                                             z      z ( i<ī i )
                                           11
Then expected excess returns are given by:

                                          σ2
                             
                                 σz2 +   N
                              βi                for i < ī
                             
                             
                                      γ
                   E[R̃i ] =              σ2
                                                                                           (6)
                                    2
                                 σ +                        σ2
                              βi z       N
                                                (1 − θκ(λ)) +  θ (1 + κ(λ)) for i ≥ ī
                             
                             
                                      γ                      γN

This follows directly from Theorem 1. For α = 0 (θ = 0), investors have homogenous beliefs
so that λ does not affect the expected returns of the assets and the standard CAPM formula
holds. Precisely, the expected returns depend on the covariance of the asset with the market
return, and the risk premium is simply determined by the ratio of the variance of the market
return (which is close to the variance of the aggregate factor σz2 when N is large) to the risk
tolerance of investors γ.
    However, when a fraction α > 0 of investors are short-sales constrained and aggregate
disagreement is large enough, ī ≤ N and expected returns for assets i ≥ ī depend on
aggregate disagreement λ. High beta stocks are subject to more disagreement about their
expected cash flows and experience more binding short-sales constraints, higher prices and
hence lower expected returns. The CAPM does not hold and the Security Market Line is
kink-shaped. For assets with a beta above some cut-off (ī is determined endogenously and
depends itself on λ), the expected return is increasing with beta but at a lower pace than
for assets with a beta below this cut-off (this is the −θκ(λ) < 0 term above). If λ is large
enough, the slope of the Security Market Line for assets i ≥ ī can even be negative, i.e. the
Security Market Line is inverted-U shaped.
 11
      The derivation of this formula can be found in Appendix A.2.


                                                          9
   In our empirical analysis below, we approach this kink-shaped relationship between ex-
pected excess returns and β by looking at the concavity of the Security Market Line and
how this concavity is related to our proxies for aggregate disagreement. In addition, rather
than relying fully on the structure of the model, we take a simpler approach and also esti-
mate directly the slope of the Security Market Line, i.e. the coefficient estimate of an OLS
regression of realized excess returns on β. We show in the following corollary that that our
model predicts that this coefficient is strictly decreasing with idiosyncratic disagreement.

Corollary 1. Let µ̂ be the coefficient estimate of a cross-sectional regression of realized
returns R̃i on βi (and assuming there is a constant term in the regression). The coefficient
µ̂ decreases with λ the aggregate disagreement. This effect is larger when there are less
arbitrageurs in the economy (i.e. when α increases).

Proof. See Appendix A.3

    In the absence of disagreement and short-sales constraints (α = 0 – Pi.e. all investors are
                                                                      σ 2 +( N    1
                                                                             i=1 N 2 )σ
                                                                                       2
arbitrageurs), the slope of the Security Market Line is simply µ̂ = z         γ
                                                                                         . When at
least one asset experiences binding short-sales constraints (i.e. when λ ≥ uN ), µ̂, the slope of
the Security Market Line (as estimated from a regression of excess returns on β), is strictly
decreasing with λ, the aggregate disagreement parameter. In particular, it is direct to show
that µ̂ will be strictly negative, provided that λ is large enough relative to γ (i.e. that
the speculation motive for trading is large relative to the risk-sharing motive for trading).
Furthermore, the role of aggregate disagreement is magnified by the presence of short-sales
constrained investors: in an economy with a low fraction of arbitrageurs (i.e. high short-sales
constraints), an increase in λ leads to a much larger decrease in the estimated slope of the
Security Market Line than in an economy with many arbitrageurs.
    Corollary 1 implies that: (1) the slope of the SML (µ̂) is strictly lower when short-sales
constraints are binding (λ > uN ) than in the absence of binding short-sales constraints
(λ < uN ) and (2) the slope of the Security Market Line is strictly decreasing with λ as soon
as λ > uN . In particular, provided λ is high enough, the estimated slope of the Security
Market Line µ̂ can even become negative.


2.4.    Discussion of Assumptions and Limiting Cases
Our theory relies on two fundamental ingredients, disagreement and short-sales constraint.
Both are important. In the absence of disagreement, all investors share the same portfolio
and since there is a strictly positive supply of assets, this portfolio is long only. Thus, the
short-sales constraint is irrelevant – it never binds – and the standard CAPM results apply.

                                               10
In the absence of short-sales constraints, the disagreement of group A and group B investors
washes out in the market clearing condition and prices simply reflect the average belief,
which we have assumed to be correct.
    The model also relies on important simplifying assumptions. First of them is that, in our
framework, investors disagree only on the expectation of the aggregate factor, z̃. A more
general setting would allow investors to also disagree on the idiosyncratic component of
stocks dividend ˜i . If the idiosyncratic disagreement on a stock is not systematically related
to this stock’s cash-flow beta, then our analysis is left unchanged since whatever mispricing
is created by idiosyncratic disagreement, it does not affect the shape of the Security Market
Line in a systematic fashion. If idiosyncratic disagreement is positively correlated with
stocks’ cash-flow beta, then the impact of aggregate disagreement on the Security Market
Line becomes even stronger. This is because there are now two sources of over-pricing
linked systematically with bi : one coming from aggregate disagreement, the other coming
from this additional idiosyncratic disagreement. Of course, theoretically, the case where
idiosyncratic disagreement is negatively correlated with bi – low cash flow beta assets have
high idiosyncratic disagreement – can potentially reverse our result. In this case, high beta
assets are overpriced because of their higher exposure to aggregate disagreement, but low beta
assets could also be overpriced because of their higher exposure to idiosyncratic disagreement.
However, as we show in Figure 6(b), in the data, disagreement on high β stocks earnings
is always larger than on low beta stocks, even in low aggregate disagreement months. This
suggests that, if anything, idiosyncratic disagreement is larger for high beta stocks. We also
believe that this conforms to standard intuition on the characteristics of high and low beta
stocks.
    Another restriction in the model is that investors only disagree on the first moment of
the aggregate factor z̃ and not on the second moment σz2 . From a theoretical viewpoint,
this is not very different. In the same way that β scales disagreement regarding z̄, β would
scale disagreement about σz2 . In other words, label the group that underestimates σz2 as
the optimists and the group that overestimate σz2 as the pessimists. Optimists are more
optimistic about the utility derived from holding a high β asset than a low β asset and
symmetrically, the pessimists are more pessimistic about the utility derived from holding a
high β asset than a low β asset. Again, high β assets are more sensitive to disagreement
about the variance of the aggregate factor σz2 than low β assets. As in our model, this would
naturally lead to high β stocks being overpriced when this disagreement about σz2 is large.
However, while empirical proxies for disagreement about the mean of the aggregate factor
can be constructed, it is not clear how one would proxy for disagreement about its variance.
    The model also imposes homoskedasticity of the dividend process. If dividends are


                                              11
heteroskedastic, then the short-sales constraints need not bind on high beta assets first.
More precisely, it is easily shown that in equilibrium short-sales constraints bind on as-
sets with a large ratio of cash-flow beta bi to idiosyncratic volatility of stock i’s dividend
              2                                                                                   2
process, σ,i    . That is, one can simply re-rank the assets in ascending order of bi /σ,i        ,
 bN        bN −1                b1
  2
σ,N
       > σ2          > · · · > σ2 and the equilibrium has a marginal asset ī such that assets
            ,N −1              ,1
i ≥ ī experience binding short-sales constraints. However, the data suggest a monotonic
relationship between betas and idiosyncratic volatility. Figure 2 shows that the median
stock-level σβ2 increases with the average β of our 20 β portfolios defined over the 1981 to
                 ,i
2010 period.12 We thus maintain our homoskedasticity assumption throughout the paper
though our model easily accommodates heteroskedasticity in the dividend process.13
      Finally, it is interesting to consider the limiting case where σ2 goes to 0 to understand the
role idiosyncratic risk plays in our model. In that case, the price of asset i (which delivers
bi z̃) has to be equal to bj /bi times the price of asset j (which delivers bj z̃).14 Thus, the
Security Market Line is necessarily linear when σ2 = 0, since for all i > 1: Pi = bi × Pb11 .
However, it can still be that all assets are over-priced. If this is the case, then group B
investors are out of the stock market. This is possible only if, for all i ∈ [1, N ], their
marginal utility of holding stock i at 0 is strictly negative, i.e.: bi (z̄ − λ) − (1 + r)Pi < 0.
Using the constrained price derived in equation 4 with σ2 = 0, we see that in that case:
Pi (1 + r) = bi z̄ − bγi (σz2 − θ (λγ − σz2 )). The condition for stock i to be over-priced then
                    1                                         σz2
becomes: −λ +       γ
                        (σz2 − θ (λγ − σz2 )) < 0 ⇔ λ >       γ
                                                                    = u1 . Thus, when σ2 = 0, two cases
                                                                                              2
arise. When aggregate disagreement is larger than the aggregate variance σγz , all assets are
over-priced. The Security Market Line is a line with slope γ1 (σz2 − (1 + θ) (λγ − σz2 )). Group
B investors are sidelined from the stock market. There is a CAPM representation of stock
returns, but the market return is smaller than in the standard CAPM and can even be strictly
negative. The second case is when λγ < σz2 and the standard CAPM results apply. While
over-pricing survives in this limiting case, the kinked-shape relationship between expected
excess return and β no longer exists.
  12
      We defer the reader to Section 3.2 for the construction of our 20 β portfolios.
  13
      In particular, closed forms are also obtained under heteroskedasticity. The general model with het-
eroskedastic dividends is available from the authors upon request.
   14
      Either θ < 1 and then HFs can arbitrage away any deviation from bi Pj = bj Pi by constructing a long
short portfolio delivering 0 for sure at date 1 and yielding them a strictly positive profit at date 0. Or θ = 1,
i.e. all investors are long only, and then any deviation from bi Pj = bj Pi results in 0 demand for the asset
with the larger price per unit of exposure to z̃, which makes the deviation unsustainable.




                                                       12
2.5.     Dynamic Setting
2.5.1.   Set-up

Consider now a dynamic extension of the previous model. We consider an overlapping
generation framework. Time is infinite, t = 0, 1, . . . ∞. Each period t, a new generation
of mass 1 is born and invest in the stock market to consume the proceeds at date t + 1.
Thus at date t, the new generation is buying assets from the current old generation (born
at date t − 1), which has to sell its entire portfolio in order to consume. Each generation is
composed with 2 groups of investors: arbitrageurs, or Hedge Funds, in proportion 1 − α, and
Mutual funds in proportion α. Investors have mean-variance preferences with risk tolerance
parameter γ. There are N assets, whose dividend process is given by:

                                              d˜i = bi z̃ + ˜i

    The timeline of the model appears on Figure 3. Mutual funds born at date t hold
heterogeneous beliefs about the expected value of z̃t+1 . Specifically, there are two groups
of mutual funds: group A – the optimist MFs – whose expectation about z̃t+1 is given by
EA [z̃t+1 ] = z̄ + λ̃t ) and group B – the pessimist MFs – whose expectation about z̃t+1 is given
by EB [z̃t+1 ] = z̄ − λ̃t ).15 Finally, we assume that λ̃t ∈ {0, λ > 0} is a two-state Markov
process with persistence ρ ∈]1/2, 1[.

2.5.2.   Risk and Share Turnover

Call Pti (λ̃) the price of asset i at date t when realized aggregate disagreement is λ̃t = λ̃ and
∆Pti = Pti (λ) − Pti (0). Call µki (λ̃t ) the number of shares of asset i purchased by investors in
group k when realized aggregate disagreement is λ̃t . Call λkt the realized belief at date t for
group k.16 We first compute the date-t+1 consumption of investors in group k ∈ {a, A, B}
born at date t:
                               !
                                                                                              
        ˜
                 X                    X                 X
          k           k                     k        i     k        i                   i
      W =            µ (λ̃t )bi z̃ +
                      i                   iµ (λ̃t )˜ +   µ (λ̃t ) P (λ̃t+1 ) − (1 + r)P (λt )
                                                              i    t+1                   t
                i≤N                 i≤N                i≤N

  15
   Most of the assumptions made in this model are discussed in Section 2.1 in the context of our static
model.
 16 A
   λt = λ and λB                        A    B                        a
                t = −λ when λ̃t = λ or λt = λt = 0 when λ̃t = 0 and λt = 0




                                                    13
Thus, the expected consumption at date t + 1 from investor k’s viewpoint, and its associated
variance are given by:
                                          !
                                                                                                                                        
     Ek [W˜ k ] =
                      X                                            X
                            µki (λ̃t )bi               λkt )             µki (λ̃t )           i
                                                                                                                           r)Pti (λt )
   
   
   
   
                                              (z̄ +           +                          E[Pt+1 (λ̃t+1 )|λ̃t ]   − (1 +
                     i≤N                                          i≤N
                                             !2                                                                                          !2
   
           ˜k
                        X                                  X                                               X
                              µki (λ̃t )bi        σz2 +            (µki (λ̃t ))2 σ + ρ(1 − ρ)                                  i
                                                                                                                  µki (λ̃t ) ∆Pt+1
                                                                                                                                    
    V ar[W ] =
   
   
   
                        i≤N                                i≤N                                             i≤N


    Relative to the static model, there are two notable changes. First, investors value the
                                                 i
resale price of their holding at date 1 (the E[Pt+1 (λ̃t+1 )|λ̃t ] term in expected consumption).
Second, investors now bear the corresponding risk that the resale    Pprices move with aggregate
                                                                              k           i
                                                                                              2
disagreement λ̃t (this is in our binomial setting the ρ(1 − ρ)              µ
                                                                        i≤N i   (λ̃t ) ∆Pt+1      term
in consumption variance).
    The following Theorem characterizes the equilibrium of this economy:

Theorem 2. Let ī = min {k ∈ [0, N + 1] | λ > uk }. Short-sales constraints bind only for the
group of pessimist investors (i.e. group B), in the high disagreement
                                                                        states (λ̃t = λ > 0) and                                                       
                                                                             2
                                                                                                         
                                                                                              σz2 P                                               σ2
for assets i ≥ ī. Denote by π j the speculative premium, π j = θ bj σ2 +σ2 σP
                                                                             
                                                                                          λ −       k≥ī k −
                                                                                                        b
                                                                          z ( i<ī bi )
                                                                      
                                                                                    2         γN                                                  γN

and define:
                                                          q
                                                               ((1 + r) − (2ρ − 1))2 +                 4 θρ(1−ρ)
                                                                                                                    P
                    −(1 + r) + (2ρ − 1) +                                                              N    γ          j≥ī   πj
               ?
             Γ =
                                                                     2 θρ(1−ρ)
                                                                          γ


Equilibrium returns are given by:

                                          σ2
                                             
      j            j        1         2
        (λ)] =       (0)] =       b σ   +          for j < ī


 E[R          E[R                 j z



                           γ             N
                                                                                 !
                            σ2                               Γ?


     j        1       2                                                        j
  E[R (0)] =      bj σz +       + ρ(1 − ρ)                          θρ(1−ρ) ?
                                                                              π     for j ≥ ī
               γ            N                (1  + r) − (2ρ  − 1) +        Γ

                                                                      γ

                                                                                 !
               1            σ2                               Γ?                             1 + r − (2ρ − 1)


      j                 2                                                       j
 E[R (λ)] = γ bj σz + N + ρ(1 − ρ)                                           π −                                    πj                       for j ≥ ī


                                                                   θρ(1−ρ) ?                              θρ(1−ρ) ?
                                             (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) +     γ   Γ         (1 + r) − (2ρ −  1) +    γ   Γ

Proof. See Appendix A.4.

    Low b assets (i.e. j < ī) are never shorted since there is not enough disagreement among
investors to make the pessimist investors willing to go short, even in the high disagreement
states. Thus, the price of these assets is the same in both states of nature and similar to the
standard CAPM case. High b assets (i.e. j ≥ ī) experience binding short-sales constraints by


                                                                     14
group B investors in the high disagreement state (λ̃ = λ > 0).17 . This leads to overpricing
of these assets relative to the standard benchmark without disagreement.
    A consequence of the previous analysis is that the price of assets j ≥ ī depends on the
realization of aggregate disagreement. There is thus an extra source of risk embedded in
these assets: their resale price is more exposed to aggregate disagreement. These assets
are riskier and command an extra risk premium relative to lower b assets. This extra risk
                                              Γ?
premium is given by: γ1 ρ(1 − ρ)                             j
                                                  θρ(1−ρ) ? π . Relative to a benchmark without
                                    (1+r)−(2ρ−1)+    γ
                                                         Γ
                                                                                  
                                                                      1     2  σ2
disagreement (and where expected returns are always equal to γ bj σz + N ), high b assets
have higher returns in low disagreement states (because of the extra risk-premium). In high
disagreement states, the returns of high b assets are strictly lower than in low disagreement
states, since the large disagreement about next-period dividends lead to overpricing. Thus,
the slope of the Security Market Line strictly decreases for high b assets in high disagreement
states, while it remains unchanged for low b assets. Whether the returns of high b assets are
lower or higher than in the benchmark without disagreement depends on the relative size
of the extra-risk premium and the speculative premium. In the data, however, aggregate
disagreement is persistent, i.e. ρ is close to 1. A first-order taylor expansion
                                                                                   ofΓ? gives that
      P π                                                                           2
Γ? ≈ j≥ī Nj so that provided that ρ is close to 1, E[Rj (λ)] < γ1 bj σz2 + σN . Intuitively,
when aggregate disagreement is persistent, this resale price risk is very limited, since there
is only a small probability that the price of high b assets will change next period. Thus, the
speculative premium term dominates and returns of high b assets are lower than under the
no-disagreement benchmark. We summarize these findings in the following proposition:

Proposition 1. Let ī = min {k ∈ [0, N + 1] | λ > uk }. Then the following holds: (i) The
Security Market Line is strictly increasing in low disagreement states (λ̃ = 0). The slope of
the Security Market Line in these states is strictly higher for assets j ≥ ī than for assets j < ī.
(ii) The Security Market Line is strictly increasing in high disagreement states (λ̃ = λ > 0)
for assets j < ī. For assets j ≥ ī, the slope of the Security Market Line in high disagreement
states can be either higher or lower than for assets j < ī. There exists ρ? < 1 such that for
ρ ≥ ρ? , the slope of the Security Market Line is strictly lower for high β assets than for low β
assets. (iii) The Security Market Line can slope down for assets j ≥ ī in high disagreement
states provided ρ is close to 1 and λ is large enough. (iv) The slope of the Security Market
Line for assets j ≥ ī is strictly lower in high disagreement states than in low disagreement
states.

Proof. See Appendix A.5.
  17
    In the low disagreement state, λ̃ = 0 so there is no disagreement among investors and hence there cannot
be any binding short-sales constraint.


                                                    15
     We next turn to our final result relating to turnover. Turnover in this economy is defined
as the number of shares exchanged in each period between the old and the new generation. If
all investors are long only, then this is trivially given by the supply of shares, i.e. N1 . Indeed,
the old generation is supplying N1 shares of each asset and investors in the new generation are
simply buying all these shares. Thus, in the low disagreement state, turnover is always equal
to N1 . When HFs short some assets in the high disagreement state, the effective number of
shares for these assets that are exchanged on the market become strictly larger than N1 . In
particular, turnover in this case is simply given by: N1 + |µa (λ)|, provided that µa (λ) < 0.
In this context, the following proposition characterizing turnover can be easily shown:

Proposition 2. Let ī = min {k ∈ [0, N + 1] | λ > uk }. Turnover is constant equal to 1/N
in the low disagreement state. In the high disagreement state, there exists î ≥ ī such that
turnover is strictly greater than 1/N and strictly increasing with b for assets j ≥ î. In other
words, the differential turnover between high b assets (j ≥ î) and low b assets (j < î) is
strictly greater in the high disagreement state than in the low disagreement state.

   These results are the exact mirrors of the results on shorting by group a investors in
Theorem 1. They are a direct consequence of the proof of Theorem 2 and are left to the
reader.


2.6.     Calibration
In this section, we present a simple calibration of the dynamic version of the model. The
objective of this calibration is to see what magnitude of aggregate disagreement is required
to obtain a significant distortion in the Security Market Line.
     The parameter we use are the following. ρ is set to .94. This corresponds to the coefficient
of an AR(1) regression of the proxy for aggregate disagreement we use in our empirical
analysis. We set the number of assets to N = 100, which is arbitrary. σz2 is set to .0022 and
σ2 to .029. These two values correspond to the empirical aggregate and idiosyncratic variance
of monthly stock returns over the 1970-2010 period.18 α ≈ .63 (i.e. θ = 1.75) corresponds to
the fraction of the stock market held by mutual funds and retail investors, for which the cost
of shorting is presumably non-trivial. Finally, γ, the risk-tolerance parameter is set to match
the average in-sample monthly stock excess returns observed in the data of .5% monthly.
     Three cases are displayed on Figure 4:

   1. λ = 0.005. γ is then set to .48 to match the equity premium over 1970-2011. There
      are 56 assets shorted at equilibrium. This level of disagreement corresponds roughly
  18
     Aggregate variance is the variance of the market return. Idiosyncratic variance is the variance of the
residual of a CAPM regression of monthly returns on the contemporaneous market return.

                                                    16
        to 10% of the standard deviation of the market return. We see on Figure 4(a) that for
        this level of disagreement, the distortion on the Security Market Line is limited.

  2. λ = 0.01. γ is then set to .347 to match the equity premium over 1970-2011. There
     are 88 assets shorted at equilibrium. This level of disagreement corresponds to 21%
     of the standard deviation of the market return. We see on Figure 4(b) that for this
     level of disagreement, the distortion on the Security Market Line becomes noticeable.
     However, the Security Market Line at this level of disagreement is still upward slopping
     for all β.

  3. λ = 0.015. γ is then set to .29 to match the equity premium over 1970-2011. There
     are 93 assets shorted at equilibrium. This level of disagreement corresponds to 32% of
     the standard deviation of the market return. We see on Figure 4(c) that for this level
     of disagreement, the Security Market Line has an inverted-U shape.

Two additional remarks can be made on these calibrations. First, while the Security Market
Line in our theory is not piecewise linear but rather piecewise quadratic 19 , it appears in our
calibration as a piecewise linear function. This is because the quadratic coefficient is divided
by N and with N = 100, it is not noticeable. Second, the extra-risk premium coming from
the exposure of high β assets to changes in aggregate disagreement is negligible at the level
of persistence ρ that we observe in the data (i.e. ρ = .94).


2.7.       Empirical Predictions
In this section, we simply summarize the empirical predictions of our model, which we will
take to the data. The first prediction – which is almost an assumption in our model – is
that β scales up aggregate disagreement:

Prediction 1. High beta stocks experience more disagreement in months with high aggregate
disagreement.

   The next two predictions, taken from the dynamic model, tie together shorting, turnover,
β and aggregate disagreement:

Prediction 2. There is an increasing relationship between shorting and β. This relationship
is steeper in high disagreement months.

Prediction 3. There is an increasing relationship between turnover and β. This relationship
is steeper in high disagreement months.
                                                     P
 19                                           bi       i≥ī bi
      The quadratic term corresponds to the   N σ2 +σz2 i<ī b2i
                                                        P           term in the speculative premium


                                                         17
    The fourth prediction describes the Security Market Line as a function of aggregate
disagreement. It holds exactly true in the static model and holds true in the dynamic model
provided ρ is large enough. In particular, it holds true in our calibration of the model, which
uses the empirical estimation of ρ.
Prediction 4. In low disagreement months, the Security Market Line is upward slopping.
In high disagreement months, the Security Market Line has a kink-shape: its slope is strictly
positive for low β assets, but strictly lower (and potentially negative) for high β assets.
    The final prediction relates the average slope of the Security Market Line with aggregate
disagreement. It holds true in both the static and the dynamic model.
Prediction 5. The average slope of the Security Market Line is strictly higher in low dis-
agreement months than in high disagreement months.


3.     Data
In this section, we present the data used in this paper. Table 1 presents descriptive statistics
of the variables used in subsequent analyses.


3.1.    Data Source
The data in this paper are collected from two main sources. U.S. stock return data are
from the CRSP tape and include all available common stocks on CRSP between January
1970 and December 20010. We exclude penny stocks defined as stocks with a share price
below $5. β’s are computed with respect to the value-weighted market returns provided on
Ken French’s website. Excess returns are above the US Treasury bill rate, which we also
download from his website. Monthly turnover is defined as monthly volume normalized by
number of shares outstanding.20 We also use stock analyst forecasts of the earnings-per-
share (EPS) long-term growth rate (LTG) as the main proxy for investors beliefs regarding
the future prospects of individual stocks. The data are provided in the I/B/E/S database.
As explained in detail in Yu (2010), the long-term forecast has several advantages. First,
it features prominently in valuation models. Second, it is less affected by a firms earnings
guidance relative to short-term forecasts. Because the long-term forecast is an expected
growth rate, it is directly comparable across firms or across time. We use analyst forecasts
from December 1981 through December 2010. Finally, we obtain short-interest ratio data
from Bloomberg. These data cover 17,716 stocks over the 1988-2009 period.
  20
    For NASDAQ stocks, we take 1/2 the volume to share outstanding in calcuating turnover as is the
convention when using CRSP data.

                                                18
3.2.     Constructing β portfolios
We follow the literature in constructing beta portfolios in the following manner. Each month,
we use the past twelve months of daily returns to estimate the market beta of each stock in
that cross-section. This is done by regressing, at the stock-level, the stock’s excess return
on the contemporaneous excess market return as well as five lags of the market return to
account for the illiquidity of small stocks (Dimson (1979)). Our measure of β is then the
sum of these six OLS coefficients. To limit the influence of large absolute returns on the
estimation of these βs, we windsorize the daily returns using as thresholds the median return
+/- five times the interquartile range of the daily return distribution.21
    We then sort stocks into 20 beta portfolios based on these pre-ranking betas. We compute
the daily equal-weighted returns on these portfolios. We then compute the post-ranking βs
by regressing each portfolio daily returns on the excess market returns, as well as five lags
of the market return and adding these six estimates. These post-ranking βs are computed
using the entire sample period (Fama and French (1992)). Using a one-year trailing window
to compute post-ranking time-varying β’s give quantitatively similar but noisier estimates.


3.3.     Measuring Aggregate Disagreement and Uncertainty
Our measure of aggregate disagreement is similar in spirit to Yu (2010). Stock-level dis-
agreement is measured as the dispersion in analyst forecasts of the earnings-per-share (EPS)
long-term growth rate (LTG). We then aggregate this stock-level disagreement measure,
weighting each stock by its post-ranking β. Intuitively, our model suggests that there are
two components to the overall disagreement on a stock dividend process: (1) a first com-
ponent coming from the disagreement about the aggregate factor z̃ – the λ in our model
and (2) a second component coming from disagreement about the idiosyncratic factor ˜i .
We are interested in constructing an empirical proxy for the first component only (see our
discussion in Section 2.4). To that end, disagreement about low β stocks should only play a
minor role since disagreement about a low β stock has to come mostly from idiosyncratic dis-
agreement (in the limit, disagreement about a β = 0 stock can only come from idiosyncratic
disagreement). Thus, we weight each stock-level disagreement by the stock’s post-ranking
β.22
    Figure 5 reports the time-series of this disagreement measure. On the same plot, we also
show a measure of uncertainty provided in Bloom et al. (2012). This measure consists in the
  21
     We have also experimented with windsorizing at the 1% threshold and found similar results.
  22
     An alternative measure is the dispersion of analyst forecasts of the earnings growth of the S&P 500 index.
The problem with this top-down measure is that there are far fewer analysts forecasting this quantity, making
it far less attractive when compared to our bottom-up measure.


                                                      19
cross-sectional dispersion of plant-level sales growth and is discussed extensively in Bloom
et al. (2012). This measure captures the uncertainty underlying the economic fundamentals
of the economy.
    These two series are strongly correlated with our measure of aggregate disagreement on
the overlapping sample (correlation of .57). The time-series of our aggregate disagreement
and uncertainty measures peak during the 1981/82 recession, the dot-com bubble of the late
90s and the recent recession of 2008. When these fundamentals are more uncertain, there
is more scope for disagreement among investors. Given how correlated these two series are,
we focus on the aggregate disagreement measure for the most part but we also consider
robustness checks using the longer sample period for the uncertainty measure which goes
back to 1970.


4.     Empirical Analysis
4.1.    Predictions on Disagreement, Shorting and Share Turnover
We first start by testing the predictions of our model that are related to quantity as opposed
to prices. Figure 6 highlights the role played by aggregate disagreement on the relationship
between turnover, shorting and stock-level disagreement and β. For each of our 20 β port-
folios, we compute the average of the stock-level short ratio (top panel), average stock-level
dispersion in analyst earnings forecasts (middle panel) and average stock-level share turnover
(bottom panel). These averages are calculated for high aggregate disagreement months (red
dots) and low aggregate disagreement months (blue dots), where high (resp. low) aggregate
disagreement months are defined as being in the top (resp. bottom) quartiles of in-sample
aggregate disagreement. As shown in Figure 6, stock-level short-interest ratio, disagreement
and turnover all increases with β; this relation is steeper in months with high aggregate
disagreement relative to months with low aggregate disagreement.
    Those results are confirmed by a simple regression analysis in Table 2, where we estimate
the following equations:

∀t ∈ [1981 : 12, 2010 : 12], ∀i ∈ [1, 20] :
               yit = αt + µβi + νSizei + δβi × Agg. Dis.t−1 + ρSizei × Agg. Dis.t−1 + it

where yit is the equal-weighted average short-interest ratio of stocks in portfolio i at date t
(column 1 and 2), the equal-weighted average disagreement of stocks in portfolio i at date
t (column 3 and 4) and the equal-weighted average turnover of stocks in portfolio i at date


                                              20
t (column 5 and 6). This equation controls for size as a way to account for the existing
heterogeneity in our 20 β portfolio that could potentially correlate with our dependent
variables.
    Column 1, 3 and 5 estimate the previous equation using simple pooled cross-sectional
regressions where standard errors are clustered at the year/month level. Column 2, 4 and 6
use a Fama-MacBeth approach. This is a two-stage procedure. In the first-stage, we estimate
the following cross-sectional regression every month:

                         ∀i ∈ [1, 20] : yit = α + δt βi + ρt Sizei + it

The second-stage projects the time-series of coefficients obtained in the first-stage (δt , ρt )
against the time-series of aggregate disagreement, using a simple OLS estimation with robust
standard errors.
                                            (
                                              ρt = ν̄ + ρ̄Agg. Dis.t−1 + ωt
               ∀t ∈ [1981 : 12, 2010 : 12],
                                              δt = µ̄ + δ̄Agg. Dis.t−1 + ηt

    Column 2, 4 and 6 reports the coefficients (δ̄, µ̄, ρ̄, ν̄) estimated using this two-step pro-
cedure. The resulting δ̄ coefficients are very similar to the δ coefficients obtained using the
simple pooled cross-sectional approach in column 1, 3 and 5.
    The findings are broadly consistent with our model. Consider first the result regarding
stock-level disagreement. We notice that even for the lowest possible value of aggregate
disagreement (i.e. aggregate disagreement of 3.26), there is a strictly increasing relationship
between stock-level disagreement and β (1.1 × 3.26 − 2.5 > 0 in column 3). This validates an
important modeling choice in our theory, which is to neglect idiosyncratic disagreement. In-
deed, even in low aggregate disagreement months, high β stocks experience more stock-level
disagreement than low β stocks. Thus, idiosyncratic disagreement appears to be positively
correlated with β in the data. As we discussed in Section 2.4, this positive correlation should
magnify the speculativeness of high β stocks. Moreover, we see that the relationship between
stock-level disagreement and β becomes significantly steeper as aggregate disagreement in-
creases. This is consistent with the basic premise of our analysis that β scales aggregate
disagreement.
    In column 1 and 2, we report that while the short-interest ratio typically increases with
aggregate disagreement, this relation is significantly stronger in high aggregate disagreement
months. This is consistent with our theory, since, mispricing is larger for high β stocks and
hence arbitrageurs are on average more likely to short those stocks. However, mispricing is
also increasing with λ, the aggregate disagreement parameter – so that there will be more


                                                 21
shorting by the arbitrageurs for high disagreement months. Note that these effects are quite
sizable. Consider a one s.d. increase in aggregate disagreement (.90). It will lead to a
relative increase in the short interest ratio of a β = 1 stock relative to a β = 0 stock of
.004 × .90 = .0036, which represents 20% of the s.d. of the short ratio.
    Finally, column 5 and 6 shows that the same patterns hold for turnover: turnover in
general increases with β, but much more so in months of high aggregate disagreement. This
is consistent with our simple dynamic extension whereby in high disagreement states, more
shares are being exchanged from one generation to the next due to the larger shorting activity
by young group a investors.


4.2.    Aggregate Disagreement and the Security Market Line
The Concavity of the Security Market Line

The second part of our empirical analysis examines how the Security Market Line is affected
by aggregate disagreement. To this end, we first present in Figure 7 the empirical relationship
between β and excess returns. For each of the 20 β portfolios in our sample, we compute the
average excess forward return for high (red dots) and low (blue dots) disagreement months
(defined as top vs. bottom quartile of aggregate disagreement). We do this using various
horizons: 1-month (top left panel), 3-months (top-right panel), 6 months (bottom-left panel)
and 12 months (bottom-right panel). While the relationship between excess forward returns
and β is quite noisy at the 1 and 3 months horizon, two striking facts emerge at the 6
and 12 months horizons. First, the excess return/β relationship seems to be increasing
for months with low aggregate disagreement. This is consistent with our theory whereby
low aggregate disagreement means low or even no mispricing and hence a strictly upward
sloping Security Market Line. Second, in months of high aggregate disagreement the excess
returns/β relationship appears to exhibit the inverted-U shape predicted by the theory.
    To evaluate the importance of this inverted-U shaped relationship in the data, we consider
the following Fama-MacBeth regressions. In the first stage, we estimate, for each month in
our sample the following cross-sectional regression:

                                        e
                        ∀i ∈ [1, 20] : ri,t→t+k = αtk + πtk βi + φkt βi2 + kit
            e
where ri,t→t+k       is the k-months forward excess return of the ith β portfolio at date t and
βi is the post-ranking β of portfolio i. This gives us a time-series of coefficient estimates
(αt , πt , φt )t∈[1981:12,2010:12] . We are especially interested in how the concavity in the excess
return/β relationship evolves with aggregate disagreement. In fact, our theory predicts that
the relationship should be more concave in high disagreement states than in low disagreement

                                                  22
states since the slope of the Security Market Line is constant in low disagreement state
but decreasing in high disagreement states for sensible levels of persistence. To formally
test this, we simply project this time-series of estimates onto our aggregate disagreement
measure. Table 3 reports our findings. The first line corresponds to the ψ k coefficient in the
estimation of the following equation:

                                   φkt = ck + ψ k × Agg. Dis.t + ωtk

where k ∈ {1, 3, 6, 12} corresponds to the various horizons used in the first-stage cross-
sectional regressions. In this context, ψ k is naturally interpreted as how the concavity in the
excess returns/β relationship evolves with aggregate disagreement. In column 2, 4, 6 and 8,
we control for other variables potentially affecting the shape of the security market line as
well, i.e. we estimate an augmented version of the previous equation:

                               φkt = ck + ψ k × Agg. Dis.t + τ k Xt + ωtk

where Xt includes the returns on HML (the long high book to market and short low book to
market portfolios), SMB (the long small stock and short big stock portfolios), the PE ratio
(the price to earnings ratio) and DP ratio (the dividend to price ratio), the TED spread, the
one year inflation rate as well as the k year forward market return. When k is strictly larger
than 1, we use Newey-West standard errors with k − 1 lags to account for the overlapping
returns in our dependent variable. When k = 1, we simply report Huber-White standard
errors.
    These additional control variables are meant to account for alternative explanations for
our concave relationship between beta and returns. Our relationship, if anything, gets
stronger when controlling for these covariates. Note that these covariates include forward
market returns, which means that our results are not due to omitted market predictors of
aggregate disagreement itself forecasting poor market returns as in Yu (2010). They also
include HML, which means that our results are not driven by existing predictabilty patterns
in the data such as value-growth.23
    Moreover, our findings are not simply mechanical functions of disagreement forecasting
returns in the cross-section as in Diether et al. (2002) since expected return is increasing in
beta for low enough beta stocks even though the relationship between beta and stock level
disagreement is monotonic as documented above. Finally, our aggregate disagreement and
uncertainty measures are increasing in both up and down markets, which suggests then that
  23
    Indeed, there is a value-growth effect for both high and low beta stocks, which suggests that the value-
growth effect is uncorrelated with our beta patterns.


                                                    23
our findings are not simply a manifestation of high beta stocks doing poorly during bad
times.
    The results in Table 3 indicates that, at the 3, 6 and 12 months horizon, the Security
Market Line is significantly more concave for months with high aggregate disagreement rela-
tive to months with low aggregate disagreement, i.e. ψ k is negative and significantly different
from 0 at the 5 or 1% level depending on the horizon and whether or not the control predic-
tors are included in the regression. To better grasp the implication of this regression analysis
on the shape of the security market line, we present, in Figure 8, the Security Market Line
as predicted from the regression in Table 3 column 5 for two levels of aggregate disagree-
ment: low (corresponding to the 10th percentile of the aggregate disagreement distribution
or λ = 3.55) and high (corresponding to the 90th percentile of the aggregate disagreement
distribution or λ = 5.63). As we see from this figure, the 6-months forward Security Market
Line is predicted to be upward slopping for the low disagreement months and inverted-U
shaped for the high disagreement months. While the excess return/β relationship is similar
for low beta stocks in both high and low aggregate disagreement months, excess returns
become significantly lower for high beta stocks in months of high aggregate disagreement
relative to the low aggregate disagreement months: high β stocks are predicted to have 0
excess returns in high aggregate disagreement months at the 6-months horizon, as opposed
to low disagreement months where excess returns are around 10%. These results are overall
consistent with the predictions from our speculative asset pricing model.


The Slope of the Security Market Line

In Table 4, we present the results of a similar analysis omitting the quadratic term in
the cross-sectional regressions. We are thus interested in the average slope of the Security
Market Line and in how it relates with aggregate disagreement. We have shown that the
theory predicts this average slope to be strictly higher in low disagreement states. To get
at this result empirically, we again use a two-stages procedure, where we first regress in the
cross-section:

                                           e
                           ∀i ∈ [1, 20] : ri,t→t+k = akt + bkt βi + kit

and then project bkt onto aggregate disagreement at date t, as well as the control predictors
Xt used in Table 3. The results in Table 4 reports the result from this two-step procedure. It
shows that at the 6 and 12 months horizon, the slope of the Security Market Line is strictly
lower in months with high aggregate disagreement. Again, this is a natural consequence of
our model where high β stocks are speculative when aggregate disagreement is high, which

                                                24
makes their expected returns go down.


4.3.    Aggregate Uncertainty and the Security Market Line
Finally, we repeat our earlier empirical analysis using Bloom et al. (2012)’s economic un-
certainty measure. The advantage of using this alternative measure is that it is available
since 1970, which provides us with more statistical power to identify the role played by dis-
agreement on asset prices. We think of this measure as a proxy for aggregate disagreement
since when economic fundamentals are more uncertain, there is more scope for disagreement
among investors. While economic uncertainty can have a direct impact on stock returns,
i.e. not through the disagreement it generates, we expect this direct effect to be opposite to
aggregate disagreement, and thus to bias us against finding significant results. However, the
analysis using this measure yields result similar to those derived using our initial proxy for
aggregate disagreement. Table 5 repeats the analysis of Table 3 using this uncertainty mea-
sure as our proxy for disagreement. At the 6 and 12 months horizons, the Security Market
Line is again significantly more concave for months with higher uncertainty.


5.     Conclusion
We show that incorporating the speculative motive for trade into asset pricing models yields
strikingly different results from the risk-sharing or liquidity motives. High beta assets are
more speculative since they are more sensitive to disagreement about common cash-flows.
Hence they experience greater divergence of opinion and in the presence of short-sales con-
straint for some investors, they end up being over-priced relative to low beta assets. When
aggregate disagreement is low, the risk-return relationship is upward sloping. As aggregate
disagreement rises, the slope of the Security Market Line is piecewise constant, higher in
the low beta range, and potentially negative for the high beta range. Empirical tests using
security analyst disagreement and aggregate uncertainty measures are consistent with these
predictions. We believe our simple and tractable model provides a plausible explanation for
part of the high-risk, low-return puzzle.


References
Almazan, Andres, Keith C. Brown, Murray Carlson, and David A. Chapman,
 “Why constrain your mutual fund manager?,” Journal of Financial Economics, August
 2004, 73 (2), 289–321.


                                             25
Baker, Malcolm, Brendan Bradley, and Jeffrey Wurgler, “Benchmarks as Limits
 to Arbitrage: Understanding the Low-Volatility Anomaly,” Financial Analysts Journal,
 2011, 67 (1), 1–15.

Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean, “Boys Will Be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence,
 And Common Stock Investment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2001,
 116 (1), 261–292.

Barberis, Nicholas and Ming Huang, “Mental Accounting, Loss Aversion, and Individ-
 ual Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 2001, 56 (4), 1247–1292.

Black, Fischer, “Capital Market Equilibrium with Restricted Borrowing,” Journal of Busi-
  ness, 1972, 4 (3), 444–455.

  , Michael C. Jensen, and Myron Scholes, “The Capital Asset Pricing Model: Some
  Empirical Tests,” in Michael C. Jensen, ed., Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets,
  New York: Praeger, 1972.

Blitz, David C. and Pim Van Vliet, “The Volatility Effect: Lower Risk without Lower
  Return,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 2007, 34 (1), 102–113.

Bloom, Nicholas, “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 05 2009, 77 (3),
  623–685.

  , Max Floetotto, and Nir Jaimovich, “Really Uncertain Business Cycles,” Stanford
  Working Paper, 2012.

Brennan, Michael J., “Agency and Asset Pricing,” University of California at Los Angeles,
 Anderson Graduate School of Management, Anderson Graduate School of Management,
 UCLA May 1993.

Campbell, John Y, Sanford J Grossman, and Jiang Wang, “Trading Volume and
 Serial Correlation in Stock Returns,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108 (4),
 905–39.

Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Breadth of ownership and
 stock returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2002, 66 (2-3), 171–205.

Cohen, Randolph B. Cohen Christopher Polk Randolph B., Christopher Polk,
 and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, “Money Illusion in the Stock Market: The Modigliani-Cohn
 Hypothesis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (2), 639–668.


                                           26
Cukierman, Alex and Paul Wachtel, “Differential Inflationary Expectations and the
 Variability of the Rate of Inflation: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review,
 September 1979, 69 (4), 595–609.

Daniel, Kent D., David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, “Overconfi-
 dence, Arbitrage, and Equilibrium Asset Pricing,” Journal of Finance, 2001, 56, 921–965.

Delong, J Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers, and Mark Waldmann,
 “Positive Feedback Investment Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation,” Jour-
 nal of Finance, June 1990, 45 (2), 379–95.

Diether, Karl B., Christopher J. Malloy, and Anna Scherbina, “Differences of Opin-
 ion and the Cross Section of Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, October 2002, 57 (5),
 2113–2141.

Fama, Eugene F and Kenneth R French, “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Re-
  turns,” Journal of Finance, June 1992, 47 (2), 427–65.

Frazzini, Andrea and Lasse Pedersen, “Betting Against Beta,” Working Paper, New
  York University 2010.

Harrison, J Michael and David M Kreps, “Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock
 Market with Heterogeneous Expectations,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May
 1978, 92 (2), 323–36.

Hong, Harrison and David Sraer, “Quiet Bubbles,” Working Paper, Princeton Univer-
 sity 2011.

   and Jeremy C. Stein, “Disagreement and the Stock Market,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, Spring 2007, 21 (2), 109–128.

  , Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, “Asset Float and Speculative Bubbles,” Journal
  of Finance, 06 2006, 61 (3), 1073–1117.

Jarrow, Robert A, “Heterogeneous Expectations, Restrictions on Short Sales, and Equi-
  librium Asset Prices,” Journal of Finance, 1980, 35 (5), 1105–13.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, “Returns to Buying Winners and Sell-
  ing Losers: Implications for Stock Market Efficiency,” Journal of Finance, March 1993,
  48 (1), 65–91.



                                           27
Kandel, Eugene and Neil D Pearson, “Differential Interpretation of Public Signals
 and Trade in Speculative Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, August 1995, 103 (4),
 831–72.

Koski, Jennifer Lynch and Jeffrey Pontiff, “How Are Derivatives Used? Evidence from
 the Mutual Fund Industry,” Journal of Finance, 04 1999, 54 (2), 791–816.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, “Contrarian Investment,
  Extrapolation, and Risk,” Journal of Finance, December 1994, 49 (5), 1541–78.

Lamont, Owen, “Go Down Fighting: Short Sellers vs. Firms,” NBER Working Papers,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc July 2004.

Lamont, Owen A., “Macroeconomic forecasts and microeconomic forecasters,” Journal of
  Economic Behavior & Organization, July 2002, 48 (3), 265–280.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers, “Disagreement about Infla-
 tion Expectations,” in “NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Volume 18” NBER Chap-
 ters, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 2004, pp. 209–270.

Merton, Robert C, “A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete
 Information,” Journal of Finance, 1987, 42 (3), 483–510.

Miller, Edward M, “Risk, Uncertainty, and Divergence of Opinion,” Journal of Finance,
 September 1977, 32 (4), 1151–68.

Morris, Stephen, “Speculative Investor Behavior and Learning,” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, November 1996, 111 (4), 1111–33.

Odean, Terrance, “Do Investors Trade Too Much?,” American Economic Review, Decem-
 ber 1999, 89 (5), 1279–1298.

Scheinkman, Jose A. and Wei Xiong, “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles,” Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, December 2003, 111 (6), 1183–1219.

Sharpe, William, “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under Condi-
  tions of Risk,” Journal of Finance, 1964, XIX (3), 425–442.

Yu, Jialin, “Disagreement and Portfolio Return Predictability,” Working Papers, forthcom-
 ing Journal of Financial Economics 2010.




                                           28
Tables and Figures

                  Table 1: Summary Statistics for Time Series Analysis


                            Mean    Median     Std. Dev.    25th p   75th p.    Min     Max      Obs.
 Aggregate Variable
 Agg. Dis                  4.42       4.18          .897     3.72     4.77       3.26    7.33    349
 Sales growth uncert.      8.023     7.616         1.540    6.864    8.712      5.909   13.220   486
 Price/Earnings            22.41     19.00         15.26    15.32    25.59       7.48   123.79   349
 Div./Price                0.026     0.024         0.011    0.017    0.033     0.011    0.062    349
 SMB                        0.14     -0.03         3.19     -1.61    1.84      -16.62    22.06   349
 HML                       0.37       0.34         3.13     -1.38    1.91      -12.87    13.88   349
 TED                        0.56      0.40          0.56     0.22     0.68       0.03     4.62   348
 Inflation                  3.07      3.00          1.42     2.23     3.92      -2.10    8.39    348
 Portfolio Characteristics
 Stock Disagreement        3.898     3.613          1.321   3.094     4.395     0.000   13.813 6,967
 Short-Interest Ratio      0.022      0.015        0.017     0.008   0.033      0.000   0.086 5,239
 Turnover Ratio            0.734     0.548         0.504     0.382    0.966     0.053   3.080 7,260
 1-month excess return     0.951     1.269          5.308   -1.476    3.606    -33.621 41.785 7,240
 3-months excess return    2.899      3.212        10.215   -2.455    8.023    -52.574 79.062 7,200
 6-months excess return    5.847      6.098        14.868   -1.624   13.037    -65.556 116.814 7,140
 12-months excess return 12.274      12.887        21.978   -0.819   23.499    -72.850 150.968 7,020
 β                         0.901      0.844         0.386    0.583    1.141     0.359    1.811 7,060

Note: Agg. Dis. is the β-weighted average of stock level dispersion measured as the stan-
dard deviation of analyst forecasts on a stock. Sales growth uncert. is the cross-sectional
dispersion of US plants sales growth taken from Bloom et al. (2011). Price/Earnings and
Div./Price are the aggregate price-earning ratio and dividend-to-price ratio from Shiller’s
website. SMB and HML are the monthly returns on the HML and SML portfolios from
French’s website. TED is the TED spread and Inflation is the yearly inflation rate. Stock
Disagreement is the portfolio equal-weighted average stock-level dispersion of analyst fore-
cast. Turnover ratio is monthly volume normalized by number of shares outstanding. β is
the post-ranking β.




                                              29
                      Table 2: β portfolios characteristics and disagreement

                                            Short                 Stock              Turnover
                                           Interest           Disagreement
                                     OLS              FM      OLS       FM         OLS       FM

           β× Agg. Dis.t−1          .004***      .0044***    1.1***     1.2***     .2***     .2***
                                      (7.6)         (7.7)      (19)      (18)       (12)      (12)
           β                       .0066***       .0054**    -2.5***   -2.6***     -.14**   -.15**
                                      (2.9)         (2.2)      (-10)    (-9.6)     (-2.1)     (-2)
           Size × Agg. Dis.t−1     .0016***     .00083***    .057**    -.052**    .02***    -.0069
                                      (7.8)       ( 5.08 )     (2.4)   (-2.39)      (3.7)   (-1.20)
           Size                    -.0068***    -.0033***     -.6***   -.1652*   -.081***     .024
                                     (-8.3)        (-4.85)    (-6.2)   (-1.83)     (-3.7)    (1.0)
           Observations               5,239          262       6,947     348       6,960      348
           Adj. R2                     .91                      .72                   .9

Notes: OLS and Fama-MacBeth (FM) estimation of monthly β portfolio characteristics on β, size and β and
size interacted with aggregate disagreement. Aggregate disagreement is the β-weighted sum of stock level
disagreement. The dependent variables are: the equal-weighted average monthly short interest ratio (column
1), the equal-weighted average stock-level disagreement (column 2), the equal-weighted turnover. β is the
post-ranking portfolio β of the 20 β portfolio. Size is the logarithm of the average market capitalization of
stocksin each 20-β portfolio. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of
significance.




                                                       30
                                        Table 3: Disagreement and concavity of the Security Market Line.

                                                                                 Portfolio forward excess return
                                                           1-month              3-months               6-months              12 months
                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)        (8)
                     β 2 × Aggregate Disagreement     -.728    -1.238**    -2.30** -3.39***       -4.21**    -6.60***   -6.67**     -8.51
                                                     (-1.56)    (-2.37)    (-2.12)     (-2.81)    (-2.45)     (-3.37)    (2.57)    (-3.65)

                     β2                              2.645     6.749**     8.68*      17.6***    16.09**    36.44***    26.47**   49.66***
                                                     (1.39)     (2.53)     (1.96)      (2.90)     (2.27)     (3.70)      (2.50)    (3.82)

                     β× Aggregate Disagreement       1.00*     2.046***    2.877*     5.26***     4.54*      9.73**      6.11       6.32
                                                     (1.68)     (2.73)     (1.79)      (2.74)     (1.76)     (3.21)     (1.35)     (1.51)

                     β                               -3.113    -12.89***   -9.211    -32.50***   -14.25    -63.98***    -19.45    -56.01**
                                                     (-1.25)     (-3.31)   (-1.36)     (3.38)    (-1.32)     (-3.70)    (-1.06)    (-2.22)

                     Controls                          No        Yes        No          Yes        No          Yes       No         Yes




31
                     Observations                      348       348        348         348        348         348       348        348


     Notes: Fama-MacBeth estimation with Newey-West adjusted standard-errors allowing for 2 (column 3 and 4), 5 (column 5 and 6) and 11 lags (column
     7 and 8). T-statistics are in parenthesis. The dependent variables are the 1/3/6/12 months forward equal-weighted return of 20 β portfolios. Aggregate
     disagreement is the β weighted average of stock-level disagreement measured as the dispersion of analysts forecasts on the long-run growth of EPS.
     Controls include the 1/3/6/12 months forward market return, HML, SMB, D/P, P/E, TED spread, past 12 months inflation. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ means
     statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance.
                                    Table 4: Disagreement and the average slope of the security market line

                                                                                   Slope of Security Market Line
                                         (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)         (5)         (6)      (7)     (8)        (9)     (10)      (11)       (12)
           Aggregate Disagreement       -.49     -.84*    -.49*     -1.8     -2.6**      -1.7**    -4.1* -6.4***     -3.8**    -7.5*    -13***    -7.4***
                                       (-1.3)   (-1.8)    (-1.7)   (-1.4)      (-2)        (-2)    (-1.9)  (-3.2)     (-2.5)   (-1.9)    (-4.4)     (-3.1)
           P/E                                    .031    .05**               .17**      .16***           .35***     .29***             .59***     .44***
                                                 (.97)    (2.5)               (2.4)       (4.1)            (3.4)      (4.2)                (4)      (3.1)
           D/P                                      3    -75***                -3.2     -232***              -98    -467***               -434    -873***
                                                (.071)    (-2.8)            (-.032)       (-3.4)           (-.52)     (-2.9)             (-1.3)     (-2.9)
           HML                                    -.2*     -.12              -.84**      -.53**            -1***    -.56***             -1.2**       -1**
                                                (-1.7)    (-1.6)             (-2.6)       (-2.5)           (-3.1)     (-3.1)             (-2.1)     (-2.4)
           SMB                                   -.035    -.12*             -.66***       -.4**            -1***    -.72***             -1.5**    -1.1***
                                                 (-.3)    (-1.7)             (-2.9)       (-2.6)           (-3.6)     (-3.9)             (-2.6)     (-2.8)
           Inflation                              -.54      .35                -.47       1.3**             -.46      2.1**               -.41        1.8
                                                (-1.5)    (1.5)              (-.49)       (2.5)            (-.31)     (2.2)              (-.17)     (.99)
           TED Spread                              .75     1**                  1.4      2.5***               4      4.9***               7.8*     8.2***
                                                   (1)    (2.2)               (.61)       (2.9)            (1.4)      (3.3)              (1.7)      (3.1)




32
           Forward Market Return                         1.1***                           1***                       .96***                        .84***
                                                           (23)                            (13)                        (10)                         (5.7)
           Constant                     2.3      4.4        .92     8.6         9.4         3.6     19**    23**        11     35**     56***        31**
                                       (1.3)    (1.6)     (.52)    (1.6)      (1.3)       (.76)    (2.1)     (2)      (1.2)    (2.2)    (2.7)         (2)
           Observations                 347      347       347      345        345         345       342     342       342      336      336          336
           Adj. R2


     Notes: OLS estimation with Newey-West adjusted standard-errors allowing for 2/5/11 lags in column 4 to 12. Columns 1 to 3 use HuberWhite
     standard errors. T-statistics are in parenthesis. The dependent variable is the coefficient estimate of a monthly cross-sectional regression of the 20
     beta-portfolio 1 month forward excess returns (columns 1 to 3), 3 months forward excess returns (columns 4 to 6), 6 months forward excess returns
     (columns 7 to 9) and 12 months forward excess returns (columns 10 to 12) on the portfolio beta. Aggregate disagreement is the β-weighted average of
     stock-level disagreement. Inflation rate is the past year CPI growth rate. D/P is the aggregate dividend to price ratio and P/E is the aggregate price
     to earnings ratio, both from Robert Shiller’s website. HML and SMB are the returns on the HML and SMB portfolios from Ken French’s website. ∗ ,
     ∗∗
        , and ∗∗∗ means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance.
                     Table 5: Aggregate Uncertainty (Bloom et al. (2012)) and concavity of the Security Market Line.

                                                                        Portfolio forward excess return
                                                 1-month             3-months               6-months               12 months
                                              (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)           (8)
                            β 2 × Uncert.    -.270    -.359      -.839     -.916     -2.058** -2.513**      -4.80***     -4.896***
                                            (1.10)    (-.98)    (-1.64)   (-1.34)     (-2.17)     (-2.40)    (-3.23)       (-3.41)

                            β2              1.84       4.03     6.026      9.249     15.41**    24.11**     37.96***    48.53***
                                            (1.0)     (1.42)    (1.57)     (1.60)     (2.14)     (2.57)      (3.26)      (3.22)

                            β× Uncert.      .424       .688      1.48      1.576     3.99**     3.826**     10.194***   6.492***
                                            (.91)     (1.23)    (1.37)     (1.41)    (2.01)      (2.32)       (4.35)     (2.83)

                            β               -2.64    -9.817**   -10.17    -22.32**   -29.38*   -47.63***    -79.85***   -76.749***
                                            (-.74)    (-2.19)   (-1.23)    (2.31)     (1.93)     (2.98)       (4.00)      (3.16)

                            Controls         No        Yes       No         Yes        No          Yes        No           Yes




33
                            Observations     476       342       476        342        476         342        476          342


     Notes: Fama-MacBeth estimation with Newey-West adjusted standard-errors allowing for 2 (column 3 and 4), 5 (column 5 and 6) and 11 lags (column
     7 and 8). T-statistics are in parenthesis. The dependent variables are the 1/3/6/12 months forward equal-weighted return of 20 β portfolios.Uncert.
     corresponds to the aggregate uncertainty measure in Bloom et al. (2012) using the cross-sectional dispersion of US Census plants’ sales growth.
     Controls include the 1/3/6/12 months forward market return, HML, SMB, D/P, P/E, TED spread, past 12 months inflation. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ means
     statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance.
                                              Figure 1: High Risk, Low Return Puzzle


                   100      80
         Cumulative Returns
           40       60
                   20
                   0




                                 01jan1970         01jan1980    01jan1990     01jan2000   01jan2010
                                                                  date

                                             1st          2nd         3rd         4th        5th



This figure plots the cumulative returns to one dollar invested on January 1968 to December
2010 for value-weighted portfolios of stocks sorted by a stock’s one-year trailing beta com-
puted using daily returns. 1st is the portfolio composed with stocks in the bottom quintile
of beta. 5th is the portfolio composed with stocks in the top quintile of beta. Source: CRSP.




                                                                34
                                          Figure 2: Median stock-level ratio of β to σ2 by post-ranking β.

                         .9          .8
          beta/idiosyncratic variance
            .6          .7
                         .5




                                           0                .5                            1                1.5   2
                                                                                  post-ranking beta



This figure plots the median stock-level ratio of β to σ2 for our 20 β portfolios, as a function
of the post-ranking β. See Section 3.2 for the computation of stock-level β and residual
variance σ2 as well as for the construction of the β portfolios.




                                               Figure 3: Timeline of the dynamic model in Section 2.5

                                                                                  Period t




                                                                 Dividend dt is      - New generation t
                                                                    realized         is born and invests
                                                                                     -Disagreement
                                                                                     shock for new
                                                                                     generation is
                                                                                     realized (λ)
                                                                                     - Old generation
                                                                                     sells portfolio and
                                                                                     consumes.




                                                                                      35
Figure 4: Model Calibration. See Section 2.6 for parameter values.




                       .01       .008
           Monthly excess returns
       .002    .004    0.006




                                        0          .5                  1           1.5                  2
                                                                      beta

                                            low disagreement states          high disagreement states



                                                           (a) λ = .005
                       .015
       Monthly excess returns
        .005           0.01




                                        0          .5                  1           1.5                  2
                                                                      beta

                                            low disagreement states          high disagreement states



                                                           (b) λ = .01
                       .02  .015
       Monthly excess returns
       .005       .01  0




                                        0          .5                  1           1.5                  2
                                                                      beta

                                            low disagreement states          high disagreement states

                                                                 36
                                                           (c) λ = .015
Figure 5: Time-series of Aggregate Disagreement and Aggregate Uncertainty from Bloom et
al. (2012)




                                                                                     14
                     7




                                                                                                       12
          aggregate disagreement
                             6




                                                                                     Sales uncertainty
                                                                                            10
                   5




                                                                                     8
         4




                                                                                     6
                     3




                    01jan1970      01jan1980      01jan1990   01jan2000      01jan2010
                                                      date

                                   aggregate disagreement        Sales uncertainty




                                                       37
Figure 6: Equal-weighted average of analyst forecasts’ dispersion, short interest ratio and
share turnover for stocks by β (20 β portfolios) during low and high aggregate disagreement
months.




                                      .05
                                      .04
                         short-interest ratio
                           .02        .03
                                      .01
                                      0




                                                    0          .5                1                1.5    2
                                                                         post-ranking beta

                                                              Low disagreement       High disagreement



                                                              (a) Short interest ratio
                                      10
                         stock-level disagreement
                         4           62        8




                                                    0          .5                1                1.5    2
                                                                         post-ranking beta

                                                              Low disagreement       High disagreement



                                                    (b) Dispersion of analyst earnings forecasts
                                  2
                                  1.5
                       turnover ratio
                             1    .5
                                  0




                                                    0          .5                1               1.5     2
                                                                         post-ranking beta

                                                              Low disagreement       High disagreement



                                                                (c) Share turnover



                                                                            38
Figure 7: Average 1-month, 3-months, 6-months, and 12-months excess of risk-free returns
for equal-weighted beta decile portfolios during low disagreement and high aggregate dis-
agreement months.
   1.2




                                                                               3.5
   1




                                                                               3
   .8




                                                                               2.5
   .6




                                                                               2
   .4




                                                                               1.5
   .2




         0          .5                1                 1.5           2              0          .5                 1                 1.5           2
                              post-ranking beta                                                            post-ranking beta

                   Low disagreement               High disagreement                             Low disagreement               High disagreement



             (a) 1 month equal-weighted return                                           (b) 3 months equal-weighted return

                                                                               20
   8
   6




                                                                               15
   4




                                                                               10
   2
   0




                                                                               5




         0          .5                1                 1.5           2              0          .5                 1                 1.5           2
                              post-ranking beta                                                            post-ranking beta

                   Low disagreement               High disagreement                             Low disagreement               High disagreement



             (c) 6 months equal-weighted return                                          (d) 12 months equal-weighted return




                                                                          39
   Figure 8: Predicted Security Market Line for 10% and 90% aggregate disagreement.


         15
         10
         5
         0
         -5




              0               .5                1                1.5              2
                                        beta_post_average

                             10% disagreement               90% disagreement



This figure provides the predicted relationship between expected returns and β from the
estimation in Table 3 for two levels of disagreement, λ = 3.55 (10th percentile) and λ = 5.63
(90th percentile). Standard errors for the predicted values are bootstrapped.




                                             40
A.       For Online Publication: Appendix – Proofs
A.1.        Proof of Theorem 1
Proof. In order to derive the conditions under which the proposed equilibrium is indeed an equilibrium (i.e.
ī is indeed the marginal asset), we need to derive the equilibrium holdings of group B investors:
                                                          P                        
                                                               2          bi
                                                            σ                  −   λγ
                                                 1 + bi 
                                                               z     i≥ī N
                                                
                                                
                                                                                       for i < ī
                                                
                                     µB,?                                          2
                                                                2 + σ2
                                                                         P
                                      i       =   N          σ       z      i<ī bi
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                  0 for i ≥ ī
                                                


We are now ready to derive the conditions under which the proposed equilibrium is indeed an equilibrium.
                                                  B
The marginal asset is asset ī if and only if ∂U
                                              ∂µB
                                                    (µB,? ) < 0 and µB
                                                                     ī−1
                                                                          ≥ 0, where µB,? is group B investors’
                                                 ī
holdings derived above. These conditions are easily shown to be equivalent to:
                                                                                                                                      
            σz2   X               1      σ2 + σz2
                                                           X                         σz2   X              1  2                 X
                         bk +                                      b2k  ≥ λ >                    bk +          σ + σz2               b2k 
            γN                  γN bī−1                                            γN                   γN bī
                  k≥ī                                     k<ī                            k≥ī                                 k<ī


                                                         σz2
                                                               P            
              1                                                         bi
                                                
                     σ2 + σz2              2
                                   P
Call uk =   γN bk                      i<k bi        +   γN         i≥k N        . Clearly, uk is a strictly decreasing sequence as :

                                                                                                                   !!
                                                   1        1        1                                   X
                                 uk − uk−1       =              −          σ2 + σz2                           b2i         <0
                                                   γ       N bk   N bk−1
                                                         |       {z      }                               i<k
                                                                       <0


Define u0 = +∞ and uN +1 = 0. Then the sequence (ui )i∈[0,N +1] spans R+ and the marginal asset is simply
defined as: ī = min {k|λ > uk }. We know that ī > 0 since u0 = +∞. If ī = N +1, then group B investors are
long all assets and all the previous formula apply except that there is no asset such that i ≥ ī. If ī ∈ [1, n],
then the equilibrium has the proposed structure, i.e. investors B are long only assets i < ī.
    The proof in the main text considers the case ī ≥ 2. The equilibrium is easily derived when ī = 1, i.e.
when all assets are over-priced. In this case, S = 0 and we directly have:

                                                                                  σ2                   σ2
                                                                                                         
                                                               1
                                  µz̄ − (1 + r)Pi =                    bi σz2 +       − θ λbi − bi σz2 + 
                                                               γ                  N                     N

. The equilibrium commands that λ ≤ uN , as stated in the Theorem.
     The second part of the theorem characterizes overpricing. Overpricing for assets i ≥ ī is defined as the
difference between the equilibrium price and the price that would prevail in the absence of heterogenous
beliefs and short sales constraints (α = 0). Overpricing is just simply equal to the speculative premium:
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                    σ2                  σ 2 X
                                                                                                                     σ 2
                  ∀i ≥ ī, Overpricingi = π i = θ bi                                 P          2
                                                                                                    λ − z    bk  −  
                                                                        σ2 + σz  2
                                                                                           i<ī bi       γN          γN
                                                                                                                         k≥ī


By definition of the equilibrium, λ > uī . This directly implies: π i > 0 so that assets i ≥ ī are in fact
overpriced. That mispricing is increasing with the fraction of short-sales constrained investors α is direct
as θ is a strictly increasing function of θ. That mispricing increases with bi is also directly seen from the


                                                                             41
                                                         σ2 P
                                                                     
definition of mispricing. Provided that ī < N + 1, λ − γNz   k≥ī bk   has to be strictly positive, else the
speculative premium would be strictly negative, which would violate the equilibrium condition. Then:
                                                                                            
                                                                               2 X
                                                                             σ
                ∀j > i ≥ ī,   Overpricingj − Overpricingi = θ(bj − bi ) λ − z    bk  > 0
                                                                             γN
                                                                                                        k≥ī


    The final part of the theorem characterizes the amount of shorting in the equilibrium. We first need
to derive the equilibrium holdings of arbitrageurs. group a holdings need to satisfy the following first-order
conditions:                                                               !         !
                                                                  N
                                                          1     2
                                                                  X
                                                                      a        a 2
                        ∀i ∈ [1, N ], z̄bi − Pi (1 + r) =   bi σz    µk bk + µi σ
                                                          γ
                                                                                       k=1
             PN
Define S a = k=1 µak bk . Using the equilibrium pricing equation in equation 4 and equation 5, this first-order
condition can be rewritten as:

                                                              σ2
                               ∀i ∈ [1, N ],       bi σz2 +       − γπ i 1i≥ī = bi σz2 S a + µai σ2
                                                              N

    We multiply each of these equations by bi and sum up the resulting equations for all i ∈ [1, N ] to obtain:

                                                                                   k
                                                                    P
                                               a                       k≥ī bk π
                                             S =1−γ                       P             
                                                                              N    2
                                                              σ2 + σz2       k=1 bk


We can now inject this expression for S a in group a investors’ first-order conditions derived above. This
yields the following expression for group a investors’ holdings of assets i ∈ [1, N ]:
                                                                                                 
                                                                                            k
                                                                               P
                                              1   γ                               k≥ī bk π
                     ∀i ∈ [1, N ],      µai =   − 2 π i 1{i≥ī} − bi σz2           P           
                                              N  σ                       σ2 + σz2
                                                                                         N
                                                                                              b2
                                                                                         k=1 k


First remark that if i < ī, µai > 0, so that arbitrageurs are long assets i < ī. Now consider the case i ≥ ī.
Notice from the expression of the speculative premium that:

                                                           θσ 2                   θσ2
                                                                                      
                                                                bk
                                        ∀k, i ≥ ī,    πk +  =                i
                                                                              π +
                                                           γN   bi                γN

Thus, multiplying the previous expression by bk and summing over all k ≥ ī:
                                                                              
                                                                         i    θσ2
                               X               θσ2
                                                  X          X         π   +  γN 
                                      bk πk +      bk  =    b2k  
                                              γN                           bi
                               k≥ī                    k≥ī               k≥ī




                                                                  42
Thus:
                                                                                                                                                    
                   P            k                                                                                   i      θσ2
                      k≥ī bk π                                            σz2                  X                π    +    γN           θσ 2    X
π i − bi σz2            P                  =       π i − bi              P                      b2k                         −                bk 
               σ2 + σz
                      2      N    2                             2        2     N       2                                b                γN
                             k=1 bk                           σ + σz           k=1 bk
                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                 k≥ī                                            k≥ī
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                           2      2             2
                                                                      P                                2                    2
                                                         σ   +  σ              b                    σz                  θσ        X              X
                                             =       πi          z
                                                                    P k<ī k  −                   P                               b2k − bi       bk 
                                                          2
                                                         σ + σz 2       N
                                                                               b 2       σ 2  + σ 2       N
                                                                                                                b 2     γN
                                                                         k=1 k                   z       k=1 k                   k≥ ī          k≥ ī

                                                                            σz2 P
                                                                                           
                                                     θσ2   λγ − N                  i≥ī bi
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                       1 σ2 + σz2                    2
                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                               k<ī bk
                                             =               bi                 P             −
                                                                                                                                      
                                                       γ            σ2 + σz2
                                                                                     N      2         N σ 2 + σ 2 PN b2
                                                                                     i=1 bi                          z       k=1 k
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                       2
                                                                     1               σ                  X                  X
                                                                 −                   z                     b2k − bi           bk 
                                                                     N σ 2 + σ 2 PN b2
                                                                                  z      k=1 k          k≥ī              k≥ ī
                                                                                                                P              
                                                                                                                        N
                                                     θσ2               1                           σ2 + σz2           i=1 bi
                                                                                                                               2

                                             =                                       bi λγ −                                    
                                                       γ σ 2 + σ 2 PN b2                                         N
                                                                   z       i=1 i


We can now derive the actual holding of arbitrageurs on assets i ≥ ī:
                                                                                          
                                       1    1         bi λγ            1+θ             bi λγ
                  ∀i ≥ ī,   µai =       +θ −         P          =     −θ           P         
                                       N    N   2    2
                                               σ + σz
                                                            N
                                                               b2       N     σ 2 + σ 2      N
                                                                                                b2
                                                            i=1 i                    z      i=1 i


    First, notice that arbitrageurs holdings are decreasing with i since bi increases strictly with i. There
is at least one asset shorted by group a investors provided that µaN < 0, which is equivalent to λ > λ̂ =
      2  2 PN     2
1+θ σ +σz ( i=1 bi ) 1                                                                             a
  θ         N        γbN . Provided this is verified, there exists a unique ĩ ∈ [1, N ] such that µi < 0 ⇔ i ≥ ĩ.
We know already that ĩ ≥ ī since for i < ī, group a investors holdings are strictly positive. It is direct to see
from the expression for group a investors holdings that provided that i ≥ ĩ, we have:

                                                            ∂|µai |                  ∂ 2 |µai |
                                                                    >0      and                 >0
                                                             ∂λ                      ∂λ∂bi

There is more shorting on high cash-flow beta assets. There is more shorting the larger is aggregate dis-
agreement. The effect of aggregate disagreement on shorting is larger for high cash-flow beta assets.


A.2.           Proof of formula 6 for expected excess returns
                                              σ2
                                                                                  σz2 +(
                                                                                           PN
                                       bi σz2 +
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                            i=1 N 2   )σ2       1 σ
                                                                                                                     2
Proof. Note that βi =                   PN     N
                                                            , so that bi = βi               σz2              −   N σz2 .   We can rewrite the pricing
                           (       )
                               σz2 +            1
                                           i=1 N 2    σ2
equations in terms of expected returns:

                                                                                   σ2
                                                        
                                                                  bi σz2 +        N
                                                         E[Ri ] =                         for i < ī
                                                        
                                                        
                                                                          γ
                                                                        2          1 2
                                                                   bσ +            N σ
                                                         E[Ri ] = i z
                                                        
                                                                                            − πi
                                                        
                                                        
                                                                           γ




                                                                             43
                                                 σ2
                            
                                      bi σz2 + N
                                   ] =              for i < ī
                            
                             E[Ri
                                              γ
                            
                            
                            
                                                                 P         
                                                               2          bi
                                            2         2 λγ − σz
                                      b  σ
                                        i z        σ               i≥ī N        σ2
                                                  −                                    (1 + θ) for i ≥ ī
                            
                            
                             E[Ri ] =          1       θ                  2
                                                                               +
                                                    σz2 σ2 + σz2
                                                                   P
                            
                                        γ                          i<ī bi
                                                                                   γN
                                                  
                                      2 P       bi
                            σ2 λγ−σz      i≥ī N
    Define κ(λ) =           σz2 σ2 +σz2 (           .   Using the definition of βi , this can be rewritten as:
                                           i<ī bi )
                                                 2
                                          P



                                                             σ2
                                  
                                               σz2 +        N
                                   E[Ri ] = βi                     for i < ī
                                  
                                  
                                                    γ
                                                  2          σ2
                                   E[Ri ] = βi σz +
                                  
                                                            N                          σ2
                                                                   (1 − κ(λ)θ) +            θ(1 + κ(λ)) for i ≥ ī
                                  
                                                    γ                                   γN




A.3.          Proof of Corollary 1
Proof. We can write the actual excess returns as:

                                         σ2
                              
                                   σz2 + N
                                            + η̃ i for i < ī
                              
                               βi
                              
                              
                                       γ
                        R̃i =
                                             2     σ2            2
                               E[Ri ] = βi σz + N (1 − κ(λ)θ) + σ θ(1 + κ(λ)) + η̃ i for i ≥ ī
                              
                              
                              
                                               γ                 γN

where η˜i = bi ũ + ˜i and ũ = z̃ − z̄.
                                          P   P
    Using the fact that by definition, i bi = i βi = N , a cross-sectional regression of realized returns R̃i
on βi and a constant would deliver the following coefficient estimate:
              PN            PN
                i=1 βi R̃i − i=1 R̃i
  µ̂ =             PN 2
                     i=1 βi − N
                      σ2
                                                                                 !       !       1              N −ī+1
                                                                                                                          !
                                                           2
                                                  P                P                                 P
              σz2 +   N            γ                 i≥ī βi   −     i≥ī   βi                   N    i≥ī βi −   N           σ2
        =                      1 + 2 ũ −            PN                              θκ(λ)   +       PN 2                         θ (1 + κ(λ))
                  γ               σz                     i=1   βi2 − N                                 i=1 iβ  − N            γ


    u
Let ī−1
       γ  > λ1 > λ2 > uγī . Call ī1 (ī2 ) the threshold associated with disagreement λ1 (resp. λ2 ). We have
that ī1 = i¯2 = ī. Then:
                                                                                                      
                                                                     N         N           N
                                           θ (κ(λ1 ) − κ(λ2 ))  2 X 2 X  σ2 X                      2
              µ̂(λ1 ) − µ̂(λ2 )         = − PN                  σz       βi −      βi +        (βi − 1) 
                                                    β
                                                i=1 i
                                                      2−N                               N
                                                                    i≥ī      i≥ī        i≥ī


             P       2
                         P                                                P                PN 2
We show that   i≥ī βi ≥  i≥ī βi . Call βi = 1 + yi with yi such that      yi = 0. Then:      i=1 βi =
     XN
             PN            PN
N +2    yi + i=1 y 2 > N = i=1 βi . Thus, the relationship is true for ī = 0. Now assume it is true for
        i=1
     | {z }
        =0



                                                                             44
                            β2 −           βi = i≥k βi2 − i≥k βi + βk − βk2 . Either βk > 1 in which case it
                    P             P             P           P
ī = k. We have:
                  P i≥k+12 i P i≥k+1
is evident that i≥k+1 βi − i≥k+1 βi > 0 as βi > 1 for i ≥ k. Or βk ≤ 1 in which case βk − βk2 > 0 and
using the recurrence assumption, i≥k+1 βi2 − i≥k+1 βi > 0. Thus, µ̂(λ1 ) − µ̂(λ2 ) < 0. Moreover, we show
                                    P             P
                                                                                                  −
now that µ̂(λ) is continuous at ui , for all i ∈ [1, N ]. When λ = u+
                                                                    i , we have ī = i. When λ = ui , we have
ī = i + 1. First, notice that κ(λ) is continuous at ui . Indeed:

                                                                σ2 1
                                            κ(u−        +
                                               i ) = κ(ui ) =
                                                                σz2 N γbi

Thus:

                                                                            σ2   σ2
                                                                                        
                                          θ   βī − 1
               µ̂ u+   − µ̂ u−                           βi κ(ui ) σz2 +  −  (1 + κ(ui ))
                              
                   i         i   =
                                          γ N      2                        N    N
                                            P
                                             i=1 βi − N
                                                                          2
                                                                           
                                          θ   βī − 1                   σ
                                  =         PN 2         bi σz2 κ(ui ) −  = 0
                                          γ i=1 βi − N                  N


Thus µ̂ is continuous and strictly decreasing over ]ui+1 , ui [, so that it is overall strictly decreasing with
aggregate disagreement λ. We can also easily show that the slope of the security market line, µ̂, is strictly
decreasing with θ, the fraction of short-sales constrained investors in the model. Indeed (noting that the
thresholds ui are independent of θ):
                                                                         
                                           2 X
                 ∂ µ̂        κ(λ)        σ            2   2
                                                               X
                                                                  2
                                                                      X
                      = − P                 (βi − 1) + σz    βi −   βi  < 0
                 ∂θ      γ
                            N
                               β2 − N    N
                               i=1    i             i≥ī                    i≥ī   i≥ī


As we have already shown that: i≥ī βi2 − i≥ī βi . Finally, going back to the expression for µ̂(λ1 ) − µ̂(λ2 ),
                                  P          P

we see that this difference can be expressed as −Cθ with C > 0, so that it is clearly increasing with θ. Thus,
when α increases, θ increases, and the difference between µ̂(λ1 ) and µ̂(λ2 ) decreases. Because this difference
is strictly negative, this means that the gap between the two slopes becomes wider.


A.4.      Proof of Theorem 2
Proof. We first consider the case where λ̃t = 0. There is no disagreement among investors so all investors
are long all assets i ∈ [1, N ]. There is thus a unique first order-condition for all investors’ type – for all
j ∈ [1, N ] and k = a, A or B:
                                                                                                                
                                             1        X                                          X
bj z̄−(1+r)Ptj (0)+Eλ̃t+1 [Pt+1
                            j
                                (λ̃t+1 )|0] = bj σz2                                      j
                                                        µki (0)bi + µkj (0)σ2 + ρ(1 − ρ)∆Pt+1     µki (0) ∆Pt+1
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                 
                                             γ
                                                     i≤N                                        i≤N


Summing up this equation across investors’ types, using the market clearing condition and dropping the time
subscript leads to:
                                                                                                 
                                                             1         σ 2                 X ∆P i
        bj z̄ − (1 + r)P j (0) + Eλ̃+1 [P j (λ̃+1 )|λ̃ = 0] = bj σz2 +  + ρ(1 − ρ)∆P j                 (7)
                                                             γ         N                      N
                                                                                          i≤N




                                                           45
Consider now the case where λt = λ. Importantly, note that investors disagree on the expected value of
                                                                                                 j
the aggregate factor z̃, but they agree on the expected value of asset i’s resale price Eλ̃t+1 [Pt+1 (λ̃t+1 )]. This
is because investors agree to disagree, so they recognize the existence in the next generation of investors
with heterogeneous beliefs – and in particular with beliefs different from theirs. However, they nevertheless
evaluate the t + 1 expected dividend stream differently. We proceed as in the static model. We assume
there is a marginal asset ī, such that there are no binding short-sales constraints for assets j < ī and strictly
binding short-sales constraints for assets j ≥ ī. We check ex post the conditions under which this is indeed
an equilibrium. Under the proposed equilibrium structure, the first-order condition of the three groups of
investors born at date t write, for assets j < ī:

                                bj (z̄ + λkt ) − (1 + r)Ptj (λ) + Eλ̃t+1 [Pt+1
                                                                           j
                                                                               (λ̃t+1 )|λ̃t = λ] =
                                                                                P                       
                 1                                                           j
                         bj σz2 i≤N µki (λ)bi + µkj (λ)σ2 + ρ(1 − ρ)∆Pt+1                   k        i
                               P
                 γ                                                                    i≤N i µ  (λ) ∆P t+1


Dropping the time subscript, summing up across investors types and using the market clearing condition
leads to:
                                                                                                  
                                                                         2                     i
                                                             1         σ              j
                                                                                          X ∆P t+1 
    ∀j < ī, bj z̄ − (1 + r)P j (λ) + Eλ̃+1 [P j (λ̃+1 )|λ] = bj σz2 +  + ρ(1 − ρ)∆Pt+1            (8)
                                                             γ         N                     N
                                                                                                       i≤N


Subtracting equation (7) from equation (8) leads to:

                         ∀j < ī,   − (1 + r)∆P j + ρ∆P j − (1 − ρ)∆P j = 0 ⇔ P j (λ) = P j (0)

Thus, for all j < ī, ∆P j = 0. The payoff of assets below j̄ is not sufficiently exposed to aggregate dis-
agreement to make pessimist investors willing to go short. Hence, even in the high disagreement state, these
assets experience no mispricing and in particular, their price is independent of the realization of aggregate
disagreement. Aggregate disagreement thus only creates resale price risk on these assets that experience
binding short-sales constraint in the high aggregate disagreement states, i.e. the high b assets with i ≥ ī. We
now turn to the assets with binding short-sales constraints in the high disagreement states, i.e. the assets
j > ī. For these assets, we know that under the proposed equilibrium µB j (λ) = 0 and we have the following
first-order conditions for HF and optimist MFs:
                                                                                                                             
                        j                  j              1       X                                    j
                                                                                                                X
  bj (z̄ + λ) − (1 + r)Pt (λ) + Eλ̃t+1 [Pt+1 (λ̃t+1 )|λ] = bj σz2     µA            A     2
                                                                         i (λ)bi + µj (λ)σ + ρ(1 − ρ)∆Pt+1         µA      i 
                                                                                                                     i (λ)∆Pt+1

                                                                                                           


                                                          γ
                                                                  i≤N                                          i≤N
                                                                                                                       


                   j                  j               1 2X a                                      j
                                                                                                        X
                                                                µi (λ)bi + µaj (λ)σ2 + ρ(1 − ρ)∆Pt+1     µai (λ)∆Pt+1
                                                                                                                      i 

 bj z̄ − (1 + r)Pt (λ) + Eλ̃t+1 |λ [Pt+1 (λ̃t+1 )] = γ bj σz



                                                                  i≤N                                           i≤N




                                                               46
Summing up these equations across investors’ types, using the market clearing conditions and dropping the
time subscript lead to:
                                                                                                
                           α                                                      j
                           2 bj λ   + (1 − α2 ) bj z̄ − (1 + r)P j (λ) + Eλ̃t+1 [Pt+1 (λ̃t+1 )|λ] =
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                      
                           σ2
                                                                           X                                          X
                                                                                  µB                                         µB         i
            1
                 2                                              α
                                                                                                                                      
            γ
                bj σz +
                          N      + ρ(1 − ρ)∆P Γ −      j              2
                                                                 2 bj σz           i (λ)bi    − α2 ρ(1   − ρ)∆P   j
                                                                                                                              i (λ)∆P 
                                                                          i<ī                                       i<ī             
                                                                           |       {z     }                           |         {z    }
                                                                                   S1                                          S 2 =0

                       i
Where Γ = i≥ī ∆P                                     2                           i                   1
            P
                    N . In the previous equation, S = 0 since for all i < j̄, ∆P = 0. To recover S , we use
B-investors’ first-order condition on assets j < ī, the equilibrium prices derived above for assets j < ī and
the fact that for all i < j̄, ∆P j = 0. This leads to the following equation :

                                                    X                                                       σ2
                             ∀j < ī,      bj σz2           µB      B 2                2
                                                             i bi +µj σ = −λγbj + bj σz +
                                                                                                            N
                                                    i≤N
                                                    |       {z    }
                                                            S1


Multiplying the previous expression by bi for i < ī and summing up the equations over i gives a formula for
S 1 similar to the static model:
                                                P           
                                                          bi
                                                                                   
                                            σ2                                b2i
                                                                       P
                                                     i≥ī N    + λγ       i<ī
                                  S1 = 1 −                     P        2
                                                                          
                                                   σ2 + σz2      i<ī bi


This allows us to derive the excess return on assets j ≥ ī:

                                                                    j
                                  bj z̄ − (1 + r)P j (λ) + Eλ̃t+1 [Pt+1 (λ̃t+1 )|λ] =
                                  |                      {z                           }
                                                   Excess Return
                                                                                                            
                     2                                                  2                     2 X            2
                                                
       1           σ                                                  σ                     σ              σ
           bj σz2 +  + (1 + θ)ρ(1 − ρ)∆P j Γ − θ bj 2                 
                                                                                       λ − z       bk  −  
                                                                                  b2i
                                                                        P
       γ           N                                         σ + σz2       i< ī
                                                                                            γN             γN
       |                    {z                    }                                             k≥ī
                       Risk Premium
                                                       |                                {z                     }
                                                                                               π j =speculative premium


Note that the risk premium embeds a term that reflects the resale price risk of high b assets. Subtracting
equation (7) from the previous equation yields, for all j ≥ ī:
                                                                                                                                
                                                    θρ(1 − ρ)                                                         θρ(1 − ρ)
−(1 + r)∆P j + (2ρ − 1)∆P j = −π j +                          Γ∆P j ⇒                   (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) +                    Γ ∆P j = π j
                                                        γ                                                                 γ

                                  ∆P i
                      P
Remember that Γ =          i≥ī    N .   We can thus obtain a formula for Γ by adding up the previous equations for
all j ≥ ī:                                                          
                                                           θρ(1 − ρ)      1 X j
                                      (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) +           Γ Γ=    π
                                                               γ          N
                                                                                                         j≥ī




                                                                           47
There is a unique Γ+ > 0 which satisfies the previous equation, call it Γ+ :
                                                        q
                                                                             2      4 θρ(1−ρ)
                                                                                                  P
                               −(1 + r) + (2ρ − 1) +     ((1 + r) − (2ρ − 1)) +     N    γ            j≥ī   πj
                 ?      +
               Γ =Γ =
                                                                  2 θρ(1−ρ)
                                                                       γ


There is also a unique Γ < 0 which satisfies the quadratic equation defining Γ:
                                                     q
                                                                          2       4 θρ(1−ρ)
                                                                                              P
                            −(1 + r) + (2ρ − 1) −     ((1 + r) − (2ρ − 1)) +      N    γ        j≥ī   πj
                     Γ− =
                                                             2 θρ(1−ρ)
                                                                  γ


                                    πj
And for j ≥ ī: ∆P j =                  θρ(1−ρ) ?   For the equilibrium to exist, it needs to be that for each asset
                            1+r−(2ρ−1)+    γ   Γ
j ≥ ī, the pessimists do not want to hold the asset j, i.e. the marginal utility of holding assets j ≥ ī at the
optimal holding is 0. This is equivalent to:

                                                                                     1        X
              ∀j ≥ ī (bj (z̄ − λ) − (1 + r)P j (λ) + ρP j (λ) + (1 − ρ)P j (0) −      bj σz2      µB
                                                                                                    i bi < 0
                                                                                     γ
                                                                                              j<ī
                                                                                              | {z }
                                                                                                  =S


We have:

                                                                              1
                  (bj (z̄ − λ) − (1 + r)P j (λ) + ρP j (λ) + (1 − ρ)P j (0) − bj σz2 S
                                                                              γ
                                        σ2
                                                             
                            1       2                                    θρ(1 − ρ)        1
                = −bj λ +       bj σz +     + ρ(1 − ρ)∆P Γ − π j +
                                                           j
                                                                                   Γ∆P j − bj σz2 S
                            γ           N                                    γ            γ
                    πj                  ρ(1 − ρ)
                = − − π j + (1 + θ)               Γ∆P j
                     θ                       γ
                                          θρ(1−ρ)
                                                                   !
                  1+θ j                      γ    Γ
                =         π                                    −1
                    θ          (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) + θρ(1−ρ) Γγ
                    1+θ      (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1)
                = −                                   × πj
                     θ (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) + θρ(1−ρ) Γ
                                                         γ


Consider first the case where Γ? = Γ− < 0. We know that:
                                                           q
                                                                                2                 4 θρ(1−ρ)
                                                                                                                  P
           Γ −                        (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) −  ((1 + r) − (2ρ − 1)) +                N    γ          j≥ī   πj
 θρ(1 − ρ)     + (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) =                                                                                         <0
            γ                                                    2 θρ(1−ρ)    γ

                                  (1+r)−(2ρ−1)
Thus, if Γ? = Γ− , then − 1+θ                                                                       j
                           θ (1+r)−(2ρ−1)+ θρ(1−ρ) Γ > 0 so that it has to be that for all j ≥ ī, π < 0. Thus:
                                              γ
        j
P
  j≥ī π < 0, so that                                               
                                                        θρ(1 − ρ) −
                                 (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) +             Γ    Γ− < 0
                                                            γ

However, the previous expression is > 0 since Γ− < 0 and (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) + θρ(1−ρ)  γ   Γ− < 0 as well. Thus,
we can’t have Γ? = Γ− . Since Γ? > 0, we have from the previous equilibrium condition that necessarily,
for all j ≥ ī, π j > 0. Similarly, it is direct to show that for pessimists to have strictly positive holdings of
assets j −¯ 1, a necessary and sufficient condition is that π j̄−1 < 0. This leads to the same condition for the



                                                             48
existence of the equilibrium than in the static case, i.e.: uī < λ ≤ uī−1 . Since ∆P j = 0 for j < ī, we have
that for all j < ī:

                                                                                                                    σ2
                                                                                                                        
                                                                             1
                         j               j                     j
                     E[R (λ)] = E[R (0)] = bj z̄ − rP (λ) = bj z̄ − rP (0) =       j
                                                                                                          bj σz2   + 
                                                                             γ                                      N

For j ≥ ī, however:

                 E[Rj (0)]       = bj z̄ − (1 + r)P j (0) + ρP j (0) + (1 − ρ)P j (λ)
                                                                                                                              !
                                     1                 σ2                          Γ?
                                 =           bj σz2   +  + ρ(1 − ρ)                                      θρ(1−ρ) ?
                                                                                                                      π   j
                                     γ                 N             (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) +                        Γ
                                                                                                             γ


The extra-term is the risk-premium required by investors for holding stocks which are sensitive to disagree-
ment and are thus exposed to changes in prices coming from changes in the aggregate disagreement state
variable. Of course, in the data, since ρ is very close to 1, this risk premium is going to be quantitatively
small. However, the intuition here is that high b stocks have low prices in the low disagreement states for
two reasons: (1) they are exposed to the aggregate risk z̃ (2) they are exposed to changes in aggregate
disagreement λ̃. And finally:

E[Rj (λ)]   = bj z̄ − (1 + r)P j (λ) + ρP j (λ) + (1 − ρ)P j (0)
                                                                                                  !
                1              σ2                          Γ?
            =        bj σz2   +  + ρ(1 − ρ)                                  θρ(1−ρ) ?
                                                                                          π   j
                                                                                                      − πj
                γ              N             (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) +                    Γ
                                                                                 γ
                     ρ(1 − ρ)               Γ?
                +θ                                           θρ(1−ρ) ?
                                                                         πj
                        γ     (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) +                  Γ
                                                                γ
                                                                                                  !
                1              σ2                          Γ?                                                       1 + r − (2ρ − 1)
            =        bj σz2   +  + ρ(1 − ρ)                                  θρ(1−ρ) ?
                                                                                          π   j
                                                                                                      −                           θρ(1−ρ) ?
                                                                                                                                              πj
                γ              N             (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) +                    Γ                    (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) +           Γ
                                                                                 γ                                                   γ


Thus, for assets j ≥ ī, the expected return is strictly lower in high disagreement states than in low disagree-
ment states.


A.5.        Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Part (i) is a direct consequence of the formula for expected excess returns in Theorem 2. For (ii), we
                                                                j
do a Taylor expansion around ρ = 1 for Γ? : Γ? ≈ 1r j≥ī πN > 0, so that in the vicinity of ρ = 1 and for
                                                        P

j ≥ ī,
                                               σ2
                                                  
                            j      1      2                    1 + r − (2ρ − 1)
                        E[R (λ)] ≈    bj σz +        −                                 πj
                                   γ           N       (1 + r) − (2ρ − 1) + θρ(1−ρ) Γ?                γ

The slope of the security market line for assets i < ī (expressed as a function of bi – it would be equivalent
as a function of βi ) is thus strictly lower for i < ī than for i ≥ ī in the vicinity of ρ = 1, which proves (ii).
(iii) can also be seen directly from the previous Taylor expansion and making λ grows to infinity. (iv) is also
a direct consequence of the formula for expected excess returns in Theorem 2.




                                                                   49
