                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TAXES AND THE MERGER DECISION:
                      AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS




                         Alan 3. Auerbach


                          David Reishus




                      Working Paper No. 1855




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             March 1986




This paper was prepared for the Conference on Takeovers and
Contests for Corporate Control, sponsored by the Center for Law and
Economic Studies, Columbia Law School, November 13-15, 1985. We
thank Brenda Chamberlain, Laurie Dicker and Kevin Hassett for
research assistance. Financial support by the National Science
Foundation (Grant No. SES-8409892), the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation,
and the Institute for Law and Economics at Penn is gratefully
acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper 1855
                                                   Mirch 1986




                     Taxes and the I4erger Decision:
                         An Eripirical Analysis




                                ABSTRACT


     One motive that is often cited for merger activity is the avoidance of

federal income taxes by corporations and their shareholders. Yet there is

little empirical evidence on the tax consequences of merger activity, or on

the postmerger effects on firm policies of tax motivated mergers.



     In this paper, we present some initial results based on a large sample of

mergers and acquisitions that occurred over the period 1968—83. We find that,

in about one fifth of all mergers, there was a potential gain from the

transfer of unused tax losses and credits, with an average value of

approximately ten percent of the acquired company's market value. Other tax

incentives to merge are also measured, but found to be less important

quantitatively.



Alan J. Auerbach                                       David Reishus
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                             T-larvard University
3718 Locust Walk                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
Philadelphia, PA 19104
(215) 898—1503                                         (617) 498—7401
                                          1




 1.   INTRODUCTION



      There   are many economic explanations for the acquisition of one firm by

 another, or for the combination of two firms through a merger. Some, such as

 synergy, better organization of production or the improvement of the

 management of one of the firms, are associated with the generation of social

 benefits through more efficient resource allocation.   Others, such as

 increased market power and managers seeking empires, are associated with

private gains that may very well be more than offset by the losses of others

in society. Hence, it is important that motives underlying a merger be

understood for a judgment to be made about its social desirability.



      One particular motive that is often cited as generating private rather

than social gains is the avoidance of federal income taxes by corporations and

their shareholders. At first blush, it may seem that merging for tax reasons

alone must be socially undesirable, since it leads to a revenue loss that must

be made up with distortionary taxes on others in the economy. It must be

noted, however, that reducing their own taxes, combining firms      also

facilitate more efficient behavior on their own part. For example, wiping out

tax losses may increase the incentive to invest, particularly in the presence

of a system of accelerated depreciation'. Hence, there can be no presumption

that merging for tax purposes reduces aggregate economic efficiency.

Nevertheless, there are many cases in which the tax benefits are essentially
                                        2




lump sum transfers to the merging firms; such outcomes cause concern and

generate proposals for policy action.



     The recent rise in merger activity, coupled with frequent publicity about

tax benefits generated by some of these mergers, has provided an impetus for

such proposals. One plan currently under Congressional scrutiny would

substantially reduce the tax benefits gained from merging2. Yet there is

little empirical evidence on the tax consequences of merger activity, or on

the postmerger effects on financial and Investment policies of tax motivated

behavior. Indeed, though there have been theoretical analyses over the years

of the tax benefits to be derived from different types of mergers and

acquisitions3, there have been, to our knowledge, no serious attempts to

evaluate the Importance of these incentives beyond the consideration of

particular mergers. From a policy standpoint, it is important to know not

only what the potential tax benefits are, and what benefits certain companies

have been able to avail themselves of, but also the aggregate importance of

such Incentives. This requires a broader empirical investigation than the

case study method permits, one which considers enough mergers so that patterns

can be discerned.



     In this paper, we present some initial results based on a large sample of

mergers and acquistions that occurred over the period 1968—83. Our aim is to

assess the potential tax benefits that these merging firms could have gained

In the process, and to take a preliminary look at one of the distortions to

firm behavior often associated with the acquisition process, increased

leverage of the combined entity. The analysis is largely descriptive, in that

we do not estimate behavioral models to measure the relationship between tax
                                        3




 incentives and merger activity. In the future, we hope to determine the

 extent to which tax factors induce mergers by comparing the tax

 characteristics of pairs of firms that choose to merge with those that do

 not. This work will require considerably more data preparation than has been

 done for the results reported below. However, in developing behavioral models

 an important first step is to establish the potential importance of tax

 factors in the merger decision, and to see whether the change in financial

 policy hypothesized to come from tax motivations (I.e., increased leverage) is

 present in the data.



     The paper's next section reviews the tax treatment of mergers and

discusses the various ways in which taxes can be reduced when two firms

combine. Section 3 describes the data set which we have constructed from a

variety of public sources. Section 4 presents the empirical methodology and

the results themselves. In the final section, we interpret these findings,

discuss their limitations, and consider directions for future research.



     Our results suggest that potential tax benefits associated with the

relaxation of constraints on the use of tax losses and tax credits are present

in approximately one in five mergers and acquisitions. In about one—third of

this subsample, the benefits may exceed 10% of the acquired company's market

value. There is less evidence of substantial gains being available through

the achievement of higher asset bases and associated tax deductions, though

this measure is not calculated very precisely. Finally, we find little

evidence, for the pre—1984 sample period studied, that significant changes in

leverage are associated with mergers and acquisitions, even when acquired

companies are large relative to those making the acquisition.
                                        4




2.   TAXES AND MERGER ACTIVITY




     In   this section, we discuss the key tax provisions involved when firms

combine through a merger or an acquisition. This discussion is not

exhaustive, in that it does not touch on every section of the Internal Revenue

Code that might be relevant to a particular merger. It is intended to

highlight the tax factors that are likely to arise in any merger.



     An ambiguity that must be addressed at the start is that in determining

whether merger activity is encouraged by the tax code, it is important to know

what the best alternative activity would he in the absence of a merger. For

example, the tax law may favor a merger relative to the continued operation of

the two firms in question, but might be neutral with respect to the merger

choice if the alternative were that the target firm liquidated in the absence

of a takeover. Likewise, a cash acquisition might be favored relative to the

retention of earnings, but not relative to repurchases of the firmts own

shares. In most situations, mergers are associated with tax benefits that may

be potentially available without the occurence of a merger. Here, one must

carefully assess whether the costs of achieving such benefits are reduced

substantially when a merger occurs.



A. Stockholder Taxation



     Shareholders can receive many forms of payment when they sell their

shares as part of a merger or acquisition. If they receive cash or stock as

part of a taxable transaction, they must pay capital gains taxes on the
                                       5




difference between sale price and basis. If they receive voting stock as part

of a tax—free reorganization, they carry over the basis on their old stock and

defer capital gains taxes until the new stock is sold. If they receive debt

as part of an installment sale, they are not taxed until the deferred payments

are received.



     From a tax standpoint, some types of transactions are better than

others. Compared to the taxable receipt of voting stock, for example, the

receipt of such stock with taxes deferred is obviously better. Likewise an

installment sale allows sellers to defer taxes on payments until they are

received even though the purchaser establishes a liability immediately for the

amount that must be put aside to satisfy the debt. This has the effect of

allowing the seller to accumulate interest tax free on unreceived portions of

the sale price. Thus, it is preferable to a straight sale for cash.



     In comparing a cash sale to a nontaxable stock sale, however, and in

comparing each to the situation in which no acquisition occurs, one must make

additional assumptions in order to determine whether a particular activity is

favored. If the alternative to a stock sale were continued ownership of the

acquired entity, then there would be no tax consequences of the sale. If,

however, the investor is less likely to sell shares in the acquiring company,

a tax saving is realized. To the extent that the acquiring company is larger

and offers the investor greater diversification of his wealth, the probability

of holding onto the stock may very well be increased.



    A cash sale has tax costs and tax benefits relative both to a nontaxable

stock sale and the no—merger situation. The shareholders pay extra taxes, but
                                      6




the taxes saved by the acquiring company may more than offset these. Suppose

that in performing the acquisition, the parent company borrows the amount

needed for the purchase. The result is then similar to a firm borrowing to

repurchase its own equity. In each case, there has been a change in the debt—

equity ratio with cash passing out to equity—holders being subject to partial

capital gains taxation. If the debt for equity swap could occur equally well

in the presence or absence of an acquisition, there is no particular tax

benefit to a cash—financed merger. The same logic holds for any cash

purchase, no matter where the cash comes from. If the purchasing firm always

has the alternative to use the cash to repurchase its own shares, there is no

direct tax benefit from a cash purchase of another firm's shares.



     This equivalence could break down for one of two reasons. First, it

could be more difficult to purchase one's own shares than those of another

firm. If this were the case, then increased leverage without an acquisition

could only be achieved by an increase in fully taxable dividends (either

immediately, or realistically, gradually over time). Likewise, the ability to

borrow to purchase shares might be more difficult if the shares were in one's

own company.



     There is some presumption, or at least a fear, that it is easier to

borrow to distribute cash through the acquisition of another firm's shares

than through the acquisition of one's own shares. For example, the Tax Reform

Act of 1969 restricted the use of convertible debt in takeovers. According to

the General Explanation of the Act issued by the Joint Committee on Taxation

(1970, at p. 123), the focus on debt involved in mergers was justified

because:
                                           7




                  Although it is possible to substitute debt for equity without

                  a merger, this is much easier to bring about at the time of

                  merger. This is because, although stockholders ordinarily

                  would not be willing to substitute debt for their stockholdings,

                  they may be willing to do so pursuant to a corporate acquisition

                  where they are exchanging their holdings in one company for debt

                  in another (the acquiring) company.



        There is, indeed, a view expressed by many policymakers that increased

merger activity is leading to increased leverage in the corporate sector

because it is associated with borrowing that would not otherwise occur. While

one might contemplate economic models to explain such an outcome4, it may be

possible here, without doing so, to test the hypothesis that it occurs. We

develop a preliminary such test below.



B. Corporate Taxation



        At the corporate level (assuming each firm's shareholders are not

themselves corporations), the tax treatment of a merger or acquisition depends

on whether the acquiring firm elects to treat the acquired firm as having been

absorbed into the parent with its tax attributes intact or first liquidated

and then received in the form of its component assets. While a tax—free

reorganization must follow the first path, a taxable transaction can be either

type.




        Once again, each form of transaction has potential tax benefits, the

magnitude of which depend on the alternative activities of the acquired firm
                                      8




in the absence of a merger. The acquisition of a firm as a collection of

assets leads typically to a stepped—up basis for the assets, with depreciable

or depletable assets then receiving higher allowances than would otherwise

have been permitted. At the same time, the liquidating target company (and,

therefore, its new parent) must pay some taxes due to recapture provisions,

but avoids capital gains that would have been due on a simple sale of

assets. For some assets, like equipment, this is not a major benefit, since

recapture at the ordinary income tax rate applies to all excess of sale price

over basis up to the original purchase price. For structures, however,

recapture is much more limited and the exemption from capital gains taxes more

         5




     It is easy to see that such an exemption may constitute the difference

between a net tax increase and a net tax decrease. For example, suppose a

structure has a basis of b and a sale price of s. Assuming that depreciation

allowances follow a declining balance formula6, and ignoring the truncation of

such allowances at the asset's actual tax lifetime, we may approximate the

present value of its remaining depreciation allowances as bz, where z is the

present value of depreciation deductions per dollar of new assets. The

allowances received on the stepped—up basis would be sz. If the depreciation

followed the straight—line method, there would he no recapture, so the

increased value of depreciation allowances net of capital gains taxes and

would be (s—b) (tz—e), where t is the ordinary tax rate and c is the capital

gains tax rate. For corporations, c=.28 and t=.46, so z would have to exceed

61 percent, which it generally does not. If c0, of course, the gain could be

substantial7.
                                       9



     Such gains could be received without any acquisition taking place. The

capital gains exemption, based on the General Utilities doctrine, applies to

the distribution of property to stockholders and would apply in any

liquidation, not just one associated with an acquisition of the company.

However, it seems implausible that a large, widely—held company could be

reconstituted after distributing its assets to its individual shareholders as

part of a real liquidation. Hence, if the firm would have continued operating

in the absence of an acquisition, the ability to obtain stepped—up asset bases

without suffering capital gains taxes constitutes a tax benefit for the

merger.



     When an acquiring firm takes over the tax attributes of the acquired

company, it does not get the opportunity to step—up asset bases8, but it does

get the benefit of any unused tax credits or tax losses that the target firm

has carried forward because it was not able to use them in prior years. The

use of such tax benefits is limited by sections 269 and 382 of the Internal

Revenue Code, which require the acquisition to have economic substance and

impose either conditions requiring the continuation of the target's operations

(in the case of a taxable transaction) or restrictions on the extent to which

losses can be used based on the relative sizes of target and parent (in the

case of a tax—free reorganization)9. Even with restrictions, the parent firm

may be able to use the acquired losses and credits more easily than the

acquired firm would have on its own, given its projected taxable income and

other vehicles available, such as leasing, to make its losses fungible.



    This incentive to merge was used to justify the liberalized leasing

provisions introduced in 1981 as part of the Economic Recovery Tax Act, when
                                      10




legislators feared that the increased depreciation allowances introduced at

the same time would lead to more firms with tax losses and that these firms

would come under takeover pressure. More recently, the Treasury has supported

pending revisions to the Internal Revenue Code that would impose further

restrictions on the ability to apply prior losses and credits of a target

against income of a parent'0 This legislative history, along with the

observed presence at any given time of large numbers of firms carrying forward

large amounts of unused credits and losses, suggests that it may be difficult

to transfer such benefits without a merger taking place.



     Finally, however the assets and tax attributes of the acquired company

are treated, there is an additional tax benefit that may be obtained if the

parent company has unused tax losses and credits, since it may set these

against the otherwise taxable income of the company it acquires. Restrictions

on this are weaker than those of parent using the losses of the acquired

company. For example, the rule regarding reorganizations would not be binding

as long as the loss company represented more that 20% of the new entity's

total value, which it almost certainly would if it were the parent.



     Thus, given that liquidation of an ongoing enterprise and the sale of tax

losses and credits already being carried forward appear to be facilitated by

the act of merger, these must be considered tax incentives for the merger

activity itself.
                                        11




  3.   DATA

       We have used several sources to construct a data set
                                                              containing
 information over time on several hundred mergers that occurred over the past

 two decades. All of the mergers and acquisitions actually studied ocurred

 during the period 1968—83. Since tax returns themselves are confidential, our

 tax data are limited to what the firms have chosen to disclose in their

 financial statements. Fortunately, standard accounting practice is to

 disclose tax attributes of the type in which we are interested when they are

 of material importance.



       The COMPUSTAT 1983 Industrial File provides balance sheet and income

 statement information over the twenty year period leading up to 1983 on a

 larger number of corporations currently listed on the New York and American

 Stock Exchanges. A companion COMPUSTAT file, the Industrial Research File,

provides similar information for firms that were included on previous versions

of the regular Industrial File but were removed because they were delisted

from their exchanges. The most common reasons were bankruptcy and merger.

For each firm on the Research File that was dropped because of a merger, we

consulted the Directory of Obsolete Securities to ascertain the year of merger

and the parent into which the firm in question merged. We then determined

whether the parent was included on the ordinary Industrial File. If it was,

then we had time series data on both firms Involved in the merger, and

included this as one of the observations in our sample. This procedure led to

422 mergers. Many firms from the Industrial File appear more than once, having

engaged in more than one merger over the period that was captured by our

collection method.
                                      12




     While a typical annual observation form COMPUSTAT provides information on

federal taxes paid and tax losses carried forward, the former sometimes

includes deferred taxes as well as taxes currently payable, and the latter

frequently Is an accounting measure that does not reflect the actual value of

taxes carried forward, indicating instead what taxes would have been caned

forward if the company were taxed on its accounting income rather than its

taxable income. Moreover, tax losses carried forward on operations in other

countries are usually combined with domestic losses. Hence, the tax loss

carry forward data provided by COMPUSTAT are mostly entirely useless for our

purposes; they do not necessarily indicate the value of losses that could be

used by another firm to offet its own domestic taxable income.



     Fortunately, the original annual reports of the companies usually do

include the appropriate tax information. For every firm in our sample for

which tax data were missing or for which the tax data indicated a potential

presence of unused tax benefits", we consulted the reports themselves to

obtain information on federal taxes paid, tax losses carried forward, and

Investment and foreign tax credits carried forward. Where data were still

substantially missing, or when the year of merger listed by the Directory of

Obsolete Securities differed by more than one from that indicated by the

dissapearance of the acquired from COMPUSTAT, we were forced to drop this firm

(and its merger companion) from our sample. In a few additional cases, what

was called a merger was really just the reorganization of an existing company

under a new name; these were also dropped from consideration. What remained

was a sample of 318 mergers for which we had usable tax Information on both

firms involved in the merger. Each observation consists of time series

information on both firms until the merger date and data on the new enity
                                       13




 thereafter.



      It is often difficult to give the precise calendar year in which each

merger occurred, because of differences in fiscal years and mergers which did

not happen instantaneously. However, it is usually fairly clear from the data

when the acquired company ceased to exist as an independent entity. We use

the convention of calling the merger year the year after that for which

information on the acquired company is last available. By this classification,

we have mergers in each year of the period 1968—1983, with the bulk (all but 25)

falling in the period 1972—1982 and over three—quarters (247) occurring between

1976 and 1982. This was a period during which the tax treatment of mergers was

essentially unchanged.



     As might have been expected, the acquiring companies are larger on

average than those acquired. Parent companies had an average value of debt

plus equity of 1.957 billion dollars, while the average target firm's value

was 204 million dollars'2. There was relatively little difference in

financial structure between the two groups, with the ratio of long—term debt

to long—term debt plus equity averaging 29.7 percent for acquiring firms and

27.4 percent for those acquired.



     Not surprising is the positive sample correlation between the sizes of

parent and target firms. A breakdown of the relative sizes of the merger

pairs is given in Table 1. Over one fourth of the mergers involved cases

where the acquiring company had value less that 250 million dollars and the

target less than 50 million. At the other extreme, there were over 10 percent

where the parent's value exceeded a billion dollars and the target's 250
                                         14




billion. There were relatively few cases in which the parent company was not

substantially larger than the target.



      There is also a positive correlation in the sample between the debt—

equity ratios of the two firms merging, but this can only be partly explained

by the positive correlation between firms' sizes and the tendency for debt—

equity ratios to fall with firm size. Using the ratio of long—term debt to

equity plus long—term debt as a measure of financial policy, there remains a

partial correlation of .27 between the target and acquiring firms' ratios

after controlling for the market value of each.



     A majority of companies in the sample are in manufacturing (i.e., have a

primary SIC classification beginning with 2 or 3): 65 percent of the targets

and 74 percent of the parents. Of the remaining companies, 23 firms in the

energy and mining exploration area were acquired, ten by companies in the same

industry. (There was only one case of a company in this industry acquiring

one in another industry.) Likewise, in the transportation industry, where

there were 19 parents and 21 targets, 13 mergers involved two firms in the

Industry. The same general pattern was also observed in the financial

industry, where of the 16 acquired companies and 16 acquiring companies, 10

were matched.




4.   MEASURING TAX INCENTIVES



     As   a measure of the tax incentives for two firms to merge, the
conceptually    correct measure would be the reduction in the present value of
                                       15




taxes owed by two firms due to the merger. Ideally, one would project the

distribution of future tax payments for each firm in isolation and for the two

firms combined and then discount the expected tax payments under each

situation by an appropriate discount rate. There are a number of difficulties

in doing so. The most important limitation Is on the number of years for

which data are available for the acquired firms. We may typically have two or

three years of federal income tax payments. In cases of firms with tax

losses, we may have even less. Hence, it is extremely difficult to know how

such firms would have fared in the absence of a takeover. It is also unclear

from our data whether acquiring firms chose to step up the bases of assets or

to assume the tax attributes of acquired companies. Hence, projections for

the combined entity are also difficult to construct.



     What we can do is identify mergers in which there were obvious potential

tax benefits involved from the transfer of losses and credits or the step—up

in asset bases, or in which a substantial change in the debt—equity ratio of

the combined companies ocurred.



A. Losses and Credits



     If one company with taxable income takes over another with taxable

income, and neither has unused tax credits, there are no evident tax benefits

to be transferred through merger. There may still be future benefits to be

gained by a pooling of fluctuations in taxable income that reduces the

possibility of subsequent unused losses and credits, but we have little hope

of measuring such effects. Likewise, it is hard to see the obvious tax

benefits if two firms that are unable to make full use of their credits and
                                         16




deductions combine. The clearest case for benefits being present is when one

of the firms is fully taxable and the other is not. Here, a more rapid use of

the constrained firm's tax benefits is likely to occur because of the

merger. How much more rapid we cannot tell, but we can at least get a sense

of the order of magnitude of the incentive from the extent to which the

taxable firm can use the other firm's losses and credits against its own

taxable income.



     In this spirit, we classify firms (both target and parent) into four

categories according to their tax status in the year before the merger. Group

I has positive federal taxes payable and no credits carried forward. This

group does not face tax constraints as we have defined them. Group I contains

the majority of firms on both sides of the merger. Group II firms have no

current federal taxes, but are able to carry back current losses and credits

against prior years' taxable income. These firms have no tax benefits to

transfer, but they also have little capacity to absorb such transfers from

other firms. Group III firms possess unused tax credits that have been

carried forward, but no tax losses. Group IV firms have tax losses and

credits carried forward. In estimating the gains from the transfer of tax

benefits, we assume these to be zero except for mergers between firms from

Group I and those from Groups III and IV. For cases where the benefit is

assumed to be present, we measure it as the maximum amount of the constrained

firm's tax benefits that could be used by its Group I partner over a three

year period, assuming that the latter firm has the same taxable income In each

year as in the year before the merger.



     For example, suppose firm A has taxable income and takes over firm B,
                                        17




 which has tax losses and credits carried forward. We multiply A's taxable

 income by three and compare this to B's losses. If the losses exceed A's

 three—year income, the latter figure, multiplied by the corporate tax rate, is

 the measured benefit. If not, we then offset the credits against the

 remaining income, taking into account the relevant limitations that applied in

 each year on the use of credits to offset taxes. We do not take account of

 the potential restrictions imposed by sections 269 and 382 of the Code, nor do

we account for the potential expiration of transferred losses and credits.

Finally, we do not attempt to measure the use that the Group III or IV company

would have made of its tax benefits had it not merged. Our choice of a three

year horizon is meant to prevent an overstatement of benefits that might come

from ignoring these various factors. The notion is that benefits that the

taxable firm could not use almost immediately are benefits that might have

expired or been used by the other company'3.



     Table 2 presents a cross—tabulation of target and parent firms by their

tax status, as measured by the groupings I—IV described above. We also

include an additional group, V, which has ambiguous group membership because

firms reported having both tax losses carried forward and positive federal

taxes currently payable. This presumably results from the presence of more

than one entity for tax purposes being combined on the financial statements.

Typically, this occurs for financial companies which have a life insurance

subsidiary. Fortunately, there are relatively few cases in which this occurs.



    As mentioned earlier, most of the companies are in Group I: 234 of the

acquired companies and 260 of the acquiring companies. There are a total of

40 mergers where a Group I parent acquires a company in Group III or Group IV,
                                      18




and 21 mergers where a Group I company is acquired by Group III or Group IV

parent. There are only 9 mergers in which both firms are in one of these

groups. Hence, there appear to be potential tax benefits in nearly 20 percent

of all mergers.



     It is interesting to note that mergers between pairs of Group III/IV

firms occur slightly more often than would be predicted by chance'4. Given

the size of this sample, however, this is not a very conclusive finding. In

addition, most of the mergers of two constrained firms involved firms in the

same industry, for which cyclical profitability would tend to be highly

correlated. Hence, the absence of a clear pairing of firms with tax losses

and gains may simply be due to the offsetting effect of the tendency of firms

in related businesses to merge.



     Using the method described above, we calculated the potential tax benefit

in each merger of a type I and type III/IV firm.   For the sake of

completeness, we reclassified the 14 group V firms by assuming their measured

tax losses to be zero. This led to an additional two mergers falling into the

tax category, both with Group I targets and Group III parents'5. The results

are summarized in Table 3, with the estimated tax gains being expressed as a

percentage of the combined value of the acquired firm's equity plus debt'6.



     Overall, potential tax benefits are estimated to be present in nearly one

fifth of the mergers, with the average gain in these cases being just over one

tenth of the target firm's value. In the majority of these cases, the

benefits come from losses and credits of the acquired entities. The largest

such gain, over 100 million dollars, is estimated for the takeover of Anaconda
                                        19




 by Atlantic Richfield in 1976. There are, however, two particularly important

 cases of parent companies providing the tax benefits; in each case, the

 company is involved in more than one takeover in the sample. Allied

 Corporation's acquisitions of Bunker Raino, Fisher Scientific and Supron Energy

 in 1980—81 were estimated to provide benefits over 80 million dollars, and

 Penn Central's absorption of CR Technologies and Marathon Manufacturing in

 1978—80 had measured tax benefits of over 180 million dollars.



      Though the ability to transfer unused tax benefits seems to be of some

 relevance in a substantial number of mergers, it is likely to be economically

 important in only a relatively small fraction of these. Of the 63 mergers

with positive estimated tax benefits, only one third, 21, have benefits in

excess of 10 percent of the acquired firm's market value. Given the mean

benefit of 10.5 percent, this indicates substantial skewness in the

distribution of tax benefits. When weighted by the market value of the target

firm the average declines to 6.1 indicating that the mergers for which this

tax attribute is of importance tend to be for the smaller targets.



B. Gains from Basis Step—up



     This is an area where special circumstances may play a major role. We do

not have sufficiently detailed data to identify such cases. Broadly speaking,

however, we know that the step—up in basis is most valuable for assets which

are classified as structures, including those in the minerals area, for these

are subject only to limited recapture. We use a mechanical procedure,

described in the appendix, to identify the step—up in basis that each target

firm would receive on it structures, and then estimate the increase in the
                                            20



present   value of after—tax income due to the higher associated depreciation

allowances. The procedure assumes that the firm's earliest reported book

assets that we have available are correctly reported, estimates the fraction

of these assets that are structures, and calculates the market and book values

of these and subsequently acquired structures at the time of the merger under

the assumption that the assets grew in nominal value at the general rate of

price inflation, adjusted for economic depreciation of the assets. We do this

calculation for all acquired firms.



     The estimated benefits from basis step—up are substantially smaller in

value than those estimated to have come from the transfer of losses and

credits. We must point out, however, that at our level of aggregation of

assets we may be missing some important variation in the types of assets being

transferred. Our algorithm may greatly understate the step—up in basis

possible for assets that have risen in value substantially faster than the

general price level or were on the target firm's books for many years before

the date at which our data became available, and hence incorrectly valued at
             17
that date



     For 43 of the 318 target firms, there are additional data problems that

prevent a calculation of this benefit. Of the remaining 275 firms, only 7 are

estimated to produce a gain from basis step—up in excess of 5 percent of the

target firm's value. Of the 40 cases where the target firm also has estimated

tax benefits from unused credits and tax losses, the benefit from basis step—

up is larger      in only two. It   should be recognized, however, that it has been

possible    in    the past to get the advantages of both step—up in basis and unused

tax losses and credits through a variety of mechanisms, such as partial
                                       21




liquidations to the parent company of the property to be stepped—up without a

liquidation of the acquired company itself18.




C. Changes in Leverage



     The final calculation we perform concerns the change in leverage for

firms in our sample, to evaluate the hypothesis that the tax benefits from

leverage are made accessible by mergers. Such an investigation might well be

limited to cases where a substantial portion of the consideration received by

shareholders of the acquired firm was cash, but we do not have sufficient

information at present to make this distinction. Hence, we have considered

all mergers in our sample.



     There is a very serious conceptual problem in trying to estimate how much

leverage changes because of a merger. Presumably, one measures the fraction

of the two firms' total capitalization that is debt both before and after

merger. But an increase in the debt—equity ratio when the merger occurs is

not necessarily evidence in support of the hypothesis. Suppose, for example,

that a firm accumulates retentions for several years, in anticipation of a

merger program, and then makes its acquistion using borrowed funds in addition

to its own internal accumulations. There would be an immediate increase in

its debt—equity ratio because of the "lumpiness" of the project, but, viewed

from a longer perspective, no real change in its underlying financial

policy. If a firm makes large investments every five years, we might observe

its debt—equity ratio jump with each investments and then decline gradually

until the next jump.   It would be misleading to describe this as a recurring
                                      22




change in its financial policy.



     We consider this to be an important problem in assessing the impact of

mergers on leverage. To deal with it, we look at debt—equity ratios two years

before and two years after the merger, rather than immediately before and

immediately after. One would hope that this will give us better estimates of

the firms' "long—run" debt—equity ratios, but caution is still advised.



     We measure equity by the year—end market value of common stock and debt

by the book value of long—term debt. The use of book values for long—term

debt may cause problems. However, given the lack of information on the

maturity structure of each firm's debt, we found there to be little

alternative. We also performed the same calculations including short—term

debt. However, the data on short—term debt are of poorer quality and we are

less confident about results that include them.



     As already mentioned, we attempt to measure changes in debt and equity

over the period beginning two years before the merger and ending two years

after the merger. We have only 162 pairs of merging firms for which all data

necessary for this calculation are available. The sample size can be

increased to 207 by allowing minor variations in the base years for the

calculation (1 to 3 years before to 1 to 3 years after). The results of the

two samples are quite similar.



    We find that long—term debt as a fraction of long—term debt plus equity

increases in each sample from an average of 30.0 percent to one of 32.1

percent. Weighting by the value of long—term debt plus equity of the combined
                                       23




 firms gives smaller changes as the weighted average ratio increases from 25.4

 percent to 26.7 percent.



      Given that our data ends in 1982 and we require debt—equity ratios two

years after the merger for this calculation, no mergers beyond 1980 are

included in these calculations. Thus, most of the four—year changes averaged

here are from 1972—76 to 1978—82. According to data presented in Taggart

 (1985)19 on the first six of these seven four year periods (data on the last

are not given), aggregate market debt—equity ratios increased over two,

decreased over two, and increased quite negligibly (by 1 percentage point)

over two. These year to year changes in average debt—value ratios were

sufficiently large to make it difficult for us to view the increases in the

sample as significant.



     Indeed, this conclusion is reinforced by an examination of mergers where

the acquired company was large relative to the acquiring company. One might

expect the use of debt to be especially important in such cases. Yet the

average combined debt—market value ratio for mergers in which the target's

market value was between 25 and 50 percent of the parent's (before the

combination) was unchanged at 39.0 percent, unweighted, and actually declined

in the weighted sample, from 40.4 percent to 38.3 percent. Even for the small

sample of mergers in which the acquired company's market value exceeded half

that of the parent, the average rise in debt—market value ratio was small,

from 30.0 percent to 35.4 percent, unweighted, and from 32.1 percent to 35.3

percent, weighted.
                                       24




5.   CONCLUSIONS



     In   this paper, we have examined a sample of 318 mergers and acquisitions

that took place over the period 1968—83. Nearly two—thirds of the mergers

were between two manufacturing firms; the average acquiring firm was about ten

times the size of the average acquired company.



     A substantial fraction of the sample companies entered the mergers with

some constraints on their ability to use tax benefits. About one fifth of all

mergers in the sample involved cases where one firm faced such a constraint

(indicated by the presence of tax credits or losses carried forward), while

the other had positive current federal taxes and no such constraints. Such

firms may have reduced their combined federal taxes by merging. Our estimates

suggest, however, that the magnitude of such gains, though averaging 10.5

percent of the acquired firm's market value, exceeded 10 percent in only one

third of the cases, or about 6.5 percent of the sample. When expressed as a

fraction of equity, rather than total market value, gains this large are of a

similar order of magnitude as the average stock price premium paid for target

firms in successful tender offers (Jensen and Ruback 1983). Thus, for a small

fraction of the mergers, the transfer of tax benefits could have played a

significant role.



     A second measure of the potential tax gain from merger, associated with

the ability to step up the basis of depreciable assets without being subject

to capital gains taxes, was generally estimated to be small relative to the

acquired firm's market value. Here, however, our measurement technique is

limited by the availability of data, and may very well have understated the

true gains available in cases where assets had greatly appreciated over time.
                                       25




     Finally, we found that the ratio of combined debt to market value for the

parent and target firms in our sample increased slightly over the period

beginning two years before and ending two years after the merger. The

increase of 2.1 percentage points was small, however, given the magnitude of

year to year changes in aggregate debt to value ratios over this period. Even

when attention is limited to acquisitions of firms large in size relative to

the acquiring companies increases in leverage are small or absent.



     In future work, we hope to extend our analysis by looking at different

types of mergers within our sample that have been argued to have a special

characteristics (e.g., those in the oil industry). We also plan to use data

on firms that did not merge to gain a better understanding of the factors, tax

related and otherwise, that lead firms to merge.
                                        26




APPENDIX



       In this appendix, we describe our method for calculating the potential

value of the step—up in basis an acquired firm would obtain on its structures.



       We begin with the firm's book value of fixed assets at the end of the

last year before the merger. Using data on the firm's gross investment and

the capital stock at the end of the earliest year for which it is available

for the firm, we use the "perpetual inventory" method to estimate the rate of

declining balance depreciation that is consistent with the firm's initial and

terminal capital stocks. Given this estimate of economic depreciation, we

then estimate the current market value of the capital stock by multiplying

capital remaining from different vintages by the ratio of the price

(represented by the GNP deflator) in the current year to that for the year in

which the capital was purchased. We also assume that the initial capital

stock was valued correctly on the firms books. That is, we solve for 6 from

the equation:



(Al)                 =   (l6)TK   + (16)T_11 + ... +



where Kt is the book capital stock at the end of year t and     is fixed

investment in year t. We then calculate the market value of the capital stock

as:




(A2)                 m =                    + ...   +
                            (l_6)TKOPT/Po               It



We assume that a fraction e of this market value is structures, where 0 is the
                                                    27




  fraction that structures represents for all firms in the same industry (taken

 from Auerbach 1983). Note that this will understate the market value of

 assets that have increased in nominal value at a rate in excess of the GNP

 deflator or were worth more than their book value even at time zero.



         Since structures are written off at a different rate from equipment, they

 will generally represent a different fraction of the book capital stock than

 of the market value capital stock. Since structures decay more slowly the

 book fraction will be smaller: inflation has a greater effect on the ratio of

 current to book value as the time since purchase increases.



        If one assumes that the structures fraction of the firm's capital stock

at time zero was also e, and that structures are written off at the declining

balance rate E, it follows that the book value of structures at date T is:



(A3)                          =   GE   K(l_E)T + (KTm_K (l÷ir)T) x
                        jçS



                                                [(1—(1—g+ir) (1—€)) I (l_(l_g+1T)T(l_e)T)]x




                                                 (l_(l_g)T(l_E)T) I (1-(1-g) (1—E) I



where   it   is   the average inflation rate over the period from 0 to T and g is the

nominal growth rate of investment in structures. These are easily calculated

for each firm. We set E=.033, the aggregate value derived in Auerbach and

Hines (1985).



       Given the market value of the firm's structures capital stock, we
                                      28




estimate the after—tax value of depreciation allowances the firm would receive

by multiplying the corporate tax rate by the average present value of

depreciation allowances on all structures, estimated by Auerbach and Hines

(1986). It is somewhat more difficult to estimate the depreciation allowances

the firm would receive if continuing along its previous depreciation schedule,

since its capital stock purchase dates are not known. We simply assume that

they would get the same present value as is available on new capital per each

dollar of remaining basis. Moreover, we assume that recapture will neutralize

the additional depreciation allowances received on increases in basis up to

the straight line basis, and that this latter basis equals the actual book

value. Thus, the net estimated gain is the present value of depreciation

allowances on new structures, multiplied by the corporate tax rate, multiplied

by the difference between the market and book values estimated for structures.
                                        29



FOOTNOTES




 1.    See Auerbach (1983, 1986) for empirical and theoretical analyses of this

       point.



2. The proposal, prepared by the staff of the Senate Finance Committee,

      would restrict the use of losses and credits of an acquired company

      by a parent by allowing only a certain percentage of them to be used

      in each year following the merger.



3.    See, for example, Butters et al (1951) and Feld (1982).



4. One that has been suggested to us relates to the smoothing of taxable

      income discussed further below. In reducing the possibility of a

      tax loss occurring in the future, the firms may make the interest

      deduction on additional borrowing more valuable.



5. Martin Ginsburg has pointed out to us that many other assets, such as

      F1FO inventories, may also be written up without recapture. See also

      Lowenstein (1985).



6. The declining balance formula specifies that year t's depreciation

      allowance will be d(1_d)t, where d is the rate of decline.



7. For further discussion on the economic incentives to turn over

      assets under a variety of circumstances, see Auerbach (1981) and
                                      30




    Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983).



8. This Ignores the possibility that firms can, to a certain extent,

    utilize both approaches simultaneously. This is discussed further

    below.



 9. The criterion used was that the firm had negative federal taxes,

     zero investment tax credits, investment tax credits greater than

     or equal to federal taxes, or a positive reported tax loss

     carry forward.



10. This is discussed further in Senate Finance Committee (1985).



11. Testimony of Ronald A. Peariman, Assistant Secretary of the

     Treasury for Tax Policy, before the Senate Finance Committee,

     September 30, 1985.



12. The average size of the parent companies is somewhat larger, and that of

     the target companies considerably smaller, than those of the sample of

    hostile takeovers analyzed by Herman and Lowenstein in this volume for a

    similar sample period. The smaller gap in average sizes for hostile

    takeovers is not surprising.



13. Experiments suggested that lengthening this time period had a

    relatively minor quantitative impact on the results.



14. Given the overall fractions of acquired and acquiring companies
                                       31




     with unused losses or credits, one would predict fewer than 6,

     rather than 9 mergers between two firms from this group.



15. We also considered putting the Group V firms into Group IV.

     Because there are so few of them, this decision had little

     aggregate impact.



16. For a small fraction of the sample of target firms, we did not

     have the data necessary to construct a market value, using the

     sample mean market value in its place. This would probably tend

     to understate our results somewhat, since one would expect missing

     data to be more common among smaller firms. Likewise, there were

     a smaller number of cases in which the taxable firms did not give a

     breakdown of total taxes into federal taxes and other taxes. For

     these firms, we Imputed a value of .7 times total taxes, based on

     a regression run on the rest of the sample.



17. This is likely to be a particular problem in the cases of some oil

     mergers where large amounts of reserves were transferred.



18. Celebrated examples of this led to the restrictions on partial

    liquidations to corporate shareholders introduced in the Tax

    Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982. Other channels

    for similar activity may remain.



19. These calculations are based on the Holland—Myers series presented

    by Taggart.
                                         32




REFERENCES



Auerbach, A.J., 1981 "Inflation and the Tax Treatment of Firm Behavior,

     American Economic Review, May.



          , 1983, "Corporate Taxation in the U.S.," Brôokings Papers i
     Economic Activity, II.



          ,    1986, "The Dynamic Effects of Tax Law Asymmetries," Review

     of Economic Studies, forthcoming.



              and L.J. Kotlikoff, 1983, "Investment Versus Savings Incentives:

     The Size of the Bang for the Buck and the Potential for Self—Financing

     Business Tax Cuts,' in L.J. Meyer, ed., The Economic Consequences of

     Government Deficits.



              and J.R. Hines, 1986, "Tax Reform, Investment and the Value of

     the Firm," NBER Working Paper no. 1803, January.



Butters, J.K., J. Lintner and W.L. Cary, 1951, Effects of Taxation on

     Corporate Mergers (Harvard Business School).



Feld, A., 1982, Tax Policy and   Corporate    Concentration (Lexington).



Herman, E. S. and L. Lowenstein, 1985, "The Efficiency of Hostile Takeovers:

     An Empirical Study," mimeo.
                                          33




Jensen, M.C. and R.S. Ruback, 1983, "The Market    for   Corporate Control,"
     Journal   of Financial Econoijics.


Lowenstein, L., 1985,    "Management Buyouts," Columbia Law Review, May.



Pearlman, R.A., 1985, Testimony before the Senate Finance Committee.

     Subcommittee on Taxation and Debt Management, September 30.



Taggart, R.A., 1985, "Secular Patterns in the Financing of U.S. Corporations,"

     in B. Friedman, ed., Corporate Capital Structures in the U.S.



U.S. Joint Committee on Taxation, 1970, General Explanation of the Tax

     Reform Act of   1969.




U.S. Senate Finance Committee, 1985, Staff Report on The Subchapter C

    Revision   Act of   1985.
                               34




                              Table 1
                      Sizes of Merging Firms
              (Millions of Dollars in Market Value)

                          Target Size



Parent Size       0—50     50—100       100—250       250+   Total

   0—250            86         18             7         0      111

 250—500            18         11             9         2       40

500—1000            31          8            11         0       50

   1000+            30         21           27         33      111

   Total           159         58           54         35      312
                                      35




                                  Table 2
                           Mergers by Tax Status



                                 Parent Group

Target Group       I        II             III     IV      V         Total

          I      199         7         18            3     7              234

         II       20         0          2            1     2               25

        III       13         3         4             0     0               20

         IV       27         3         0             5     2               37

         V         1         0         0             0     1                2

Total            260        13        24             9    12              318



Notes:

     Group I     firms have positive tax payments.

     Group II    firms have negative tax payments, but no tax losses or

                 credits carried forward.

     Group III   firms have tax credits but not losses carried foward.

    Group IV     firms have tax losses carried forward.

    Group V      firms report both positive tax payments and tax losses

                 carried forward.
                                             36




                                    Table 3
                   Potential Gains from Tax Benefit Transfer
                (As a Percentage of Target Firm's Market Value)


                                     Source of Gains
                                   (Number of Mergers)

Potential              Target                               Parent           Grand
    Gain     Losses   Credits        Total        Losses   Credits   Total   Total


    none       291        290          278           315       298     295     259

     <5%        15         24           22             0        10      10      32

   5—10%         1             2         6             0         4       4      10

  10—25%         7             2         8             2         6       8      16

    >25%         4             0         4             1         0       1         5




  # > 0         27        28            40             3        20      23      63

  % > 0        8.4      8.7           12.4           0.9      6.2      7.1    19.6



                       Average Gain, Conditional on > 0

unweighted     14.4     3.1           11.9          22.3       5.9    8.0     10.5

weighted        9.3     2.4            5.0          20.9      4.3     8.25   6.1
by market
value of
target
