                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     EMBEDDED LEVERAGE

                                           Andrea Frazzini
                                          Lasse H. Pedersen

                                        Working Paper 18558
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18558


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




We thank Yakov Amihud, Mike Chernov, George Constantinides (discussant), Nicolae Garleanu,
Michael Johannes, Xavier Gabaix, Kasper Ahrndt Lorenzen, Alessio Saretto and seminar participants
at the NBER Asset Pricing Workshop 2012, New York Federal Reserve Bank, Wharton, London Business
School, Imperial College, London School of Economics, INSEAD, Paris HEC, New York University,
and Tilburg University for helpful comments and discussions. The authors are affiliated with AQR
Capital Management, a global asset management firm that may apply some of the principles discussed
in this research in some of its investment products. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18558.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Embedded Leverage
Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 18558
November 2012
JEL No. G0,G1,G12,G13

                                             ABSTRACT

Many financial instruments are designed with embedded leverage such as options and leveraged exchange
traded funds (ETFs). Embedded leverage alleviates investors’ leverage constraints and, therefore, we
hypothesize that embedded leverage lowers required returns. Consistent with this hypothesis, we find
that asset classes with embedded leverage offer low risk-adjusted returns and, in the cross-section,
higher embedded leverage is associated with lower returns. A portfolio which is long low-embedded-leverage
securities and short high-embedded-leverage securities earns large abnormal returns, with t-statistics
of 8.6 for equity options, 6.3 for index options, and 2.5 for ETFs. We provide extensive robustness
tests and discuss the broader implications of embedded leverage for financial economics.


Andrea Frazzini
AQR Capital Management, LLC
Two Greenwich Plaza, 3rd Floor
Greenwich, CT 06830
andrea.frazzini@aqr.com

Lasse H. Pedersen
Copenhagen Business School
Solbjerg Plads 3, A5
DK-2000 Frederiksberg
DENMARK
and NYU
and also NBER
lpederse@stern.nyu.edu
       We propose that an important feature of a financial instrument is its embedded
leverage, that is, the amount of market exposure per unit of committed capital. The
importance of embedded leverage arises from investors’ inability (or unwillingness) to use
enough outright leverage to get the market exposures they would like. For instance,
individual investors and pension funds may not be able to use any leverage, banks face
regulatory capital constraints, and hedge funds must satisfy their margin requirements.
However, an investor can gain substantial market exposure without using outright leverage
by buying options, leveraged ETFs, or other securities that embed the leverage. In fact, many
of these securities are designed precisely to provide embedded leverage.
       Buying securities that embeds leverage increases market exposure without violating
leverage constraints, without risking a loss of more than 100%, and without a need for
dynamic rebalancing (as opposed to borrowing money for outright leverage). Investors are
therefore willing to pay a premium for securities with embedded leverage and intermediaries
who meet this demand need to be compensated for their risk.
       We find strong evidence that embedded leverage is associated with lower required
returns: (1) Looking at the overall return of asset classes with embedded leverage, we find
that such asset classes offer low risk-adjusted returns; (2) In each of the cross-sections of
equity options, index options, and ETFs, securities with more embedded leverage offer lower
risk-adjusted returns; (3) For each asset class, we consider betting-against-beta (BAB)
portfolios which are long low-embedded-leverage securities and short high-embedded-
leverage securities, constructed to be market neutral and neutral to each of the underlying
securities. These BAB portfolios earn large and statistically significant abnormal returns with
Sharpe ratios in excess of 1 and large t-statistics; (4) In contrast to prior work on options
focused on S&P500 index options, our portfolios are statistically well behaved with
skewness and kurtosis in line with those of standard risk factors since we diversify across 12
indices and about 3000 equities, respectively, include a large number of long and short
option positions (value-weighted) for each underlying, apply daily hedges, and rebalance
portfolios to keep a constant risk profile.
       To test our hypotheses, we must first formally define a security’s embedded leverage.
The embedded leverage, which we denote by omega Ω, of a derivative security with price F
with respect to exposure to underlying asset S is given by




              Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 2
                                                                                                              (1)

where Δ=∂F/∂S is the security’s delta. In other words, a security’s embedded leverage is its
percentage change in price for a one percentage change in the underlying. Hence, a security’s
embedded leverage measures its return magnification relative to the return of the underlying.
We take the absolute value since investors’ capital constraints can alleviated both by return
magnification on the long and short sides (see Appendix B for details). The name omega is
taken from the option literature where this definition is usually referred to as the option
elasticity (no standard notation exists, however, as some references use other symbols such
as lambda). Another justification of the name omega comes from the X-Men stories in which
the omega symbol is identified with powerful mutants, just like securities with embedded
leverage are powerful mutants of the underlying securities.
         For a leveraged ETF, computing omega is straightforward. For instance, the
embedded leverage of a 2-times S&P500 is naturally 2. It is also straightforward to compute
the embedded leverage for options as it only relies on the standard delta Δ and the option
price. Equity options typically have embedded leverage between 2 and 20, with larger
embedded leverage for short-dated options that are out of the money.1 Index options tend to
have yet larger embedded leverage, often ranging from 3 to 40. For instance, if an index is at
$100 and has a volatility of 15%, then a 1-month option with strike price 100 has a Black-
Scholes-Merton price of $1.9. If the index goes up 1% to 101, then the option value increases
to $2.5, which is 31% increase, ($2.5-$1.9)/$1.9=31%. This is clearly a dramatic
magnification of returns.
         The significant amount of dispersion in embedded leverage across securities with
similar fundamental exposure allows us to directly test our hypothesis that leverage aversion
affects required returns. We consider three different samples. We consider a rich dataset of
equity options and index options from 1996 to 2010 using OptionMetrics. The sample of
equity options consists of nearly 3000 underlying equities per year with 62 options per stock-
month on average. The sample of index options contains 12 different indices with 371


1
  We show this monotonicity of embedded leverage with respect to moneyness and time to maturity empirically
in Table III, but it is related to analytical results for European options in Borell (1999, 2002) and for American
options in Ekström and Tysk (2006).




                Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 3
options per index on average. We hand-collect the sample of leveraged ETFs and
unleveraged counterparts from Yahoo finance from 2006 to 2010. Each of these samples
provides strong evidence consistent with our hypothesis as detailed above.
        Our results relate to several literatures. Foremost, our tests are directly based on the
theory of leverage constraints (Black (1972, 1992), Frazzini and Pedersen (2010)). Frazzini
and Pedersen (2010) show theoretically that a “Betting Against Beta” (BAB) portfolio should
earn a positive expected return when some investors face leverage constraints. A BAB
portfolio is a zero-beta self-financing portfolio which goes long low-risk securities and shorts
high-risk securities, where the long and short sides are scaled to have equal market exposure.
Frazzini and Pedersen (2010) finds consistent empirical evidence within equities,
government bonds, corporate bonds, and other asset classes, as higher beta is associated with
lower alpha.2
        While the existing literature studies securities that differ both in the level of risk and
in their fundamentals, this paper focuses on securities with different embedded leverage, but
based on the same underlying instrument. This offers a more direct test of the theory of
leverage aversion. Importantly, each of the asset classes that we study has been designed –
and gained interest – at least in part because of the embedded leverage that it offers. Indeed,
embedded leverage is an important driver of option markets (together with volatility
exposure) and it is in fact the only reason for the existence of leveraged ETFs. The fact that
embedded leverage is the economic driver behind the innovation in these asset classes lends
to credence to our finding that embedded leverage affects required returns, makes data-
mining concerns less severe, and has broader implications for financial economics. Our
findings suggest that embedded leverage is a driver of asset prices, providing a novel
perspective on derivative pricing. Further, our results suggest that embedded leverage is a


2
  This evidence complements the large literature documenting that the standard CAPM is empirically violated
for equities (Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1972), Gibbons (1982), Kandel (1984), Shanken (1985), Karceski
(2002)) and across asset classes (Asness, Frazzini, and Pedersen (2012)). Also, stocks with high idiosyncratic
volatility have realized low returns (Falkenstein (1994), Ang, Hodrick, Xing, Zhang (2006, 2009)) though this
effect disappears when controlling for the maximum daily return over the past month (Bali, Cakici, and
Whitelaw (2010)) and when using other measures of idiosyncratic volatility (Fu (2009)). More broadly,
leverage and margin constraints can explain deviations from the Law of One Price (Garleanu and Pedersen
(2009)), the effects of central banks’ lending facilities (Ashcraft, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2010)), and general
liquidity dynamics (Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)).




                Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 4
force behind security design and the desire for leverage implicitly challenges Modigliani-
Miller.
           In the option literature, the main puzzle is that index options appear expensive
(Rubinstein (1994), Longstaff (1995), Bates (2000), Jackwerth (2000), Coval and Shumway
(2001), Bollen and Whaley (2004), Jurek and Stafford (2011)) and, to some extent, equity
options (Ni (2006)). Our findings suggest that options’ expensiveness can be explained by
their embedded leverage.
           Our tests are also consistent with the idea that demand pressure affects option prices
as intermediaries need compensation for taking unhedgeable risk (Garleanu, Poteshman, and
Pedersen (2009)). We show how the demand could arise from a desire for embedded
leverage and find consistent price effects in asset classes where intermediaries face non-
trivial amounts of unhedgeable risk.3
           Much of the option literature is focused on S&P500 options, which have very skewed
returns (often with monthly returns of –100%) leading to poor statistical properties (Broadie,
Johannes, and Chernov (2009)). To address this, we consider portfolios that diversify across
options written on 12 different indices and almost 3000 equities, respectively, diversify
across strikes and maturities, use value weighing to aggregate options, and apply daily
hedging of the underlying securities. Furthermore, as we explain in more detail below, at
each rebalance date, both the long and the short leg of our BAB portfolios are de-leveraged
and scaled to have an exposure to the underlying security of one. This method keeps the
BAB portfolios dynamically risk balanced for two reasons: i) In the time series, the BAB
factor for each underlying security is risk balanced since option position sizes are scaled
down at times when the options are more volatile due to high embedded leverage; ii)
Similarly, this method balances risk when aggregating individual BABs into a portfolio.
Based on this methodology, our BAB factors’ return distributions don’t have the problems
highlighted in the literature. In fact, the BAB factors are as well behaved (e.g., similar
kurtosis) as standard risk factors such as HML, SMB, and UMD, making standard inference
possible.



3
    See also Figlewski (1989) and Santa-Clara and Saretto (2009).




                  Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 5
       Our extensive evidence on the risk-adjusted return of options across strikes and
maturities complements the emerging literature on the determinant of equity option returns
that includes Duan and Wei (2009), Goyal and Saretto (2009), Cao and Han (2010), and
Vasquez (2011). Leveraged ETFs have also been studied by Jarrow (2010) and Lu, Wang,
and Zang (2009) who focus on compounding effects, while we focus on daily returns to
study the returns without compounding.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes our data sources,
methodology, and preliminary evidence. Section 2 presents our evidence that asset class with
embedded leverage offer low risk adjusted returns in general, while Sections 3-5 present our
main cross-sectional tests that higher embedded leverage is associated with lower returns.
Section 3 does this by considering portfolios sorted on embedded leverage, Section 4
performs a regression analysis, and Section 5 contains an extensive robustness analysis. We
conclude by discussing broader implications of embedded leverage pricing. The Appendix
contains a discussion of margin requirements, shortselling constraints, and additional
summary statistics and robustness analysis.


1. Methodology, Data, and Preliminary Evidence

       This section first describes the variety of data sources that we use and the cleaned
using various filters as we describe in detail below. We also describe how we calculate
returns, how portfolios are constructed, and how we adjust for risk. Our summary statistics
show how embedded leverage and returns vary with maturity and moneyness, which already
yields preliminary evidence on the return-Omega link.


1.1.   Option Data and Return Calculation

       Our options data include both equity and index options and are drawn from
OptionMetrics Ivy DB database. The data cover all U.S. exchange-listed options and includes
daily closing bid and ask quotes, open interest, trading volume, implied volatility and option




             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 6
“Greeks” computed following standard market conventions.4 OptionMetrics’ security price
file contains closing prices and returns of the underlying securities. Table I summarizes the
sample description, Table II reports summary statistics, and Table A1, A2 and A3 in the
appendix provide additional summery statistics.
         Our analysis focuses on monthly delta-hedged option returns in excess of the U.S.
Treasury Bills rate. Exchange-listed option contracts expire on the Saturday immediately
following the third Friday of the expiration month, and we refer to these dates as “rebalance
dates.” For each option, we compute the return of buying an option on the first trading day
following the expiration Saturday (typically a Monday) and holding it to the next expiration
date, while delta-hedging daily using the underlying security. We choose this approach
(rather than using daily option rebalances, for instance) to make the returns in our empirical
tests closer to an implementable strategy. Indeed, keeping option positions constant for a
month and dynamically varying the delta hedge is typical among option traders since trading
costs tend to be higher for options than the underlying spot markets.
         To see exactly how we compute monthly hedged returns, consider two arbitrary
rebalance dates [0,T]. Starting with $1 worth of options at time 0, we wish to compute the
value of the buy-and-hold option portfolio with daily delta hedges at time T when the
positions are unwound. The value of the portfolio at date 0 is given by                                and we
iteratively compute the value at the following dates as follows. At each generic date t, the
value of the portfolio is given by


                          (            )                             (                                   ) (2)


where     is the option price,      is the spot price,       is the daily spot return,        is the daily risk
free rate,    is the option delta, and        is the number of option contracts given by                        .
Note the lack of time subscript for         since the option position is kept constant, that is, options


4
  U.S. listed equity options are American while index options are European. To compute implied volatilities and
the Greeks for American Options, Optionmetrics uses Cox, Ross, and Rubinstein (1979) binomial tree model.
Interest rates are derived from LIBOR rates and settlement prices of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Eurodollar
futures. The current dividend yield is assumed to remain constant over the life of the option and the security is
assumed to pay dividends at specific predetermined times.




                Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 7
are purchased at time 0 and unwound at date T with no intermediate trading. In Equation (2),
the term    (           ) is the option’s price appreciation,                  is the profit or loss
from the delta hedge based on the delta from the previous day, and                (
             ) is the interest payment in the margin account, which can be positive or
negative. Note that we are assuming no financing spread between lending and borrowing
rates, no loan fee on short-sale transactions, and option returns are computed from the
bid/ask midpoint. The monthly delta-hedged option return can now be computed as


                                                                                                (3)


The monthly delta-hedged return in excess of the risk free rate is given by


                                     (∏       (       )    )                                    (4)


Intuitively, the excess return in (4) corresponds to the returns of a self-financing portfolio
that borrows $1 at date 0, purchases $1 worth of options, overlays a zero-cost delta-hedging
strategy rebalanced daily, and unwinds all positions at date T. These excess returns            are
the basis of all our option tests.
         We apply several data filters to minimize the impact of recording errors (see also
Driessen, Maenhout, and Vilkov (2009) and Goyal and Saretto (2009)). We discard all
options with non-standard settlement or non-standard expiration dates. We drop all
observations for which the ask price is lower than the bid price , the bid price is equal to zero
or the bid-ask spread is lower than the minimum tick size (equal to $0.05 for option trading
below $3 and $0.10 in any other case).
         In order to be included in our tests, we impose a series of additional portfolio-
inclusion filters. All these filters are applied on the portfolio formation date, so that there is
no look-head bias. We require options to have positive open interest, and non-missing delta,
implied volatility, and spot price. We also drop options violating that basic arbitrage bound
of a non-negative “time value”                    where   is the option “intrinsic value” equal to
     (          ) for calls and           (           ) for puts. U.S. listed equity options are




                Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 8
American so, in order to control for early expiration, we drop equity options with a time
value (        )    (in percentage of option value) below 5%. A percentage time value close to
0 means that the option’s entire market value is close to the intrinsic value so that there is
little optionality and, importantly, immediate exercise might be optimal (in which case we do
not want to include this option’s next period return in the sample). This filter does not impact
any of our results. As another control for early exercise, we also report results using only call
equity options on non-dividend paying stocks (since early exercise is never optimal for such
options).
          Finally, to ensure that our results are not driven by outliers, at portfolio formation we
also drop options with embedded leverage in the top or bottom 1% of the distribution (for
both puts and calls separately). Our final sample includes 11,327,382 equity option-months
covering 7,179 stocks, and 290,125 index option-months covering 12 equity indices. The
sample period runs from January 1996 to December 2010.


1.2.       ETF Data and Return Calculation

          Our ETFs data were collected from Yahoo Finance and contains daily returns of
exchange-traded funds on seven major U.S. equity indices for which leveraged ETFs exist.
For each index, we select an ETF tracking the index and a corresponding leveraged ETF
seeking to mimic twice the daily return of the index. Table I reports the ETFs and their
tickers, and Table II provides summary statistics.
          For all ETF portfolios, we rebalance the positions daily. We do this to avoid any
mismatch or compounding effects. Specifically, a leveraged ETF seeks to replicate a multiple
of the daily return on the index, not a multiple of the buying and holding the index for a
month or a year (see Avellaneda and Jian (2009)) so therefore we focus on daily ETF
returns.
          Finally, we consider both ETF returns after fees and before fees. Of course, the return
the buyer of an ETF receives is net of fees, but we want to examine the extent to which our
results are driven by fee differences between leveraged and unleveraged ETFs. As shown in
Table I, twice-leveraged ETFs have expense ratios that are more than twice the expense ratio
of unleveraged ETFs. The leveraged ETFs have fees ranging from 4 to 10 times the fees of




                Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 9
the corresponding unlevered counterpart. We compute returns before fees by adding back the
expense ratio to the daily return of the fund.


1.3.   Option Portfolios by Maturity and Moneyness: Preliminary Evidence

       We start by giving some summary statistics on portfolios of options. To show how
options’ embedded leverage varies as a function of moneyness and maturity, on each
rebalance date, we assign each option to one of 30 groups based on its moneyness measured
by delta and its time to expiration. We consider 5 groups of option deltas: deep out the
money (DOTM), out of the money (OTM), at the money (ATM), in the money (ITM), and
deep in the money (DITM). Similarly, we consider 6 groups based on the option expiration
date from short-dated to long-dated. Options portfolios are rebalanced every month and
weighted by their total market capitalization, defined as price times open interest. This is
done separately for calls and puts and then we calculate the equal-weighted average of the
two. We will use these 30 value-weighted portfolios extensively in our test. The Appendix
reports the results separately for calls and puts.
       Table III shows the precise ranges for deltas and times to expiration. More
interestingly, Table III Panel A shows the embedded leverage in each group of equity options
and Panel D shows the same for index options. We see that options in general have a large
degree of embedded leverage, especially index options. Further, embedded leverage various
systematically and significantly with moneyness and maturity. Short-dated DOTM equity
options have embedded leverage above 16 while long-dated DITM equity options have
embedded leverage close to 2. For index options, short-dated DOTM options have embedded
leverage above 305 while long-dated DITM options have embedded leverage close to 3.
       To put these numbers in perspective, recall that an embedded leverage of 35 means
that an investors buying $1 worth of short-dated DOTM options gets a similar market
exposure as buying $35 worth of the underlying index. This is clearly an enormous
multiplication of returns generated by such options.
       Panel B shows the average delta-hedged excess returns for each group of equity
options, Panel E shows this for index options, and Panels C and F provide the corresponding
t-statistics. We see that option returns tend to be negative, large in magnitude, and
statistically significant, especially for options with large embedded leverage, which is



              Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 10
consistent with our hypothesis. For instance, a number of option groups with large embedded
leverage have monthly returns below minus 10 percent per month. Sections 2-6 test our
hypothesis more formally and consider a number of risk-adjustments and robustness checks.


1.4.    Construction of BAB Portfolios

       We construct of BAB portfolios in a similar way to Frazzini and Pedersen (2010). For
each underlying security, we build a self-financing long/short portfolio, which is long a
value-weighted basket of low-embedded-leverage securities scaled to have an exposure to the
underlying security of one, and short a value-weighted basket of high-embedded-leverage
securities scaled to have on exposure of one. Hence, these portfolios are market neutral since
the long and short sides have the same market exposure. The portfolios are effectively bets
against embedded leverage and therefore useful to test the return premium associated with
embedded leverage.
       Let us explain in detail how we construct BAB portfolios, starting with the option
portfolios. On each rebalance date, we sort all options on a given security based on their
embedded leverage. We then assign each option to either a high- or low-embedded-leverage
portfolio based on the median value of embedded leverage. For each group, we compute the
average monthly excess return weighted by the market capitalizations of the options’ open
interest. We denote the weighted average embedded leverage of the high (H) and low (L)
embedded leverage portfolio for underlying i by         and        , respectively. Similarly, the

corresponding excess returns are denoted by           and       . With this notation, the excess
returns of the BAB factor for underlying security i can be written as


                                 (        )       (         )                                 (5)


This gives the excess return on a zero-beta self-financing portfolio that is long low-
embedded-leverage options and short high-embedded-leverage options. Dividing both the
long and short sides by their average embedded leverage (          and     ) means that each has
a unit exposure to the underlying, i.e., by construction this portfolio has a zero ex-ante
exposure to the underlying spot price as measured by option delta. As noted in the




             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 11
introduction, this keeps a relatively balanced risk profile since position sizes      are scaled
down (up) at times where options are more likely to experience larger (smaller) subsequent
price movements.
       We aggregate the BAB portfolios for all underlying securities of an asset class to an
overall BAB portfolio for, respectively, equity options and index options. The overall BAB
portfolio is simply a value-weighted portfolio of the individual BABs:


                                     ∑                                                        (6)


where the value weights                    ∑           are based on the total market value of all
outstanding options for security ,          . We construct BAB portfolios separately for puts
and calls and report results for both. We also report results for an equally weighted portfolio
of puts and calls


                                           (                     )                            (7)


       The ETF BAB portfolio is constructed in a similar fashion. It is simply a special case
of (5) where the low leverage portfolio has a fixed leverage of 1 and the high leverage
portfolio has a fixed leverage of 2. If we let         denote the excess return of the unlevered
ETF on index i and        the excess return of the leveraged ETF, then the BAB portfolio for
these ETFs is simply given by


                                               (   )                                          (8)


Finally, the overall ETF BAB portfolio is the equal-weighted average of these individual
ETF BABs.


1.5.    Risk Adjustment




             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 12
           We obtain U.S. Treasury Bills rates, the three Fama and French (1993) factors, and
the Carhart (1997) momentum factor from Kenneth French’s data library.5 Since our monthly
option returns are computed from one roll date to the next, we need to compute monthly
returns of the Fama and French (1993) and Carhart (1997) factors over the same window
(rather than the standard monthly factor ends based on month-ends). To do this, we use daily
returns on the self-financing long short portfolios, we add back cash rate, compound over the
relevant horizon and compute excess returns. For example, the HML return between date 0
and T is given by


                                   ∏     (                    )   ∏     (      )                (5)


where             is the daily HML return from French’s data library. The other monthly risk
factors at option expiration dates are computed in a similar way.
           Following Coval and Shumway (2001) and Goyal and Saretto (2009), we also
compute an additional aggregate volatility factor (straddle). The straddle factor is a portfolio
that holds 1-month zero-beta at-the-money (ATM) S&P 500 index straddles, computed as
follows: On each roll date, out of all options satisfying our portfolio inclusion requirements,
we select all S&P 500 put-call pairs expiring on the following month with absolute value of
delta between 0.4 and 0.6 and compute their value-weighted delta-hedged excess returns.
Straddles are weighted by their total market capitalization, price times open interest.


2. Asset Classes with Embedded Leverage have Low Alphas

           We first examine the overall return of asset classes with embedded leverage. In
particular, we are interested in whether equity options, index options, and ETFs offer low
returns relative to standard risk factors (constructed in Section 1.5).            This question is
addressed in Table IV. Panel A reports equally-weighted results, while Panel B has value-
weighted ones.




5
    http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html




                  Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 13
       The top of each panel considers equity options. We first form a monthly time series
of delta-hedged excess returns for calls options (the columns labeled “Calls” in the table).
This is done by taking the average of the 30 portfolios sorted by moneyness and maturity
discussed in Table III, which ensures a relatively constant exposure to the various types of
options. In Panel A, these 30 portfolios are “equally weighted” (though, recall that the
options are value-weighted within each of the 30 portfolios), while in Panel B the 30
portfolios are “value weighted.” We similarly construct a time series of hedged excess
returns for put options (“Puts”), and, finally, we average the time series of call and put
returns giving rise to the columns labeled “All” in the table. Similarly for index options, we
compute hedged returns of “All”, “Calls”, and “Puts.”
       We also compute the excess returns of a sample of ETFs, equal weighted in Panel A
and weighted by the market capitalization of the underlying indices in Panel B. For ETFs, we
use daily data so that compounding effects do not influence our results.
       Based on these portfolios, we estimate the average excess return, the 1-factor CAPM
alpha, the 3-factor alpha that controls for the value and size effects, and the 4-factor alpha
that additionally controls for momentum. The table reports both the alphas and their t-
statistics. (We note that this table does not control for the Straddle factors used in the 5-factor
models below. This is because the Straddle factor is constructed to capture the general
tendency for options to have low returns, which is precisely the effect that this table seeks to
establish in our dataset. We include the Straddle factor in our later cross-sectional tests in
order to demonstrate that the outperformance of low-embedded-leverage options relative to
high-embedded-leverage options is a separate statistical phenomenon, even if it is driven by
the same economics.)
       We see that all the equal weighted option portfolios in Panel A have large negative
and statistically significant alphas, ranging from -4.9% to -1.7% per month. This is true both
for calls, puts, and all, both for equity options and index options, and for all types of risk
adjustment.
       The value-weighted evidence in Panel B also shows that option portfolios have large
negative alphas ranging from -3.3% to -0.7% per month, but the statistical significance tends
to be weaker, and in some cases we are unable to reject the null of zero. The value-weighted




              Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 14
results are weaker because it places less weight on the options with the least amount of
embedded leverage.
       For ETFs, we see that the point estimate of the alpha tends to be negative both in the
equal- and value-weighted Panels, and for most of the risk adjustments, but these alphas are
not statistically significant. The lack of statistical significance is perhaps not surprising given
the short ETF sample period of less than 4 years.
       Overall, results in table III and IV are consistent with the hypothesis that leverage-
constraints investors are willing to pay a premium for securities with embedded leverage and
intermediaries who meet this demand need to be compensated for their risk. As a result,
aggregate portfolios of securities with embedded leverage earn lower average returns. While
these results for the overall asset classes are consistent with our hypothesis, we can achieve
much more statistical power in the cross-sectional tests that we consider next in Sections 3-5.


3. Embedded Leverage in the Cross Section: Portfolio Analysis

       To test whether securities with more embedded leverage offer lower returns, we
proceed in three ways: We consider portfolios sorted on embedded leverage, long/short BAB
factors that bet against embedded leverage, and regression analysis (Section 4).
       We first sort double sort options into portfolios based on maturity and moneyness as
discussed in Section 1.3 and Table III. The connection between the embedded leverage of the
hedged excess returns on these option portfolios is illustrated in Figure 1, showing embedded
leverage on the x-axes and average returns on the y-axes, as well as a fitted cross sectional
regression. We see a clear negative relationship both for equity options and for index options:
portfolios with higher embedded leverage have lower average returns. Figures A1 and A2 in
the appendix report the results separately for puts and calls.
       Table V tests whether this negative relationship between return and embedded
leverage also holds when we adjust for the risk exposures to various standard risk models.
For ease of exposition, we aggregate portfolios in two ways, namely into portfolios sorted on
maturity and moneyness, respectively. To compute the return of portfolios sorted by
maturity, we take the equal-weighted average across moneyness of the double-sorted
portfolios in Table III. Similarly, to compute moneyness portfolios, we take the average




              Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 15
across maturities in each group. Table V analyzes these portfolios both for equity options
(Panel A) and for index options (Panel B).
       Both for equity options and index options, we see that shorter maturity options have
larger embedded leverage. Further, consistent with our hypothesis, we see that the high-
embedded-leverage options have negative and significant alphas and that alphas are almost
monotonic in embedded leverage. This holds both for 4-factor alphas that control for the
market, value, size, and momentum, and for 5-factor alphas that additionally control for the
straddle factor that captures the general premium of options. Also, a long-short strategy that
goes long the portfolio with low embedded leverage and shorts the portfolio with high
embedded leverage earns significant alpha between 7.5% and 11.5% per month with t-
statistics ranging between 6.7 and 12.0.
       Similar results hold when we sort based on moneyness. We first see that naturally
out-of-the-money options have larger embedded leverage than in-the-money options. Further,
the alphas of the OTM options are negative and significant, and alphas are close to
monotonic, and the long-short portfolio has significant alphas between 5.2% and 7.4% per
month based on the 4-factor model (t-statistics of 3.79 and 3.84). While the alphas based on
the 5-factor model show the same patterns, they are not statistically significant.
       One issue with the long/short strategies in Table V is that the portfolios on the short
side with high embedded leverage have much larger volatilities than the portfolios on the
long side with low embedded leverage. Hence, the return on such a strategy mostly reflects
the return of the short side, while the return of the long portfolio is swamped. This disparity
in risk is due to the standard convention of having the same notional exposure on the long
and short sides, namely the convention of going long $1 and short $1.
       Instead, we can consider a strategy that has the same risk exposure (rather than
notional exposure) on the long and short side. This is exactly what a betting-against-beta
BAB factor does (following Frazzini and Pedersen (2010), as explained in detail in Section
1.4). Recall that a BAB is constructed as


                                     (        )       (        )




             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 16
        We see that the long-side of the portfolio is scaled to have an exposure of 1 since we
divide by the embedded leverage ΩL of the low-embedded-leverage securities. Similarly, the
short side of the portfolio is scaled to have an exposure of 1. Thus the long and short side of
the portfolio have equal exposure, making the portfolio market neutral and balances the
importance of the long and short sides. Therefore, the BAB return does not reflect moves in
the underlying, but rather the discrepancy between getting market exposure using high-
embedded-leverage securities relative to that of low-embedded-leverage securities.         The
BAB portfolios represent our main test assets.
        Figure 2 shows the Sharpe ratios of all the 14 BAB factors that we consider. First, we
consider 6 BAB factors of equity options, both for all options, call options, put options, all
ATM options, ATM call options, and ATM put options. Second, we consider 6 BAB factors
of index options, categorized in the same way. Third, we consider a BAB factor of all
leveraged ETFs’ net returns, and a BAB factor of all leveraged ETF returns with
fees/expenses added back. We see that all BAB factors have large Sharpe ratios, often in
excess of 1 and with some as high as 2. This strong performance suggests that investors put a
high premium on embedded leverage.
        Table VI presents in more detail our evidence on the performance of these BAB
factors for equity options, index options, and ETFs, including the Sharpe ratios of Figure 2 in
the last row. For each of these BAB factors, Table VI shows large and significant average
returns and 5-factor alphas. Each of these overall BAB factors is a weighted average of BAB
factors based on, respectively, all the options on each underlying equity, all options on each
underlying stock index, and all pairs of leveraged/unleveraged ETFs. Alphas for option
BABs range between 14 and 44 basis point per month with t-statistics between 2.7 and 8.0.
ETFs alphas are between 7 and 9 basis points per month with t-statistics between 2.5 and 3.4.
Table VII also reports the fraction of the individual BAB factors that have positive alphas
(labeled “Frac(Alpha>0)”), and we see that most of the individual BAB factors have positive
abnormal returns, with index options being the extreme case where all the individual indices
have BAB returns with positive alphas. Figures A3 and A4 in the appendix plot the time
series of returns.
        Table VI also shows the risk exposures of the BAB factors. The realized market
exposures (which should be zero ex ante) are close to zero but there are some positive and




              Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 17
negative ones. Of course, even if the realized market exposure is different from zero, this is
captured in the alphas. The BAB factors have little exposure to the size factor SMB, and only
occasionally a small and negative exposure to the HML, UMD, and Straddle returns.
       The table also shows the average embedded leverage of the long and short sides of
the BAB factors. By construction, the embedded leverage is larger on the short side of the
portfolio. As a result, the notional exposures of the short positions (labeled “Dollar short”)
are larger than the notional exposures of the long positions (labeled “Dollar long”). Both the
long and short sides have notional exposures less than 1 since they have been scaled to unit
exposure and all options have some degree of embedded leverage. Said differently, the
average notional exposures are naturally (close to) the inverse of the average embedded
leverage.
       To summarize, the evidence in Table VI is consistent with the hypothesis of the
existence of a premium for securities that embed leverage and therefore alleviate investors’
constrains by increasing their return per unit of committed capital. Indeed, portfolios that are
long a basket of low-embedded-leverage securities and short a basket of high-embedded-
securities earn high subsequent returns.


4. Embedded Leverage in the Cross Section: Regression Analysis

       To show that our result that high embedded leverage is associated with lower
subsequent returns is not an artifact of our BAB portfolio construction, Table VII instead
tests the pricing of embedded leverage using a cross-sectional regression. This table reports
coefficients from Fama-MacBeth regressions in which the dependent variable is the delta-
hedged option excess return in month t (or, the excess return of ETFs on day t, since the ETF
regressions are run daily). The explanatory variables are the security’s embedded leverage
     as well as a number of control variables. For options, the control variables are the
“Total open interest” (the dollar open interest of all outstanding options for a given security),
“Maturity “ (the option’s maturity in months), “Moneyness” (the ratio of (          )    for call
options and (      )    for put options where     is the strike price), “1-Month spot volatility”
(the standard deviation of the daily spot returns over the past month), “Implied volatility”,
“Vega” and “Gamma”, “12-Month spot volatility”, “Stock return” the month t stocks of




             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 18
index excess return, “Option turnover” (defined as log(1 + volume/open interest)), and “Total
option turnover” (defined as log(1+total volume / total open interest) where total volume is
the sum of dollar volume of all outstanding options for a given underlying security).
       Since we are running cross-sectional regressions of excess returns on lagged
embedded leverage, the time series of cross sectional coefficients can be interpreted as the
monthly returns of a self-financing portfolio that hedge out the risk exposure of the
remaining variables on the right-hand side (see Fama (1976)). We report the average slopes
estimates (corresponding to average excess returns) and, when indicated by the “Risk
Adjusted” flag, abnormal returns. Abnormal returns (alphas) are the intercept of a second-
stage regression of monthly excess returns (i.e., slope estimates from the first-stage
regression) on the 5-factors used in Table VI. The standard errors are adjusted to
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation up to 12 months.
       In each of the regression specifications, we see that high embedded leverage predicts
lower subsequent returns. The coefficients are large (pooling all columns in table VI, on
average around -125 basis point per month) and highly statistically significant in all of the
specifications using equity options and index options. The coefficient is also negative and
marginally significant for the ETF sample. To summarize, regression results in table VII are
consistent with our evidence on portfolio sorted by maturity and moneyness in table V as
well as our results for BAB portfolio in table VI: derivative securities that embed leverage to
a larger degree earn substantially lower subsequent returns.


5. Robustness Analysis and Alternative Hypotheses

       While the large alphas of the BAB factors and the significant results of the cross
sectional regressions are consistent with our hypothesis that investors prefer embedded
leverage, we must also consider alternative hypotheses. One alternative hypothesis is that
these alphas reflect tail risk, while another alternative hypothesis is that they reflect poor
statistical properties due to highly non-Normal returns. To evaluate these alternative
hypotheses, Figure 3 plots the empirical distribution of the main BAB factors. We see that
while the BAB returns are not exactly Normally distributed (a Jarque–Bera test strongly
reject the null of normality), the distribution is far closer to a bell curve than many of the
option strategies considered in the literature (e.g., see Broadie, Johannes, and Chernov



             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 19
(2009)). While most of the literature focuses exclusively on S&P500 options, our BAB
factors have several features that improve their statistical properties: (i) we diversify and
value-weight across, respectively, 12 indices and almost 3000 equities; (ii) we delta hedge
the strategy daily; and (iii) we are both long and short options; and (iv) our BAB factors keep
constant notional exposure rather than a constant dollar exposure, thus automatically
dampening occurrences of extreme return realizations.
       To put in perspective the non-Normality of the BAB factor returns, Table VIII reports
summary statistics, skewness and excess kurtosis of the BAB factors as well as standard
factor returns over respectively, a longer sample period and an overlapping sample period.
The BAB factors have skewness between -0.87 and 0.41 and excess kurtosis of between 1.16
and 4.57 compared. These values are comparable to those of the standard factors in the
overlapping sample, while the standard factors in the long sample are more non-Normal with
excess kurtosis of 22.21, 15.54 and 26.67 for SMB, HML and UMD. Hence, although we can
safely reject normality in all factors (including the standard ones), we see that the BAB
factors are, if anything, less extreme than the full history of the standard risk factors, which
does not support the alternative hypothesis regarding the statistical properties.
       Also, the evidence does not point toward compensation for tail risk. We compute the
return of the BAB factors during recession and expansions, during severe bear markets
(defined as total market returns in the past 12-month below -25%) and during periods of
market stress (defines as a contemporaneous market return below -5% and -10%). We find
no evidence of compensation for tail risk. We report these results in Table IX.
       The Appendix contains a battery of additional robustness checks. We report returns
and alphas of our equity, index and (when available) ETFs BAB portfolios. Table A4 reports
results for alternative risk adjustments. In Table A5, we split the sample by time periods and
report results for the various sub-samples. In Table A6, we report results for options BAB
constructed within each moneyness and maturity groups. Finally, Table A7 uses only equity
call options of non-dividend payers to ensure that our results are not driven by early exercise
of American options. (Recall that we also have a portfolio screen to account for this.) We do
this in two ways. First we restrict the sample to options that never paid a dividend over the
full sample. Obviously this method suffers from look-ahead bias. Second, we restrict the
sample to firms that have never paid a dividend as of portfolio formation date. In table A8 we




             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 20
report returns using different assumption for borrowing rates, sorting rates based on their
average spread over the Treasury bill. We use overnight repo rate, the overnight indexed
swap rate, the effective federal funds rate, and the 1-month and -3 month LIBOR rate. The
robustness checks in the Appendix are consistent with our main finding that high embedded
leverage predicts lower subsequent returns, providing an extensive overall amount of
evidence.


6. Conclusion

       We propose that a security’s embedded leverage is an important economic
characteristic. We test the hypothesis that securities with large embedded leverage help
alleviate investors’ leverage constraints and, therefore, have a lower required return, finding
strong evidence for the pricing of embedded leverage for equity options, index options, and
leveraged ETFs.
       Embedded leverage may have broader effects on the financial markets than the asset
classes that we study. For instance, equity in firms with debt are securities with embedded
leverage on the firm value. Hence, future research may show how the pricing of embedded
leverage affects corporate finance decisions. One could imagine a trade-off model in which
firms trade off the costs of financial distress against the benefits of providing embedded
leverage.
       Also, the whole securitization market may be affected by embedded leverage
considerations. For instance, the risky trances of a securitized product embed leverage on the
underlying economic risks, e.g., mortgage risk. In a market in which certain investors prefer
AAA-rated securities while other investors seek embedded leverage, tranching may be the
security design that meets both these demands. Certainly, embedded leverage was a crucial
consideration in the security design of leveraged ETFs and options so it is possible that it
affects other security designs and economic decisions.
       The private equity industry also offers embedded leverage as the portfolio companies
are typically leveraged, e.g. through leveraged buyouts (LBOs). Similarly, the hedge fund
industry offers embedded leverage on a variety of strategies that would have low risk and
expected return on an unleveraged basis.




             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 21
References



       Acharya, V. V., and L. H. Pedersen (2005), “Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk,"
Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 375-410.

       Ang, A., R. Hodrick, Y. Xing, X. Zhang (2006), “The Cross-Section of Volatility and
Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 61, pp. 259-299.

       – (2009), “High Idiosyncratic Volatility and Low Returns: International and Further
U.S. Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 91, pp. 1-23.

       Ashcraft, A., N. Garleanu, and L.H. Pedersen (2010), “Two Monetary Tools: Interest
Rates and Haircuts,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, forthcoming.

        Asness, C., A. Frazzini, and L. H. Pedersen (2012), “Leverage Aversion and Risk
Parity”, 2011, Financial Analysts Journal, 68(1), 47-59.

      Baker, M., B. Bradley, and J. Wurgler (2010), “Benchmarks as Limits to Arbitrage:
Understanding the Low Volatility Anomaly,” working paper, Harvard.

       Black, F. (1972), “Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing,” Journal of
business, 45, 3, pp. 444-455.

       – (1992), “Beta and Return,” The Journal of Portfolio Management, 20, pp. 8-18.

      Black, F., M.C. Jensen, and M. Scholes (1972), “The Capital Asset Pricing Model:
Some Empirical Tests.” In Michael C. Jensen (ed.), Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets,
New York, pp. 79-121.

       Bollen, N., and R. Whaley, (2004), “Does net buying pressure affect the shape of
implied volatility functions?,” Journal of Finance 59, 711–753.

       Borell, C. (1999), “Geometric inequalities in option pricing. Convex Geometric
Analysis,” Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ. 34, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 29-51.

     Borell, C. (2002), “Isoperimetry, log-concavity, and elasticity of option prices,” in
New Directions in Mathematical Finance (Editors: P. Willmott, H. Rasmussen), Wiley, 73-
91.




             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 22
       Brennan, M.J., (1971), “Capital market equilibrium with divergent borrowing and
lending rates.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 6, 1197-1205.

      Brennan, M.J. (1993), “Agency and Asset Pricing.” University of California, Los
Angeles, working paper.

       Broadie, M., M. Johannes, and M. Chernov (2009), “Understanding Index Option
Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 22 (11), 4493-4529.

       Brunnermeier, M. and L.H. Pedersen (2009), “Market Liquidity and Funding
Liquidity,” The Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2201-2238.

      Cao, J. and B. Han (2010), “Cross-Section of Option Returns and Stock Volatility,”
working paper, Chinese University of Hong Kong.

      Coval, J. and T. Shumway (2001), “Expected option returns,” Journal of Finance 56,
983–1009.

      Cox, J. C., S. A. Ross, and M. Rubinstein. 1979. "Option Pricing: A Simplified
Approach." Journal of Financial Economics 7, 229-263.

       Cuoco, D. (1997), “Optimal consumption and equilibrium prices with portfolio
constraints and stochastic income," Journal of Economic Theory, 72(1), 33-73.

       Dimson, E. (1979), “Risk Measurement when Shares are Subject to Infrequent
Trading,” Journal of Financial Economics, 7, 197–226.

        Duan, J.-C. and J. Wei (2009), “Systematic risk and the price structure of individual
equity options,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 1981–2006.

       Ekström, E. and J. Tysk (2006), “The American put is log-concave in the log-price,”
Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 314:2, 710-723.

       Falkenstein, E.G. (1994), “Mutual funds, idiosyncratic variance, and asset returns”,
Dissertation, Northwestern University.

       Fama, E. 1976, Foundations of Finance: Portfolio Decisions and Securities Prices
(Basic Books, New York).




             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 23
       Fama, E.F. and French, K.R. (1993), "Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds", Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

       Figlewski, S. (1989), “Options arbitrage in imperfect markets,” Journal of Finance
44, 1289–1311.

       Goyal, A, and A. Saretto (2009), “Cross-section of option returns and volatility,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 94, 310–326.

       Frazzini, A. and L. H. Pedersen (2010), “Betting Against Beta”, working paper, AQR
Capital Management, New York University and NBER working paper (WP 16601).

       Fu, F. (2009), “Idiosyncratic risk and the cross-section of expected stock returns,”
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 91:1, 24-37.

       Garleanu, N., and L. H. Pedersen (2009), “Margin-Based Asset Pricing and
Deviations from the Law of One Price," UC Berkeley and NYU, working paper.

       Garleanu, N., A. Poteshman, and L. H. Pedersen (2009), “Demand-Based Option
Pricing,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2009, vol. 22, pp. 4259-4299.

       Gibbons, M. (1982), “Multivariate tests of financial models: A new approach,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 10, 3-27.

       Hindy, A. (1995), “Viable Prices in Financial Markets with Solvency Constraints,"
Journal of Mathematical Economics, 24(2), 105-135.

        Jarrow, R. (2010), “Understanding the risk of leveraged ETFs,” Finance Research
Letters 7, 135-139.

       Jurek, J. W. and E. Stafford (2011), “The Cost of Capital for Alternative
Investments”, HBS Working Paper 12-013

       Kandel, S. (1984), “The likelihood ratio test statistic of mean-variance efficiency
without a riskless asset,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13, pp. 575-592.

       Karceski, J. (2002), “Returns-Chasing Behavior, Mutual Funds, and Beta’s Death,”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 37:4, 559-594.




            Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 24
      Lu, L., J. Wang, and G. Zhang (2009), “Long term performance of leveraged ETFs,”
working paper. Baruch College.

      Ni, S. (2006), “Stock option return: a puzzle,” Unpublished working paper, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology.

       Newey, W. K, and K. West (1987), "A Simple, Positive Semi-definite,
Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica 55,
703–708.

        Stein, J. (1989), “Overreactions in the Option Markets”, Journal of Finance 44 , 1011-
1023.

       Pastor, L. , and R. Stambaugh. (2003), "Liquidity risk and expected stock returns",
Journal of Political Economy 111, 642–685.

        Roll, R., E. Schwartz, and A. Subrahmanyam (2007), “Liquidity and the Law of One
Price: The Case
        of the Futures-Cash Basis,” The Journal of Finance 62, 2201–2234.

         Santa-Clara, P. and A. Saretto (2009), “Option strategies: good deals and margin
calls,” Journal of Financial Markets 12, 391–417.

       Scholes, M., and J. Williams (1977), “Estimating Betas from Nonsynchronous Data"
Journal of Financial Economics ,5 ,309-327.

      Shanken, J. (1985), “Multivariate tests of the zero-beta CAPM,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 14,. 327-348.

       Vasicek, O. A. (1973), “A Note on using Cross-sectional Information in Bayesian
Estimation on Security Beta’s,” The Journal of Finance, 28(5), 1233–1239.

     Vasquez , A. (2011), “Volatility Term Structure and Option Returns,” working paper,
ITAM School of Business.




             Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Page 25
           Appendix A: Embedded Leverage and Margin Requirements


       While our focus is on securities that directly embed leverage, one can also consider the
return magnification when the position is bought on margin with a margin requirement. The
embedded leverage of a position in a security with market value F leveraged with a margin
requirement of m is given by:

                                                                                             (A.1)

       In general, the denominator m in the calculation of embedded leverage should be the
minimal amount of capital an investor needs to commit to the trade. To see this, consider the
following examples:

       First, if an option is further leveraged through a margin loan as in (A.1), then the overall
embedded leverage in the position is even higher than the embedded leverage that we use in our
analysis (based on Equation (1)). We focus on the embedded leverage of derivatives bought for
cash (i.e., not margined) since many investors simply rely on the option’s own embedded
leverage without the ability or willingness to add outright leverage through margining. Indeed, as
mentioned in the introduction, many investors buy securities with embedded leverage
specifically to avoid outright leverage. Avoiding outright leverage limits the potential loss to
minus 100%, eliminates the need for dynamic rebalancing, and circumvents potential rules
against leverage, among other advantages.

       Second, some derivatives such as futures contracts are constructed to have an initial
market value of zero. Such derivatives would in principle have in an infinite embedded leverage
as per Equation (1). However, to enter into such a security position one must post a margin
requirement. Since investors naturally cannot achieve an infinite market exposure, Equation
(A.1) is a more meaningful definition of embedded leverage for such securities. Said differently,
for futures one must compute the embedded leverage of the portfolio of the futures contract plus
the margin collateral. Applying the initial definition from (1) to compute the embedded leverage
of this portfolio yields precisely (A.1). This is because the return sensitivity remains ∂F/∂S and
the market value of the portfolio is m.




          Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A1
       Third, short positions also associated with margin requirements (so shorting does not free
up capital). For options, margin requirements are not the same for long and short positions.
Santa-Clara and Saretto (2009) report that on average, “a customer must deposit $6.60 as margin
(in addition to the option sale proceeds) for every dollar received from writing ATM puts.” For a
put option that is 10% out of the money, the margin requirement is much higher yet, 29.6 times
the value of the option on average and as high as 116.7 times in the sample of Santa-Clara and
Saretto (2009). Hence, the return magnification from writing put options is significantly
diminished considering the large margin requirements. For this and other reasons, investors often
prefer to obtain embedded leverage through buying options.




         Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A2
         Appendix B: Embedded Leverage on the Short Side: Put Options


        In the model of Frazzini and Pedersen (2010), agents have no hedging demands and no
differences of opinions. Hence, there is no demand for embedded leverage on the short side of
the market. Here we briefly sketch how such a demand for embedded leverage for shortselling
can arise and be priced. The intuition is with heterogeneous agents with different endowment
risk (or differences of options), some agents may want to sell short. If such agents are capital
constrained then they prefer securities the embed leverage on short exposure.
        We consider an economy with two types of agents, a and b, that differ in their labor
income ei. The economy has a risk free asset with return rf , a “market” asset with final payoff
      and x* shares outstanding, and some “put options” with final payoffs                       , s=1,…,S, and
zero shares outstanding. Agent i maximizes the following objective function:



                                ( (        )    (        )    )           (              )



subject to the constraint1 that x ≥ 0 and the capital constraint




                                                ∑




where Pt is the vector of prices, γi is agent i’s risk aversion, and Wi is the wealth.

Suppose that agent a’s labor income has much more market risk than that of agent

b (i.e.,         (          ) is much larger than                 (           )) such that, in equilibrium,

agent b holds all the shares outstanding of the market asset while agent a has a larger

demand for the put options. Therefore, agent a’s first order condition prices the put options:

1
  Many investors are prohibited from writing options. E.g., brokers do not allow investors to write options unless
they can document a sufficient level of sophistication and some institutional investors have rules against writing
options. Further, the high margin requirements on writing options makes them less attractive from the standpoint of
a capital constrained investor as discussed in the end of Appendix A.


           Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A3
                            (       )   (           )            (             )



where           (    ), element s in                    is   (            ),           is the Lagrange multiplier

for the capital constraint, and q has the Lagrange multipliers for the shortsale

constraints. Given that this first-order condition must be satisfied at x=0, we have the

following equation for the expected returns of the put options (where the return r is

naturally defined as                            and the shortsale constraints do not bind for agent

a because of his large hedging demand):


                                    (       )                        (             )



        Finally, consider a BAB portfolio that goes long put options with low embedded

leverage       and short put options with a high embedded leverage                              , i.e.,           .

The expected excess return on this portfolio is:



                        (       )



where      assume    that       (               )            (           )              since   the   options   are

derivatives on the same underlying that just have different amounts of embedded

leverage. Importantly, the embedded leverage                         is defined with an absolute value as

in Equation (1). With this notation, the BAB portfolio has a positive expected return

when it goes long low-omega securities and shorts high-omega ones.

        In summary, the put options have low expected return because of their hedging

benefits to the marginal investor,                      (        )       , but the expected returns are


           Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A4
elevated if the investor’s capital constraint is binding such that           . For put options

with high embedded leverage, then return elevation due to            is low in a risk-adjusted

sense (i.e.,           is low). Intuitively, the investor is willing to accept a particularly

low risk-adjusted return for put options with high embedded leverage as such options

provide hedging benefits per unit of capital that they tie up.




         Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A5
        Appendix C: Additional Empirical Results and Robustness Tests


       Tables A1 to A8 and Figures A1 to A4 contain additional empirical results and
robustness tests.


    Table A1 reports implied volatilities, Sharpe ratios, Gammas and Vegas of 30 option
       portfolios sorted by maturity and moneyness.


    Table A2 and A3 report embedded leverage, excess returns and summary statistics of 30
       option portfolios sorted by maturity and moneyness. We report results for calls and puts
       separately.


    Table A4 reports alphas of our equity, index and ETF BAB portfolios for alternative risk
       adjustments.

    Table A5 reports alphas of our equity, index and ETF BAB portfolios. We split the
       sample by time periods and report returns for the various sub-samples.


    Table A6 reports results for options BAB constructed within each moneyness and
       maturity groups.


    Table A7 report s results for options BAB using only equity call options of non-dividend
       payers. We do this in two ways. First we restrict the sample to options that never paid a
       dividend over the full sample. Second, we restrict the sample to firms that have never
       paid a dividend as of portfolio formation date.

    Table A8 reports alphas of our equity, index and ETF BAB portfolios. We report returns
       using different assumption for borrowing rates, sorting rates based on their average
       spread over the Treasury bill. We use overnight repo rate, the overnight indexed swap
       rate, the effective federal funds rate, and the 1-month and -3 month LIBOR rate. If the




          Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A6
   interest rate is not available over a date range, we use the 1-month Treasury bills plus the
   average spread over the entire sample period.


 Figure A1 and A2 plot results from cross sectional regressions of excess returns on
   embedded leverage corresponding to table A2 and A3.


 Figure A3 and A4 plot the time series of returns of our equity, index and ETF BAB
   portfolios.




     Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A7
                                          Table A1
     Implied Volatility, Sharpe Ratio, Gamma and Vega across Maturity and Moneyness
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns and summary statistics of option portfolios based on maturity and moneyness.
Each calendar month, on the first trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30 portfolios that are
the 5 x 6 interception of 5 portfolios based on the option’s delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6
portfolios based on the option’s expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted within a given
portfolio based on the value of their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. For
each delta-maturity bucket we form a call portfolio and a put portfolio and average them. This table includes all available options
on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010.


Equity Options                                        Abs(delta) range                     M aturity (months)
                                                                            1         2         3           6        12        >12

Panel A                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   0.52      0.42       0.44       0.38      0.31       0.36
Implied volatility            Out of the money           0.20     0.40   0.47      0.38       0.42       0.37      0.29       0.33
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   0.43      0.37       0.41       0.38      0.30       0.33
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   0.43      0.42       0.45       0.40      0.33       0.34
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00   0.46      0.43       0.42       0.37      0.31       0.34

Panel B                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   -2.14    -0.99      -0.65      -0.35      -0.09      0.15
Sharpe ratio                  Out of the money           0.20     0.40   -2.56    -1.29      -0.82      -0.33      -0.08      0.00
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   -2.22    -1.31      -0.56      -0.22      -0.05     -0.03
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   -2.18    -0.99      -0.67      -0.06       0.05      0.17
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00   -1.50    -0.24      -0.50       0.40       0.29      0.51

Panel C                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   3.05      2.07       2.09       1.37      0.82       0.94
Gamma *100                    Out of the money           0.20     0.40   5.02      3.26       3.51       2.50      1.36       1.57
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   5.43      3.78       4.10       3.10      1.73       1.93
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   4.86      4.20       4.21       3.14      2.09       2.12
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00   3.98      3.49       3.32       2.66      2.07       1.51

Panel D                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   16.0      38.8       33.4       68.5     121.3      102.7
Vega                          Out of the money           0.20     0.40   34.3      72.3       57.1      102.4     200.5      164.3
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   48.7      83.5       66.6      103.8     210.3      165.4
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   41.1      52.9       41.4       77.8     146.2      103.2
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00   19.9      21.2       19.4       34.6      63.4       34.7




               Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A8
                                    Table A1 (continued)
     Implied Volatility, Sharpe Ratio, Gamma and Vega across Maturity and Moneyness
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns and summary statistics of option portfolios based on maturity and moneyness.
Each calendar month, on the first trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30 portfolios that are
the 5 x 6 interception of 5 portfolios based on the option’s delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6
portfolios based on the option’s expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted within a given
portfolio based on the value of their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. For
each delta-maturity bucket we form a call portfolio and a put portfolio and average them. This table includes all available options
on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010.


Index Options                                         Abs(delta) range                     M aturity (months)
                                                                            1         2         3           6        12        >12

Panel A                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    0.25     0.24       0.23       0.23      0.23       0.23
Implied volatility            Out of the money           0.20     0.40    0.22     0.22       0.22       0.22      0.21       0.21
                              At the money               0.40     0.60    0.22     0.22       0.21       0.22      0.21       0.21
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    0.22     0.22       0.22       0.22      0.22       0.22
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    0.27     0.26       0.25       0.26      0.25       0.24

Panel B                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   -1.73    -1.09      -0.86      -0.37      -0.13      -0.04
Sharpe ratio                  Out of the money           0.20     0.40   -1.56    -1.29      -0.95      -0.43      -0.06       0.02
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   -1.31    -1.38      -0.88      -0.53      -0.08       0.05
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   -1.24    -1.19      -0.71      -0.47      -0.24       0.05
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00   -1.30    -0.86      -0.38      -0.18       0.01      -0.12

Panel C                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    0.43     0.31       0.32       0.21      0.21       0.18
Gamma *100                    Out of the money           0.20     0.40    0.80     0.57       0.52       0.35      0.27       0.24
                              At the money               0.40     0.60    0.95     0.67       0.60       0.41      0.32       0.24
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    0.86     0.63       0.58       0.40      0.40       0.28
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    0.52     0.42       0.39       0.27      0.24       0.19

Panel D                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    61.6     89.1       86.4      142.0     187.0      255.0
Vega                          Out of the money           0.20     0.40   111.2    152.7      146.8      243.6     320.1      430.3
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   125.2    171.9      166.7      269.5     354.5      482.8
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   107.5    145.8      142.0      229.3     290.0      377.2
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    52.1     71.5       74.2      115.0     158.9      213.5




                Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A9
                                    Table A2
  Embedded Leverage and Excess Returns across Maturity and Moneyness, Call Options
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns and summary statistics of option portfolios based on maturity and moneyness.
Each calendar month, on the first trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30 portfolios that are
the 5 x 6 interception of 5 portfolios based on the option’s delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6
portfolios based on the option’s expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted within a given
portfolio based on the value of their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. For
each delta-maturity bucket we form a call portfolio and a put portfolio and average them. This table includes all available call
options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010. “Embedded leverage” is defined as
where      is the option delta, is the option price and is the spot price. Returns are monthly in percent, and 5% statistical
significance is indicated in bold.


Equity Call Options                          Abs(delta) range                   M aturity (months)
                                                                   1       2         3           6       12        >12        Sum

Panel A              Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    0.21    0.22     0.21        0.53      0.53       0.50       2.19
Percent of total     Out of the money           0.20     0.40    0.96    0.92     0.86        2.26      2.31       2.19       9.49
open interest        At the money               0.40     0.60    2.39    2.15     2.12        4.95      5.35       6.30      23.26
                     In the money               0.60     0.80    4.21    3.40     3.00        7.46      8.08      10.47      36.62
                     Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    3.66    2.97     2.73        6.28      6.75       6.05      28.44
                     Sum                                        11.42    9.66     8.93       21.46     23.02      25.51     100.00

Panel B              Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    1.36    0.77     0.36        0.61      0.33       0.18       3.62
Percent of total     Out of the money           0.20     0.40    4.96    3.56     1.87        3.39      1.91       1.18      16.87
volume               At the money               0.40     0.60    9.02    6.44     4.06        6.67      4.68       3.82      34.68
                     In the money               0.60     0.80   10.11    4.96     2.67        4.97      3.27       4.18      30.15
                     Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    5.94    2.25     1.25        2.17      1.44       1.62      14.67
                     Sum                                        31.39   17.98    10.21       17.81     11.62      10.99     100.00




Index Call Options                           Abs(delta) range                   M aturity (months)
                                                                   1       2         3           6       12        >12        Sum

Panel C              Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    0.42    0.29     0.17        0.47      0.56       0.71       2.62
Percent of total     Out of the money           0.20     0.40    1.22    0.98     0.63        1.67      2.42       2.17       9.09
open interest        At the money               0.40     0.60    2.71    2.55     2.05        3.73      5.71       6.83      23.58
                     In the money               0.60     0.80    4.73    3.93     2.58        6.23      8.11       9.19      34.76
                     Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    9.19    4.51     3.35        6.27      4.35       2.29      29.95
                     Sum                                        18.26   12.26     8.78       18.37     21.14      21.19     100.00

Panel D              Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    2.26    1.57     0.34        0.46      0.38       0.30       5.30
Percent of total     Out of the money           0.20     0.40    6.00    5.27     2.06        2.27      1.92       1.22      18.74
volume               At the money               0.40     0.60    9.07    9.84     5.71        5.05      5.27       4.28      39.22
                     In the money               0.60     0.80    7.90    6.57     2.58        2.68      2.31       2.20      24.24
                     Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    6.24    3.18     1.00        1.13      0.70       0.24      12.49
                     Sum                                        31.48   26.43    11.69       11.58     10.58       8.23     100.00




              Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A10
                               Table A2 (continued)
  Embedded Leverage and Excess Returns across Maturity and Moneyness, Call Options
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns and summary statistics of option portfolios based on maturity and moneyness.
Each calendar month, on the first trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30 portfolios that are
the 5 x 6 interception of 5 portfolios based on the option’s delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6
portfolios based on the option’s expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted within a given
portfolio based on the value of their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. For
each delta-maturity bucket we form a call portfolio and a put portfolio and average them. This table includes all available call
options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010. “Embedded leverage” is defined as
where      is the option delta, is the option price and is the spot price. Returns are monthly in percent, and 5% statistical
significance is indicated in bold.


Equity Call Options                                   Abs(delta) range                     M aturity (months)
                                                                             1        2         3           6        12        >12

Panel E                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   17.04    15.42     13.37       13.12     12.30       7.64
Embedded leverage             Out of the money           0.20     0.40   15.66    14.18     11.14        9.79      9.04       5.59
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   14.79    12.23      8.94        7.58      6.84       4.39
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   12.56     8.99      6.68        5.92      5.11       3.37
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    8.75     5.95      4.78        4.17      3.46       2.40

Panel F                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   -30.29   -14.34     -8.41      -4.88      -2.46     -0.64
Delta hedged excess returns   Out of the money           0.20     0.40   -16.68    -8.10     -5.17      -1.62      -0.62     -0.82
                              At the money               0.40     0.60    -9.18    -3.91     -2.06      -0.21       0.05     -0.27
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -3.89    -0.96     -1.32       0.26       0.12      0.05
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -1.00     0.21     -0.38       0.45       0.02      0.15

Panel F                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   -13.25    -5.73     -3.86      -2.20      -1.14     -0.37
t-statistics                  Out of the money           0.20     0.40    -9.26    -5.03     -4.21      -1.38      -0.55     -0.89
Delta hedged excess returns   At the money               0.40     0.60    -7.55    -4.16     -2.58      -0.30       0.08     -0.52
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -5.21    -1.81     -2.92       0.64       0.32      0.19
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -2.05     0.67     -1.52       1.80       0.10      0.81



Index Call Options                                    Abs(delta) range                     M aturity (months)
                                                                             1        2         3           6        12        >12

Panel G                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   44.28    31.82     26.84       20.67     15.48      11.29
Embedded leverage             Out of the money           0.20     0.40   33.16    23.12     18.98       14.82     11.18       8.02
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   24.67    17.11     14.07       10.92      8.28       5.87
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   17.99    12.58     10.22        7.87      6.03       4.42
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00   10.28     7.43      6.17        4.94      3.94       3.19

Panel H                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   -37.50   -18.51    -13.11      -4.92      -2.15     -2.00
Delta hedged excess returns   Out of the money           0.20     0.40   -14.83    -9.72     -6.44      -2.15       0.05     -0.35
                              At the money               0.40     0.60    -7.31    -5.36     -3.68      -1.51      -0.03     -0.15
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -3.05    -2.41     -1.80      -0.64       0.10     -0.15
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -0.57    -0.18     -0.51       0.00       0.17      0.07

Panel I                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    -6.14    -3.65     -2.90      -1.34      -0.81     -0.84
t-statistics                  Out of the money           0.20     0.40    -4.75    -4.33     -3.26      -1.28       0.04     -0.31
Delta hedged excess returns   At the money               0.40     0.60    -4.15    -4.27     -3.17      -1.73      -0.04     -0.25
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -2.80    -3.29     -2.57      -1.36       0.25     -0.45
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -1.24    -0.58     -1.00      -0.01       1.06      0.40




             Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A11
                                     Table A3
   Embedded Leverage and Excess Returns across Maturity and Moneyness, Put Options
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns and summary statistics of option portfolios based on maturity and moneyness.
Each calendar month, on the first trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30 portfolios that are
the 5 x 6 interception of 5 portfolios based on the option’s delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6
portfolios based on the option’s expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted within a given
portfolio based on the value of their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. For
each delta-maturity bucket we form a call portfolio and a put portfolio and average them. This table includes all available put
options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010. “Embedded leverage” is defined as
where      is the option delta, is the option price and is the spot price. Returns are monthly in percent, and 5% statistical
significance is indicated in bold.


Equity Put Options                           Abs(delta) range                   M aturity (months)
                                                                   1       2         3           6       12        >12        Sum

Panel E              Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    0.74    1.01     0.90        2.27      2.66       3.20      10.77
Percent of total     Out of the money           0.20     0.40    2.00    2.23     2.10        5.62      6.28       7.99      26.22
open interest        At the money               0.40     0.60    3.13    3.03     2.79        6.49      7.20       7.74      30.38
                     In the money               0.60     0.80    4.27    3.29     2.63        5.98      5.98       4.70      26.85
                     Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    1.51    0.88     0.54        1.16      1.17       0.52       5.78
                     Sum                                        11.63   10.45     8.97       21.51     23.29      24.16     100.00

Panel F              Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    3.19    4.02     1.89        2.57      1.55       1.32      14.55
Percent of total     Out of the money           0.20     0.40    7.10    7.50     3.94        7.10      5.16       4.03      34.82
volume               At the money               0.40     0.60    8.31    7.17     4.17        6.24      4.38       2.72      32.98
                     In the money               0.60     0.80    6.36    2.95     1.64        2.33      1.14       0.83      15.26
                     Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    1.42    0.39     0.17        0.20      0.15       0.05       2.39
                     Sum                                        26.39   22.02    11.81       18.44     12.38       8.96     100.00




Index Put Options                            Abs(delta) range                   M aturity (months)
                                                                   1       2         3           6       12        >12        Sum

Panel G              Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    1.05    0.88     0.65        1.58      2.00       2.70       8.86
Percent of total     Out of the money           0.20     0.40    1.95    1.85     1.42        3.49      4.57       6.11      19.39
open interest        At the money               0.40     0.60    2.35    2.37     1.84        3.56      4.95       5.76      20.83
                     In the money               0.60     0.80    2.92    2.24     1.25        3.16      4.19       3.36      17.13
                     Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    9.92    4.92     2.58        6.84      7.44       2.09      33.79
                     Sum                                        18.19   12.27     7.74       18.64     23.15      20.02     100.00

Panel H              Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    5.56    4.95     2.17        2.02      1.52       1.30      17.51
Percent of total     Out of the money           0.20     0.40    8.26    8.92     4.22        5.79      5.13       3.80      36.12
volume               At the money               0.40     0.60    7.18    8.27     4.64        4.68      4.15       2.56      31.48
                     In the money               0.60     0.80    3.45    2.61     1.33        0.87      0.64       0.42       9.32
                     Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    1.87    1.30     0.93        0.86      0.44       0.17       5.57
                     Sum                                        26.32   26.05    13.28       14.22     11.88       8.25     100.00




              Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A12
                                Table A3 (continued)
   Embedded Leverage and Excess Returns across Maturity and Moneyness, Put Options
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns and summary statistics of option portfolios based on maturity and moneyness.
Each calendar month, on the first trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30 portfolios that are
the 5 x 6 interception of 5 portfolios based on the option’s delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6
portfolios based on the option’s expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted within a given
portfolio based on the value of their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. For
each delta-maturity bucket we form a call portfolio and a put portfolio and average them. This table includes all available put
options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010. “Embedded leverage” is defined as
where      is the option delta, is the option price and is the spot price. Returns are monthly in percent, and 5% statistical
significance is indicated in bold.


Equity Put Options                                    Abs(delta) range                     M aturity (months)
                                                                             1        2         3           6        12        >12

Panel E                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   15.93    14.95     10.29        9.18      7.14       4.12
Embedded leverage             Out of the money           0.20     0.40   14.31    13.23      8.89        7.71      6.29       3.70
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   13.14    10.85      7.38        6.10      5.24       3.00
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   10.33     7.08      5.00        4.33      3.74       2.33
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    7.21     5.26      4.28        3.98      3.63       2.53

Panel F                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   -19.13    -8.52     -4.12      -1.04       1.06      2.36
Delta hedged excess returns   Out of the money           0.20     0.40   -17.27    -8.28     -2.89      -1.30      -0.01      0.80
                              At the money               0.40     0.60    -9.89    -5.22     -1.21      -0.86      -0.27      0.17
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -5.09    -2.50     -0.65      -0.41      -0.01      0.28
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -3.00    -0.73     -0.62       0.18       0.55      0.56

Panel F                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    -3.76    -1.98     -1.25      -0.42       0.51      1.65
t-statistics                  Out of the money           0.20     0.40    -8.38    -4.38     -2.02      -1.12      -0.01      1.08
Delta hedged excess returns   At the money               0.40     0.60    -7.97    -5.38     -1.53      -1.35      -0.48      0.35
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -7.45    -5.01     -1.63      -1.23      -0.02      1.02
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -5.63    -1.87     -1.54       0.69       1.32      2.19



Index Put Options                                     Abs(delta) range                     M aturity (months)
                                                                             1        2         3           6        12        >12

Panel G                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   28.00    19.10     15.11       11.54      8.35       5.64
Embedded leverage             Out of the money           0.20     0.40   26.05    17.44     13.91       10.50      7.57       5.01
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   22.71    15.36     12.39        9.46      6.81       4.66
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   18.98    12.77     10.49        8.04      5.79       4.19
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00   13.05     9.43      7.74        5.90      4.39       3.43

Panel H                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   -30.23   -15.83     -9.95      -3.57      -0.11      1.13
Delta hedged excess returns   Out of the money           0.20     0.40   -17.82   -10.57     -6.84      -2.68      -0.60      0.47
                              At the money               0.40     0.60    -9.53    -6.67     -4.16      -1.72      -0.38      0.35
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -4.94    -3.13     -1.87      -0.88      -0.63      0.16
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -3.22    -2.05     -0.52      -0.47      -0.47     -0.52

Panel I                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    -4.45    -3.35     -2.45      -1.18      -0.05      0.69
t-statistics                  Out of the money           0.20     0.40    -6.03    -5.08     -3.82      -2.02      -0.59      0.56
Delta hedged excess returns   At the money               0.40     0.60    -5.37    -5.75     -3.71      -2.22      -0.63      0.64
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -4.85    -4.72     -2.55      -1.87      -1.73      0.33
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -4.87    -3.83     -0.82      -1.37      -1.49     -1.51




             Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A13
                                           Table A4
                Robustness Analysis: BAB Portfolios, Alternative Risk Adjustments
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first
trading day following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For
each security, the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage
(H). Options are weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value
weights. Both portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB portfolio for security i
is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:                   (
      )        (       )      where        and      are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L portfolio and       and
     are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios with
weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for each security. Similarly, at the end of each trading day, ETFs are
assigned to one of two portfolios: low leverage (unlevered ETFs) and high leverage (levered ETFs). The BAB portfolio for index
  is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:
             where       is the excess return on the unlevered ETF and        is the excess return of the levered ETF. The ETF BAB
portfolio is an equal-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios and it is rebalanced daily to maintain equal weights. The
asterisk * in the ETF sample indicates that expenses ratios have been added back to the returns of the fund. This table includes all
available options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and all the available ETFs in our data
between 2006 and 2010. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the
monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios, Carhart (1997) momentum factor and a straddle factor. The
straddle factor is a portfolio of 1-month zero-beta at-the-money (ATM) S&P 500 index straddles. Alphas are in monthly percent
and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

Panel A: Equity Options                                         Alpha                                       t-statistics
                                                          All      Calls          Puts                All          Calls      Puts

All                       Capm                          0.36         0.29         0.42               8.46          7.62        6.51
                          3-Factor model                0.36         0.30         0.43               8.50          7.76        6.48
                          4-Factor model                0.38         0.30         0.45               8.66          7.65        6.75
                          5-Factor model                0.33         0.26         0.40               7.60          6.58        5.86

At-the-money              Capm                          0.35         0.28         0.41               7.97          6.32        7.94
                          3-Factor model                0.36         0.30         0.42               8.35          6.72        8.21
                          4-Factor model                0.37         0.30         0.44               8.39          6.57        8.42
                          5-Factor model                0.36         0.28         0.44               7.83          5.96        8.01

Panel B: Index Options                                    All        Calls        Puts                All         Calls       Puts

All                       Capm                          0.32         0.22         0.43               6.19          5.12        4.95
                          3-Factor model                0.32         0.22         0.43               6.07          5.06        4.85
                          4-Factor model                0.33         0.21         0.45               6.14          4.88        5.03
                          5-Factor model                0.26         0.15         0.37               4.95          3.58        4.10

At-the-money              Capm                          0.24         0.20         0.29               4.47          3.89        4.37
                          3-Factor model                0.25         0.20         0.30               4.48          3.86        4.41
                          4-Factor model                0.24         0.19         0.30               4.33          3.65        4.32
                          5-Factor model                0.19         0.14         0.25               3.41          2.71        3.51

Panel C: ETFs                                                          All        All*                              All        All*

                          Capm                                       0.08         0.06                             3.29        2.35
                          3-Factor model                             0.08         0.06                             3.32        2.37
                          4-Factor model                             0.09         0.06                             3.45        2.49
                          5-Factor model                             0.09         0.07                             3.43        2.52




            Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A14
                                                   Table A5
                               Robustness Analysis: BAB Portfolios, Sub-Samples
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first
trading day following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For
each security, the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage
(H). Options are weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value
weights. Both portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB portfolio for security i
is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:                   (
      )        (       )      where        and      are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L portfolio and       and
     are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios with
weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for each security. Similarly, at the end of each trading day, ETFs are
assigned to one of two portfolios: low leverage (unlevered ETFs) and high leverage (levered ETFs). The BAB portfolio for index
  is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:
             where       is the excess return on the unlevered ETF and        is the excess return of the levered ETF. The ETF BAB
portfolio is an equal-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios and it is rebalanced daily to maintain equal weights. The
asterisk * in the ETF sample indicates that expenses ratios have been added back to the returns of the fund. This table includes all
available options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and all the available ETFs in our data
between 2006 and 2010. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the
monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios, Carhart (1997) momentum factor and a straddle factor. The
straddle factor is a portfolio of 1-month zero-beta at-the-money (ATM) S&P 500 index straddles. Alphas are in monthly percent
and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

Panel A: Equity Options                                              Alpha                                  t-statistics
                                                               All      Calls     Puts                All          Calls      Puts

All options                1996 - 1999                        0.36       0.20     0.52               4.37          3.57        3.75
                           2000 - 2005                        0.35       0.31     0.39               5.00          3.91        4.44
                           2006 - 2010                        0.29       0.26     0.33               3.61          4.26        2.33

At-the-money               1996 - 1999                        0.35       0.34     0.37               3.39          3.67        2.88
                           2000 - 2005                        0.33       0.25     0.41               4.51          3.12        4.55
                           2006 - 2010                        0.34       0.24     0.44               4.14          3.03        4.67

Panel B: Index Options                                         All      Calls     Puts                All         Calls       Puts

All options                1996 - 1999                        0.47       0.13     0.81               4.75          1.90        4.29
                           2000 - 2005                        0.15       0.11     0.18               2.11          1.72        1.56
                           2006 - 2010                        0.27       0.21     0.32               2.44          2.49        1.75

At-the-money               1996 - 1999                        0.42       0.42     0.41               3.08          3.54        2.55
                           2000 - 2005                        0.01      -0.03     0.05               0.08         -0.49        0.45
                           2006 - 2010                        0.22       0.14     0.31               2.09          1.33        2.55

Panel C: ETFs                                                             All     All*

                           2006 - 2007                                   0.07     0.07                             1.49        1.93
                           2008 - 2010                                   0.10     0.09                             1.99        2.59


* Expenses ratios have been added back to the return of the fund




              Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A15
                                           Table A6
              Robustness Analysis: BAB Option Portfolios by Moneyness and Maturity
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first
trading day following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For
each security, the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage
(H). Options are weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value
weights. Both portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB portfolio for security i
is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:               (
     )        (        )    where        and     are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L portfolio and      and
     are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios with
weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for each security. This table includes all available options on the
domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return.
The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios, Carhart (1997)
momentum factor and a straddle factor. The straddle factor is a portfolio of 1-month zero-beta at-the-money (ATM) S&P 500
index straddles. Alphas are in monthly percent and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

Panel A: Equity Options                           Alpha                                    t-statistics
                                                       All         Calls        Puts                 All      Calls        Puts

M aturity                 M oneyness
Long-dated                All                         -0.02       -0.03        -0.02              -0.52      -0.53        -0.33
Short-dated               All                          0.30        0.44         0.15               6.31       8.21         1.76
All                       At-the-money                 0.36        0.28         0.44               7.83       5.96         8.01
All                       In the money                 0.26        0.18         0.35               8.51       5.19         7.74
All                       Deep in the money            0.11        0.07         0.15               2.04       2.40         1.44
All                       Out of the money             0.55        0.45         0.65               8.82       6.63         9.40
                          Deep out of the money        0.72        0.61         0.84               6.98       6.18         5.77
All
Panel B: Index Options                                  All        Calls        Puts                All       Calls        Puts

M aturity                 M oneyness
Long-dated                All                          0.10        0.01         0.20              2.48        0.34         2.70
Short-dated               All                          0.11        0.25        -0.02              2.35        3.81        -0.24
All                       At-the-money                 0.19        0.14         0.25              3.41        2.71         3.51
All                       In the money                 0.11        0.08         0.15              3.61        1.91         3.40
All                       Deep in the money            0.06        0.04         0.08              2.66        1.58         1.70
All                       Out of the money             0.39        0.30         0.48              5.11        3.63         5.62
All                       Deep out of the money        0.71        0.56         0.85              5.40        4.23         4.66




              Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A16
                                        Table A7
     Robustness Analysis: BAB Portfolios, Equity Call Options on Non-Dividend Payers
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first
trading day following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For
each security, the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage
(H). Options are weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value
weights. Both portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB portfolio for security i
is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:                     (
      )        (       )     where        and      are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L portfolio and          and
     are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios with
weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for each security. This table includes all available options Non-dividend
payers on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly
excess return. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios, Carhart
(1997) momentum factor and a straddle factor. The straddle factor is a portfolio of 1-month zero-beta at-the-money (ATM) S&P
500 index straddles. “Frac (Alpha >0)” is equal to the fraction of assets with positive abnormal returns. “No dividend in full
sample” indicates the securities that never paid dividends over the full sample. “No dividend prior to portfolio formation”
indicates securities that never paid dividends as of portfolio formation date. Returns and Alphas are in monthly percent, t-
statistics are shows below the coefficient estimates and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold. Volatilities and Sharpe
ratios are annualized.


                                                 All Calls                              At-the-M oney Calls

                                    No dividend in     No dividend                No dividend in     No dividend
                                      Full sample prior to portoflio                Full sample prior to portoflio
                                                          formation                                     formation



               Excess return %                 0.47               0.29                      0.44                0.42
                                              (5.72)              (2.89)                    (5.58)              (3.37)

               5-factor alpha %                0.41               0.22                      0.44                0.50
                                               (4.71)             (2.10)                    (5.36)              (3.77)

               Frac (Alpha >0)                 0.75               0.74                      0.70                0.70
               M KT                           -0.01              -0.02                      -0.04              -0.06
                                              -(0.56)             -(0.81)                  -(2.39)             -(2.07)

               SM B                            0.02              -0.02                      0.01               -0.03
                                              (0.59)             -(0.58)                    (0.43)             -(0.64)

               HM L                           -0.01               0.01                      -0.03              -0.05
                                              -(0.24)             (0.33)                    -(1.25)            -(1.26)

               UM D                            0.02              -0.03                      0.02               -0.03
                                               (1.30)             -(1.29)                   (1.37)              -(1.12)

               Straddle                       -0.01              -0.01                      0.00                0.00
                                              -(1.59)             -(2.31)                  -(0.46)              (0.31)

               Leverage short                 4.92                3.93                      5.54                4.75
               Leverage long                 10.17                7.82                     10.21                8.00
               Dollar Short                    0.24               0.31                      0.21                0.26
               Dollar Long                     0.12               0.15                      0.13                0.16
               Volatility                      3.82               4.65                      3.63                5.83
               Sharpe ratio                    1.48               0.75                      1.44                0.87




            Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A17
                                              Table A8
                    Robustness Analysis: BAB Portfolios, Alternative Risk-Free Rates
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first
trading day following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For
each security, the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage
(H). Options are weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value
weights. Both portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB portfolio for security i
is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:                   (
      )        (       )      where        and      are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L portfolio and       and
     are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios with
weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for each security. Similarly, at the end of each trading day, ETFs are
assigned to one of two portfolios: low leverage (unlevered ETFs) and high leverage (levered ETFs). The BAB portfolio for index
  is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:
             where       is the excess return on the unlevered ETF and        is the excess return of the levered ETF. The ETF BAB
portfolio is an equal-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios and it is rebalanced daily to maintain equal weights. The
asterisk * in the ETF sample indicates that expenses ratios have been added back to the returns of the fund. This table includes all
available options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and all the available ETFs in our data
between 2006 and 2010. We report returns using different risk free rates sorted by their average spread over the Treasury bill. “T-
bills” is the 1-month Treasury bills. “Repo” is the overnight repo rate. “OIS” is the overnight indexed swap rate. “Fed Funds” is
the effective federal funds rate. “Libor” is the 1-month and 3-month LIBOR rate. If the interest rate is not available over a date
range, we use the 1-month Treasury bills plus the average spread over the entire sample period. Alpha is the intercept in a
regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking
portfolios, Carhart (1997) momentum factor and a straddle factor. The straddle factor is a portfolio of 1-month zero-beta at-the-
money (ATM) S&P 500 index straddles. Alphas are in monthly percent and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

Panel A: Equity Options                                              Alpha                                  t-statistics
                               Average Spread                  All      Calls     Puts                All          Calls      Puts
                               (Annual , Bps)

T-Bills                              0.0                      0.33       0.26     0.40               7.60          6.58        5.86
Repo                                 18.3                     0.32       0.25     0.39               7.43          6.40        5.75
OIS                                  23.3                     0.32       0.25     0.39               7.43          6.40        5.74
Fed Funds                            23.4                     0.32       0.25     0.39               7.42          6.38        5.74
Libor 1M                             44.9                     0.31       0.25     0.38               7.29          6.28        5.63
Libor 3M                             54.5                     0.31       0.24     0.38               7.22          6.23        5.58
Panel B: Index Options                                         All      Calls     Puts                All         Calls       Puts

T-Bills                              0.0                      0.26       0.15     0.37               4.95          3.58        4.10
Repo                                 18.3                     0.26       0.15     0.37               4.87          3.47        4.05
OIS                                  23.3                     0.26       0.15     0.37               4.86          3.46        4.04
Fed Funds                            23.4                     0.26       0.15     0.37               4.86          3.46        4.05
Libor 1M                             44.9                     0.25       0.14     0.36               4.79          3.40        4.00
Libor 3M                             54.5                     0.25       0.14     0.36               4.76          3.36        3.97
Panel C: ETFs                                                             All     All*                              All        All*

T-Bills                              0.0                                 0.09     0.07                             3.43        2.52
Repo                                 18.3                                0.07     0.05                             2.54        1.66
OIS                                  23.3                                0.06     0.04                             2.28        1.41
Fed Funds                            23.4                                0.07     0.04                             2.40        1.52
Libor 1M                             44.9                                0.04     0.01                             1.43        0.51
Libor 3M                             54.5                                0.03     0.00                             0.99        0.05




* Expenses ratios have been added back to the return of the fund




             Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A18
                                     Figure A1
  Embedded Leverage and Excess Delta-Hedged Returns across Maturity and Delta, Calls

This figure shows average excess returns of portfolios of options based on maturity and delta. Each calendar month, on the first
trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30 portfolios that are the 5 x 6 interception of 5
portfolios based on the option delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6 portfolio based on the option
expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted within a given portfolio based on the value of
their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. This figure includes all available
call options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and shows average excess returns and means
embedded leverage for each of the 30 portfolios. Embedded leverage is defined as                  where is the option delta, is
the option price and is the spot price. Returns are in monthly percent. “Linear” is a fitted cross sectional regression.




                                      10.0


                                        5.0


                                        0.0
                                              0.0            10.0          20.0             30.0                   40.0                50.0         60.0

                                       -5.0
    Monthly delta-hedged return (%)




                                      -10.0


                                      -15.0


                                      -20.0


                                      -25.0


                                      -30.0


                                      -35.0


                                      -40.0
                                                                                      Embedded Leverage

                                                     Index Options   Equity Options       Linear (Index Options)          Linear (Equity Options)




                                              Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A19
                                     Figure A2
  Embedded Leverage and Excess Delta-Hedged Returns across Maturity and Delta, Puts

This figure shows average excess returns of portfolios of options based on maturity and delta. Each calendar month, on the first
trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30 portfolios that are the 5 x 6 interception of 5
portfolios based on the option delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6 portfolio based on the option
expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted within a given portfolio based on the value of
their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. This figure includes all available
put options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and shows average excess returns and means
embedded leverage for each of the 30 portfolios. Embedded leverage is defined as                  where is the option delta, is
the option price and is the spot price. Returns are in monthly percent. “Linear” is a fitted cross sectional regression.




                                         5.0



                                         0.0
                                               0.0        5.0        10.0          15.0         20.0            25.0      30.0            35.0   40.0


                                        -5.0
     Monthly delta-hedged return (%)




                                       -10.0



                                       -15.0



                                       -20.0



                                       -25.0



                                       -30.0



                                       -35.0
                                                                                          Embedded Leverage

                                                     Index Options     Equity Options        Linear (Index Options)    Linear (Equity Options)




                                           Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A20
                                         Figure A3
            Annual Returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios: All Options and ETFs
This figure shows annual returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first trading day
following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For each security,
the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage (H). Options
are weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value weights. Both
portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB portfolio for security is a self-
financing portfolio that is long the low embedded leverage portfolio and shorts the high embedded leverage portfolio:
 (         )       (         )     where        and    are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L portfolio for
security , and       and     are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual
BAB portfolios with weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for security . Similarly, at the end of each
trading day, ETFs are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (unlevered ETFs) and high embedded leverage
(levered ETFs). The BAB portfolio for index is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low embedded leverage portfolio and
shorts the high embedded leverage portfolio:                               where       is the excess return on the unlevered ETF
and      is the excess returns of the levered ETF. The ETFs BAB portfolio is an equal-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB
portfolios. The ETF BAB portfolio is rebalanced daily to maintain equal weights. This figure includes all available options on
the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and all the available ETFs in our data between 2006 and 2010.




  8.00%



  6.00%



  4.00%



  2.00%



  0.00%
           1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001   2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007    2008   2009    2010


 -2.00%



 -4.00%                                   Index Options          Equity Options          ETFs




            Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A21
                                         Figure A4
           Annual Returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios: At-The-Money Options
This figure shows annual returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first trading day
following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For each security,
the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage (H). Options
are weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value weights. Both
portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB portfolio for security is a self-
financing portfolio that is long the low embedded leverage portfolio and shorts the high embedded leverage portfolio:
 (         )       (         )     where        and    are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L portfolio for
security , and       and     are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual
BAB portfolios with weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for security . Similarly, at the end of each
trading day, ETFs are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (unlevered ETFs) and high embedded leverage
(levered ETFs). The BAB portfolio for index is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low embedded leverage portfolio and
shorts the high embedded leverage portfolio:                                where       is the excess return on the unlevered ETF
and      is the excess returns of the levered ETF. The ETFs BAB portfolio is an equal-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB
portfolios. The ETF BAB portfolio is rebalanced daily to maintain equal weights. This figure includes all at-the-money options
on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010.




 10.00%



  8.00%



  6.00%



  4.00%



  2.00%



  0.00%
            1996   1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002   2003    2004    2005    2006    2007    2008   2009    2010

 -2.00%



 -4.00%                               Index Options - ATM             Equity Options - ATM




            Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Appendix - Page A22
                                              Table I
                                           Sample Description
This table reports the list of instruments included in our three samples – the equity option sample, the
index option sample and the exchange-traded funds samples (ETF) – and the corresponding date ranges.
The table also report ticker symbols and expense ratios (in basis points).


Equity Option Sample                                                               Start Year   End Year
All domestic equity options on OptionMetrics Ivy DB                                     1996       2010

Index Option Sample            Ticker (latest)                                     Start Year   End Year

NYSE ARCA Major Market         XMI                                                      1996       2008
S&P Midcap 400                 MID                                                      1996       2010
Russell 2000                   RUT                                                      1996       2010
S&P SmallCap 600               SML                                                      1996       2010
Dow Jones                      DJX                                                      1997       2010
Nasdaq 100                     NDX                                                      1996       2010
Mini-NDX                       MNX                                                      2000       2010
CBOE Int Rate 30 Yr T Bond     TYX                                                      1996       2010
NYSE Composite Old             NYZ                                                      1996       2003
S&P 500                        SPX                                                      1996       2010
Wilshire Small Cap             WSX                                                      1996       1999
S&P 100                        OEX                                                      1996       2010

ETF Sample                     Ticker (latest)                   Expense ratio     Start Year   End Year
                                                                (Basis Points)

                               1x           2x                  1x          2x

Dow Jones                      DIA          DDM                17           95          2006       2010
S&P Mid Cap 400                MDY          MVV                25           95          2006       2010
Nasdaq 100                     QQQQ         QLD                20           95          2006       2010
Russell 2000                   IWM          UWM                20           95          2007       2010
Russell 3000                   IWV          UWC                20           95          2009       2010
S&P 500                        SPY          SSO                 9           92          2006       2010
S&P SmallCap 600               IJR          SAA                20           95          2007       2010




         Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Tables - Page T1
                                                    Table II
                                                 Summary Statistics
This table shows summary statistics. “Option maturity” is the option’s time to expiration, in months. “Embedded
leverage” is defined as             where is the security’s delta, is the security’s price and is the price of the
underlying. “Moneyness” is defined as the ratio of (S-X) / S for call options and (X-S)/S for put options where X is
the option strike price. “Implied volatility” is the option implied volatility computed using Cox, Ross, and
Rubinstein (1979) binomial tree model. This table includes all available options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy
database between 1996 and 2010 and all the available ETFs in our data between 2006 and 2010.


                                                               Mean      Median          Std       Min         Max
Equity options        Number of stocks per year                 2,920      2,929         418      2,172       3,519
                      Number of options per year              262,903    225,489      94,961    131,551     458,604
                      Number of options per stock-month            62         40          74          1         826
                      Option maturity (months)                   6.47        5.00       6.32        1.00      38.00
                      Embedded leverage                          6.48        5.09       4.79        0.14      43.94
                      Moneyness                                 -0.08       -0.04       0.34      -47.24       1.92
                      Implied volatility                         0.50        0.44       0.25        0.02       4.58

Index options         Number of indices per year                   10         10           1           9         11
                      Number of options per year                6,387      4,957       2,727       3,490     11,856
                      Number of options per index-month           371        335         234           1      1,048
                      Option maturity (months)                   7.02        4.00       7.08        1.00      38.00
                      Embedded leverage                         12.14        8.90      10.15        0.72     120.60
                      Moneyness                                 -0.07       -0.04       0.32      -21.18       1.25
                      Implied volatility                         0.28        0.25       0.12        0.05       1.58

ETFs                  Number of ETFs per year                       6          6           1          4           7




                Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Tables - Page T2
                                            Table III
                Embedded Leverage and Excess Returns across Maturity and Moneyness
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns and summary statistics of option portfolios based on maturity and moneyness.
Each calendar month, on the first trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30 portfolios that are
the 5 x 6 interception of 5 portfolios based on the option’s delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6
portfolios based on the option’s expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted within a given
portfolio based on the value of their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. For
each delta-maturity bucket we form a call portfolio and a put portfolio and average them. This table includes all available options
on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010. “Embedded leverage” is defined as                       where
is the option delta, is the option price and is the spot price. Returns are monthly in percent, and 5% statistical significance is
indicated in bold.


Equity Options                                        Abs(delta) range                     M aturity (months)
                                                                             1        2         3           6        12       >12

Panel A                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   16.48    15.18     11.83       11.15      9.72       5.88
Embedded leverage             Out of the money           0.20     0.40   14.99    13.70     10.01        8.75      7.67       4.65
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   13.97    11.54      8.16        6.84      6.04       3.69
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   11.45     8.04      5.84        5.13      4.42       2.85
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    7.98     5.60      4.53        4.08      3.54       2.42

Panel B                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   -24.71   -11.43     -6.27      -2.96      -0.70      0.86
Delta hedged excess returns   Out of the money           0.20     0.40   -16.98    -8.19     -4.03      -1.46      -0.31     -0.01
                              At the money               0.40     0.60    -9.53    -4.56     -1.64      -0.54      -0.11     -0.05
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -4.49    -1.73     -0.99      -0.07       0.06      0.17
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -2.00    -0.26     -0.50       0.31       0.28      0.31

Panel C                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    -8.26    -3.82     -2.53      -1.37      -0.36      0.57
t-statistics                  Out of the money           0.20     0.40    -9.88    -4.98     -3.18      -1.29      -0.31     -0.01
Delta hedged excess returns   At the money               0.40     0.60    -8.58    -5.05     -2.18      -0.84      -0.18     -0.10
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -8.43    -3.83     -2.60      -0.21       0.18      0.64
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -5.79    -0.94     -1.92       1.56       1.12      1.92



Index Options                                         Abs(delta) range                     M aturity (months)
                                                                             1        2         3           6        12       >12

Panel D                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   36.14    25.46     20.60       16.07     11.82       8.17
Embedded leverage             Out of the money           0.20     0.40   29.61    20.28     16.44       12.66      9.37       6.51
                              At the money               0.40     0.60   23.69    16.24     13.30       10.19      7.55       5.28
                              In the money               0.60     0.80   18.48    12.68     10.41        7.95      5.91       4.35
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00   11.64     8.38      6.92        5.30      4.07       3.27

Panel E                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20   -33.87   -17.17    -11.74      -4.23      -1.09     -0.28
Delta hedged excess returns   Out of the money           0.20     0.40   -16.33   -10.15     -6.61      -2.42      -0.28      0.07
                              At the money               0.40     0.60    -8.42    -6.02     -3.77      -1.61      -0.20      0.10
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -4.00    -2.77     -1.74      -0.77      -0.31      0.06
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -1.86    -1.05     -0.64      -0.13       0.01     -0.07

Panel F                       Deep out of the money      0.00     0.20    -6.70    -4.20     -3.30      -1.45      -0.50     -0.16
t-statistics                  Out of the money           0.20     0.40    -6.01    -4.99     -3.69      -1.68      -0.25      0.07
Delta hedged excess returns   At the money               0.40     0.60    -5.06    -5.33     -3.41      -2.04      -0.32      0.19
                              In the money               0.60     0.80    -4.80    -4.60     -2.75      -1.82      -0.91      0.20
                              Deep in the money          0.80     1.00    -5.01    -3.31     -1.40      -0.71       0.05     -0.44




                 Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Tables - Page T3
                                           Table IV
          Excess Returns and Alphas of Asset Classes with Embedded Leveraged Assets
This table shows calendar-time returns of portfolios of options and levered ETFs. The top and middle part of each panel report
option returns. Each calendar month, on the first trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30
portfolios that are the 5 x 6 interception of 5 portfolios based on the option’s delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-
money) and 6 portfolios based on the option’s expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted
within a given portfolio based on the value of the value of their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to
maintain value weights. For each delta-maturity bucket we form a call portfolio and a put portfolio. We average all portfolios to
compute aggregate options returns. Panel A reports equal-weighted averages of the 30 option portfolios. Panel B reports value-
weighted averages of the 30 portfolios. This table includes all available options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database
between 1996 and 2010. “Excess return” is the delta-hedged return in excess of the Treasury Bills rate. The bottom part of each
panel reports levered ETFs returns obtained by averaging the return of the levered ETFs in our sample. The ETF regression is run
daily, but results are reported in monthly percent. This table includes all available levered ETFs between 2006 and 2010 “Excess
return” is the return in excess of the Treasury Bills rate. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The
asterisk * in the ETF sample indicates that expenses ratios have been added back to the returns of the fund. The explanatory
variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor.
Returns and alphas are in monthly percent and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

Panel A: Equally Weighted                                            Alpha                                t-statistics
                                                               All      Calls   Puts                All          Calls      Puts
Equity Options       Excess return                          -4.80       -4.68   -4.92             -3.90          -3.56      -3.77
                     CAPM                                   -4.07       -3.96   -4.18             -3.77          -3.36      -3.60
                     3-Factor model                         -3.75       -3.61   -3.88             -3.52          -3.12      -3.35
                     4-Factor model                         -3.25       -3.22   -3.29             -3.04          -2.75      -2.84

Index Options        Excess return                          -3.47       -3.92   -3.02             -3.91          -4.79      -2.93
                     CAPM                                   -2.89       -3.47   -2.31             -3.84          -4.73      -2.72
                     3-Factor model                         -2.65       -3.19   -2.10             -3.58          -4.45      -2.49
                     4-Factor model                         -2.37       -3.00   -1.74             -3.18          -4.12      -2.05
                                                                         All     All*                              All       All*
Levered ETFs         Excess return                                       0.73    0.80                             0.34       0.38
                     CAPM                                               -0.11   -0.04                            -0.18      -0.06
                     3-Factor model                                     -0.37   -0.30                            -0.75      -0.59
                     4-Factor model                                     -0.43   -0.35                            -0.88      -0.72

Panel B: Value Weighted                                              Alpha                                t-statistics
                                                               All      Calls   Puts                All          Calls      Puts
Equity Options       Excess return                          -1.57       -1.28   -1.86             -2.31          -2.46      -2.05
                     CAPM                                   -1.13       -1.01   -1.25             -1.96          -2.14      -1.65
                     3-Factor model                         -0.94       -0.81   -1.07             -1.66          -1.76      -1.43
                     4-Factor model                         -0.69       -0.72   -0.66             -1.21          -1.54      -0.88

Index Options        Excess return                          -2.40       -1.53   -3.26             -2.75          -2.11      -2.85
                     CAPM                                   -1.91       -1.15   -2.67             -2.46          -1.75      -2.56
                     3-Factor model                         -1.68       -0.92   -2.43             -2.19          -1.44      -2.34
                     4-Factor model                         -1.27       -0.80   -1.73             -1.65          -1.23      -1.68
                                                                         All     All*                              All       All*
Levered ETFs         Excess return                                       0.73    0.80                             0.34       0.38
                     CAPM                                               -0.11   -0.04                            -0.18      -0.06
                     3-Factor model                                     -0.37   -0.30                            -0.75      -0.59
                     4-Factor model                                     -0.43   -0.35                            -0.88      -0.72


* Expenses ratios have been added back to the return of the fund



                 Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Tables - Page T4
                                              Table V
                    Alphas of Maturity-Sorted and Delta-Sorted Option Portfolios
This table shows calendar-time portfolio return. Each calendar month, on the first trading day following expiration Saturday, we
assign all options to 1 of 30 portfolios that are the interception of 5 portfolios based on the option delta (from deep-in-the-money
to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6 portfolio based on the option expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are
value weighted within a given portfolio based on the value of their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly to
maintain value weights. For each delta-maturity bucket we form a call portfolio and a put portfolio and average them. This table
includes all available options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010. The top panel reports results
for portfolios sorted by maturity. To compute the excess return for each maturity bucket, we average the excess return across the
5 corresponding delta-sorted portfolios. P6-P1 is a self-financing portfolio that is long long-maturity options and short short-
maturity options. The bottom panel reports results for portfolios sorted by delta. To compute the excess return for each delta
bucket we average the excess return across the 6 corresponding maturity-sorted portfolios. P5-P1 is a self-financing portfolio that
is long in-the-money options and short out-of-the-money options. “Excess return” is the delta-hedged return in excess of the
Treasury Bills rate. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the monthly
returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios, Carhart (1997) momentum factor and a straddle factor. The straddle
factor is a portfolio of 1-month zero-beta at-the-money (ATM) S&P 500 index straddles. Returns and alphas are in monthly
percent and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

Panel A: Equity Options                                            Returns                                  t-statistics
                                      Embedded           Excess        4-factor   5-factor        Excess         4-factor   5-factor
                                       Leverage          return          alpha      alpha         return            alpha      alpha
Portfolio    M aturity (months)
P1           1                             12.97         -11.54         -10.39       -7.99         -9.76           -9.45      -8.70
P2           2                             10.81          -5.24          -3.98       -1.50         -4.34           -3.73      -1.74
P3           3                              8.07          -2.68          -1.32        0.32         -2.71           -1.62       0.45
P4           6                              7.19          -0.94           0.11        1.63         -1.08            0.15       2.56
P5           12                             6.28          -0.16           0.80        2.09         -0.20            1.23       3.55
P6           >12                            3.90           0.25           1.03        1.78          0.41            1.97       3.61
P1 - P6                                    -8.92          11.49          11.08        9.57         12.75           12.08      11.48

Portfolio    M oneyness
P1           Deep out of the money         11.76           -7.70         -5.25       -1.54          -3.66          -2.95      -1.00
P2           Out of the money              10.01           -5.25         -3.75       -1.37          -4.45          -3.76      -1.74
P3           At the money                   8.41           -2.79         -1.89       -0.45          -4.05          -3.22      -0.98
P4           In the money                   6.32           -1.21         -0.78       -0.12          -3.51          -2.71      -0.52
P5           Deep in the money              4.71           -0.33         -0.12        0.14          -1.69          -0.71       0.87
P1 - P5                                    -7.05            7.37          5.13        1.68           3.79           3.11       1.17

Panel B: Index Options                                             Returns                                  t-statistics
                                      Embedded           Excess        4-factor   5-factor        Excess         4-factor   5-factor
                                       Leverage          return          alpha      alpha         return            alpha      alpha
Portfolio    M aturity (months)
P1           1                             23.91         -12.89         -10.68       -5.73          -6.61          -5.98      -5.01
P2           2                             16.61          -7.43          -5.52       -1.85          -4.74          -3.97      -1.83
P3           3                             13.76          -5.09          -3.33       -0.28          -3.50          -2.60      -0.27
P4           6                             10.43          -1.83          -0.54        1.66          -1.63          -0.54       1.96
P5           12                             7.74          -0.37           0.62        2.05          -0.43           0.81       2.95
P6           >12                            5.52          -0.03           0.83        1.77          -0.05           1.33       2.92
P1 - P6                                   -18.39          12.86          11.52        7.50           7.99           7.29       6.69

Portfolio    M oneyness
P1           Deep out of the money         19.70         -11.42          -7.79       -1.88          -3.83          -3.01      -0.89
P2           Out of the money              15.81          -5.95          -4.05       -0.24          -3.83          -2.94      -0.26
P3           At the money                  12.71          -3.33          -2.24        0.09          -3.69          -2.77       0.17
P4           In the money                   9.96          -1.59          -1.00        0.10          -3.36          -2.42       0.35
P5           Deep in the money              6.60          -0.62          -0.36        0.00          -2.95          -1.93       0.01
P1 - P6                                   -13.10          10.80           7.43        1.88           3.84           3.03       0.93




                Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Tables - Page T5
                                                                                        Table VI
                                                                                BAB Portfolios, 1996 – 2010
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first trading day following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending
order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For each security, the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage (H). Options are
weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value weights. Both portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio
formation. The BAB portfolio for security i is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:                                         where
and       are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L portfolio and            and      are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB
portfolios with weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for each security. Similarly, at the end of each trading day, ETFs are assigned to one of two portfolios: low leverage (unlevered
ETFs) and high leverage (levered ETFs). The BAB portfolio for index is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:
             where       is the excess return on the unlevered ETF and       is the excess return of the levered ETF. The ETF BAB portfolio is an equal-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios
and it is rebalanced daily to maintain equal weights. The asterisk * in the ETF sample indicates that expenses ratios have been added back to the returns of the fund. This table includes all available
options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and all the available ETFs in our data between 2006 and 2010. “Excess return” is the delta-hedged return in excess of the
Treasury Bills rate (simple excess returns for ETFs). Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993)
mimicking portfolios, Carhart (1997) momentum factor and a straddle factor. The straddle factor is a portfolio of 1-month zero-beta at-the-money (ATM) S&P 500 index straddles.“Frac (Alpha >0)” is
equal to the fraction of assets with positive abnormal returns. Returns and Abnormal returns are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates and 5% statistical significance is
indicated in bold. Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are annualized.

                                                  Equity options                                                                   Index options                                               ETFs
                                     All                              At-the-M oney                                  All                                At-the-M oney
                             All      Calls       Puts              All       Calls       Puts               All       Calls       Puts               All      Calls       Puts             All*         All

Excess return %            0.36        0.29       0.43             0.33        0.26       0.40              0.33       0.22        0.43             0.23       0.18        0.28             0.06        0.09
                           (8.57)     (7.57)      (6.65)          (7.07)       (5.13)     (7.61)           (6.26)      (5.24)      (4.98)           (4.14)     (3.55)       (4.11)          (2.49)     (3.45)

5-factor alpha %           0.33        0.26       0.40             0.36        0.28       0.44              0.26       0.15        0.37             0.19       0.14        0.25             0.07        0.09
                           (7.60)     (6.58)      (5.86)          (7.83)      (5.96)      (8.01)           (4.95)      (3.58)      (4.10)           (3.41)     (2.71)      (3.51)           (2.52)     (3.43)

Frac (Alpha >0)            0.78        0.78       0.70             0.77        0.74       0.74              1.00       1.00        1.00             1.00       1.00        1.00             0.86        0.86
M KT                      -0.01       -0.02       -0.01           -0.04       -0.06      -0.03             -0.02       -0.01      -0.03            -0.04      -0.04       -0.04             0.00        0.00
                          -(1.53)     -(2.44)    -(0.54)          -(4.45)    -(5.76)     -(2.54)           -(1.76)     -(1.00)    -(1.58)          -(3.26)    -(3.22)     -(2.88)           (0.51)     (0.53)

SM B                      -0.01       -0.01       -0.01           -0.03       -0.03      -0.04             -0.01       0.00       -0.02            -0.01      -0.01       -0.02             0.00        0.00
                          -(0.55)     -(0.58)    -(0.37)          -(2.20)     -(1.90)    -(2.06)           -(0.40)     (0.30)     -(0.61)          -(0.70)    -(0.55)     -(0.72)           (0.02)     (0.00)

HM L                      -0.03       -0.03       -0.03           -0.03       -0.03      -0.03             -0.02       -0.01      -0.02            -0.02      -0.01       -0.02            -0.01       -0.01
                          -(2.45)     -(2.61)     -(1.60)         -(2.49)    -(2.66)      -(1.90)          -(1.08)     -(1.26)    -(0.67)           -(1.01)    -(0.61)     -(1.18)          -(1.66)    -(1.65)

UM D                      -0.02       -0.01       -0.03           -0.01        0.00      -0.02             -0.02       0.00       -0.03             0.00       0.00       -0.01             0.00        0.00
                          -(2.33)     -(1.05)    -(2.35)           -(1.11)    -(0.18)     -(1.70)          -(1.92)    -(0.60)     -(1.95)          -(0.25)     (0.14)     -(0.51)          -(0.67)     -(0.64)

Straddle                  -0.01       -0.01       -0.01            0.00        0.00       0.00             -0.01       -0.01      -0.01            -0.01      -0.01       -0.01             0.00        0.00
                          -(4.17)     -(4.35)    -(2.79)          -(0.71)     -(1.18)     -(0.18)          -(5.05)    -(5.67)     -(3.24)          -(3.15)     -(3.19)    -(2.72)           (0.96)     (0.98)

    long                   4.61       4.57        4.66             4.77       5.39        4.16             6.69        6.39        6.99            7.01        7.46        6.55             1.00        1.00
    short                 10.23      10.16       10.30             9.75      10.45        9.04            16.84       16.18       17.50           16.03       16.47       15.60             2.00        2.00
Dollar long                0.29        0.26       0.32             0.29        0.22       0.36              0.17       0.17        0.18             0.17       0.15        0.18             1.00        1.00
Dollar short               0.13        0.12       0.14             0.15        0.12       0.17              0.07       0.07        0.07             0.07       0.07        0.08             0.50        0.50
Volatility                 1.95        1.78       3.01             2.15        2.31       2.44              2.42       1.97        4.00             2.57       2.38        3.12             0.63        0.63
Sharpe ratio               2.22        1.96       1.72             1.83        1.33       1.97              1.62       1.36        1.29             1.07       0.92        1.06             1.18        1.63


                                                Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Tables - Page T6
                                                               Table VII
                                                       Cross-Sectional Regressions
This table reports coefficients from Fama-MacBeth regressions. The dependent variable is the option delta-hedged excess return
in month t or the ETF excess return on day t. The explanatory variables are the embedded leverage and a series of controls. For
options “embedded leverage” is defined as Ω                 where is the option delta, is the option price and is the spot price.
“Total open interest” is the dollar open interest of all outstanding options for a given security. “Moneyness” is the ratio of (S-X) /
S for call options and (X-S)/S for put options where X is the strike price. “x-Month spot volatility” is the standard deviation of
the daily spot returns over the past x months. Stock return is the monthly spot return. Option turnover is defined as log(1 +
volume/open interest). “Total option turnover” is defined as log(1+total volume / total open interest) where total volume is the
sum of dollar volume of all outstanding options for a given security. This table includes all available options on the domestic
OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and all the available ETFs in our data between 2006 and 2010. We report the
average slope estimates (corresponding to average excess returns) or, when indicated by the “Risk Adjusted” flag, abnormal
returns. Abnormal returns are the intercept on a regression of the monthly slope estimates (corresponding to monthly excess
returns). The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios, Carhart (1997)
momentum factor and a straddle factor. The straddle factor is a portfolio of 1-month zero-beta at-the-money (ATM) S&P 500
index straddles. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation using a Bartlett kernel (Newey and West (1987)) with a maximum lag length of 12 months. T-statistics are shown
below the coefficient estimates and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.


                                                    Equity Options                                          Index Options                           ETFs

Embedded Leverage (t-1)          -0.72       -1.53        -1.57       -1.49       -1.28     -1.21      -1.43      -1.49       -1.51       -1.30     -0.26
                                 -(5.40)    -(9.37)      -(10.52)    -(10.83)    -(10.08)   -(7.30)   -(8.57)     -(8.83)     -(9.20)     -(7.99)   -(2.35)


Log(open interest) (t-1)                     -0.52         1.00        0.90        0.89                0.02        0.29        0.34        0.37
                                            -(2.23)       (4.38)       (4.31)     (3.89)               (0.13)      (2.13)     (2.28)       (1.72)

Log(total open interest) (t-1)               0.25         -1.20       -1.33       -1.25                0.47        0.59        0.17        1.23
                                             (0.65)       -(2.10)     -(1.13)     -(1.18)              (1.78)     (3.53)       (0.15)     (0.76)

Months to expiration (t-1)                   -1.27        -1.93       -1.82       -2.85                -0.13      -0.39       -0.37       -2.23
                                            -(2.02)      -(3.52)     -(3.20)      -(5.10)              -(0.18)    -(0.58)     -(0.57)     -(2.86)

Moneyness (t-1)                              -0.24        -0.03       -0.06       -0.06                -0.19       0.00        0.08        0.17
                                             -(2.31)     -(0.22)     -(0.95)     -(0.89)              -(2.69)     -(0.03)     (0.82)       (1.13)

Implied volatility (t-1)                    -36.28      -39.34       -38.47      -37.33               -39.33     -47.49      -48.21      -16.90
                                            -(7.36)      -(7.06)      -(4.41)    -(4.53)               -(1.30)    -(1.90)     -(1.97)     -(0.42)

1-Month spot volatility (t-1)                3.77          2.07       -2.83       -2.55               21.63       34.35      98.28       75.48
                                             (0.69)       (0.46)     -(0.73)      -(0.71)              (0.46)     (0.60)      (2.57)       (1.12)

12-Month spot volatility (t-1)              10.48          5.91        6.05        5.09                -4.51     -55.76     -152.22     -137.16
                                             (2.22)        (1.35)     (2.37)      (2.02)              -(0.08)     -(0.94)     -(3.41)     -(1.95)

Option Vega (t-1)                                         -0.03       -0.03       -0.05                           -0.01       -0.02       -0.03
                                                         -(2.20)     -(2.53)      -(3.31)                         -(2.72)     -(3.42)     -(4.35)

Option Gamma (t-1)                                        -0.33       -0.28       -0.34                            1.64        2.19        2.27
                                                          -(1.44)    -(2.30)     -(2.89)                          (3.33)       (3.91)     (3.60)

Stock return (t)                                        -10.18       -11.01      -13.25                           93.25      35.57        -4.95
                                                          -(1.79)    -(2.07)     -(2.86)                          (2.64)      (0.59)      -(0.07)

Option turnover (t)                                        8.10        8.03        9.42                            0.98        1.05        2.02
                                                         (12.00)      (11.96)     (12.31)                          (1.33)      (1.40)      (1.86)

Total option turnover (t)                                  9.02      11.47       11.77                             3.09        3.41        3.89
                                                          (2.82)       (4.21)     (4.76)                           (2.61)      (1.97)      (1.64)

Asset Fixed Effects              No            No          No          Yes         Yes        No        No         No          Yes         Yes       No
Risk Adjusted (5-factor)         No            No          No           No         Yes        No        No         No          No          Yes       Yes
Number of observations       11.3M         11.3M       11.3M        11.3M       11.3M       290K      290K       290K        290K        290K
                                                                                                                                          290K      13K




                   Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Tables - Page T7
                                                 Table VIII
                               BAB and Factor Portfolios: Skewness and Kurtosis
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first
trading day following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For
each security, the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage
(H). Options are weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value
weights. Both portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB portfolio for security i
is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:
                              where        and      are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L portfolio and       and
     are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios with
weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for each security. Similarly, at the end of each trading day, ETFs are
assigned to one of two portfolios: low leverage (unlevered ETFs) and high leverage (levered ETFs). The BAB portfolio for index
  is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:
             where       is the excess return on the unlevered ETF and        is the excess return of the levered ETF. The ETF BAB
portfolio is an equal-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios and it is rebalanced daily to maintain equal weights.
This table includes all available options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and all the available
ETFs in our data between 2006 and 2010. The “Factor” panel shows summary statistics of Fama and French (1993) mimicking
portfolios, Carhart (1997) momentum factor (from Kenneth French’s data library) and a straddle factor. The straddle factor is a
portfolio of 1-month zero-beta at-the-money (ATM) S&P 500 index straddles. Returns are in monthly percent. Volatilities and
Sharpe ratios are annualized.



                                                         Factors                                                         BAB Portfolios
                       Full sample 1926 - 2010                     Overlapping sample 1996 - 2010
                    MKT     SMB      HML         UMD         MKT       SMB      HML      UMD Straddle       Equity    Equity   Index     Index    ETFs
                                                                                                                     (ATM)             (ATM)
Mean
                     0.62    0.25      0.39       0.70         0.50      0.33     0.23     0.58     -8.46     0.36      0.33    0.33       0.23    0.09
Volatility           0.19    0.12      0.12       0.17         0.19      0.13     0.11     0.20      0.88     0.02      0.02    0.02       0.03    0.01
Sharpe Ratio         0.40    0.26      0.38       0.50         0.32      0.34     0.22     0.42     -1.15     2.22      1.83    1.62       1.07    1.63
Min                 -0.29   -0.17     -0.13      -0.51        -0.27     -0.12    -0.15    -0.27     -0.78    -0.03     -0.02   -0.03      -0.03    0.00
P10                 -0.05   -0.03     -0.03      -0.04        -0.06     -0.04    -0.04    -0.06     -0.38     0.00      0.00    0.00      -0.01    0.00
P90                  0.06    0.04      0.04       0.05         0.06      0.04     0.04     0.06      0.25     0.01      0.01    0.01       0.01    0.00
Max                  0.38    0.39      0.35       0.18         0.15      0.14     0.13     0.25      0.89     0.02      0.03    0.02       0.03    0.01
Skewness             0.16    2.18      1.83      -3.04        -1.04      0.32    -0.27    -0.72      0.63    -0.87      0.37   -0.87      -0.51    0.41
Excess Kurtosis      7.49   22.21     15.54      26.67         3.62      2.27     3.77     4.93      1.26     4.57      3.35    3.18       3.42    1.16




                  Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Tables - Page T8
                                       Table IX
       BAB Returns during NBER Recessions, Severe Bear Markets and Market Distress
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first trading day
following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For each security, the ranked
options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage (H). Options are weighted by their market
capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value weights. Both portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded
leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB portfolio for security i is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts
the high leverage portfolio:                                         where         and    are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L
portfolio and       and      are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios
with weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for each security. Similarly, at the end of each trading day, ETFs are assigned to
one of two portfolios: low leverage (unlevered ETFs) and high leverage (levered ETFs). The BAB portfolio for index is a self-financing
portfolio that is long the low leverage portfolio and shorts the high leverage portfolio:                                     where       is the excess
return on the unlevered ETF and           is the excess return of the levered ETF. The ETF BAB portfolio is an equal-weighted portfolio of the
individual BAB portfolios and it is rebalanced daily to maintain equal weights. In the “Add ER” column, expense ratios are added back to the
fund return. This table includes all available options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and all the available
ETFs in our data between 2006 and 2010. “Excess return” is the delta-hedged return in excess of the Treasury Bills rate (simple excess returns for
ETFs). Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French
(1993) mimicking portfolios, Carhart (1997) momentum factor and a straddle factor. The straddle factor is a portfolio of 1-month zero-beta at-
the-money (ATM) S&P 500 index straddles. “Recession” indicates NBER recessions. “Expansion” indicates all other months. “Severe bear
market” is defined as a total market return in the past 12-month below -25%. “Rising markets’ indicate all other months. “Market return” < -5%
and “Market return < -10%” indicate months with contemporaneous market returns below 5% and 10%. Returns and alphas are in monthly
percent and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

Panel A: Equity Options                                                   Alpha                                            t-statistics
                                                                  All          Calls          Puts                   All          Calls          Puts
All options                  Recession                           0.38          0.55           0.21                 2.41            3.65          0.85
                             Expansion                           0.38          0.24           0.52                 9.63            6.18          8.56
                             Severe bear market                  0.92         -0.08           1.93                 7.24            6.51          5.61
                             Rising markets                      3.61          1.92           5.30                 2.73            4.24          2.00
                             M arket return < -10%               0.32          0.23           0.40                 7.24            6.51          5.61
                             M arket return < -15%               0.83          0.96           0.71                 2.43            1.68          2.11
At-the-money                 Recession                           0.37          0.15           0.59                 2.13            0.95          2.88
                             Expansion                           0.39          0.35           0.43                 8.27            7.34          7.55
                             Severe bear market                  0.06          0.27          -0.15                 8.02            6.53          7.74
                             Rising markets                      1.99          1.83           2.15                 4.52          11.46           2.62
                             M arket return < -10%               0.36          0.30           0.42                 8.02            6.53          7.74
                             M arket return < -15%               0.99          0.70           1.28                 1.78            1.42          1.98
Panel B: Index Options                                            All          Calls          Puts                   All          Calls          Puts
All options                  Recession                           0.20          0.47          -0.07                 1.07            2.34         -0.23
                             Expansion                           0.34          0.12           0.55                 6.48            3.24          6.27
                             Severe bear market                  1.30         -0.22           2.82                 4.40            3.49          3.74
                             Rising markets                      2.64          0.98           4.31                 1.57            2.05          1.47
                             M arket return < -10%               0.24          0.12           0.36                 4.40            3.49          3.74
                             M arket return < -15%               0.97          1.09           0.86                 3.04            1.43          2.07
At-the-money                 Recession                           0.11         -0.07           0.29                 0.66           -0.42          1.38
                             Expansion                           0.23          0.21           0.26                 3.64            3.68          3.24
                             Severe bear market                  0.06          0.35          -0.23                 3.39            3.10          3.22
                             Rising markets                      0.67          0.40           0.95                 0.62            0.46          0.62
                             M arket return < -10%               0.20          0.16           0.23                 3.39            3.10          3.22
                             M arket return < -15%               1.01          0.72           1.30                 1.67            1.10          1.78




                  Embedded Leverage – Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Tables - Page T9
                                                Figure 1
               Embedded Leverage and Excess Delta-Hedged Returns across Maturity and Delta

This figure shows average excess returns of portfolios of options based on maturity and delta. Each calendar month, on the first
trading day following expiration Saturday, we assign all options to one of 30 portfolios that are the 5 x 6 interception of 5
portfolios based on the option delta (from deep-in-the-money to deep-out-of-the-money) and 6 portfolio based on the option
expiration date (from short-dated to long-dated). All options are value weighted within a given portfolio based on the value of
their open interest, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. For each delta-maturity bucket we
form a call portfolio and a put portfolio and average them. This figure includes all available options on the domestic
OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and shows average excess returns and means embedded leverage for each
of the 30 portfolios. Embedded leverage is defined as Ω               where is the option delta, is the option price and is the
spot price. Returns are in monthly percent. “Linear” is a fitted cross sectional regression.




                                       10.0


                                         5.0


                                         0.0
                                               0.0          5.0        10.0          15.0         20.0            25.0      30.0            35.0   40.0

                                        -5.0
     Monthly delta-hedged return (%)




                                       -10.0


                                       -15.0


                                       -20.0


                                       -25.0


                                       -30.0


                                       -35.0


                                       -40.0
                                                                                            Embedded Leverage

                                                       Index Options     Equity Options        Linear (Index Options)    Linear (Equity Options)




                                                     Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Figures - Page F1
                                                                              Figure 2
                                                           Sharpe ratios of Betting-Against-Beta Portfolios

This figure shows Sharpe ratios of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the first trading day
following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage. For each security,
the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded leverage (H). Options
are weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain value weights. Both portfolios
are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB portfolio for security is a self-financing
portfolio that is long the low embedded leverage portfolio and shorts the high embedded leverage portfolio:
     Ω                Ω           where Ω and Ω are the embedded leverage of the value-weighted H and L portfolio for
security , and      and     are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-weighted portfolio of the individual
BAB portfolios with weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for security . Similarly, at the end of each
trading day, ETFs are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (unlevered ETFs) and high embedded leverage
(levered ETFs). The BAB portfolio for index is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low embedded leverage portfolio and
shorts the high embedded leverage portfolio:                                    where       is the excess return on the unlevered
ETF and        is the excess returns of the levered ETF. The ETFs BAB portfolio is an equal-weighted portfolio of the individual
BAB portfolios. The ETF BAB portfolio is rebalanced daily to maintain equal weights. This figure includes all available options
on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996 and 2010 and all the available ETFs in our data between 2006 and
2010. Sharpe ratios are annualized.




                                2.5




                                2.0
BAB Sharpe Ratio (Annualized)




                                1.5




                                1.0




                                0.5




                                0.0
                                      All   Calls   Puts      Atm    Atm Calls Atm Puts   All      Calls    Puts    Atm   Atm Calls Atm Puts   All*   All


                                                                    Equity Options          Index Options          ETFs




                                             Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Figures - Page F2
                                             Figure 3
                 Distribution of Monthly Returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios

This figure shows the distribution of monthly returns of Betting-Against-Beta portfolios (BAB). Each calendar month, on the
first trading day following expiration Saturday, options are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their embedded leverage.
For each security, the ranked options are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage (L) and high embedded
leverage (H). Options are weighted by their market capitalization and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to
maintain value weights. Both portfolios are rescaled to have an embedded leverage of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB
portfolio for security is a self-financing portfolio that is long the low embedded leverage portfolio and shorts the high
embedded leverage portfolio:                Ω                Ω          where Ω and Ω are the embedded leverage of the
value-weighted H and L portfolio for security , and      and     are their respective excess returns. The BAB portfolio is value-
weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios with weights equal to the total value of all outstanding options for
security . Similarly, at the end of each trading day, ETFs are assigned to one of two portfolios: low embedded leverage
(unlevered ETFs) and high embedded leverage (levered ETFs). The BAB portfolio for index is a self-financing portfolio that is
long the low embedded leverage portfolio and shorts the high embedded leverage portfolio:
where         is the excess return on the unlevered ETF and         is the excess returns of the levered ETF. The ETFs BAB
portfolio is an equal-weighted portfolio of the individual BAB portfolios. The ETF BAB portfolio is rebalanced daily to
maintain equal weights. This figure includes all available options on the domestic OptionMetrics Ivy database between 1996
and 2010 and all the available ETFs in our data between 2006 and 2010 and pools all portfolios in table VI.




 200


 180


 160


 140


 120


 100


  80


  60


  40


  20


   0
        0.5%




        1.3%
        1.5%



        2.1%
        2.3%




        3.0%
        0.1%
        0.3%

        0.7%
        0.9%
        1.1%



        1.7%
        1.9%



        2.5%
        2.7%
        2.9%

        3.2%
        3.4%
        3.6%
       -5.3%
       -5.1%



       -4.5%
       -4.3%




       -3.6%




       -2.8%




       -2.0%
       -1.8%



       -1.2%
       -1.0%




       -0.3%
       -5.9%
       -5.7%
       -5.5%



       -4.9%
       -4.7%



       -4.1%
       -3.9%
       -3.8%

       -3.4%
       -3.2%
       -3.0%

       -2.6%
       -2.4%
       -2.2%



       -1.6%
       -1.4%



       -0.8%
       -0.6%
       -0.5%

       -0.1%




                   Embedded Leverage - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen – Figures - Page F3
