                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE FEDERAL RESERVE, EMERGING MARKETS, AND CAPITAL CONTROLS:
               A HIGH FREQUENCY EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION

                                         Sebastian Edwards

                                        Working Paper 18557
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18557


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




This is a revised version of a paper presented at the conference on monetary policy that celebrated
the 20th Anniversary of the Studienzentrum Gerzensee, October, 2011. I am grateful to Juan Marcos
Wlasiuk for excellent assistance, to José De Gregorio and Vittorio Corbo for discussions on the policies
of the Banco Central de Chile during their tenure as governors, and, especially, to my discussant Frank
Shorfheide for excellent comments and suggestions. I also thank the participants at the conference
for helpful comments. I thank two anonymous reviewers for very helpful and detailed comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Federal Reserve, Emerging Markets, and Capital Controls: A High Frequency Empirical
Investigation
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 18557
November 2012
JEL No. F30,F32

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper I use weekly data from seven emerging nations – four in Latin America and three in Asia
– to investigate the extent to which changes in Fed policy interest rates have been transmitted into
domestic short term interest rates during the 2000s. The results suggest that there is indeed an interest
rates “pass through” from the Fed to emerging markets. However, the extent of transmission of interest
rate shocks is different – in terms of impact, steady state effect, and dynamics – in Latin America and
Asia. The results also indicate that capital controls are not an effective tool for isolating emerging
countries from global interest rate disturbances. Changes in the slope of the U.S. yield curve, including
changes generated by a “twist” policy, affect domestic interest rates in emerging countries. I also provide
a detailed case study for Chile.


Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
                                                    1


        1. Introduction
        A fundamental principle of open economy macroeconomics is that under fixed exchange
rates and free capital mobility it is not possible for a central bank to conduct an independent
monetary policy. This idea is generally known as the “Impossibility of the Holy Trinity.” A
corollary of this “impossibility” is that under floating exchange rates it is possible for a country
to have “monetary independence.” Whether these principles are strictly true, or whether they
hold partially and only in the long run has, for a long time, concerned central bankers and policy
makers. Indeed, in my own work with different central banks, this is one of the first questions
that is raised when discussing policy. Moreover, in a course for central bankers from the
emerging markets that I have taught at the Studienzentrum Gerzensee since 1995, the students –
all of them mid-level officials with extensive experience--, invariably end up asking whether the
adoption of flexible exchange rates (either “clean” or “dirty” floats) truly grants central banks
policy autonomy.
        Traditional empirical studies on the degree of monetary independence under alternative
exchange rate regimes centered on the extent to which changes in domestic credit were “offset”
by changes in international reserves. Under fixed exchange rates, and with free capital mobility,
it is expected that the “offset coefficient” would be equal to -1. That is, the central bank is unable
to alter the supply of base money; this is demand-determined. On the other hand, under (some
degree of) exchange rate flexibility the offset coefficient is expected to be negative but smaller
(in absolute terms) than one. In the extreme case of absolute and clean floating, this coefficient
would be equal to zero. The reason for this is that under a strict float there would be no changes
in the central bank holdings of international reserves.
        Early empirical studies that focused on the “offset coefficient” were undertaken at a time
when central banks followed “money targeting” strategies. During the last few years, however,
most central banks have moved in two directions: first, money targeting has been replaced, either
implicitly or explicitly, by “inflation targeting” and, second, central banks have replaced
traditional policy tools by the manipulation of a (very) short run policy interest rate. The
following process describes, in a simplified way, how modern central banks conduct monetary
policy: if inflationary pressures are perceived to be increasing, the central bank raises the policy
rate in an effort to directly affect short term interest rates – that is, interest rates on short term
government securities and/or short term CDs. Higher short term rates are expected, in turn, to be
                                                  2


transmitted along the yield curve, affecting, in particular, medium to long-term interest rates (say
10 year government bonds rates). In many central banks policy rates are also adjusted as a
reaction to other economic developments, including changes in unemployment, changes in the
currency value, or external shocks. In this world where monetary policy is conducted through
interest rates adjustments, the question of monetary policy independence may be posed as
follows: to what extent are changes in policy interest rates in the advanced nations – for example,
changes in the Federal Reserve Federal Funds’ rate—transmitted into short term interest rates in
the domestic country. At an analytical level, the answer to this question will depend on a number
of factors, including the degree of substitutability of domestic and international securities, the
degree of risk aversion, and the extent of capital mobility.
         In this paper I use weekly data from seven emerging nations -- four in Latin America and
three in Asia -- to investigate the extent to which changes in Fed policy interest rates have been
transmitted into domestic short term interest rates during the 2000s. All countries in the sample –
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Indonesia, Korea, and the Philippines – had flexible exchange
rates during the period under study, and followed some kind of inflation targeting. Also, these
countries had different degrees of capital mobility during the first decade of the 2000s. In an
index from 1 to 10, where 10 denotes absolute free mobility of capital, capital mobility ranged
from a high 8.4 in Chile in early 2008, to a low of 2.9 in Colombia in 2002 – see Section 4
below.
         Previous work on this general topic include, among others, Hausmann, Gavin, Pages-
Serra, and Stein (2000), Frankel, Schmukler, and Serven (2002), Shambaugh (2004), Miniane
and Rogers (2007), Edwards and Rigobón (2009), and Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito (2011). Many
of these authors have investigated the transmission of interest rate shocks under alternative
exchange rate regimes. This paper differs from previous work in a number of respects: First, and
as noted, I use weekly data, while most previous analyses have relied on either monthly or
quarterly data. Second, I concentrate exclusively on countries with flexible exchange rates, the
exchange rate regime that has become increasingly common among emerging economies. Third,
I use a new index on capital mobility to analyze whether controls on financial flows affect the
transmission of interest rates shocks. Fourth, I pay particular attention to the short run dynamics
of interest rate adjustments to global financial disturbances. Fifth, I explicitly concentrate on the
role of the steepness of the U.S. yield curve in explaining the international transmission of
                                                          3


interest rates. In particular, I investigate how a policy aimed at “twisting” the yield curve – as
announced by the Fed’s FOMC on September 21, 2011 – may affect local interest rates in the
two regions. Sixth, I investigate in some detail the channels through which advanced countries
interest rates shocks are transmitted into changes in domestic interest rates. Seventh, I use high
frequency data for one of the countries (Chile) to investigate whether monetary policy in that
nation has been influenced by actions undertaken by the Federal Reserve. And eighth, while
most previous work has relied on VAR analyses, I use a GGM regression approach. However,
and as I point out in Section 6 on extensions and robustness, the results obtained using these two
methodologies are very similar.1
           The topic of this paper may seem, to some readers, somewhat extemporaneous. After all,
for some time now the Federal Reserve has conducted monetary policy in the old fashioned way:
it has engaged in massive open market operations that have greatly affected its balance sheet –
the so-called “quantitative easing” policy. Moreover, the Fed’s Chairman announced that short
term policy rates will be maintained at a very low level (virtually zero) until mid 2014, at the
least. In spite of current monetary conditions in the in the U.S., and more generally in the
advanced nations, the analysis pursued in this paper continues to be relevant for at least four
reasons. First, this paper goes beyond the Federal Funds rates and analyzes how various external
shocks impact on short term interest rates in Latin America and Asia. Second, and as noted, I
also analyze how other policy actions by the Fed, including attempts at altering the steepness of
the yield curve, affect domestic interest rates in emerging nations. Third, issues related to the
effectiveness of capital controls continue to be of paramount policy importance. This is
particularly the case after recent actions geared at controlling capital inflows by countries such as
Brazil and Korea. And fourth, the vast majority of experts expect that at some point in the future
the Fed will resume its normal monetary policy procedures, and will once again use the Federal
Funds rates as its main policy tool.
           The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 I provide a first look at the data
on Federal Funds rates and short term interest rates for the seven emerging countries in the
sample. More specifically, I use weekly data from January 2000 through September 2008 to
analyze the unconditional reaction of domestic short term interest rates in Asia and Latin
America to changes in the Federal Funds rates. In Section 3 I provide the theoretical

1
    I thank my discussant at the conference, Frank Schorfheide, for suggesting me to make this comparison.
                                                          4


underpinnings for the analysis, and I present the basic econometric results from the panel
estimation of an error correction model on deposit interest rates for the seven Latin American
and the Asian countries. Here I analyze the impact and long term effects, and the dynamics of
adjustment, to an interest rate shocks stemming from abroad. I consider shocks to the Federal
Funds rate, as well as shocks to the long term interest rate in the U.S. In Section 4 I deal with
capital controls and the international transmission of interest rate disturbances. In particular, I
ask whether a higher degree of capital mobility helps “isolate” domestic interest rates from
external financial shocks. In Section 5 I focus on one of the countries in the sample, Chile, and I
ask whether Fed actions have systematically affected decisions by the Banco Central de Chile. In
Section 6 I deal with robustness and extensions. In particular, I analyze whether allowing for
changes in other covariates affect the results; I discuss alternative estimation techniques,
including multivariate VARs; and I deal with other robustness issues, including alternative
measures of capital mobility. And, finally, in Section 7 I offer brief concluding remarks.


           2. Federal Reserve policy and short term interest rates in Latin America and Asia:
               A first look at the data
           In this paper I use weekly data from the first week of January 1, 2000 through the second
week of September 2008.2 The analysis focuses on this period for two reasons: First, during this
time span all emerging countries in the sample had a flexible exchange rate regime. To be sure,
all seven of them intervened from time to time in the currency market, but, by and large, nominal
exchange rates were determined by market forces. And second, I am interested in analyzing a
relatively tranquil period. For this reason I excluded the turbulence that followed the collapse of
Lehman Brothers in mid September 2008. In Section 6 on extensions I briefly discuss the results
for different time periods; in particular, I ask whether the Argentine default of early 2002
affected the transmission mechanism for interest rate shocks.
           2.1 Basic interest rate data
           In Figure 1 I present data on short term interest rates for the United States. Two rates are
displayed: (i) the Federal Funds policy rate; and (ii), the 3 months certificate of deposits rate. As
may be seen, both rates move closely together. Indeed, the null hypothesis that these two series



2
    The exception is Korea, which only has weekly data (in Data Stream) on 90-day deposit rates from 2004 onwards.
                                                         5


are not cointegrated is strongly rejected.3 In addition, the data in Figure 1 suggest that changes in
the Fed’s policy rate are rapidly reflected in changes in short term deposit rates – for details, see
Table 1 below.
        During the period under consideration – January 2000-September 2008 -- there were 40
changes in the Federal Funds policy rate. Twenty were increases, and in 19 of them the rate hike
was 25 basis points; on one occasion it was increased by 50 basis points (on the week of May
19th, 2000). The other 20 policy actions correspond to cuts in the Fed Funds rate. In seven cases
it was cut by 25 basis points; in 11 cases it was cut by 50 basis points; and on 2 occasions it was
reduced by 75 basis points (both of them in early 2008: the week of January, 25th and the week
of March 21st.)
        Figure 2 I present the weekly evolution of short term (90 days) deposit rates for the seven
emerging counties in this study.4 For each of them I also present the Federal Funds policy rate.
Several aspects of these data deserve attention: (a) there is significant variation in deposit interest
rates in the countries in the sample during this period. (b) Deposit rates in many of the emerging
countries – and in particular in Brazil – were quite volatile during this period. (c) In most cases
there is no obvious relationship between domestic interest rates and the Fed policy rate. And (c),
towards the end of the sample, when the Fed embarked on aggressive interest rate cutting, in
many of the countries there seems to be a divergence between Fed policy rates and short term
deposit rates.
        2.2 Changes in the Federal Funds interest rates and short term rates in Latin America
             and Asia
        In Table 1 and Table 2 I present data on the change in the short term (3-month) deposit
rate in Latin America and Asia the week in which the Federal Reserve changed the Federal
Funds policy rate. I also provide the accumulated change in short term deposit rates 1, 2, 3 and 6
weeks after the Fed’s action. I also include data on changes in the U.S. 3-month CD rate during
the same periods. Table 1 deals with increases in the Federal Funds rate, while Table 2 contains
the results for cuts in the Federal Funds rates. The average increase in the Fed Policy rate was
26.2 basis points across all 20 hike episodes; the average cut was 43.8 basis points.


3
 Results available on request.
4
 These countries were included in the analysis due to data availability, and because they satisfied two important
considerations: having flexible regimes and following some variant of inflation targeting.
                                                         6


        The following aspects of these results are noteworthy: First, there are some important
differences in interest rates’ behavior in Asia and Latin America. Changes in short term rates in
Latin America are higher (in absolute terms) than in Asia, on average. This is particularly the
case for Fed Funds hikes. Interestingly, however, none of these short term deposit rates changes
– either after Fed Funds’ hikes or cuts – are statistically significant. Second, after 6 weeks there
appears to be a one-to-one transmission of the Fed’s action into U.S. deposit rates. This is the
case for both Fed Funds increases and Fed Funds’ cuts. And third, in the immediate aftermath of
cuts in the Fed Funds’ rate, short term interest rates in both Asia and Latin America are
somewhat erratic, and exhibit both increases and declines. After 6 weeks, however, in both
regions there is an accumulated decline in short terms rates. These declines average 12 basis
points in Latin America, and only 6 basis points in Asia. In contrast, the 6 week accumulated
change in short term deposit rates in the U.S. is -54 basis points (remember that the average cut
in the Federal Funds interest rate during this period was almost 44 basis points.)
        To summarize, the unconditional results presented in Table 1 and Table 2 suggest that
after 6 weeks Federal Funds policy rates changes have been transmitted fully into changes in
short term deposit rates in the United States. There is no such evidence in Latin America or Asia:
in these two regions the changes in short term deposit rates are very small – indeed, in the two
regions they are not significantly different from zero. In Sections 3 and 4 of this paper I use a
dynamic model to analyze whether these results are maintained under conditional estimation that
incorporates the role of other covariates.
        2.3 Capital controls in Asia and Latin America in the 2000s
        During the 2000s the seven emerging countries included in this study relied, to different
degrees, on capital controls. An important question is whether the international transmission of
interest rate shocks depends on the degree of capital mobility. In a number of emerging markets
– Brazil, Colombia and Korea being premier examples – policy makers have recently (that is,
during 2011) argued that controlling capital mobility, and, in particular, controlling so-called
“speculative” capital flows will increase the degree of policy independence.5
        In order to analyze this issue I constructed a new measure of capital controls. The basis of
this indicator is the index on “International Capital Markets Controls” published by the Fraser

5
  The main reason given for imposing capital controls is to avoid “excessive” currency appreciation. In most
countries, however, it has also been argued that capital controls will protect the local economy from external
financial shocks, including shocks to interest rates.
                                                         7


Institute. This index goes from 0 to 10, with higher values denoting an economy that is more
open to international financial movements, and is available yearly from 2000 through 2008. In an
effort to improve this index, I used information obtained from the World Bank, the Interamerican
Development Bank, and national sources for the seven countries to modify (and improve) the
Fraser index. More specifically, I made an effort to adjust its value and to record changes in the
degree of capital mobility at the time they actually took place, and not only once a year. 6 In
Section 6 I discuss alternative indexes of capital mobility, and their merits and limitations.
        In Figure 4 I present the distribution and basic statistics on the “International Capital
Markets Controls” index for 2000-2008. The means for the index are significantly different
across both regions: 5.3 for the four Latin American countries and 4.2 for the three East Asian
nations. That is, during the period under study the Latin American nations were, on average,
more open to international capital movements than the Asian countries. For the Latin American
sample the country with the highest degree of capital mobility is Chile with an index value of 8.2
in 2008; the Asian nation with the highest index value is Korea with 5.3, also in 2008. In Section
4 I present a number of results that explicitly incorporate the (possible) role of capital controls in
the international transmission of interest rate shocks.


        3. The international transmission of interest rate shocks: Basic results and “twist”
           policies

        In this Section I present the basic results on the transmission of Federal Reserve policy
changes into short term deposit interest rates in two groups of emerging nations in Asia and Latin
America. I begin by discussing the theoretical underpinnings for the analysis. I then present the
base-run results using both GLS and GMM techniques. Then, in Sub Section 3.2 I analyze the
way in which changes in the U.S. yield curve affect short term interest rates in these two groups
of countries.
        3.1 Theoretical underpinnings
        A number of authors have recently constructed open economy DSGE models to analyze
different aspects of monetary policy. For example, in an influential paper Monacelli (2005)
6
 The bases of the Fraser Index are data compiled by the International Monetary Fund. Individual country studies,
of course, lend themselves for using more detailed measures of capital mobility that may change week to week.
This is what Roberto Rigobón and I do in our study of Chile’s control with controls on capital inflows. See (Edwards
and Rigobón (2009). For a recent overall assessment of alternative indexes of capital mobility see, for example,
Quinn, Schindler, and Toyoda (2011).
                                                          8


developed a model of a small open economy with monopolistic competitive firms, short run
deviations to the law of one price for importables (but not for exportables), and complete
international markets for state-contingent securities.7 As is customary, he assumed that the
central bank minimizes a quadratic loss function on the deviations of inflation and output from
target values. He then used this model to investigate how different variables are affected by a
series of shocks, including productivity shocks. As in most DSGE models of open economies,
the optimization of Monacelli’s framework yields an interest parity condition of the following
form (this assumes risk neutrality):


         (1)                                         ,


Where      and     are nominal interest rates at home and abroad, and              is the log of the nominal
exchange rate.
         Another important contribution in this field is Lubik and Schorfheide (2006), who
developed a two country DSGE empirical model that lends itself for empirical estimation. The
authors assume symmetry in technology and consumers’ preferences, asymmetric nominal
rigidities in the two countries, currency pricing by domestic and foreign firms, incomplete
exchange rate pass through, central banks that minimize a quadratic loss function, and a series of
country-specific and world-wide shocks. As in Monacelli (2005), and under the assumption of
integrated capital markets and perfect risk sharing, they generate an equilibrium condition
identical to (1). Models by De Paoli (2009) and Justiniano and Preston (2010), among many
others, also generate equations such as (1).
         Equation (1), as noted, assumes that there are no impediments for moving capital across
borders. For most emerging countries, however, this is a simplification. As may be seen in
Figure 3, all the countries considered in this paper controlled capital mobility in one way or
another during the period under analysis (2000-2008). It is easy to show that if the home country
levies a tax of rate on capital outflows, equation (1) becomes (assuming risk neutrality): 8

7
  Monacelli (2005) shows that if the pass through from the exchange rate to prices is incomplete in the short run,
the closed and open economy versions of the “canonical” New Keynesian models are not isomorphic. The
deviation of the law of one price for imports stems from the assumption that imports are sold to the public by
monopolistic competitive retailers. In the long run, however, the law of one price holds for imports.
8
  Different countries use different mechanisms for controlling capital mobility, including taxes, licenses, quotas,
and other. The analysis that follows assumes that country nationals have to pay a tax t if they take funds out of the
                                                          9




         (2)                                                        ,


That is, under capital controls the wedge between domestic and foreign interest rates will tend to
be higher than when there is free capital mobility. Also, equation (2) indicates that the extent of
interest rate “pass through” from foreign to domestic interest rates will depend on the magnitude
of the capital controls. The higher is the tax on capital movement the lower will be the pass
through. The above, of course, assumes that capital controls are fully enforceable. There is
substantial evidence, however, that firms and individuals find ways of evading these controls,
and that de facto impediments are much weaker than the jure capital controls – see Edwards
(1999), and Eichengreen (2002). In the final analysis, whether capital controls are an effective
mechanism for isolating countries from external interest rate shocks is an empirical question, and
one that I address in the pages that follow, where I report results from the estimation of a series
of dynamic interest rate equations based on (1) and (2).
         Two additional remarks are in order: First, the models that yield equations (1) and (2)
assume that domestic and international securities are perfect substitutes, and that investors are
risk neutral. If, however, these securities are imperfect substitutes the pass through will be less
than complete even in the absence of capital controls. In this case, equation (2) becomes:


         (2’)                                                 ,


Where,      is a combination of parameters that capture the extent of capital controls and the
degree substitutability across securities --                      , The value of     in empirical analyses will
capture the magnitude of the interest rate pass through. Second, after a change in foreign interest
rates, and during the transition, the expected rate of depreciation                        will change,
affecting the dynamic path of domestic interest rates. The actual behavior of                             during
the transition will depend on a number of factors, including the degree of price stickiness, the
speed at which different markets clear, and whether the law of one price holds for importables
and/or exportables. If the spot exchange rate overshoots its final equilibrium, as in the celebrated


country. The results are very similar, however, for cases where capital controls take different forms. For a
discussion on different forms of capital controls see, for example, Edwards (1999).
                                                        10


Dornbusch model, an increase in foreign interest rates will result in an expected appreciation of
the local currency. At the end of the road, then, the extent to which changes in foreign interest
rates – say, changes in the Fed’s policy interest rates – affect domestic short term rates is an
empirical question. The purpose of the analysis that follows is to use a number of variants of
equations (1) through (2’) to analyze this issue using historical weekly data for the countries
discussed above.
          3.2 Basic empirical equations and data
          At a very general level the dynamics of interest rates in an open economy may be
described by the following error correction model:


          (3)


Where       is the domestic interest rate for securities of a certain maturity in period t,           is the
“equilibrium” domestic interest rate in period t, the            are other variables that possibly affect the
change in interest rates, including changes in international economic conditions captured by
terms of trade shocks and global perceptions about risk;             is an error term with the usual
characteristics.9 If  is equal to zero, the dynamic structure becomes very simple, and is
characterized by a partial adjustment process, where the speed of convergence is given by . If,
however,  is different from zero, the adjustment process will be more complex, and may be
characterized by oscillations. In the empirical analysis that follows I investigate this issue
empirically, and I allow the data to tell whether   0 . An important question, and one that I
address in the section that follows, is whether the estimated coefficients depend on the extent of
capital controls.10 As pointed out above, most modern macroeconomic open economy models
with fully integrated capital markets yield an “equilibrium” (non-arbitrage) condition for
domestic interest rates similar to equation (2’). Further assuming that there is a nonzero
probability of a country defaulting on its obligations, it is possible to rewrite (2’) as follows:


    (4)                                                      .

9
  Whether the equilibrium rate should be dated contemporaneously at t, or with a one period lag at period t-1 is a
matter of debate. I discuss this issue below, in light of the results.
10
   Miniane and Rogers (2007) address this issue using a panel of countries and monthly data. They define a U.S.
monetary shock in a different way, however.
                                                       11




     is “a” foreign or international interest rate,     is the expected rate of devaluation of the
domestic currency,        is a country risk premium, and         is an error term. Under full international
capital markets integration (that is, no capital controls)         is expected to be equal to 0, and
     through     are expected to be equal to 1. Whether this is the case is, of course, an empirical
issue. As may be seen, equation (1) is a special case of equation (4).
         The following definitions for the key variables in equations (3) and (4) were used in the
estimations reported below: rt is the nominal interest rate on 3-months CDs in the local banking

sector in each of the seven emerging nations in the sample. rt* is the Federal Funds rate (in some

regressions alternative definitions for rt* were used; see the discussion below).  t is the
expected rate of depreciation calculated as the difference between the natural logarithm of the 3
months non-deliverable forward exchange rate, and the natural logarithm of the spot exchange
rate. Both the forward and spot rates are with respect to the U.S. dollar. I annualized the expected
depreciation by multiplying the logarithmic differential by 4. Finally, for all countries in the
sample, with the exception of Korea,  t is given by the EMBI Global spread for sovereign
bonds. For Korea I constructed a data series on country risk premium by combining the EMBI
Global spreads and Credit Default Swap (CDS) spreads. The reason for doing this is that Korea
was removed from the EMBI Global index by the end of April of 2004.11 All data were obtained
from Data Stream.
         An important question refers to the timing of the observations. The reason for being
concerned about this issue is that when the FOMC of the Federal Reserve announces its interest
rate decisions, Asian financial markets are likely to be closed for that calendar day. That is, if
there is any reaction to the Fed’s action, it is likely to be on the next calendar day. In this study,
however, each data point corresponds to that week’s Friday data. FOMC meetings are never on
Fridays, however. They are usually on Tuesdays. Two days meetings usually span a Tuesday
and a Wednesday. This means that using contemporaneous -- that is, same week -- data for




11
   The Korean sovereign risk spread was constructed by the following procedure: a regression was run of the EMBI
spread on the CDS spread for the period where both data were available. Then, fitted values from this regression
were used as a country risk indicator for the period after April 2004.
                                                        12


analyzing the transmission issue does not pose a timing problem. It would be problematic,
however, in studies that rely on daily data.12
        3.2 Preliminary Tests
        In Table 3 I present data on unit root tests for short term interest rates in the seven
countries, both for levels and first differences. As may be seen, the null hypothesis of a unit root
cannot be rejected in levels. This is the case both when a common process is assumed, and when
individual unit root processes are considered. On the other hand, the null of unit root is rejected
for the differenced series. Tests for the Fed Funds rate, the log of the Embi and the expected rate
of devaluation, not reported here due to space considerations, indicate that these series are non-
stationary in levels and stationary in first differences.13
        In Table 4 I present the results from the Pedroni panel cointegration tests for domestic
interest rates, the Fed Funds rate, the log of the Embi index, and expected devaluation. As may
be seen, the null hypothesis of no integration is strongly rejected, indicating that, as posited in
equation (4), there is indeed a long run equilibrium relationship between these variables. The
estimated cointegtrating vector for Latin America is (t-statistics in parentheses): 1, -0.88 (-4.32),
-0.55 (-1.84), -1.2 (-11.92). The cointegrating vector for Asia is: 1, -1.23 (-7.13), -0.40 (-0.94), -
1.027 (-11.53). When Kao and Fisher tests were used the results were similar, and the null
hypothesis was strongly rejected, as in Table 4.
        3.3 An Error Correction Model: Results
        After combining equations (3) and (4) I estimated the following dynamic panel equation
for the Latin American and the Asian countries (see Section 6 for a discussion on alternative
estimation techniques):




In this equation       is a country-specific fixed effect.
        Table 5 contains the base-run results using pooled data sets for the four Latin American
countries and the three Asian nations in the sample. Two                shocks were included in the base

12
   For that actual dates of FOMC meetings since 1967, see the Fed’s web site. The URL is:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_historical.htm
13
   The expected rate of devaluation is borderline stationary. The null hypothesis cannot be rejected when a
common unit root process is assumed; it is rejected under the assumption of individual processes.
                                                 13


regressions: the percentage change in the price of WTI crude oil, and the percentage change in JP
Morgan’s agricultural commodities index (both of these indexes are available at weekly
frequencies). The first two equations in Table 5– equations (5.1) and (5.2) -- were estimated
using GLS with White corrected covariances. Equations (5.3) and (5.4), on the other hand, were
estimated using a dynamic panel GMM method that takes into account the fact that both Embi
and expected devaluation are endogenous. Three groups of instruments were used: commodity
indexes that instrument for expected devaluation; global financial indicators that capture the
degree of global and regional risk; and lagged values of some regressors in equation (5). More
specifically, the following instruments were used: the contemporaneous and lagged 3-month
Libor rate, the log of the country risk premium for neighboring countries, the Ted spread in
levels and first differences, the percentage change in commodity price indexes for oil,
agricultural commodities, energy and metals, and lagged values of the different covariates.
Unless otherwise stated, all the equations reported in this paper include fixed country effects.
       As may be seen from Table 5, there are both similarities and differences in the estimates
for the two regions. The main results may be summarized as follows:


              For both regions the estimated coefficient of      is negative and significant, as
               expected. It is also small in absolute terms, with its point estimate ranging from -
               0.05 to -0.13. It should be noted, however, that these coefficients correspond to
               weekly data; when transformed into quarterly equivalents the numbers are
               significantly higher, indicating that in 3 months between 45% and 82% of the
               adjustment process is completed.
              In both regions the coefficient of the Federal Funds policy interest rates is
               significantly positive, indicating that during the period under analysis Federal
               Reserve actions were indeed transmitted into changes in domestic interest rates in
               Latin America and Asia.
              Two points related to the previous conclusion deserve particular attention. First,
               the estimated coefficient for the Federal Funds is significantly higher in the Asian
               region than in Latin America. Second, the GMM estimation generates smaller
               coefficients in both regions than the GLS estimates. The GMM estimates suggest
               that 50 basis points Fed Funds rate hike is transmitted, on impact, into a 6 basis
                                                          14


                    points interest rate increase in Asia; in Latin America the impact effect is merely
                    1.5 basis points. Both of these impact effects are statistically different from zero.
                   While the coefficient of            is significantly negative in Latin America (with a
                    point estimate of -0.387 in the GMM estimate), it is not significantly different
                    from zero in the Asian estimation. This means that the adjustment is slower in
                    Latin America than in Asia (See Figure 4, below).
                   The long run estimated coefficient for the Federal Funds rate is 0.60 in Latin
                    America and 1.20 in Asia (both of these estimates are obtained from the GMM
                    results).14 This means that while Federal Reserve interest rate shocks have been
                    transmitted only partially to Latin America, they have been fully transmitted to
                    the Asian nations (this long run coefficient is not significantly different from one
                    in Asia).
                   In every regression the coefficients of the Embi and expected devaluation are
                    positive. In three of the four regressions they are significant at conventional
                    levels. This suggests that, as expected in open economies, domestic interest rates
                    are affected by country risk and expectations of devaluation.
                   The coefficients of the terms of trade shocks are not significant in the Asia
                    regressions, and only one of them is marginally significant for Latin America.


           In Figure 4 I present the path followed by domestic interest rates as a result of a
hypothetical permanent hike in the Federal Reserve Federal Funds rate of 50 basis points. For
illustrative purposes I assume that short term deposit rates are initially equal to 5% in both
regions, and that before the hike the Federal Funds’ rate was 3%. I also assume that the Fed hikes
its policy rate in week 11, and that everything else remains constant. In these simulations, for the
Asian region I set the coefficient of               equal to zero (recall, from Table 5, that it is not
significantly different from zero). As may be seen, 4 weeks after the Fed action, short term
deposit rates in Asia will be 5.19%, while they will only be 5.05% in Latin America. After 3
months deposit rates will be 5.4% in Asia and 5.11% in Latin America, and after 6 months they
will be 5.47% in Asia and 5.22% in Latin America. Although the adjustment process is much
faster in Asia, in both regions it is smooth and is virtually finished after one year.

14
     These are approximations due to rounding. The actual long run coefficients are 0.56 and 1.16.
                                                  15


        It is important to notice that equation (5) does not include as a covariate the emerging
countries’ monetary policy interest rate. That is, when interpreting the coefficient of the Federal
Funds interest rate    presented in Table 5 the “with other things given” does not include the
domestic country’s policy interest rate. That is, this interest rate “pass through” could be the
result of the local central bank adjusting its policy stance in response to the Fed’s action, or to a
direct market response in the country in question to changing international financial conditions.
In Section 5 I deal with this issue in greater detail for the case of Chile.
        3.4 “Twist” policies and the U.S. yield curve
        An interesting question is how changes in the steepness of the yield curve in the United
States affects short term interest rates in the emerging markets. This has become particularly
important in light of the September 2011 decision by the Federal Reserve to “twist” the yield
curve by buying long term securities, while simultaneously selling short term securities. The goal
of this policy is to flatten the yield curve, without affecting the overall stock of base money. At a
more general level an important issue is whether changes in the steepness in the U.S. yield curve
– independently of whether they are triggered by “twist” policies or by market forces – affect
short term interest rates in the emerging markets. In order to deal with this issue I estimated a
number of equations similar to (5), where I included the yield of the 10-year Treasury note as an
additional regressor. The GMM results obtained for both regions are reported in Table 6 – see
equations (6.1) and (6.2).
        As may be seen, for the Asian countries the estimated coefficient for the ten year note is
not significantly different from zero, and the point estimates of the other coefficients – including
the coefficient for the Fed Funds rate -- are very similar to those obtained in the base case
estimation reported in Table 5. For Latin America, on the other hand, the coefficient of the 10-
year Treasury note is significantly negative with a point estimate of -0.105. The point estimate of
the coefficient of the Fed Funds policy rate is still significant, but its point estimate is now 0.062,
twice as large as the one reported in Table 5. This indicates that changes in the slope of the U.S.
yield curve will tend to have significant effects on interest rates in Latin America. It is useful to
distinguish four cases:


               Consider first a Fed Funds hike of 50 basis points that doesn’t affect the 10 year
                yield. This will flatten the yield curve, and will result in an immediate (same
                                                 16


               week) increase in Latin American deposit rates of 3 basis points. The long run
               effect will be an increase in Latin American deposit rates of 50 basis points. That
               is, under these circumstances there is full transmission of the Fed Policy hike.
              Consider now the case where the U.S. yield curve becomes flatter due to a
               reduction in the ten year note yield, with no change in the Federal Funds rate. In
               this case, on impact, short term deposit rates in Latin America will increase by 5
               basis points.
              A Fed Funds 50 basis points hike that results in a parallel shift of the yield curve
               (that is, in a simultaneous 50 points increase in the ten year yield), will generate a
               long run decline in short term interest rates in Latin America of 36 basis points.
              Finally, under current circumstances the most interesting case is that of a “twist”
               policy like the one announced by the FOMC on September 2011. Assume that
               such policy results in a Fed Funds hike of 50 bps and a simultaneous decline of 50
               basis points in the 10 year note. According to equation 6.1 this Fed policy will put
               significant upward pressure on short term rates in Latin America. In the long run
               this “twist” approach will result, on average and with everything else given, in an
               increase in 90 days deposit rates of 133 basis points.


       In an effort to gain further insights on this issue I also estimated an equation that included
the yield on the 30 year Treasury note (detailed results are available on request). When this is
done the coefficient of the 10 year note becomes insignificant; that of the 30 year note is
significantly negative, indicating that, as reported above, the steepness of the yield curve affects
deposit rates in this group of Latin American nations.


       4. Capital controls and the international transmission of interest rate disturbances
       During the period under study the vast majority of emerging markets – including the
seven countries in the current sample -- relied on some kind of controls on capital mobility.
According to the “capital mobility” index reported in Figure 4 Asian nations controlled cross
border capital movements more tightly than the Latin American countries: in a scale that goes
from 1 to 10, where a higher number represents a higher degree of capital mobility, the Latin
American nations have an average of 5.3, while the Asian nations have an average of 4.1. There
                                                   17


are, however, important differences within regions: Colombia, as noted, had one of the lowest
degrees of capital mobility during this period; Korea, on the other hand, had a fairly high (that is,
above the sample’s median) degree of capital mobility during most (but not all) of the years
considered in this paper. For the sample as a whole the average value of the index for the seven
countries is 4.8; the median is 4.6. The average (and median) values of the capital mobility index
for the individual emerging markets in this study are:


                        Brazil:         5.3    (5.5)
                       Chile:           7.2    (7.7)
                       Colombia:        3.7    (3.8)
                       Mexico:          4.7    (4.8)
                       Indonesia:       4.4    (4.8)
                       Korea:           4.3    (4.1)
                       The Philippines: 3.6    (3.4)


           An important question is whether the international transmission of interest rate shocks
depends on the degree of openness of the capital account. From a policy point of view this issue
has become central in global policy discussions. A number of political leaders in the emerging
markets have argued that recent monetary largesse in the advanced nations, and in particular in
the United States (QE1, QE2 and a possible QE3), has impacted their country’s macroeconomic
performance. Indeed, in a number of countries – including in Brazil and South Korea --, the
response to this perceived problem has been the strengthening of controls on capital mobility.
This effectiveness of capital controls has been addressed by De Gregorio, Edwards, and Valdés
(2000), Edwards (1999) and (2010), Eichengreen (2002), Miniane and Rogers (2007), Edwards
and Rigobón (2009), and Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito (2011), among others.15 These papers have
used different techniques and have covered different groups of countries: some have focused on
panel estimation, while others have analyzed in great detail specific countries’ experiences.
These works, as the vast majority of other analyses on this subject, have used either quarterly or
monthly data, and most of them have relied on VAR estimation techniques. By and large these
papers have found that there is no robust evidence suggesting that countries with a higher degree
15
     See, also, Chinn and Ito (2002)
                                                   18


of capital controls are less vulnerable to monetary shocks from abroad. Miniane and Rogers
(2007, p. 20) summarize the state of this debate aptly: “We find essentially no evidence that
capital controls are effective in this sense [of isolating countries from external shocks.]”
       In principle, capital controls could affect the transmission of interest rates shocks in three
ways: they could affect the impact effect, the long run effect, and/or they could alter the dynamic
process of convergence towards the steady state. In this Section I analyze the potential role of
capital controls in the transmission process by interacting the capital mobility index discussed in
Section 2 with different regressors of interest.
       In Table 7 I present the GMM regressions obtained when the capital controls index is
interacted with a number of variables for the Latin American and Asian countries. The results
pertaining to the variables of interest may be summarized as follows:


              For the Latin American countries the coefficient for the interaction between
               capital controls and the Fed policy rate is negative and significant at the 10
               percent level. The interactive coefficient for      is significantly negative, as is
               that of       .
              For the Asian region the coefficient for the interaction between capital controls
               and the Fed policy rate is not significantly different from zero (its point estimate
               is -0.004). The coefficient of       is negative and imprecisely estimated. The
               coefficient of       is significantly negative with a point estimate of -0.08.


       Taken literally, these estimates suggest that capital controls are not a very effective tool
for reducing a country’s exposure to global interest shocks. Indeed, for both regions the
regressions in Table 7 indicate that countries with a high degree of capital mobility – say,
countries with an index value of 6 – will be affected mildly by Fed policy actions. On the other
hand, this is not the case for countries with a low level of mobility. For example, in a Latin
American country with a mobility index of 3, a 50 basis points Fed Funds rate hike will be
translated, in the long run, into an increase in deposit rates of 40 basis points. These estimates
also indicate that the speed of adjustment to different shocks is faster in countries with low
mobility than in countries with high mobility. In order to analyze this issue further I estimated a
number of regressions for countries with “very high” mobility – where “very high” is defined as
                                                       19


having a value of the index in excess of 5.2 --, and countries with an index lower than 4, or a
“very low” degree of capital mobility. When GMM are used the coefficient of the Federal Funds
policy rate for the “very high mobility” countries is insignificantly different from zero (with a
point estimate of 0.014). On the other hand, the coefficient for the “very low” mobility countries
is 0.05 with a t-statistic of 3.7. When GLS are used, the coefficient for the Fed Funds policy rate
turns out to be significant for both groups of nations. However, the point estimate for the high
mobility countries is lower than that for the very low mobility countries; 0.06 vs. 0.075.
           The results that capital controls don’t help countries to effectively isolate themselves
from monetary shocks stemming from abroad confirm findings from other authors that have used
lower frequency data for shorter periods and a smaller set of countries.16 Interestingly, however,
the results in this paper go a step further and indicate that nations with lower capital mobility
have tended to experience a slightly higher “interest rate pass through” than countries with
higher mobility of capital. A plausible explanation is that countries with lower mobility tend to
have a higher rate of inflation, and are thus more sensitive to different shocks, including Fed
policy actions. Indeed, the average yearly inflation in the “low mobility” countries is 6.2%; in the
“high mobility” countries it is 4.7%. At this stage, however, this is only a conjecture and a more
definitive conclusion would require more refined and textured measures of the degree of capital
mobility. It is important to emphasize that the analysis reported in this Section relies on an
imprecise measure of capital restrictions. More conclusive results – including a more precise
estimation of the coefficients of interest – will require refining the capital controls index. I
discuss possible directions for this research in Section 6. Also, see the discussion in Habermeier,
Kokenyne, and Baba (2011).


           5. The Federal Reserve and policy rates in emerging countries: A case study
           The analysis presented in the preceding Sections analyzed the way in which market
interest rates in seven emerging markets have reacted to changes in Federal Reserve’s policy. An
interesting and related question is whether central bankers in emerging nations react directly to
Fed actions by adjusting their own policy rates. In this Section I investigate this issue for the
case of one of the countries in the original sample: Chile.



16
     Miniane and Rogers (2007), Edwards and Rigobón (2009).
                                                 20


       In Figure 5 I present the weekly evolution of Chile’s policy interest rate, known as the
Tasa de Política Monetaria (TPM), from January 2000 through mid September 2008. I also
depict the Federal Funds rate. During this period the Banco Central de Chile changed its policy
rate 42 times: there were 26 interest rate hikes and 16 cuts. The average (median) TPM increase
was 39 (25) bps, while the average (median) cut was 44 (50) bps.
       A preliminary inspection of the data in Figure 5 suggests that there are periods of
synchronicity and periods of divergence between the two policy rates. Indeed, the Figure
suggests that there may have been a break in the relationship between these two policy rates in
mid 2007, when the Fed embarked in an aggressive process of rate cuts, while the Banco Central
de Chile entered a period of concerted tightening. For this reason, most (but not all) of the results
reported below concentrate on the 2000 through June 2007 period. During 2000-mid-2007, on
average, the TPM is almost 60 bps higher than the Federal Funds policy rate. If the longer 2000-
2008 period is taken, the average differential is 90 bps. Interestingly, however, the TPM is not
always higher than the Federal Funds rate. Indeed, and as may be seen from Figure 5, there are
periods when the Fed’s policy rate exceeded Chile’s rate.
       As a first step in the analysis I performed Granger causality tests. As may be seen from
Table 8, the results indicate that the hypothesis that Fed policy doesn’t cause Chile’s policy is
strongly rejected. Of course, the other half of the result is uninteresting, as no one would
seriously believe that Chile’s policy actions would influence the FOMC. What is possible,
however, is that in an open economy Central Banks from both large and small countries react to
similar and common signals and information on global inflationary pressures.
       In an effort to further understand the way in which Fed policy influenced monetary policy
in Chile I estimated a number of error correction equations similar to (5), with the change in the
TPM as the dependent variable. In addition to the Federal Funds policy rate, in the basic
specification I included the following covariates: (a) the log of the Embi for Latin America,
excluding Chile, lagged one period. (b) The one year change in the price of copper (Chile’s main
export), lagged one period. (c) Expected inflation in the U.S. measured as the difference between
the yield on the 10 year Treasury note and the 10 year TIPS, also lagged one period. (d)
Expected annualized devaluation of the peso, lagged one period. (e) Actual 12 month rate of
devaluation of the peso, lagged one period. (f) The one year change in an index of agricultural
                                                        21


commodities prices, lagged one period. And, (g) the one year change in an index of global
energy prices, lagged one period.
        In Table 9 I present the basic least squares regressions from this analysis.17 The main
results may be summarized as follows: (a) as expected, the TPM exhibits significant persistence.
(b) In all estimates the coefficient of the Federal Funds rate is positive and significant. However,
the point estimate of this short run coefficient is rather small. (c) In the longer run, changes in the
Fed Funds policy rate tend to be fully incorporated into changes in the TPM. (d) The coefficient
of expected inflation in the U.S. is significantly positive. (e) The coefficient of the 12 months
change in the price of copper is negative and marginally significant. (f) The coefficient of the
expected rate of devaluation is positive and significant at marginal levels. And, (g) the Embi
index, and changes in global agriculture and energy prices are not significant. This is also the
case for the estimated coefficients of the actual rate of devaluation during the past year (when
alternative periods were used for the actual rate of devaluation the results were similar).
        The fact that the coefficient of the Federal Funds rate is significant even when the U.S.
expected devaluation is included suggests that central bankers in Chile believe that decisions
made by the Federal Reserve contain information that goes beyond the information captured by
the market and reflected in the TIPS breakeven expected inflation. With respect to the other
covariates, a few comments are in order: the negative coefficient for the price of copper suggests
that the Banco Central de Chile has taken into consideration the evolution of the real exchange
rate when making policy decisions. A higher price of copper will exercise upward pressure on
the currency value; this pressure may be (partially) relieved by reducing domestic interest rates.
Interestingly, the fact that the expected rate of devaluation also enters positively in the regression
indicates that the Banco Central de Chile has a forward looking attitude and takes into account
other determinants of currency values, in addition to the price of copper, when making policy
decisions.18




17
  Results from other specifications and other estimation procedures are available on request.
18
  The results in Table 9 were obtained when the Fed Fund’s policy rate was introduced as a covariate. As I point
out in Section 6 below, it may be argued that what really matters is the effective (as opposed to policy) Federal
Funds rate. However, when the effective rate is used the results are almost identical to those in Table 9.
                                                  22


       6. Robustness, extensions and future work
       In this section I briefly deal with some extensions and robustness checks. I also discuss
some directions for future research.
       6.1 Which Fed Funds rate?
       The results reported in the preceding sections focused on how changes in the Fed Funds
policy rate affect deposit rates in seven emerging markets. It may be argued, however, that what
matters are changes in the effective Fed Funds rate. The reason for this is that the market for
Federal Funds tends to anticipate changes in Federal Reserve actions. Indeed consider the
following information: the overall mean differential between the effective and policy Federal
Funds rates was merely one basis point during 2000-2008. However, the mean differential the
week before a Fed Funds rate increase was 12 bps (with a standard deviation of 6 bps); the mean
differential the week before a Fed Funds cut was -17 bps (standard deviation of 20 bps).
       In order to address this issue I estimated a number of regressions with the effective Fed
Funds rate instead of the policy rate. I also used the differential between the two rates as a
covariate. When the Fed Funds effective rate was used the results were virtually identical to
those reported in the Tables above. When the differential between effective and policy rate was
included its coefficient was insignificant, however.
       6.2 Allowing for expected devaluation and country risk premia to adjust
       The results presented above, including the simulations in Figure 4, assume that the
country risk premium and expected devaluation remain constant when the Fed Funds policy rate
changes. In reality, however, it is unlikely that this will be the case. Indeed, work by Uribe and
Yue (2006) and Edwards (2010) indicate that increases in the Federal Reserve’s policy rate will
have a small but significant effect on perceived country risk in the emerging markets. Also,
changes in interest rates in the U.S. will tend to affect currency values in the short run through
the carry trade. An interesting question, then, is what will be the reaction of domestic interest
rates if the Embi spread and the expected devaluation are allowed to adjust. I deal with this issue
by excluding these variables from the short run interest rate regression. In this way, the “all other
things given” will not refer to either the country risk premia or the expected rate of devaluation.
       The results obtained when excluding these variables are in Table 10. As may be seen the
coefficients of the Fed Funds rate are still significantly positive, but their point estimates are
somewhat smaller than in Table 6. This indicates that even when other key determinants of
                                                       23


domestic interest rates are allowed to adjust, Fed policy has an effect on short term interest rates
in these emerging nations.
        6.3 Volatility in global financial markets and contagion
        The analysis reported above concentrated on how changes in U.S. interest rates (both
policy as well as market rates) affect financial markets in the developing countries. A related
question is the way in which perceived risk in the advanced economies impact on interest rates in
Asia and Latin America. In order to address this issue I incorporated as an additional covariate
the Ted spread (defined as the spread between the 3-month Libor rate and the effective Fed
Funds rate). The results obtained – available on request – are quite interesting: for Latin
America the coefficient of the Ted spread is significantly positive, with a point estimate (t-
statistic) equal to 0.19 (2.03). For Asia, on the other hand, the coefficient of the Ted spread is not
significantly different from zero. This suggests that, as one would expect, with other things given
an increase in perceived risk in the advanced economies is translated into higher domestic
interest rates in the emerging economies.
        During the early 2000s the main source of global financial volatility was the Argentine
crisis that eventually resulted in the abandonment of that country’s fixed exchange rate and
currency board. It is possible that this situation, which was reflected in a significant increase in
the EMBI index for Argentina and, thus, for Latin America, affected the transmission mechanism
of interest rate shocks across countries. Indeed, the EMBI for Latin America more than doubled
between December 1999 and September 2002: from 596 to 1,349 basis points in. By early May
2003, however, the EMBI spread for the Latin American region had declined to 649 basis points.
The EMBI for Asia, in contrast, increased by less than 100 basis points between December 1999
and September 2002 (from 190 to 282). In order to investigate the possible impact of the
Argentine crisis I included in the GMM estimates a variable that interacted the Fed Funds rate
with a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 during September 2001 and April 2003, and zero
otherwise (this is the period of heightened Argentine instability).19 The results obtained –
available on request – show that the interacted variable is insignificant in both Asia and Latin
America, indicating that the Argentine crisis didn’t alter the transmission mechanism for the
countries in the sample. It is still the case global (that is Fed originated) interest rate shocks are


19
  April 2003 is an important date, since at that time the freeze on bank deposits that had been implemented in
December 2001 was lifted. For details see Edwards and Rigobón (2009).
                                                        24


more completely transmitted to the Asian than to the Latin American countries. As a way of
further analyzing this issue I re estimated the GMM equations for a shorter period (2003-2008)
that excluded the Argentine crisis. The results for Asia were virtually unchanged, with a point
estimate for the Federal Funds rate of 0.099 (3.21). In Latin America, the new point estimate for
the Federal Funds rate is higher than when the complete sample is used (0.064 vs 0.026). It is
still the case, however, that the pass through is faster and stronger in Asia than in Latin America.
        6.4 Alternative estimation techniques: Using multivariate VARs
        The results reported in the preceding Sections were obtained by estimating different
versions of an error correction equation – equation (3) – with GMM for dynamic panels. It is
possible, however, to use alternative methodologies for addressing the question at hand. A
popular option – and one that has been used in a number of empirical applications of DSGE
models – is to estimate a multivariate VAR, and analyze the impulse response functions. This
has been done, for instance, by Lubik and Schorfheide (2006) in their analysis of the U.S. and
the Euro Zone; see, also, Monacelli (2005), and Justiniano and Preston (2010) for discussions on
these issues.
        In order to investigate whether the econometric strategy affects the results in a significant
way I estimated a number of multivariate VARs for individual countries in the sample.20 The
results obtained for the effect of a Fed Fund’s policy action were quite similar to those from the
GMM estimations reported above. In order to illustrate this, in Figure 6 I show the impulse
response function for short term interest rates in Mexico. As in the exercises reported above the
shock is a 50 basis points permanent increase in the Federal Funds policy rate. As may be seen,
the impact effect is an increase in Mexico’s short term deposit rates of 13 basis points; the long
run effect is an increase in deposit interest rates of 27 basis points. This long run effect is almost
identical to the one obtained using GMM for Latin America and reported in Table 5.
        6.5 Other extensions
        Other extensions and robustness tests included checking whether different time periods
affected the results in a significant way. Also, I used interest rates other than the Fed Funds rate
as a measure of “foreign interest rates.” More specifically, I included the 3-month Libor and the
20
  I thank Frank Schorfheide for suggesting me to undertake this exercise. In the estimation of the multivariate
VARs the following variables were included: domestic interest rates, log of the EMBI for Mexico, expected
devaluation, change in commodity price index for oil, and Fed Funds policy rate. As is customary, several orderings
were considered when computing the impulse response function. In the results depicted in Figure 6 the Fed Policy
rate was considered first.
                                                            25


3-month CD rate in the U.S. In addition, I considered different timing for the different covariates
included in the different versions of equation (5). None of these changes affected the main
conclusions captured in the results reported above. As a further robustness check I estimated the
ECM model when the Fed’s policy rate enters lagged one period, rather than contemporaneously.
The results obtained were very similar to those reported in Table 5. For example, for Asia the
coefficient of the lagged Fed Funds rate was 0.097 (t-statistic, 3.30); when it is entered without a
lag the estimated coefficient is 0.106 (3.49). For Latin America the coefficient of the lagged Fed
Funds rate is 0.030 (2.05); when it enters without a lag it is 0.029 (1.98).21
           The results reported in this paper were obtained using pooled data for two groups of
countries for Latin American and Asia. Further work on this area should look in greater detail at
individual countries. Efforts to analyze individual country experiences could either rely on ECM
estimation (as in the analysis of Chile’s case in Section 5), or use VAR analyses, as in the
Mexican analyses in Sub Section 6.4. A challenge for pursuing this type of country-specific
analysis is that in most countries there is limited time series variability of the capital controls
index.
           6.6 Alternative measures of capital controls and future work
           There are a number of possible directions for future work. Perhaps one of the most
promising -- and challenging – one has to do with the formulation of a multiple equation system
for analyzing this transmission issue. Ideally, this system would include equations for domestic
interest rates in the emerging markets, exchange rate expectations, and country risk premia. This
type of analysis would allow researchers -- as well as policy makers -- to understand better the
channels through which the Fed’s (or other advanced central banks’ for that matter) actions
affect domestic interest rates and interest rate differentials.
           For a long time researchers have struggled to define an appropriate index of capital
mobility. Initial measures were very crude, and considered a binary situation: the capital account
was either “open” (the index got a value of 1), or it was “closed” (zero). The underlying data for
constructing these indexes were taken from actual regulations and were obtained from the IMF’s
Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions Yearbook. In an attempt to use a finer
measure with different shades of grey, some authors used data on the capital markets to make an



21
     I am grateful to a reviewer for suggesting this robustness check.
                                                   26


inference on the actual extent of capital mobility.22 Quinn (1997) provided one of the first
comprehensive indexes of capital mobility. This index covered 20 advanced countries and 45
emerging economies. In the last 15 years or so, a number of authors (and institutions) have made
additional efforts to improve on these indexes. Some of these attempts include Edison and
Warnock (2003), Chinn and Ito (2002), Quinn, Inclan and Toyoda (2001), Miniane (2004),
Edwards (2007), Binici, Hutchison and Schindler (2010), Quinn, Schindler and Toyoda (2011),
and Habermeier, Kokenyne, and Baba (2011). Some of these indexes have attempted to make a
distinction between type of flows (equities vs debt), and whether they are inflows or outflows. In
spite of significant progress in this area, most indexes continue to be subject to limitations,
including the fact that most of them are only available at low yearly frequencies. Future work in
this field will require refining the measures of capital mobility along the lines of the work done
by some of the authors mentioned above. In order to check for the robustness of the results
reported in this paper, I re estimated the ECM models using an alternative measure of capital
controls constructed by extending the indexes by Quinn (2003). The results obtained were
similar to those reported above, and indicate that during the period under consideration, and for
the nations in this sample, controls on capital mobility were not very effective in isolating these
countries from interest rate shocks. This means that, until improved indexes become available,
the (tentative) conclusion that emerges from this study is that countries with higher controls have
not been overly successful in isolating themselves in the medium to long run from interest rate
shocks.
           Further work should also tackle the issue of (potential) omitted variables. These come in
two flavors: those variables that are not usually available at the weekly (or higher) frequency,
and those variables pertaining to a country’s policy stance. Among these, an effort should be
made to incorporate the potential role of prudential regulations. Although constructing an index
that captures the nuances in this area will not be easy, it is possible to learn from past efforts to
construct encompassing measures of capital mobility (see Habermeier, Kokenyne, and Baba
(2011)).
           7. Concluding Remarks
           In this paper I used high frequency (weekly) data from seven emerging nations -- four in
Latin America and three in Asia -- to investigate the extent to which changes in Fed policy

22
     Dooley (1995), Edwards & Khan (1986).
                                                  27


interest rates have been transmitted into domestic short term interest rates during the 2000s. The
results suggest that there is, indeed, interest rates “pass through” from the Fed to emerging
markets. However, the extent of transmission of interest rate shocks is different – in terms of
impact, steady state effect, and dynamics – in Latin America and Asia.
       Fed actions tend to be fully transmitted into interest rates in the three Asian countries in
the sample. In Latin America, on the other hand, the final effect is approximately equal to one
half. Also, as shown in Figure 4 the adjustment process is significantly faster in Asia than in
Latin America. The results reported in this paper also suggest that changes in the steepness of the
yield curve have important consequences for interest rates in the Latin American countries. This
is not the case, however, in the Asian nations. These are important results for evaluating the
possible effects of the Fed’s “twist” policy announced in September 2011.
       The results reported here are in line with results in other studies, including Shambaugh
(2004), Miniane and Rogers (2007), Edwards and Rigobón (2009), Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito
(2011), Binici, Hutchison, and Schindler (2010), and Quinn, Schindler and Toyoda (2011). The
estimations presented above suggest that capital controls are not an effective tool for isolating
emerging countries, in the medium and longer run, from global interest rate disturbances. Indeed,
the econometric analysis indicates that domestic interest rates in countries with a lower degree of
international mobility of capital have been somewhat more sensitive to Fed policy shocks than in
nations that are more integrated to the world capital market. However, as I point out in Section 6,
these results are not fully conclusive, and are subject to the limitations of the indexed of capital
mobility used in the analysis. Moreover, some of the estimated coefficients are marginally
significant. More definitive results require improving the measures of capital mobility, including
the frequency with which they are available.
       Before closing, a few words on some of the limitations of this study are in order. As is
always the case with studies that use high frequency data, the analysis suffers from a “missing
variables” problem. This is because much of the data on macroeconomic conditions and policies
– including inflation rates and different measures of economic activity – are only available at a
monthly (or lower) frequency. In spite of this, however, the results presented here provide useful
information for understanding the influence of the Fed on emerging nations.
                                                       28




Table 1 - Average accumulated changes in short term deposit interest rates weeks following a Fed Funds policy
rate hike, weekly data 2000-2008 (in basis points; standard deviation in parentheses)*



                                              1 week         2 weeks            3 weeks            6 weeks
                        Impact




Latin America             14                   14              14                 12                 15

                         (111)                 (99)           (100)              (115)              (150)




Asia                       2                    5               7                  5                  9

                          (29)                 (33)            (39)               (54)               (78)




U.S.                       3                    6               9                 12                 25

                          (2)                  (3)             (4)                (6)                (12)



*Average Fed Funds hike is 26 basis points.
                                                      29


Table 2 - Average accumulated changes in short term interest rates weeks following a Fed Funds policy rate cut,
weekly data 2000-2008 (in basis points; standard deviation in parentheses)



                        Impact               1 week          2 weeks            3 weeks             6 weeks




Latin America             17                   5                15                  9                 -12

                          (82)                (89)             (115)              (145)              (161)



Asia                       -1                  8                 4                 -15                 -6

                          (84)               (121)             (93)                (72)              (113)



U.S.                      -20                 -21               -24                -30                -54

                          (22)                (26)             (28)                (29)               (29)



*Average Fed Funds cut is 44 basis points.
                                                            30


Table 3 - Unit Root Tests for Short Term Interest Rates in Asia and Latin America, weekly data 2000-2008

    a.   Levels

Exogenous variables: Individual effects
User-specified lags: 4
Newey-West automatic bandwidth selection and Bartlett kernel

                                                              Cross-
Method                           Statistic     Prob.**       sections     Obs
Null: Unit root (assumes common unit root process)
Levin, Lin & Chu t*              0.15942       0.5633            7        2817

Null: Unit root (assumes individual unit root process)
Im, Pesaran and Shin W-stat          0.28892       0.6137        7        2817
ADF - Fisher Chi-square              15.3446       0.3550        7        2817
PP - Fisher Chi-square               26.2916       0.0238        7        2829

** Probabilities for Fisher tests are computed using an asymptotic Chi
     -square distribution. All other tests assume asymptotic normality.




    b. First differences
Exogenous variables: Individual effects
User-specified lags: 4
Newey-West automatic bandwidth selection and Bartlett kernel

                                                              Cross-
Method                            Statistic    Prob.**       sections     Obs
Null: Unit root (assumes common unit root process)
Levin, Lin & Chu t*              -3.73717      0.0001            7        2814

Null: Unit root (assumes individual unit root process)
Im, Pesaran and Shin W-stat         -20.6321       0.0000        7        2814
ADF - Fisher Chi-square              408.668       0.0000        7        2814
PP - Fisher Chi-square               838.939       0.0000        7        2826

** Probabilities for Fisher tests are computed using an asymptotic Chi
     -square distribution. All other tests assume asymptotic normality.
                                                        31


Table 4 - Cointegration Tests: Panel for Seven Emerging Markets, weekly data 2000-2008

Pedroni Residual Cointegration Test
Included observations: 3192
Cross-sections included: 7
Null Hypothesis: No cointegration
Trend assumption: Deterministic intercept and trend
User-specified lag length: 4
Newey-West automatic bandwidth selection and Bartlett kernel

Alternative hypothesis: common AR coefs. (within-dimension)
                                                       Weighted
                             Statistic     Prob.        Statistic       Prob.
Panel v-Statistic            4.348856      0.0000      2.361670         0.0091
Panel rho-Statistic         -60.42462      0.0000     -42.80862         0.0000
Panel PP-Statistic          -26.11857      0.0000     -20.77056         0.0000
Panel ADF-Statistic         -1.520729      0.0642     -1.673731         0.0471

Alternative hypothesis: individual AR coefs. (between-dimension)

                               Statistic    Prob.
Group rho-Statistic           -38.58590     0.0000
Group PP-Statistic            -20.22773     0.0000
Group ADF-Statistic           -1.663894     0.0481


Cross section specific results

Phillips-Peron results (non-parametric)

    Cross ID          AR(1)      Variance      HAC       Bandwidth         Obs
      BRA             0.640      3.019182   5.948539         14.00         439
      CHL             0.600      0.243076   0.396258         11.00         353
      COL             0.734      0.497780   0.667721         11.00         455
     INDO             0.597      0.684649   0.871621          7.00         225
      KOR             0.953      0.001478   0.003783          8.00         213
      MEX             0.648      0.822551   1.213694         10.00         455
      PHL             0.797      0.393689   0.328063          4.00         369

Augmented Dickey-Fuller results (parametric)

    Cross ID          AR(1)      Variance         Lag        Max lag       Obs
      BRA             0.871      2.389361           4              --      435
      CHL             0.822      0.197131           4              --      349
      COL             0.869      0.442208           4              --      451
     INDO             0.819      0.599421           4              --      221
      KOR             0.934      0.001004           4              --      209
      MEX             0.826      0.716708           4              --      451
      PHL             0.866      0.370034           4              --      365
                                                        32


Table 5 - Dynamic Panel Estimates: Short Term Interest Rates in Latin America and Asia, weekly data 2000-2008

                                            Eq. 5.1          Eq. 5.2         Eq. 5.3          Eq. 5.4
                                        Latin America         Asia       Latin America         Asia
                                             GLS              GLS            GMM              GMM

 FF_POLICY                                  0.06              0.13            0.03             0.11
                                            (4.33)           (7.09)          (1.98)           (3.49)


 C                                          0.24              0.10            0.20            -0.06
                                            (3.43)           (1.02)          (2.76)           (-0.40)


 EMBI                                       0.08              0.07
                                            (6.91)           (2.80)


 LOG(EMBI)                                                                    0.17             0.36
                                                                             (2.51)           (2.81)


 EXP_DEV_AN                                 0.03              0.07            0.01             0.03
                                            (4.22)           (8.43)          (0.80)           (2.33)


 R_90D(-1)                                  -0.09            -0.13           -0.05            -0.09
                                            (-7.93)          (-9.82)         (-4.14)          (-4.79)


 D(R_90D(-1))                               -0.37             0.02           -0.39             0.03
                                           (-16.73)          (0.48)          (-17.09)         (0.88)


 DLOG(WTI_SPOT)                             0.02              0.33            0.44             1.34
                                            (0.04)           (0.99)          (0.33)           (1.29)


 DLOG(COMM_AGRIC)                           -0.64            -0.08           -0.64            -0.62
                                            (-0.77)          (-0.13)         (-1.62)          (-0.83)


 Periods included:                          452               367             452              366

 Cross-sections included:                     4                3               4                3
 Total panel (unbalanced) obs.:             1688              799            1688              798
 Cross-section fixed (dummy
                                              x                x                x               x
 variables)
 R-squared                                   0.2              0.1             0.2              0.1
 F-statistic                                42.1              12.2
 Prob(F-statistic)                            0                0
 Mean dependent var                        -0.011            -0.002          -0.011           -0.002
 Durbin-Watson stat                         2.16              1.91            2.17             1.99
 Instrument Rank                                                               26               25
 J-statistic                                                                  22.6             18.0
 Note: t-statistics in parenthesis.
                                                        33


Table 6 - “Twist” Policies by the Fed and Short Term Interest Rates in Latin America and Asia, weekly data 2000-
2008*

                                            Eq. 6.1          Eq.6.2
                                        Latin America         Asia

 FF_POLICY                                   0.06             0.11
                                             (2.90)           (3.49)


 C                                           0.54             -0.06
                                             (3.09)           (-0.25)


 LOG(EMBI)                                   0.23              0.36
                                             (3.17)           (2.63)


 EXP_DEV_AN                                  0.01             0.03
                                             (1.43)           (2.32)


 R_90D(-1)                                   -0.06            -0.09
                                            (-4.57)           (-4.71)


 D(R_90D(-1))                                -0.39            0.03
                                            (-17.06)          (0.88)


 UST_10YR                                    -0.10            0.002
                                            (-2.13)           (0.04)


 DLOG(WTI_SPOT(-1))                          0.83             1.34
                                             (0.63)           (1.29)


 DLOG(COMM_AGRIC(-1))                        -1.76            -0.61
                                            (-1.79)           (-0.82)


 Method: Panel GMM                           Yes               Yes

 Total panel (unbalanced) obs.:              1688              798
 Cross-section fixed (dummy
                                             Yes               Yes
 variables)
 R-squared                                   0.19             0.09
 Mean dependent var                         -0.011           -0.002
 Durbin-Watson stat                          2.17             1.99
 Instrument Rank                              26               25
 J-statistic                                 18.12            18.00
 Note: t-statistics in parenthesis.
* The data used in these estimates correspond to end-of-week interest rates. See the text for a discussion on
timing.
                                                        34


Table 7 - Capital Controls and the Transmission of Fed Poly Action to Latin America and Asia, weekly data 2000-
2008

                                              Eq. 7.1               Eq. 7.2        Eq. 7.3         Eq. 7.4
                                       Latin America GMM      Latin America GLS   Asia GMM        Asia GLS

 FF_POLICY                                     .88                  0.13             0.41           0.27
                                              (1.66)                (1.80)           (1.78)        (2.83)


 C                                             3.17                -0.003            -1.03          1.23
                                              (1.38)               (-0.006)          (-1.00)       (2.85)


 LOG(EMBI)                                     1.28                 0.22             2.45           0.99
                                              (1.21)                (1.02)           (-3.97)       (4.05)


 EXP_DEV_AN                                    0.94                 0.14             -0.31          0.04
                                              (1.87)                (2.63)           (-3.49)       (0.95)


 R_90D(-1)                                    -1.17                 -0.19            -0.19          -0.50
                                              (-1.75)               (-2.46)          (-1.49)       (-6.31)


 D(R_90D(-1))                                  0.56                 0.47             0.32           0.14
                                              (2.10)                (2.59)           (1.73)        (0.84)


 FF_POLICY*CAP_CONTROLS                       -0.15                 -0.01            -0.07          -0.04
                                              (-1.57)               (-1.12)          (-1.28)       (-1.57)


 LOG(EMBI)*CAP_CONTROLS                       -0.19                 0.02             -0.52          -0.16
                                              (-0.95)               (0.42)          (-3.53)        (-2.78)


 EXP_DEV_AN*CAP_CONTROLS                      -0.17                 -0.02            0.10           0.01
                                              (-1.86)               (-2.37)          (4.54)        (1.01)


 R_90D(-1)*CAP_CONTROLS                       -0.20                 0.02             -0.00          0.08
                                              (1.64)                (1.47)           (-0.14)       (4.15)


 D(R_90D(-1))*CAP_CONTROLS                    -0.17                 -0.15            -0.08          -0.04
                                              (-3.54)               (-4.70)          (-1.74)       (-0.81)


 CAP_CONTROLS                                 -0.56                 0.04             0.37           -0.20
                                              (-1.25)               (0.38)           (1.51)        (-1.95)

 Total panel (unbalanced) obs.:               1545                  1687              799           799
 Cross-section fixed (dummy
                                               Yes                   Yes              Yes           Yes
 variables)
 R-squared                                     0.10                 0.20             0.05           0.18
 F-statistic                                                        30.43                          13.22
 Prob(F-statistic)                                                    0                              0
 Mean dependent var                           -0.01                 -0.01            -0.00          -0.00
 Durbin-Watson stat                            2.08                 2.17             1.73           1.88
 Instrument Rank                                32                                    31
 J-statistic                                   17.9                                  18.54
 Note: t-statistics in parenthesis.
                                                      35


Table 8 - Granger Causality Tests: Weekly Data for Fed Funds and Chile’s TPM rate, weekly data

A: 2000-2007

Pairwise Granger Causality Tests
Sample: 12/31/1999 6/15/2007 IF CHILE=1
Lags: 12

Null Hypothesis:                                           Obs   F-Statistic    Prob.

FF_POLICY does not Granger Cause TPM_1D                    390    3.38462      0.0001
TPM_1D does not Granger Cause FF_POLICY                           3.33618      0.0001


B: 2000-2008

Pairwise Granger Causality Tests
Sample: 12/31/1999 9/19/2008 IF CHILE=1
Lags: 12

Null Hypothesis:                                           Obs   F-Statistic    Prob.

FF_POLICY does not Granger Cause TPM_1D                    456    1.99616      0.0232
TPM_1D does not Granger Cause FF_POLICY                           2.53588      0.0031
                                                      36


Table 9 - An error correction model for the Fed’s influence on Chile’s monetary policy, weekly data 2000-2008

Dependent Variable: D(TPM_1D) (Chile) – Sample : 12/31/1999 6/15/2007
                                        Eq. 9.1       Eq. 9.2       Eq. 9.3      Eq. 9.4

 FF_POLICY                                0.03         0.03          0.02         0.02
                                         (3.00)        (2.49)       (2.24)        (2.01)


 C                                       -0.25         -0.27        -0.24         -0.20
                                         (-1.34)       (-1.41)      (-1.20)       (-0.94)


 TPM_1D(-1)                              -0.03         -0.02        -0.03         -0.03
                                         (-2.69)       (-2.05)      (-2.23)       (-2.26)


 TIPS_EXP_INF_USA(-1)                     0.10         0.11          0.11         0.10
                                         (1.98)        (2.02)       (1.95)        (1.80)


 LOG(EMBI_LATAM(-1))                      0.03         0.03          0.02         0.01
                                         (0.96)        (0.91)       (0.51)        (0.25)


 ANN_CH_COPPER(-1)                       -0.08         -0.09        -0.09         -0.08
                                         (-1.40)       (-1.52)      (-1.47)       (-1.11)


 ANN_CH_OIL(-1)                                        0.02          0.02         0.03
                                                       (0.49)       (0.50)        (0.58)


 ANN_CH_AG(-1)                                         0.04          0.05         0.05
                                                       (0.42)       (0.59)        (0.59)


 EXP_DEV_AN(-1)                                                      0.01         0.01
                                                                    (1.23)        (1.24)


 DEV_12_MONTH(-1)                                                                 0.09
                                                                                  (0.50)

 Periods included.:                       389           389          389           389
 R-squared                                0.03         0.03          0.04         0.04
 F-statistic                              2.50         1.83          1.79         1.62
 Prob(F-statistic)                        0.03         0.08          0.08         0.11
 Mean dependent var                       0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00
 Durbin-Watson stat                       2.00         2.02          2.00         2.00
 Note: t-statistics in parenthesis.
                                                      37


Table 10 - Allowing for Embi and expected devaluation adjustments, weekly data 2000-2008

                                         Eq. 10.1             Eq. 10.2     Eq. 10.3        Eq. 10.4
                                      Latin America        Latin America
                                                                           Asia GMM        Asia GMM
                                          GMM                  GMM

 FF_POLICY                                 0.05                0.02          0.08            0.03
                                          (2.55)               (1.24)        (2.86)          (2.78)


 LOG(EMBI)                                 0.21                              0.41
                                          (2.99)                             (2.88)


 EXP_DEV_AN                                                    0.01                          0.02
                                                               (0.91)                        (3.30)


 C                                         0.48                0.37          -0.16           0.09
                                          (2.82)               (2.22)       (-0.64)          (0.79)


 R_90D(-1)                                -0.05                -0.03         -0.06           -0.04
                                          (-4.85)             (-3.28)       (-4.49)         (-4.07)


 D(R_90D(-1))                             -0.39                -0.40         0.04            0.02
                                         (-17.38)             (-17.61)       (1.04)          (0.73)


 UST_10YR                                 -0.08                -0.04         0.01            0.01
                                          (-1.79)             (-0.91)        (0.25)          (0.21)


 DLOG(WTI_SPOT(-1))                        0.67                0.27          1.37            0.70
                                          (0.52)               (0.21)        (1.29)          (0.88)


 DLOG(COMM_AGRIC(-1))                     -1.75                -1.64         -0.67           -0.47
                                          (-1.78)             (-1.66)       (-0.87)         (-0.79)

 Total panel (unbalanced) obs.:           1688                 1688          798             1026
 Cross-section fixed (dummy
                                            x                    x             X               X
 variables)
 R-squared                                 0.19                0.18          0.03            0.05
 Mean dependent var                       -0.01                -0.01         -0.00           -0.01
 Durbin-Watson stat                        2.18                2.17          1.98            1.99
 Instrument Rank                            26                  26            25              25
 J-statistic                              20.02               27.80         20.48           25.28
 Note: t-statistics in parenthesis.
                                                       38


Figure 1 - Federal Funds policy rate and 3thre-month certificate of deposit rate in the US: Weekly data, 2000-
2008

7


6


5


4


3


2


1


0
      2000        2001       2002        2003       2004        2005       2006       2007        2008


                                     FF_POLICY               US3MO_CD
                                                                                                        39


Figure 2 - Short term deposit rates in seven emerging markets and Federal Funds’ policy rates: Weekly data,
2000-2008
                                 BRA                                                                         CHL                                                                      COL
 7                                                                   36   14                                                                     7   18                                                                  7

 6                                                                   32   12                                                                     6   16                                                                  6

 5                                                                   28   10                                                                     5   14                                                                  5

 4                                                                   24    8                                                                     4   12                                                                  4

 3                                                                   20    6                                                                     3   10                                                                  3

 2                                                                   16    4                                                                     2    8                                                                  2

 1                                                                   12    2                                                                     1    6                                                                  1

 0                                                                   8     0                                                                     0    4                                                                  0
     2000   2001   2002   2003    2004   2005   2006   2007   2008              2000   2001   2002    2003   2004    2005   2006   2007   2008            2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008


                                 INDO                                                                        KOR                                                                      MEX
20                                                                   7    6.5                                                                    7   28                                                                  7

18                                                                   6    6.0                                                                    6   24                                                                  6

16                                                                   5    5.5                                                                    5   20                                                                  5

14                                                                   4    5.0                                                                    4   16                                                                  4

12                                                                   3    4.5                                                                    3   12                                                                  3

10                                                                   2    4.0                                                                    2    8                                                                  2

 8                                                                   1    3.5                                                                    1    4                                                                  1

 6                                                                   0    3.0                                                                    0    0                                                                  0
     2000   2001   2002   2003    2004   2005   2006   2007   2008              2000   2001   2002    2003   2004    2005   2006   2007   2008            2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008


                                 PHL
35                                                                   7

30                                                                   6

25                                                                   5

20                                                                   4

15                                                                   3

10                                                                   2

 5                                                                   1

 0                                                                   0
     2000   2001   2002   2003    2004   2005   2006   2007   2008


                                                                                                     R_90D          FF_POLICY
                                                       40


Figure 3: Capital Controls Data for Seven Emerging Markets, 2000-2008

600
                                                                               Series: CAP_CONTROLS
                                                                               Sample 12/31/1999 9/19/2008
500
                                                                                  IF SAMPLE=1
                                                                               Observations 3640
400
                                                                               Mean          4.707599
                                                                               Median        4.600000
300
                                                                               Maximum       8.400000
                                                                               Minimum       2.900000
200                                                                            Std. Dev.     1.277331
                                                                               Skewness      1.257444
                                                                               Kurtosis      4.292867
100

                                                                               Jarque-Bera   1212.752
  0                                                                            Probability   0.000000
       3.0   3.5   4.0   4.5   5.0   5.5   6.0   6.5   7.0   7.5   8.0   8.5

Source: These data were constructed by making some adjustments and corrections to the Fraser
Institute’s index on capital mobility. See the text for details.
                                                        41


Figure 4 - Simulated response of deposit interest rates to a 50 basis points Fed Funds hike in Asia and Latin
America

 5.7

 5.6

 5.5

 5.4

 5.3

 5.2                                                                            rt_LATAM 5
                                                                                rt_ASIA 5
 5.1

   5

 4.9

 4.8

 4.7
       31




       91
        1
        6
       11
       16
       21
       26

       36
       41
       46
       51
       56
       61
       66
       71
       76
       81
       86

       96
                                                       42


Figure 5 - Monetary policy interest rates for the U.S. and Chile: Weekly data, 2000-2008

                                           CHL
9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
     2000      2001      2002      2003     2004      2005      2006      2007     2008


                                  TPM_1D           FF_POLICY
                                                        43


Figure 6 - Impulse response function for Mexico’s deposit rates (Shock: Hike in Fed Policy rate by 50 basis points)


                              R_90D_MEXICO
 35

 30

 25

 20

 15                                                                          R_90D_B

 10

   5

   0
       1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                     44


                                            Bibliography

Aizenman, J., Chinn, M., & Ito, H. (2011). Surfing the waves of globalization: Asia and financial
globalization in the context of the trilemma. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies , 25
(3), 290-320.

Binici, M., Hutchison, M., & Schindler, M. (2010). Controlling Capital? Legal Restrictions and the Asset
Composition of International Financial Flows. Journal of International Money and Finance , 29, 666–84.

Chinn, M. D., & Ito, H. (2002). Capital Account Liberalization, Institutions and Financial Development:
Cross Country Evidence. NBER Working Paper No. 8967 .

De Gregorio, J., Edwards, S., & Valdés, R. (2000). Controls on Capital Inflows: Do They Work? Journal of
Development Economics , 63 (1), 59-83.

De Paoli, B. (2009). Monetary policy and welfare in a small open economy. Journal of International
Economics , 77 (1), 11-22.

Dooley, M. P. (1995). A Survey of Academic Literature on Controls over International Capital
Transactions. IMF Working Papers .

Edison, H. J., & Warnock, F. (2003). A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital Controls. Journal of
Empirical Finance , 10, 81-103.

Edwards, S. (2007). Capital controls, capital flow contractions, and macroeconomic vulnerability. Journal
of International Money and Finance , 26 (5), 814-40.

Edwards, S. (1999). How Effective Are Capital Controls. Journal of Economic Perspectives , 13 (4), 65-84.

Edwards, S. (2010). Left behind: Latin America and the false promise of populism. University of Chicago
Press.

Edwards, S., & Khan, M. S. (1986). Interest Rate Determination in Developing Countries: A Conceptual
Framework. NBER Working Papers 1531 .

Edwards, S., & Rigobón, R. (2009). Capital controls on inflows, exchange rate volatility and external
vulnerability. Journal of International Economics , 78 (2), 256–267.

Eichengreen, B. (2002). Capital Account Liberalization: What do the Cross-country Studies tell us? World
Bank Economic Review , 15 (3), 341-365.

Frankel, J. A., Schmukler, S. L., & Serven, L. (2002). Global transmission of interest rates: monetary
independence and currency regime. NBER Working Paper (8828).

Habermeier, K., Kokenyne, A., & Baba, C. (2011). The Effectiveness of Capital Controls and Prudential
Policies in Managing Large Inflows. IMF Staff Discussion Note, International Monetary Fund.
                                                    45


Hausmann, R., Gavin, M., Pages-Serra, C., & Stein, E. (2000). Financial Turmoil and the Choice of
Exchange Rate Regime. In E. Fernandez-Arias, R. Hausmann, I.-A. D. Bank, E. Fernandez-Arias, & R.
Hausmann (Eds.), Wanted: world financial stability (pp. 131-164). Inter-American Development Bank.

Justiniano, A., & Preston, B. (2010). Can structural small open-economy models account for the
influence of foreign disturbances? Journal of International Economics , 81 (1), 61-74.

Lubik, T., & Schorfheide, F. (2006). A Bayesian Look at the New Open Economy Macroeconomics. In M.
Gertler, & K. Rogoff (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, Volume 20. MIT Press.

Miniane, J. (2004). A New Set of Measures on Capital Account Restrictions. IMF Staff Papers , 56, 276–
308.

Miniane, J., & Rogers, J. H. (2007). Capital Controls and the International Transmission of U.S. Money
Shocks. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , 39 (5), 1003-1035.

Monacelli, T. (2005). Monetary policy in a low pass-through environment. Journal of Monetary
Economics , 37 (6), 1047-1066.

Quinn, D. (2003). Capital account liberalization and financial globalization, 1890-1999: a synoptic view.
International Journal of Finance & Economics , 8 (3), 189-204.

Quinn, D. P., Inclan, C., & Toyoda, A. M. (2001). How and where capital account liberalization leads to
economic growth. Political Science ((August)).

Quinn, D. (1997). The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation. American Political
Science Review , 91, 531–551.

Quinn, D., Schindler, M., & Toyoda, A. M. (2011). Assessing Measures of Financial Openness and
Integration. IMF Economic Review , 59 (3), 488–522.

Shambaugh, J. C. (2004). The effect of fixed exchange rates on monetary policy. Quarterly Journal of
Economics , 119 (1), 301–352.

Uribe, M., & Yue, V. (2006). Country spreads and emerging countries: who drives whom? Journal of
International Economics , 69 (1), 6-36.
