                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ON THE LINK BETWEEN THE VOLATILITY AND SKEWNESS OF GROWTH

                                           Geert Bekaert
                                          Alexander Popov

                                        Working Paper 18556
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18556


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




We thank George-Marios Angeletos, Markus Brunnermeier, Francis Diebold, Simon Gilchrist, Francois
Gourio, Bartozs Mackowiak, Kalin Nikolov, and Philippe Weil, as well as seminar participants at
the ECB, for useful discussions. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the European
Central Bank, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Geert Bekaert and Alexander Popov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
On the Link Between the Volatility and Skewness of Growth
Geert Bekaert and Alexander Popov
NBER Working Paper No. 18556
November 2012, Revised December 2013
JEL No. E32,G10,O10

                                                 ABSTRACT

In a sample of 110 countries over the period 1960-2009, we document a positive relation between
the volatility and skewness of growth in the cross-section. The relation holds regardless of initial level
of economic development and of subsequent long-run growth rate. We argue that this novel stylized
fact is related to two distinct phenomena: sudden growth spurts in mostly emerging markets, and rare
and abrupt crises in mostly developed economies. The former phenomenon is driven by industrialization,
macroeconomic stabilization, and the exploitation of natural resources. The latter is consistent with
recent theories of financial frictions. The positive relation between volatility and skewness in the cross-section
is in sharp contrast with a negative relation between the two in panel data with country fixed effects
which is fully driven by business cycle variation in rich countries.


Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu

Alexander Popov
European Central Bank
Alexander.Popov@ecb.int
      I.     Introduction


      This paper documents a novel stylized fact: in a large cross-section of countries, the
volatility and the skewness of GDP growth are positively correlated over the long run. As a
concrete example, countries in the highest decile in terms of volatility1 exhibit an average
skewness over the 1960-2009 period of 1.51, while the lowest volatility decile exhibits an
average skewness of -0.71. The statistical association between volatility and skewness is
significant and robust to the removal of outliers. It is also robust to sample selection; for
example, it holds for the top and bottom quartile of countries both in terms of 1960 per capita
GDP and in terms of subsequent average long-run growth rates.
      This stylized fact regarding the relation between the volatility and skewness of output
growth is not easily reconciled with the predictions of a variety of macro-economic and
development models. For a start, it appears inconsistent with the temporal negative relationship
predicted by the business cycle literature. A large number of papers have empirically established
that business cycles are negatively skewed, with recessions occurring suddenly and being sharp,
whereas booms occur more slowly (see, e.g., Neftci, 1984; Diebold and Rudebusch, 1990;
Hamilton, 1989; Sichel, 1993; and Acemoglu and Scott, 1994). These data features naturally
suggest a temporal negative link between volatility and skewness. Models explaining this type of
behaviour include, for example, Acemoglu and Scott (1997), who relate the business cycle
asymmetry to intertemporal increasing returns to investment, and Zeira (1994), Jovanovic
(2003), and Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006), whose models rely on a learning process
in which either bad signals are more extreme than good signals, or signals are less noisy during
booms. Given the recent interest in differences between business cycles in emerging markets and
developed countries (see e.g. Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007; Garcia-Cicco, Pancrazi, and Uribe,
2010), an interesting question is whether this stylized fact is universal or restricted to the
developed countries for which it has hitherto been documented. We show that in panel data with
country fixed effects, volatility and skewness are indeed temporally negatively correlated.
However, this is fully driven by business cycle variation in industrialized economies. In

1
 While in the empirical tests we employ the natural logarithm of the standard deviation of GDP growth, in the text
we interchangeably refer to the “volatility” of GDP growth.



                                                        1
particular, the relation between volatility and skewness starts to be negative from a GDP per
capita level of $1231 in 2005 dollars, and is only significant for very rich (mostly industrialized
OECD) countries. Hence, development comes with a very unattractive business cycle pattern,
where low growth periods go hand in hand with high real volatility.
         Importantly, business cycle models suggest that the mechanisms which generate business
cycle asymmetry are hardwired in the business cycle itself and do not depend on the size of the
volatility-generating shocks. This also applies to the new generation growth-business cycle
model of Comin and Gertler (2006) which uses technological change to generate medium-
frequency oscillations between periods of robust growth and periods of relative stagnation. In
short, business cycle models do not offer a mechanism for the positive cross-sectional
relationship between volatility and skewness observed in the data.
         The stylized fact is not fully captured in various development and growth models, either.
For example, Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1997) suggest that under-developed countries, likely
prevalent in our sample, are stuck in an equilibrium with high output variability as indivisibilities
in the production process limits the economy’s ability to diversify idiosyncratic risk. Only when
they experience “lucky draws” do they accumulate enough capital to invest in large indivisible
high-growth projects, at which point the economy takes off and volatility declines due to
diversification. Furthermore, Acemoglu et al. (2003) identify institutions as the key determinant
of the mean and variability of the growth process, and suggest that better institutions come with
higher growth, lower volatility, and less severe contractions. This would suggest a negative
cross-sectional relationship between skewness and volatility. However, we show that the positive
cross-sectional relationship we observe holds for all development levels. The recent theoretical
literature that models regime switching as part of a unified growth theory provides a different
endogenous mechanism for a transition from a “Malthusian” equilibrium (low economic growth
and high population growth) to a “Solowian” equilibrium (high economic growth and low
population growth), one based on human capital accumulation (e.g., Galor and Weil, 2000;
Hansen and Prescott, 2002). While these models suggest that at each point in time, a number of
countries could be operating under both regimes,2 they are primarily concerned with the rate of

2
    See Bloom, David, and Jaypee (2003) and Owen, Videras, and David (2009) for empirical support.



                                                         2
growth at different stages of development and do not offer explicit predictions for the
relationship between volatility and skewness.
      The stylized fact can also be viewed as puzzling from the point of view of traditional
models of financial frictions. For example, Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Bernanke, Gertler, and
Gilchrist (1996), and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) present models where microeconomic credit
constraints amplify (exogenous) technological shocks. In a world without financial
intermediation, volatility is low and growth skewness is zero as no amplification of shocks takes
place in the absence of leverage. Financial development initially increases volatility by
alleviating the capacity constraints on investment induced by positive technological shocks. As
the financial system develops further, the capacity constraint binds only for large negative
shocks, and as a result, volatility is reduced and the growth process becomes more negatively
skewed.3 Finally, at very high (infinite) levels of financial development the capacity constraint
never binds, reducing volatility further and increasing the skewness of growth. These models of
financial frictions are consistent with a temporally negative relationship between volatility and
skewness. However, they seem hard to reconcile with a cross-sectional pattern where the lowest-
volatility countries are the most negatively skewed and where a number of countries are
characterized by very volatile, very positively skewed growth.
      Our short overview strongly suggests that the stylized facts established in this article may
be particularly helpful to distinguish different models of growth, development, and business
cycles. Without formally testing the plethora of models generating predictions for the trade-off
between volatility and skewness, we do offer a simple reconciliation of the empirical facts. First,
for developed countries with sophisticated financial sectors, a positive link between volatility
and skewness may make economic sense from the perspective of models developed to explain
the recent global financial crisis. Following the Great Moderation, characterized by steady
growth and low output volatility, many countries experienced a deep financial crisis, leading to a
sharp decline in output growth. The economics profession has responded by building new
macroeconomic models of endogenous risk with financial frictions. A prime example in this
3
  Related to this literature, Ranciere, Tornell, and Westermann (2008) study a model where systemic risk taking in
financially liberalized economies with limited contract enforcement, reduces the effective cost of capital and relaxes
borrowing constraints. This allows greater investment and generates higher long-term growth, but it raises the
probability of a sudden collapse in financial intermediation when a crash occurs.



                                                          3
literature is the model by Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2013).4 Their model generates a
“volatility paradox”, where agents respond to a low volatility environment by over-levering and
creating latent endogenous variability which may then lead to a financial crisis. Conceptually,
this model is reminiscent of the work of Minsky (1986) who contends that during good times
(characterized by high growth and low volatility) speculative euphoria leads to a borrowing
bubble, which leads to a financial crisis and a contraction. In such an environment, there is a
natural cross-sectional positive relationship between lagged volatility and skewness, which may
in turn help explain the long-term positive correlation between skewness and volatility, even
though, contemporaneously, the relationship between volatility and skewness is negative because
of business cycle variation. We document direct empirical evidence of this mechanism for the
most financially developed countries. It is possible then for volatility to affect the skewness of
GDP growth if risk taking increases during periods of low volatility, leading to large
macroeconomic contractions in the future.
     Such evidence alone would not suffice to explain a cross-sectional positive relationship for
our sample of 110 countries most of which are not industrialized economies. Another piece to the
puzzle is the fact that a considerable number of countries experience sudden growth spurts.
These growth spurts generate positive skewness and come hand in hand with large variability of
growth. For these countries, the temporal relationship between volatility and skewness is
consistent with the long-run relationship. A variety of theoretical models of industrialization and
early development relate such growth spurts to a transition from an agriculture-based to a
manufacturing-based economy as happened during the Industrial Revolution (Murphy, Shleifer,
and Vishny, 1991; Acemoglu and Zilibotti, 1997). While in our data over the 1960-2009 period
there are a number of cases of growth spurts due to industrialization, most of the large and abrupt
expansions we observe are associated with more prosaic developments, like the discovery and
subsequent exploitation of natural resources, or post-war economic recovery.
     The paper proceeds as follows. In Section II we study the cross-sectional relationship
between volatility and skewness, whereas Section III focuses on panel data. In Section IV, we


4
  Mendoza (2010), He and Krishnamurthy (2012), and Dewachter and Wouters (2012) also present models of
endogenous risk in a macroeconomic context.



                                                  4
dig deeper into development and financial frictions models that may help explain our results.
Section V provides concluding remarks.

      II.   The Cross- Sectional Relationship Between Volatility and Skewness

     We first study the cross-sectional relationship between the long-term volatility and long-
term skewness of output growth. To compute the two measures of output risk, we use data on
annual output growth from the Penn World Table (PWT) 7.0 for 110 countries that have data on
GDP going back at least to 1960.
     Volatility over the full sample ranges between 1.9% for Norway and 24.2% for Equatorial
Guinea. The cross-sectional distribution of volatility is very right-skewed, which is not
surprising. In fact, the skewness of volatility estimates is well documented in the statistics
literature and it is well-known that log-volatility shows a more normal distribution (see
Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold and Labys, 2003). To avoid that outliers drive the results, we use
the log of volatility throughout our empirical analysis. Figure 1 plots skewness versus log-
volatility for the 110-country sample and a strong positive relationship is readily apparent.
     Table 1, column (1) reports the cross-sectional relationship between the skewness and the
natural logarithm of the standard deviation of GDP growth, calculated over the 1960-2009
period, for the 110 countries in the sample. The estimate of the coefficient in this bivariate
regression is 1.022% and it is significant at the 1% statistical level. The R-squared of the
regression implies that variation in log volatility explains a quarter of the variation in skewness
in the cross-section.
     We next wish to establish whether this result is driven by a particular set of countries, or by
a particular time period. Columns (2) and (3) examine whether the relationship is a “rich or poor
country story.” Interestingly, we find that the relationship holds strongly and in a statistically
significant manner in both the lowest and the highest quartile of countries in terms of initial GDP
per capita. Nevertheless, the OLS estimate is almost twice larger for the poorest quartile of
countries relative to the richest quartile of countries, and the R-squared of the regression is 0.42
relative to 0.17. The combined evidence suggests that the positive association between volatility




                                                 5
and skewness is stronger for developing countries, but it is not a feature exclusive to developing
countries.
     We next split the sample along the growth dimension. We run the main regression on the
countries in the bottom quartile (column (4)) and in the top quartile (column (5)) of the
distribution of average growth over the 1960-2009 period. We thus juxtapose the 28 slowest
growing countries (with an average growth rate of 0.4% over the 50-year period) with the 28
fastest growing countries (with an average growth rate of 4.2%). Strikingly, in both cases the
coefficient of the OLS regression has almost the exact same magnitude. The combined evidence
in columns (2)-(5) thus suggests that our main result is not fully explained by the fact that growth
rates are positively skewed in poor countries, generating a “high growth rate-high volatility”
pattern. Higher volatility is associated with higher skewness at all stages of development and at
all levels of growth.
     In columns (6) and (7), we split the sample period in two and re-estimate the cross-
sectional relationship between the skewness and volatility of GDP growth over 1960-1984 and
1985-2009, respectively. The cut-off year corresponds to the beginning of the Great Moderation
(Stock and Watson, 2002), although the second period includes the 2008-09 global financial
crisis. The evidence suggests that the positive association between volatility and skewness is
independent of the period over which the two are measured. However, the relationship is
economically stronger in the post-1984 period, suggesting that GDP growth is more negatively
skewed in a low-volatility environment.
     Our results are reminiscent of but different from Ramey and Ramey (1995) who established
that there was a negative trade-off between output growth and volatility. Interestingly, given the
usual utility functions economic agents are endowed with, their stylized fact strongly suggests
high volatility is invariably welfare reducing. Our results, in contrast, suggest that, holding
average growth constant, there may be a true choice between high volatility-high skewness
outcomes and low volatility-low skewness outcomes.
     In Table 2, we subject our main stylized fact to a number of data robustness check. First,
we account for the fact that the annual data we are using may not capture properly business cycle
dynamics. In particular, the bust phase may be sharper in annual data. This may systematically



                                                 6
bias the results in favour of finding a positive correlation between volatility and skewness if the
busts are sharper in low-volatility countries. We download data on 33 OECD countries from the
STAN Dataset for Industrial Analysis, and re-run our main specification. Column (1) indicates
that the relationship we have uncovered is not due to using less granular data.5
      Next, we account for the fact that different updates of the Penn World Table can contain
different real GDP growth series for the same country, despite being derived from similar
underlying data and using almost identical methodologies.6 In some cases, there can be large
differences. For example, according to the 7.0 update that we are using throughout the paper,
Guinea-Bissau recorded a GDP growth rate of 86% in 2005, but according to the 7.1 update the
country grew by 2% in 2005. While such differences do not appear to be systematic, we repeat
the main exercise with data from PWT 7.1. Column (2) indicates that our main result is robust to
this alternative update of PWT. The same is true in column (3) where we calculate volatility and
skewness of GDP growth using PWT 7.0, but we use only 50% of the countries for which the
measure of skewness deviates the least from one version of the Penn Tables to the other.
      Finally, the positive association between the volatility and skewness of GDP growth
continues to be statistically and economically significant when we use entirely different data
sources on GDP growth, such as the World Development Indicators (column (4)) and the
International Financial Statistics of the IMF (column (5)).


       III.   Volatility and Skewness: Fixed Effects Panel Estimates


      We now exploit the panel nature of our cross-country dataset. To that end, we calculate
volatility and skewness over reasonably long non-overlapping periods. This allows us to control
for observable time-varying country-specific effects in a model that includes both time- and
country-fixed effects. Specifically, we introduce the following econometric framework:



5
  Our results are therefore difficult to reconcile with the reported results in Ordonez (2013). His suggestion that high
income countries have more positively skewed output growth than poorer countries is not consistent with either
quarterly or annual data.
6
  Johnson, Larson, Papageorgiou, and Subramanian (2009) document how the variability of the GDP growth data in
different versions of PWT matters for the cross-country growth literature.



                                                           7
                                  Skewit  1  1 Ln( St.dev.)it  X it  i  t   it


where for each variable we compute its average value over each 5-year period for each country i,
yielding a panel of 1110 observations. X it is a set of time-varying country-specific control

variables to be specified below;  i is a matrix of country fixed effects; and t is a matrix of time
fixed effects.
      In Table 3, we start with the simplest possible panel regression in which the log standard
deviation of growth is the only regressor and there are country (column (1)) and both country and
time (column (2)) fixed effects. In addition to that, we control for 1-period lagged skewness
(column (3)). Volatility now exerts a negative effect on skewness and this effect is significant at
the 10% level. We confirm this with quarterly data in column (4), for a smaller sub-sample of
(mostly OECD) countries. Here, we have once again calculated the standard deviation and the
skewness of growth over 5-year periods, which in this case yields 20 observations per period.
      In columns (5) and (6), analogous to the cross-sectional regression, we split the sample
based on initial GDP per capita. We find that the negative effect is entirely driven by the richer
countries, confirming the result from column (4). This raises the question, at what particular
level of development the negative skewness-volatility relationship becomes apparent. Column
(7) reports the results of a regression where we include the natural logarithm of beginning-of-
period GDP per capita, by itself and interacted with volatility. The coefficient on volatility itself
is now significantly positive but the interaction effect is statistically significantly negative. We
find that the coefficient on volatility turns negative at a per capita GDP level of $1231 (in 2005
dollars), which is at the 28th percentile of the GDP per capita distribution. Rich countries,
controlling for volatility, have significantly lower skewness than poor countries.7


      III.A. Recessions and crises


7
 This evidence is inconsistent with the predictions laid out in a recent paper by Ordonez (2013). He uses a learning
model with endogenous flow of information to argue that financial frictions delay the economy’s recovery after the
bust phase. Using quarterly data on (at most) 52 countries, he shows that the skewness of output growth is more
negative in less developed economies, a pattern opposite to what we observe in annual data on 110 countries.




                                                         8
     This evidence has important implications for the calibration of various business cycle
models, especially in emerging markets. Kydland and Zarazaga (2002) and Aguiar and Gopinath
(2007), among others, have suggested that a Real Business Cycle (RBC) model driven by
permanent shocks to productivity can replicate satisfactorily business cycles in developing
countries, in particular the behaviour of output and consumption volatility. Our evidence
suggests that in modelling business cycles in emerging markets, it is important to provide
mechanisms matching higher moments too. In particular, a calibration of RBC models in
emerging markets should be simultaneously mindful of the positive relation between volatility
and skewness over the long-run and of the lack of a negative short-run relation between the
second and third moment of output growth, which is nonetheless prevalent in developed
economies.
     What can explain such a “development dependent” relationship between skewness and
volatility? We examine a number of potential channels in Table 4 and discuss them in turn. The
first possibility is simply the asymmetric business cycle variation discussed before when growth
slowdowns or negative growth coincide with high volatility. Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) argue
that in emerging markets trend growth dominates cyclical growth which could explain the lack of
a strong negative relationship for less developed countries. However, Garcia-Cicco, Pancrazi,
and Uribe (2010) now dispute the conclusions in Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) by showing that an
RBC model driven by permanent and transitory productivity shocks captures poorly business
cycle dynamics in two emerging markets, Argentina and Mexico, over 1900-2005. An even
simpler explanation is that crises cause both volatility to increase and skewness to decrease
simultaneously. However, it would be somewhat surprising that developed countries experience
more and more severe crises than do emerging markets. To examine these two hypotheses, we
must measure “crises” and “recessions.” To define a recession, we set a dummy variable equal to
1 if the country experiences negative annual growth at any point during each 5-year period, and
include it in the regression alongside its interaction with the log of the standard deviation of
growth over each 5-year cycle (column (1)). The coefficient on volatility duly turns positive,
whereas the coefficients on the recession dummy and on its interaction with volatility are




                                               9
negative and statistically significant. Hence, the negative association between volatility and
skewness in the full sample is indeed potentially driven by business cycle mechanisms.


     III.B. Banking crises and financial development


     Next, we use data from Laeven and Valencia (2010) to define a dummy equal to 1 if the
economy is experiencing a systemic banking crisis at any point during each 5-year period, and
include it in the regression together with its interaction with volatility (column (2)). The
coefficients on the variable and on the interaction are negative but (marginally) insignificant,
implying that banking crises do not do fully explain the association between volatility and
skewness in the full sample.
     Next, we test for the effect of financial development on the trade-off between volatility and
skewness. In the Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) model of financial frictions, borrowing capacity is a
function of the firm’s net worth and of the state of financial development. Because net worth
fluctuates over the business cycle, real shocks are amplified when the collateral constraint binds,
and whether it does depends on the state of financial intermediation. This model yields three
distinct regimes. For very low levels of financial intermediation, the economy is in autarky as no
borrowing takes place. Because of the absence of leverage, there is no amplification of shocks
and as a result, the growth process is symmetric and characterized by low volatility. Away from
autarky, financial development exerts a non-linear effect on volatility and on skewness. As
financial markets develop initially, economic agents start accumulating leverage. In this case, the
collateral constraint is frequently binding, leading to an amplification of net worth fluctuations
which is manifested in higher output volatility. The more developed the financial system is, the
less frequently the collateral constraint binds. Collateral amplification takes place only when the
negative shocks are sufficiently large, and so the economy is characterized by low volatility and
by negative skewness. This model has a hard time explaining our cross-sectional evidence where
output growth in the highest-volatility countries is very positively skewed. However, as long as
no country in the sample is perfectly financially developed (i.e., the capacity constraint still binds
on the downside), the collateral amplification mechanism can explain the negative temporal



                                                 10
correlation between volatility and skewness in the richest countries. We test this story by
including the ratio of private credit to GDP from Beck et al. (2010), on its own and in interaction
with volatility. Column (3) confirms that more financially developed economies have more
negatively skewed business cycles.8 The relationship between volatility and skewness becomes
negative beyond a Private credit / GDP threshold of 0.14 (the 27th percentile of the sample
distribution), suggesting that the negative association between volatility and skewness
documented in Table 2 is driven by business cycle dynamics in relatively financially developed
countries.


         III.C. Trade


         Next, we investigate the effect of trade openness. Economies more open to trade are in
theory more volatile because they are exposed to terms-of-trade risk (e.g., Rodrik, 1998; Epifani
and Gancia, 2009). We include in the regression a dummy variable equal to 1 if the country is
open to trade at the beginning of each 5-period period, and also an interaction of that variable
with 5-year volatility. Data on trade openness come from Wacziarg and Welch (2008). Column
(4) confirms that trade openness does contribute significantly to the negative skewness of GDP
growth. However, the coefficient on the interaction is (marginally) insignificant, suggesting that
openness to trade is not a crucial determinant of the development-dependent temporal negative
relationship between volatility and skewness.
         In column (5), we test for terms-of-trade risk by including the standard deviation of the first
(log) difference of the terms of trade over each respective 5-year period as an independent
variable. We find that terms of trade shocks do not contribute to the positive skewness of growth
rates.


         III.D. Government




8
    We are therefore puzzled by the claims in Ordonez (2013) which appear contrary to our empirical evidence.



                                                          11
     We also explore the role of the government sector. Higher government spending can be
associated with a smoother business-cycle because transitory fluctuations are reduced through
automatic stabilisers or discretionary changes in fiscal policy (e.g., Gali, 1994; Fatas and Mihov,
2006). By making recessions milder, government spending may therefore increase the skewness
of growth. Column (6) suggests that government spending increases the skewness of output
growth (albeit insignificantly so), suggesting a more stable business cycle with less pronounced
busts in countries with high government spending. The coefficient on volatility is significantly
negative but the interaction coefficient with government spending is positive and significant,
suggesting that for countries with low government spending, there is a negative trade-off
between volatility and skewness. The interaction effect implies that the association between
volatility and skewness becomes positive beyond a government spending / GDP threshold of
0.18 (the 88th percentile of the distribution). Because government spending excludes social
security, it turns out that the countries exceeding this threshold are actually mostly developing
countries, not the developed countries with mechanisms in place to mitigate the amplitude of the
business cycle. It is therefore also possible that government spending is simply a reverse
indicator of development, just as private credit to GDP and trade openness may also indirectly
rank countries on development status.


     III.E. Growth spurts


     We now examine the growth spurt mechanism. Various theories provide endogenous
mechanisms for countries to take off and experience growth acceleration after a long period of
underdevelopment characterized by low growth. Some of these theories treat population growth
as fixed (Goodfriend and McDermott, 1995), others propose an explicit mechanism which
considers how population growth and technological growth affect each other (Galor and Weil,
2000; Galor and Moav, 2002). In some models, the economy needs a “lucky draw” to start on an
upward path (Acemoglu and Zilibotti, 1997), and in others, co-ordination is required to achieve
industrialization because no individual sector can break even by industrializing alone (Murphy,
Shleifer, and Vishny, 1989). However, what all these growth theories have in common is a



                                                12
technology-driven transition from a pre-Industrial Revolution equilibrium, characterized by low
GDP growth, to a post-Industrial Revolution equilibrium, characterized by high GDP growth.
These theories have direct implications for our tests: if such growth spurts are large enough (and
thus create volatility), they could induce a large positive temporal correlation between volatility
and skewness. If a sufficient number of countries undergo such episodes, this may account for
the fact that the negative temporal correlation between volatility and skewness that is prevalent
in richer countries is much weaker in the full sample.
      To test this prediction, in column (7) we include a variable capturing whether a country is
experiencing a growth spurt during a particular 5-year period. We define a growth spurt using a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the average growth rate over the 5-year period is more than two
standard deviations higher than the sample average, with this average and standard deviation
measured across all countries and time periods. To make sure that we exclude growth spurts
which are due to an outlier in the data potentially reflecting a data error (like Guinea-Bissau’s
86% growth in 2005 according to PWT 7.0), we also require that during this 5-year period, the
country records during at least two years a growth rate which is at least twice higher than the
sample average. We also include the interaction of this variable with volatility. The evidence
confirms the intuition: while volatility and skewness are negatively temporally correlated in the
full sample, the coefficient on the interaction term implies that they become positively correlated
during periods in which the economy is experiencing a growth spurt. Growth spurts themselves
contribute significantly to the positive skewness.
      Finally, in column (8) we run a horse race where we include all variables9, as well as their
interactions with volatility, simultaneously in the regression. Tellingly, the only effects that
remain significant are those of recessions, private credit / GDP, and growth spurts. This suggests
that business cycle mechanisms in rich countries and growth spurts in developing countries go a
long way in explaining the development-dependent temporal association between volatility and
skewness.10


9
 We exclude the terms-of-trade variable which has too many missing observations.
10
  In an unreported regression, we also include GDP per capita and its interaction with volatility in the horse race.
Both coefficients are insignificant, implying that the development channels we test in Table 4 explain the
development-dependent relationship between volatility and skewness.



                                                        13
     What is the nature of the growth spurts in our dataset? In traditional models of early
growth, take-off is due to the process of industrialization, i.e., the transition from an economy
based on agriculture to one with a diversified fast-growing manufacturing base. These models
are designed to capture the experience of what are now industrialized countries during the 18th
and 19th century (Galor and Weil, 2000), but they also aim to capture post-WWII developments
which are subsumed in our data period, such as the Big Push in Korea during the 1960s and
1970s (Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1989). Table 5 lists the growth spurt episodes in our data,
alongside the reason for the rapid growth. From 23 such episodes, 7 can indeed be classified as
Industrial Revolution-type growth spurts: Hong-Kong in 1960-1964, Japan in 1960-1964, Cyprus
in 1965-1969, Malaysia in 1970-1974, Romania in 1975-1979, Singapore in 1970-1974, and
China in 2005-2009. However, the majority of the remaining episodes (13) are related to the
discovery and exploitation of natural resources (mostly oil) and/or a sudden increase in global
demand for such resources or for agricultural products. Three are related to economic
stabilisation and/or liberalization in the wake of political independence or a war.
     One subtle distinction that we have not made so far is between growth spurts and “growth
miracles”. While the former are periods of fast growth that may nevertheless be short-lived, the
latter are usually understood as sustained periods of economic growth and convergence in per
capita income. To verify the effect of such growth miracles, we also run a regression
(unreported) including growth miracles in the definition of growth spurts. We define “growth
miracles” as country-specific episodes of at least three consecutive five-year periods with annual
growth higher than 0.05 (the 75th percentile of growth rates in the full sample), and assign a
value of 1 to such episodes. Using this criterion, we add Korea and Taiwan to the sample of
growth spurt countries, resulting in the inclusion of all four “Asian tigers”. The resulting sample
of 21 countries also subsumes the sub-sample of countries which experienced a convergence in
per capita income over the sample period: Botswana and Equatorial Guinea (which moved from
the bottom quartile to the third quartile of per capita GDP) and Korea and Taiwan (which moved
from the bottom quartile to the third quartile of per capita GDP). The main result is robust to this
alternative definition of growth spurt episodes.




                                                   14
      IV.   The Volatility Paradox: Does Low Volatility Breed Negative Skewness?


      We are still left with a puzzle. In the cross-section, there is a strong positive association
between the volatility and skewness of growth. In panel data, the relationship is overall negative,
but becomes positive for less developed countries. We documented that asymmetric business
cycles explain the negative coefficient for developed countries. We also showed that growth
spurts in developing countries can explain a temporal positive correlation between volatility and
skewness. How can such patterns lead to the strong positive cross-sectional relationship
documented in Table 1 for all stages of development? Growth spurts explain the positive
relationship in the bottom quartile of countries in terms of GDP per capita. However, the
evidence we have presented does not reconcile the strong negative temporal association between
volatility and skewness with the strong positive long-term association between the two in the top
echelon of countries in terms of per capita wealth (Table 1, column (3)), especially after 1984
(the year of the commonly accepted start of the Great Moderation). If anything, rich countries
with deeper recessions should have a higher long-term volatility than rich countries with less
deep recessions, inducing a negative cross-sectional variation between long-run volatility and
long-run skewness. At the same time, however, some rich countries have experienced large
macroeconomic contractions because they had low volatility for too long, which led to over-
leveraging and a sharp financial crisis. This is a temporal but not a contemporaneous relation
between low volatility and negative skewness that can help explain the positive long-run
association between the two in the cross-section. By populating the high and low quadrant of the
cross-sectional distribution of volatility correctly, the cross-sectional relationship becomes
strongly positive. We explore this “story” now in more detail.
     A narrative going back to Minsky (1986) suggests that good (high-growth, low-volatility)
times give rise to speculative investor euphoria, and soon thereafter debts exceed what borrowers
can pay off from their incoming revenues, which in turn leads to a financial crisis. As a result of
the collapse of the speculative borrowing bubble, investors – and especially banks – reduce
credit availability, even to companies that can afford to borrow, and the economy subsequently
contracts. This narrative suggests that past volatility and future skewness can correlate positively.



                                                 15
Building on similar models by Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist
(1996), and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2013) formalize this story
through a mechanism in which agents react to an exogenous decline in macroeconomic risk by
accumulating higher leverage. As a result, a low exogenous risk environment is conducive to a
greater build-up of systemic risk. In this setting, instability is higher when aggregate risk is low,
implying that a period of low volatility should be followed by a sharp crisis (a period of negative
skewness), especially in economies whose financial markets are developed enough as to enable a
build-up of leverage beyond the critical threshold. If reaching particular low levels of volatility
was associated with an increased propensity for large, abrupt, and rare macroeconomic
contractions in the future, this could explain a positive link between volatility and skewness at
high levels of financial development.
     In Table 6, we test these implications of the Brunnermeier-Sannikov model in a number of
ways. First, we regress the skewness of GDP growth onto the lagged standard deviation of GDP
growth and on lagged private credit / GDP, plus the interaction between the two. In the full
sample, not surprisingly, we do not find any statistically significant coefficient. The
Brunnermeier–Sannikov model is only relevant for economies that have sufficiently developed
financial sectors. In the second column, we focus on the top tertile of the sample in terms of
average private credit / GDP over the 1960-2009 period. Now all three coefficients are
significant at a minimum at the 10% level. At relatively low levels of financial development, low
past volatility is still negatively associated with future skewness; however, at private credit /
GDP levels of more than 1.05, the relationship turns positive. While the threshold may seem
somewhat high, there are 23 countries in the sample that experience private credit / GDP levels
beyond that threshold during at least one 5-year period. These regressions also include country
and time fixed effects and the controls used in Table 4. These tests thus provide strong evidence
that periods of low volatility may be causally linked to future periods of crises (negative
skewness), especially for countries in later stages of financial development.
     In the next two columns, we test an alternative specification. In particular, we define a “low
volatility duration” regime, in the following way. We create a variable equal to 1 if the country is
experiencing a 5-year GDP growth volatility of less than 0.013 (the bottom 10th percentile of the



                                                 16
overall sample distribution of 5-year volatility). If volatility was also less than 0.013 in the
previous period, we give the variable a value of 1.75 (1 + 0.75), and a value of 2.31 (1.75 + .752)
if two periods ago volatility was also less than 0.013, and so on. As a consequence, we over-
weight longer duration low volatility regimes, decaying the effect by 0.75 per 5 year block.11
Then we interact this variable with private credit / GDP and replicate the regression reported in
the first two columns where instead of volatility we employ this new “low volatility duration”
indicator. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 indicate that while the association between volatility
and skewness does not depend on financial development in the full sample, it does, and
significantly so, in the set of countries in the top tertile of the sample in terms of average private
credit / GDP over 1960-2009. The magnitude of the coefficients implies that while prolonged
periods of low volatility are positively associated with GDP growth skewness, the relation turns
negative at private credit / GDP levels of more than 0.98. We note that 26 countries in our
sample experienced at least one 5-year period during which private credit / GDP was beyond that
threshold. In 12 of these, the combination of a period of low volatility and over-the-threshold
levels of domestic credit was followed by a systemic banking crisis, as defined by Laeven and
Valencia (2010).12
      Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the two main mechanisms which are at play in the cross-section in
the long run. The evolution of GDP growth in Equatorial Guinea (Figure 2) is marked by the
discovery of large oil fields in 1996. As a result of their subsequent exploration, Equatorial
Guinea experienced a rapid growth spurt; for example, its GDP tripled between 1996 and 1998.
This development is mapped into the highest growth volatility over 1960-2009 in our sample,
0.242, as well as the third highest skewness, 2.676, although prior to 1996 the country’s
economy was characterized by a symmetric and relatively steady (low) growth process.
      At the opposite end of the development cycle is the UK (Figure 3). Characterized by a low-
volatility growth all the way up to the recent crisis, its economy experienced a very deep
contraction in 2009 following the banking crisis of 2007-08. The resulting skewness of -1.176 is


11
  The results are robust to alternative weighting schemes.
12
  These countries are: Austria (2008-), Denmark (2008-), France (1998), Japan (1997-1998 and 2008-) Malaysia
(1997-1999), Netherlands (2008-), Portugal (2008-), Spain (2008-), Sweden (1991-1995 and 2008-), Switzerland
(2008-), the United Kingdom (2008-), and the United States (2008-).



                                                    17
one of the lowest in the cross-section, despite the fact that UK’s growth volatility over 1960-
2009 is the fourth lowest at 0.020.


      V.   Conclusion

     In a sample of 110 countries during the 1960-2009 period, volatility and skewness are
temporally negatively correlated in panel data with country fixed effects, but positively
correlated in the cross-section. While the former fact is consistent with rich countries’ business
cycles where volatility is high during recessions, the latter fact is novel and somewhat puzzling.
For example, in a number of business cycle theories the skewness of GDP growth is hardwired in
the business cycle due to learning asymmetries and so is orthogonal to the standard deviation of
the distribution of real shocks (e.g., Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp, 2006). Theories of early
development and industrialization (e.g., Acemoglu and Zilibotti, 1997) do not fully explain the
prevalence of low-volatility low-skewness countries in the sample, and financial accelerator-type
theories (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler, 1989; Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997) have no mechanism for
generating a high-volatility positive-skewness growth profile.
     We argue that there are two main forces at play in the cross-section. First, a number of
developing countries experience abrupt economic expansions, which can be short-lived (growth
spurts) or sustained (“growth miracles”). While some are related to industrialization, most are the
outcome of the discovery and exploitation of natural resources, and others are due to
macroeconomic stabilisation following political conflict. Second, a number of low-volatility
countries experience systemic financial crises followed by large contractions, consistent with the
mechanism in Minsky (1986) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2013). While such countries
experience the highest volatility during the contractions (explaining the temporally negative
association between volatility and skewness), the relative magnitude of the contraction is
inversely related to the preceding long-term volatility. These two phenomena jointly explain the
co-existence of high-volatility positive-skewness and of low-volatility negative-skewness
countries in the cross-section. They are illustrated in Figure 4 where the growth spurt countries
occupy the upper right quadrant of the data points, and the financially developed countries that
experience high levels of aggregate private leverage occupy the lower left quadrant.


                                                18
      While we invoke two separate mechanisms to explain the positive correlation between
volatility and skewness in the cross-section, our data contains examples of a single country
subject to both mechanisms in the long run. Figure 5 presents the evolution of GDP growth in
Japan between 1950 and 2009. The first period, between 1951 and 1973, is characterized by high
albeit volatile growth, following rapid industrialization in the wake of WWII. The second period,
between 1975 and 2009, is a period of slower economic growth and lower volatility, especially
after 1991. This same period contains two systemic financial crises, the one following the dual
stock market and real estate boom of the 1980s and the global financial crisis of 2008-09. Thus,
Japan illustrates how a country can in a fairly short time period go from an emerging
industrializing economy characterized by high, volatile, positively-skewed growth process to a
low-growth low-volatility industrialized country with a highly developed financial sector13 that
can accumulate excessive debt and cause a systemic crisis. Recent unified growth models
provide an endogenous mechanism for the transition from pre- to post-industrialization based on
the accumulation of knowledge (Galor and Weil, 2000; Hansen and Prescott, 2002). However,
we are not aware of growth models that also capture the “late” stage of development
characterized by low volatility and occasional severe recessions led by financial crises. Our
evidence calls for theoretical endeavors in this direction.




13
  After Iceland in 2006 and Cyprus in 2009, Japan in 1998 had the highest ratio of private credit to GDP in our
sample, at 2.31.



                                                      19
References

     Acemoglu, D., and A. Scott, 1994. Asymmetries in the cyclical behavior of UK labor
markets. Economic Journal 104, 1302-1323.
     Acemoglu, D., and A. Scott, 1997. Asymmetric business cycles: Theory and time-series
evidence. Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 501-533.
     Acemoglu, D., and F. Zilibotti, 1997. Was Prometheus unbound by chance? Risk,
diversification, and growth. Journal of Political Economy 105, 709-751.
     Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J., and Y. Thaicharoen, 2003. Institutional causes,
macroeconomic symptoms: Volatility, crises and growth. Journal of Monetary Economics 50,
49-123.
     Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath, 2007. Emerging market business cycles: The cycle is the
trend. Journal of Political Economy 115, 69-102.
     Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X., and P. Labys, 2003. Modelling and forecasting
realized volatility. Econometrica 71, 576-625.
     Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and R. Levine, 2010. A new database on financial
development and structure. World Bank Economic Review 14, 597-605.
     Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler, 1989. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations.
American Economic Review 79, 14-31.
     Bernanke, B., Gertler, M., and S. Gilchrist, 1996. The financial accelerator and the flight to
quality. Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 1-15.
     Bloom, D., David, C., and S. Jaypee, 2003. Geography and poverty traps. Journal of
Economic Growth 8, 355-378.
     Brunnermeier, M., and Y. Sannikov, 2013. A macroeconomic model with a financial
sector. American Economic Review, forthcoming.
     Comin, D., and M. Gertler, 2006. Medium-term business cycles. American Economic
Review 96, 523-550.
     Dewachter, H., and R. Wouters, 2012. Endogenous risk in a DSGE model with capital-
constrained financial intermediaries. Mimeo.




                                                 20
       Diebold, F., and G. Rudebusch, 1990. A non-parametric investigation of duration
dependence in the American business cycle. Journal of Political Economy 98, 596-616.
       Epifani, P., and G. Gancia, 2009. Openness, government size, and terms of trade. Review of
Economic Studies 76, 629-668.
       Fatah, A., and I. Mihov, 2006. The macroeconomic effects of fiscal rules in the US states.
Journal of Public Economics 90, 101-117.
       Galor, O., and D. Weil, 2000. Population, technology, and growth: From Malthusian
stagnation to the demographic transition and beyond. American Economic Review 90, 806-828.
       Galor, O., and O. Moav, 2002. Natural selection and the origin of economic growth.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1133-1191.
       Garcia-Cicco, J., Pancrazi, R., and M. Uribe, 2010. Real business cycles in emerging
countries? American Economic Review 100, 2510–2531.
       Gali, J., 1994. Government size and macroeconomic stability. European Economic Review
38, 117-132.
       Goodfriend, M., and J. McDermott, 1995. Early development. American Economic Review
85, 116-133.
       Hamilton, J., 1989. A new approach to the economic analysis of non-stationary time series
and the business cycle. Econometrica 57, 357-384.
       Hansen, G., and E. Prescott, 2002. Malthus to Solow. American Economic Review 92,
1205-1217.
       He, Z., and A. Krishnamurty, 2012. A macroeconomic framework for quantifying systemic
risk. Mimeo.
       Johnson, S., Larson, W., Papageorgiou, C., and A. Subramanian, 2009. Is newer better?
Penn World Table revisions and their impact on growth estimates. NBER Working Paper 15455.
       Jovanovic, B., 2006. Asymmetric cycles. Review of Economic Studies 73, 145-162.
       Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore, 1997. Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy 105, 211-
248.
       Kydland, F., and C. Zarazaga, 2002. Argentina’s lost decade. Review of Economic
Dynamics 5, 152-165.



                                                21
     Laeven, L., and F. Valencia, 2010. Resolution of banking crises: The good, the bad, and the
ugly. IMF working paper 10/146.
     Mendoza, E., 2010. Sudden stops, financial crises, and leverage. American Economic
Review 100, 1941-1966.
     Minsky, H, 1986. Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. New Haven: Yale University Press.
     Murphy, K., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1989. Industrialization and the Big Push. Journal
of Political Economy 97, 1003-1026.
     Neftci, S., 1984. Are economic time series asymmetric over the business cycle? Journal of
Political Economy 92, 307-328.
     Ordonez, G., 2013. The asymmetric effects of financial frictions. Journal of Political
Economy, forthcoming.
     Owen, A., Videras, J., and L. Davis, 2009. Do all countries follow the same growth
process? Journal of Economic Growth 14, 265-286.
     Ramey, G., and V. Ramey, 1995. Cross-country evidence on the link between volatility and
growth. American Economic Review 85, 1138-1151.
     Ranciere, R., A. Tornell, and F. Westermann,        2008. Systemic Crises and Growth.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 359-406.
     Reinhart, C., and K. Rogoff, 2011. From financial crash to debt crisis. American Economic
Review 101, 1676-1706.
     Rodrik, D., 1998. Why do more open economies have bigger governments? Journal of
Political Economy 106, 997-1032.
     Sachs, J., and A. Warner, 1995. Economic reform and the process of global integration.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1-118.
     Sichel, D., 1993. Business cycle asymmetry: a deeper look. Economic Inquiry 31, 224-236.
     Stock, J., and M. Watson, 2002. Has the business cycle changed and why? NBER Chapters,
in: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 17, 159-230.
     Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and L. Veldkamp, 2006. Learning asymmetries in real business
cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 753-772.




                                              22
     Wacziarg, R., and K. Welch, 2008. Trade liberalization and growth: New evidence. World
Bank Economic Review 22, 187-231.
     Welch, I., 1992. Sequential sales, learning, and cascades. Journal of Finance 47, 695-732
     Zeira, J., 1994. Informational cycles. Review of Economic Studies 61, 31-44.




                                              23
        Figure 1 - Skewness of Output Growth against Log Standard Deviation of Output Growth,
                                       110 Countries, 1960-2009


                   4
Skewness of output growth, 1960-2009
          0        -2     2




                                       -4    -3.5          -3             -2.5          -2       -1.5
                                            Log standard deviation of output growth, 1960-2009




                                                               24
                               Figure 2 - Output Growth, Equatorial Guinea

                             Growth = 0.098; St. dev. = 0.242; Skewness = 2.676


1.4                                                      Equatorial Guinea

1.2

  1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

  0
  61

         64

                67

                       70

                              73

                                     76

                                            79

                                                   82

                                                          85

                                                                 88

                                                                        91

                                                                               94

                                                                                      97

                                                                                             00

                                                                                                    03

                                                                                                           06

                                                                                                                  09
-0.2
19

       19

              19

                     19

                            19

                                   19

                                          19

                                                 19

                                                        19

                                                               19

                                                                      19

                                                                             19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                           20

                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                20
-0.4




               Kernel distribution of real GDP growth, 1960-2009
 3
 2
 1
 0




       -.5                           0                         .5                                  1                   1.5
                                                        Equatorial Guinea
       kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0529




                                                                25
                                    Figure 3 - Output Growth, United Kingdom

                             Growth = 0.008; St. dev. = 0.020; Skewness = -1.176


 0.1
                                                          United Kingdom
0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

   0
   60

          63

                 66

                        69

                               72

                                      75

                                             78

                                                    81

                                                           84

                                                                  87

                                                                         90

                                                                                93

                                                                                       96

                                                                                              99

                                                                                                     02

                                                                                                            05

                                                                                                                   08
-0.02
 19

        19

               19

                      19

                             19

                                    19

                                           19

                                                  19

                                                         19

                                                                19

                                                                       19

                                                                              19

                                                                                     19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                 20
-0.04

-0.06

-0.08

 -0.1




               Kernel distribution of real GDP growth, 1960-2009
 30
 20
 10
 0




        -.1                          -.05                        0                                  .05                 .1
                                                          United Kingdom
        kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0057




                                                                 26
                                          Figure 4 - Low Volatility Bank Crisis Countries and Growth Spurt Countries



                                      4
 Skewness of output growth, 1960-2009
-2           0           2




                                          -4             -3.5          -3            -2.5           -2                 -1.5
                                                        Log standard deviation of output growth, 1960-2009

                                               Low-volatility bank crisis countries              Growth spurt countries
                                               Middle countries                                  Fitted values




                                                                             27
Figure 5 – Output Growth, Japan




              28
    Table 1 –The Skewness of GDP Growth and the Natural Logarithm of the Standard Deviation of GDP Growth: Cross-Sectional Results

                                                1st quartile, initial   4th quartile, initial   1st quartile,   4th quartile,
                                Full sample        development             development            growth           growth       1960-1984   1985-2009
                                     (1)                (2)                     (3)                  (4)             (5)           (6)         (7)
 Log (St. dev. GDP growth)          1.022***           1.398***            0.684**            1.075***         1.104***        0.366**          1.104***
                                    (0.167)            (0.307)             (0.266)            (0.323)          (0.163)         (0.142)          (0.163)
  Observations                        110                28                   28                  28              28              110              110
  R-squared                          0.25               0.42                 0.17                0.20            0.30            0.06             0.30
Notes: The skewness and the standard deviation of GDP growth are calculated for all countries in the sample for the 1960-2009 period (column (1)-(5)),
for the 1960-1984 period (column (6)), and for the 1985-2009 period (column (7)). Data on GDP growth from the 7.0 update of the Penn World Table are
used. Initial development quartiles are determined based on GDP per capita in 1960. Growth quartiles are determined based on average GDP growth over
the 1960-2009 period. Standard errors are provided in parentheses. *** indicates a p-value less than 0.01, ** indicates a p-value less than 0.05.




                                                                             29
    Table 2 –The Skewness of GDP Growth and the Natural Logarithm of the Standard Deviation of
                 GDP Growth: Cross-Sectional Results from Alternative Data Sources

                               STAN quarterly                       PWT 7.0 and
                                   data           PWT 7.1 data        7.1 data        WDI data         IFS data
                                    (1)              (2)                 (3)            (4)              (5)
 Log (St. dev. GDP growth)           0.864**        0.803***          0.797***         0.688***        0.522***
                                     (0.428)        (0.178)           (0.221)          (0.221)         (0.148)
  Observations                         33               110               55              89              142
  R-squared                           0.12              0.16             0.18            0.09            0.08
Notes: The skewness and the standard deviation of GDP growth are calculated for all countries in the sample
for the 1960-2009 period. In column (1), quarterly data on GDP growth from the STAN Dataset on Industrial
Analysis are used to calculate long-run volatility and skewness. In column (2), data on GDP growth are from
the 7.1 update of the Penn World Table. In column (3), data on GDP growth are from the 7.0 update of the
Penn World Tables, and the top 50% of the countries in terms of the difference in skewness between the 7.0
and the 7.1 update are dropped. In column (4), data on GDP growth are from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators. In column (5), data on GDP growth are from the IMF’s International Financial
Statistics. Standard errors are provided in parentheses. *** indicates a p-value less than 0.01, ** indicates a p-
value less than 0.05.




                                                       30
        Table 3 - The Skewness of GDP Growth and the Natural Logarithm of the Standard Deviation of GDP Growth: Panel Regression Results

                                                          Full sample     Full sample     Full sample     Quarterly    1st quartile   4th quartile    Full sample
                                                                                                            data
                                                              (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)
 Log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth)                          -0.059*         -0.058*         -0.064*         -0.276*       0.013         -0.213***       0.512***
                                                           (0.034)         (0.034)         (0.036)         (0.165)       (0.063)       (0.075)         (0.199)
 1-period lagged 5-year GDP                                                                -0.107***
 skewness                                                                                  (0.034)
 Log (GDP per capita)                                                                                                                                   -0.293***
                                                                                                                                                        (0.103)
  Log (5-year output volatility) × Log (GDP per capita)                                                                                                 -0.072***
                                                                                                                                                        (0.025)
  Country dummies                                               Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes             Yes
  Period dummies                                                 No              Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes             Yes
  Observations                                                 1100             1100            990           169         280             280             280
  Countries                                                     110              110            110            33          28              28              28
  R-squared                                                     0.01             0.03           0.03          0.33        0.01            0.20            0.06
Notes: The skewness and the standard deviation of GDP growth are calculated for all countries in the sample for five-year non-overlapping periods over 1960-2009.
Annual data on GDP growth from the 7.0 update of the Penn World Table are used (columns (1)-(3) and columns (5)-(7)). In column (4), quarterly data on GDP
growth from the STAN Dataset on Industrial Analysis are used. GDP per capita refers to the country’s per capita GDP in the beginning of each 5 year period. The
regressions include country and period fixed effects. In columns (5) and (6), quartiles are determined based on GDP per capita in 1960. Standard errors are provided
in parentheses. *** indicates a p-value less than 0.01, * indicates a p-value less than 0.10.




                                                                                31
                 Table 4 - The Skewness of GDP Growth and the Natural Logarithm of the Standard Deviation of GDP Growth:
                                                           Country Heterogeneity
                                                   Banking        Private       Trade      Terms of    Government                Horse
                                      Recession     crisis     credit / GDP liberalization  trade    spending/GDP Growth spurt   race
                                          (1)        (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)         (7)        (8)
Log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth)       0.138**     -0.037       0.049        -0.017       -0.145**    -0.159***     -0.092***    0.147
                                       (0.056)     (0.036)      (0.048)      (0.043)      (0.072)     (0.061)       (0.035)      (0.098)
Recession                              -0.837***                                                                                 -0.843***
                                       (0.241)                                                                                   (0.290)
Banking crisis                                     -0.391                                                                        -0.225
                                                   (0.323)                                                                       (0.333)
Private credit / GDP                                            -1.342***                                                        -0.742**
                                                                (0.334)                                                          (0.356)
Trade liberalization                                                         -0.396*                                             -0.261
                                                                             (0.232)                                             (0.263)
St. dev. (Terms of trade)                                                                 6.021                                  ---------
                                                                                          (3.930)
Government spending / GDP                                                                             2.389                      0.940
                                                                                                      (1.456)                    (1.586)
Growth spurt                                                                                                        1.775***     1.301**
                                                                                                                    (0.504)      (0.528)
Log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth) ×     -0.111*                                                                                   -0.124*
Recession                              (0.064)                                                                                   (0.076)
Log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth) ×                 -0.056                                                                        -0.018
Banking crisis                                     (0.096)                                                                       (0.098)
Log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth) ×                              -0.357***                                                        -0.212**
Private credit/GDP                                              (0.089)                                                          (0.096)
Log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth) ×                                           -0.106                                              -0.023
Trade liberalization                                                         (0.065)                                             (0.072)
Log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth) ×                                                        1.946*                                 ---------
Log (Terms of trade)                                                                      (1.138)
Log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth) ×                                                                    0.907**                    0.426
Government spending/ GDP                                                                              (0.453)                    (0.499)
Log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth) ×                                                                                  0.481**      0.432**
Growth spurt                                                                                                        (0.202)      (0.212)
Country dummies                        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
Period dummies                         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes




                                                                   32
  Observations                                  1100           1100           977           1100            569            1100            1100           977
  R-squared                                     0.05           0.05           0.06          0.05           0.03            0.05            0.09           0.09
Notes: The skewness and the standard deviation of GDP growth are calculated for all countries in the sample for five-year non-overlapping periods over
1960-2009. Data on GDP growth from the 7.0 update of the Penn World Table are used. Recession is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the country
experiences at least 1 year of negative GDP growth during each respective five-year period. Banking crisis is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the country
experiences a systemic banking crisis as defined by Laeven and Valencia (2010) during each respective five-year period. Private credit / GDP is the average
of the ratio of credit to the private sector to GDP during each respective 5-year period. Trade liberalization is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the country
has liberalized trade according to the Wacziarg and Welch (2008) classification at the beginning of each respective five-year period. St. dev. (Terms of trade)
is the standard deviation of the first (log) difference of the terms of trade over each respective 5-year period. Growth spurt is an indicator variable equal to 1
if the country experiences an average growth rate higher than the sample average by two standard deviations or more during each respective five-year period.
The threshold corresponds to an average annual growth of 0.095 over five years. All regressions include country and period fixed effects. Standard errors are
provided in parentheses. *** indicates a p-value less than 0.01, ** indicates a p-value less than 0.05, * indicates a p-value less than 0.10.




                                                                              33
                                                     Table 5 - Growth Spurt Episodes

                                Average annual   GDP skewness,
     Country          Period     GDP growth       1960-2009                                                Event
Botswana            1970-1974       0.194           0.531        In 1966, newly independent Botswana embarks on a program of economic
                                                                 liberalization under Prime Minister (and later President) Khama.
                    1985-1989       0.100            0.531       Diamonds are discovered. Diamonds now constitute 62% of Botswana’s exports.
Chad                2000-2004       0.112            1.132       Oil production starts in 2003. By 2008, oil revenues constitute 41% of GDP.
China               2005-2009       0.097           -1.304       The economy of China growth by more than 11.5% annually between 2005 and 2007,
                                                                 fuelled by strong foreign demand for its exports.
Republic of the     1970-1974       0.103           0.332        Rapid increase in oil production and exports.
Congo               1980-1984       0.097           0.332        Oil production continues to expand. Per capita GDP more than doubles between 1970
                                                                 and 1984.
Cyprus              1965-1969       0.104           -0.283       Rapid transition from agriculture to manufacturing in the wake of gaining
                                                                 independence from Great Britain.
                    1975-1979       0.102           -0.283       The economy recovers after the 1974-1975 war during which per capita GDP declined
                                                                 by 31% in two years.
Equatorial Guinea   1995-1999       0.545           2.676        Discovery and subsequent exploration of large oil reserves. As a result, Equatorial
                    2000-2004       0.266           2.676        Guinea has emerged as the third-largest oil producer in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Gabon               1970-1974       0.113           0.585        Oil was discovered offshore in the early 1970s. At present, the oil sector accounts for
                                                                 50% of GDP and 80% of exports.
Gambia              2005-2009       0.115            1.780       Strong sustained economic growth driven by tourism and agricultural exports.
Hong Kong           1960-1964       0.119            0.505       Hong Kong continues the policy of rapid industrialization embarked upon in the 1950s.
Japan               1960-1964       0.098            0.383       Rapid industrialization, continuing a trend since the early 1950s.
Malawi              1965-1969       0.136            0.726       Rapid economic growth based on the export of agricultural products.
Malaysia            1970-1974       0.099           -0.269       Rapid industrialization from a mining- and agriculture-based economy to a multisector
                                                                 economy
Mauritania          1960-1964       0.126           2.613        Iron mines start operating in 1963.
Morocco             1960-1964       0.109           0.496        The government embarks on a 5-year plan for the development and modernization of
                                                                 the agricultural sector.
Nigeria             1970-1974       0.102           0.369        Rapid expansion of oil production. In 2000, oil and gas exports represent more than
                                                                 98% of export earnings and 83% of government revenues.
Romania             1975-1979       0.096           -0.636       Rapid state-enforced industrialization.
Singapore           1970-1974       0.102           -0.969       Following separation from Malaysia in 1965, the government adopts a pro-foreign
                                                                 investment, export-oriented economic policy combined with investment in strategic
                                                                 government-owned companies.
Trinidad and        2005-2009       0.100           0.216        A global demand-driven boom in the production of oil, petrochemicals, and liquefied
Tobago                                                           natural gas.




                                                                    34
Zambia   2000-2004   0.150   2.780   Substantial growth in copper exports due to rising world prices. At present, copper and
                                     copper products constitutes 69% of Zambia’s exports.




                                        35
    Table 6 - The Skewness of GDP Growth and the Natural Logarithm of the Standard Deviation of
                         GDP Growth: Testing for the “Volatility Paradox”

                                                                               Top 33%                     Top 33%
                                                                 Full sample private credit Full sample private credit
                                                                      (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)
  1-period lagged log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth) × 1-period 0.058             0.201*
  lagged private credit / GDP                                      (0.087)      (0.123)
  1-period lagged log (St. dev. 5-year GDP growth)                 -0.011       -0.211*
                                                                   (0.049)      (0.127)
  Low volatility duration × 1-period lagged                                                   0.049         -0.440**
  private credit / GDP                                                                        (0.146)       (0.210)
  Low volatility duration                                                                     -0.022        0.431**
                                                                                              (0.106)       (0.192)
  1-period lagged private credit / GDP                             0.334        0.957*        0.030         0.211
                                                                   (0.371)      (0.508)       (0.113)       (0.164)
  Country variables                                                                      Yes
  Country dummies                                                                        Yes
  Period dummies                                                                         Yes
  Observations                                                       901          331           977           331
  Countries                                                          108           36           108            36
  R-squared                                                          0.08         0.19          0.07          0.18
Notes: The skewness of GDP growth, the standard deviation of GDP growth, and the ratio of private sector to GDP
are calculated for all countries in the sample for 10 five-year periods over 1960-2009. Low volatility duration refers
to the sum of consecutive periods during which the country experiences volatility of GDP growth lower by two
standard deviations or more than the sample average. The current period is given a weight of 1, the previous period a
weight of 0.75, the one before a weight of 2.31, etc. (see Section IV for details). Data on GDP growth from the 7.0
update of the Penn World Table are used. The regressions include the rest of the explanatory variables from Table 4,
as well as country and period fixed effects. Standard errors are provided in parentheses. ** indicates a p-value less
than 0.05, * indicates a p-value less than 0.10.




                                                      36
                               Appendix 1 - Description of Variables

Variable                         Description
Standard deviation of GDP growth Standard deviation of the growth rate of GDP. Calculated over the
                                 1960-2009 in the cross-section regressions, or over non-overlapping 5-
                                 year periods in the panel regressions. The underlying data on GDP
                                 growth (GRGDPCH) come from the World Penn Tables.
Skewness of GDP growth           The skewness of the growth rate of GDP. Calculated over the 1960-
                                 2009 in the cross-section regressions, or over non-overlapping 5-year
                                 periods in the panel regressions. The underlying data on GDP growth
                                 (GRGDPCH) come from the World Penn Tables.
Initial GDP per capita           GDP per capita (RGDPCH) in 1960, from the Wold Penn Tables, in
                                 PPP converted 2005 constant prices.
GDP per capita                   Average GDP per capita (RGDPCH) for non-overlapping 5-year
                                 periods, from the Wold Penn Tables, in PPP converted 2005 constant
                                 prices.
Recession                        A dummy variable equal to 1 if the country experiences a negative
                                 growth in at least one year during each non-overlapping 5-year period.
                                 The underlying data on GDP growth (GRGDPCH) come from the
                                 World Penn Tables.
Banking crisis                   A dummy equal to 1 if the country experiences a systemic banking
                                 crisis during each non-overlapping 5-year period. The underlying data
                                 come from Laeven and Valencia (2010)
Private credit / GDP             The value of total credits by financial intermediaries to the private
                                 sector in each country, excluding credit by central banks. From Beck et
                                 al. (2010).
Trade liberalization             A dummy equal to 0 (that is, a country is judged as “closed”) if any of
                                 the following five criteria holds: average tariffs are 40% or more; non-
                                 tariff barriers cover 40% or more of trade; the black market exchange
                                 rate is at least 20% lower than the official exchange rate; a state
                                 monopoly exists on major exports; and the economic system is socialist
                                 (see Wacziarg and Welch (2008)’s revision of the original Sachs and
                                 Warner (1995) classification of trade openness episodes)
Terms of trade                   The percentage ratio of the export unit value indices to the import unit
                                 value indices, measured relative to the base year (2000). From the
                                 World Bank Development Indicators
Government spending              The share of government consumption of PPP converted GDP per
                                 capita at current prices. The underlying data (KG) come from the
                                 World Penn Tables.
Growth spurt                     A dummy equal to 1 if over a non-overlapping 5-year period the
                                 country is experiencing a) average growth higher than 0.095 (which
                                 corresponds to growth higher than the average growth for the sample
                                 by two standard deviations), and b) at least two years of high growth
                                 (more than twice the sample average). The underlying data on GDP
                                 growth (GRGDPCH) come from the World Penn Tables.




                                                 37
                                                        Appendix 2 - Summary Statistics

                      St. dev. of Skewness of Initial GDP     GDP per                            Private credit     Trade      Government    Growth
Country              GDP growth GDP growth per capita          capita   Recession Banking crisis    / GDP       liberalization  spending      spurt
Algeria                     0.082      -1.533      4078.73      4586.25        0.9          0.1          0.308             0.0        0.12          0
Argentina                   0.047      -0.360      6243.57      7957.05        0.9          0.5          0.182             0.3        0.08          0
Australia                   0.019      -0.721    13116.90      23875.46        0.4          0.0          0.555             0.9        0.10          0
Austria                     0.025       0.514    10632.79      23130.55        0.3          0.1          0.753             1.0        0.10          0
Bangladesh                  0.039      -1.227        802.07      839.15        0.7          0.1          0.167             0.2        0.02          0
Barbados                    0.053      -0.252      7647.78     17739.93        0.8          0.0          0.511             0.8        0.15          0
Belgium                     0.023      -0.616    10240.59      22071.37        0.4          0.1          0.429             1.0        0.11          0
Benin                       0.057       0.793        801.33     1001.16        0.8          0.2          0.154             0.4        0.10          0
Bolivia                     0.036      -2.291      2713.58      3043.50        0.7          0.2          0.252             0.5        0.08          0
Botswana                    0.103       0.531        578.04     4047.99        0.8          0.0          0.140             0.6        0.10        0.2
Brazil                      0.042       0.053      2581.05      5664.59        0.5          0.1          0.426             0.3        0.11          0
Burkina Faso                0.058       1.364        589.88      662.76        0.9          0.1          0.106             0.2        0.14          0
Burundi                     0.076       1.215        258.73      356.28        1.0          0.2          0.104             0.2        0.18          0
Cameroon                    0.056       0.128      1241.29      1688.94        0.9          0.3          0.161             0.3        0.06          0
Canada                      0.021      -0.911    12987.91      24286.42        0.4          0.0          0.816             1.0        0.10          0
Cape Verde                  0.070      -0.471      1052.97      1613.07        0.5          0.1          0.315             0.3        0.13          0
Central African             0.043      -0.234      1073.57       840.03        1.0          0.2          0.103             0.0        0.19          0
Chad                        0.088       1.132        818.61      842.15        1.0          0.3          0.076             0.0        0.51        0.1
Chile                       0.055      -1.715      3780.41      5990.72        0.8          0.3          0.455             0.6        0.07          0
China                       0.060      -1.304        846.79     1931.41        0.5          0.1          0.859             0.0        0.16        0.1
Colombia                    0.035       1.427      2478.32      4244.86        0.8          0.3          0.264             0.4        0.05          0
Comoros                     0.048       0.744        757.21     1167.24        0.9          0.0          0.123             0.0        0.32          0
Congo, Dem. Rep.            0.131       1.486      1092.26       709.63        1.0          0.3          0.022             0.0        0.06          0
Congo, Rep.                 0.077       0.332        791.10     1773.67        0.8          0.0          0.144             0.0        0.11        0.2
Costa Rica                  0.033      -1.326      5023.87      7468.50        0.7          0.3          0.246             0.4        0.18          0
Cote d'Ivoire               0.050       0.246        977.11     1417.37        1.0          0.0          0.260             0.0        0.07          0
Cyprus                      0.081      -0.283      3335.81     10511.54        0.7          0.0          1.304             1.0        0.09        0.2
Denmark                     0.026      -0.196    12122.61      23297.79        0.8          0.1          0.698             1.0        0.10          0
Dominican Republic          0.050      -0.349      2354.83      4584.48        0.6          0.1          0.223             0.3        0.09          0
Ecuador                     0.045      -0.006      2806.84      4463.43        0.7          0.4          0.219             0.3        0.07          0
Egypt                       0.044       0.801      1036.31      2321.42        0.4          0.1          0.280             0.3        0.11          0
El Salvador                 0.034      -1.085      3397.20      4514.40        0.8          0.0          0.304             0.4        0.12          0
Equatorial Guinea           0.242       2.676        567.66     2704.78        0.8          0.1          0.097             0.0        0.16        0.2




                                                                       38
Ethiopia        0.069    0.575     388.04     435.67    0.7   0.0   0.151   0.2   0.08     0
Fiji            0.059    1.003    1977.48    3276.75    1.0   0.0   0.250   0.0   0.10     0
Finland         0.036   -1.091    9080.45   19815.52    0.3   0.2   0.571   1.0   0.10     0
France          0.020   -0.463   10101.31   21161.19    0.3   0.1   0.803   1.0   0.10     0
Gabon           0.091    0.585    4518.43   10394.44    0.8   0.0   0.143   0.0   0.04   0.1
Gambia          0.072    1.780     958.06     899.49    0.9   0.0   0.156   0.5   0.19     0
Ghana           0.116    0.308     603.04     820.34    0.8   0.1   0.073   0.5   0.12     0
Greece          0.038   -0.130    6181.45   16073.07    0.5   0.1   0.365   1.0   0.09     0
Guatemala       0.026   -0.008    2986.78    4669.33    0.4   0.0   0.168   0.4   0.10     0
Guinea          0.042   -0.553     977.34     863.45    0.9   0.2   0.043   0.4   0.10     0
Guinea-Bissau   0.163    2.674     344.06     461.82    0.9   0.1   0.093   0.4   0.13     0
Haiti           0.044    0.120    1887.87    1775.71    0.9   0.2   0.134   0.0   0.17     0
Honduras        0.036   -0.233    2235.43    2856.93    0.8   0.0   0.296   0.3   0.18     0
Hong Kong       0.053    0.505    3339.60   16661.88    0.5   0.0   1.492   1.0   0.03   0.1
Iceland         0.052   -0.013   10500.92   23493.54    1.0   0.1   0.706   1.0   0.08     0
India           0.035    0.274     711.38    1288.00    0.4   0.1   0.223   0.3   0.11     0
Indonesia       0.046   -1.755     692.51    1876.05    0.4   0.2   0.308   0.8   0.08     0
Iran            0.089   -1.229    4403.94    7197.16    0.7   0.0   0.227   0.0   0.13     0
Ireland         0.038   -0.895    6970.00   17150.76    0.3   0.1   0.659   0.8   0.07     0
Israel          0.039    0.726    7093.35   16181.94    0.7   0.1   0.559   0.5   0.17     0
Italy           0.028   -0.437    8858.11   20113.62    0.4   0.0   0.655   1.0   0.10     0
Jamaica         0.040    0.636    5609.14    7256.12    0.9   0.1   0.237   0.4   0.13     0
Japan           0.041    0.383    5850.43   20382.80    0.5   0.2   1.496   0.9   0.10   0.1
Jordan          0.080   -0.120    2681.55    3676.70    1.0   0.2   0.524   0.9   0.10     0
Kenya           0.036   -0.327    1020.12    1094.20    1.0   0.2   0.245   0.3   0.05     0
Korea           0.045   -1.257    1782.05    9242.75    0.4   0.1   0.492   0.8   0.10     0
Lesotho         0.073    0.335     400.74     780.33    0.9   0.0   0.132   0.0   0.05     0
Luxembourg      0.039   -0.371   17353.40   37006.07    0.5   0.1   1.026   1.0   0.07     0
Madagascar      0.053    0.356     841.97     840.31    1.0   0.1   0.139   0.2   0.08     0
Malawi          0.115    0.726     329.07     600.62    1.0   0.0   0.044   0.0   0.11   0.1
Malaysia        0.048   -0.269    1470.16    5261.45    0.5   0.1   0.707   0.9   0.05   0.1
Mali            0.063   -0.329     541.37     611.97    0.9   0.2   0.164   0.4   0.12     0
Mauritania      0.092    2.613     586.95    1211.78    1.0   0.1   0.219   0.3   0.22   0.1
Mauritius       0.062   -0.603    2208.24    4261.45    0.5   0.0   0.444   0.8   0.07     0
Mexico          0.042   -0.698    4588.56    8242.05    0.7   0.4   0.223   0.4   0.03     0
Morocco         0.063    0.496     736.76    1973.31    0.9   0.1   0.249   0.5   0.04   0.1
Mozambique      0.050   -0.540     357.70     428.79    0.8   0.2   0.148   0.3   0.07     0




                                                   39
Namibia               0.055    0.541    2481.49    3432.49    1.0   0.0    0.431     0.0   0.08     0
Nepal                 0.030   -0.714     632.24     811.82    0.7   0.1    0.142     0.3   0.09     0
Netherlands           0.021   -0.182   13017.26   24037.63    0.5   0.1    0.901     1.0   0.16     0
New Zealand           0.033    0.682   13802.20   19268.00    0.8   0.0    0.557     0.4   0.10     0
Nicaragua             0.094   -1.011    2546.28    2832.29    0.9   0.2    0.251     0.3   0.21     0
Niger                 0.072   -0.366     746.19     624.01    1.0   0.2    0.091     0.3   0.15     0
Nigeria               0.091    0.369    1527.86    1381.29    0.8   0.2    0.117     0.0   0.02   0.1
Norway                0.019   -0.343   12283.61   28642.44    0.2   0.0    0.461     1.0   0.08     0
Pakistan              0.035   -0.628     727.62    1518.41    0.7   0.0    0.241     0.1   0.10     0
Panama                0.051    0.623    2170.94    5009.23    0.7   0.1    0.602     0.2   0.18     0
Papua New Guinea      0.098    3.981     886.96    1727.68    0.7   0.0    0.186     0.0   0.22     0
Paraguay              0.040    0.735    1847.32    3006.74    0.8   0.1    0.196     0.4   0.05     0
Peru                  0.058   -1.049    3758.60    4938.39    0.9   0.1    0.171     0.3   0.05     0
Philippines           0.041   -0.240    1314.36    1926.18    0.8   0.4    0.272     0.4   0.06     0
Portugal              0.043   -0.770    4002.81   11744.87    0.5   0.1    0.778     1.0   0.05     0
Puerto Rico           0.041   -0.129    5716.37   15094.00    0.6   0.0   --------   0.0   0.09     0
Romania               0.061   -0.636    1511.20    5463.41    0.5   0.1    0.134     0.3   0.08     0
Rwanda                0.139    1.301     860.19     755.88    0.9   0.0    0.062     0.0   0.32     0
Senegal               0.048    0.366    1421.40    1262.30    0.9   0.2    0.218     0.0   0.07     0
Seychelles            0.104    0.343    3677.19   10639.28    0.8   0.0    0.195     0.0   0.31     0
Singapore             0.047   -0.969    4299.92   19227.81    0.5   0.0    0.743     0.9   0.09   0.1
South Africa          0.030   -0.512    3849.71    5467.06    0.6   0.0    0.905     0.3   0.06     0
Spain                 0.033    0.516    6294.55   16890.80    0.4   0.3    0.822     1.0   0.07     0
Sri Lanka             0.024   -0.369     765.12    1751.23    0.4   0.2    0.189     0.3   0.09     0
Sweden                0.021   -1.159   13322.57   23531.33    0.5   0.3    0.849     1.0   0.11     0
Switzerland           0.024   -1.062   18955.18   29666.87    0.6   0.1    1.289     1.0   0.05     0
Syria                 0.092    0.567    1600.01    2748.23    0.9   0.0    0.105     0.0   0.09     0
Taiwan                0.036   -0.781    1826.40   11174.34    0.2   0.0   --------   0.0   0.18     0
Tanzania              0.045    0.760     481.38     657.20    0.7   0.1    0.089     0.3   0.08     0
Thailand              0.039   -1.283     961.44    3454.02    0.5   0.3    0.655     1.0   0.07     0
Togo                  0.067   -0.334     765.23    1020.72    0.8   0.1    0.181     0.0   0.10     0
Trinidad and Tobago   0.072    0.216    6449.94   11359.22    0.7   0.0    0.325     0.3   0.07   0.1
Turkey                0.040   -0.522    3243.48    6011.44    0.9   0.2    0.187     0.4   0.05     0
Uganda                0.051    0.018     655.38     707.63    0.8   0.1    0.062     0.4   0.15     0
United Kingdom        0.020   -1.176   12841.08   21571.85    0.5   0.1    0.770     0.0   0.10     0
United States         0.023   -0.772   15438.08   27701.78    0.6   0.2    1.230     0.0   0.09     0
Uruguay               0.055   -0.609    4753.07    6232.80    0.8   0.4    0.318     0.4   0.06     0




                                                         40
Venezuela   0.060   -0.148   6662.75   8490.63    1.0   0.2   0.281   0.2   0.05     0
Zambia      0.099    2.780   1803.06   1557.82    1.0   0.1   0.114   0.3   0.15   0.1
Zimbabwe    0.102   -0.220    279.80    323.36    0.9   0.1   0.271   0.0   0.06     0




                                             41
