                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MISSALLOCATION AND FINANCIAL FRICTIONS:
      SOME DIRECT EVIDENCE FROM THE DISPERSION IN BORROWING COSTS

                                           Simon Gilchrist
                                             Jae W. Sim
                                           Egon Zakrajšek

                                        Working Paper 18550
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18550


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




We thank participants at the RED Mini-Conference on “Misallocation and Productivity” (which took
place at the 2011 SED Annual Meetings) for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Benjamin
Moll, Diego Restuccia (the Guest Editor), Richard Rogerson, and two anonymous referees for numerous
insightful comments and suggestions. Samuel Haltenhof and Ben Rump provided excellent research
assistance. All errors and omissions are our own responsibility alone. The views expressed in this paper
are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Simon Gilchrist, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Missallocation and Financial Frictions: Some Direct Evidence From the Dispersion in Borrowing
Costs
Simon Gilchrist, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek
NBER Working Paper No. 18550
November 2012
JEL No. D92,O16,O40

                                             ABSTRACT

Financial frictions distort the allocation of resources among productive units—all else equal, firms
whose financing choices are affected by such frictions face higher borrowing costs than firms with
ready access to capital markets. As a result, input choices may differ systematically across firms in
ways that are unrelated to their productive efficiency. We propose an accounting framework that allows
us to assess empirically the magnitude of the loss in aggregate resources due to such misallocation.
To a second-order approximation, the framework requires only information on the dispersion in borrowing
costs across firms, which we measure—for a subset of U.S. manufacturing firms—directly from the interest
rate spreads on their outstanding publicly-traded debt. Given the observed dispersion in borrowing costs,
our approximation method implies a relatively modest loss in efficiency due to resource misallocation—on
the order of 1 to 2 percent of measured total factor productivity (TFP). In our framework, the correlation
between firm size and borrowing costs has no bearing on TFP losses under the assumption that financial
distortions and firm-level efficiency are jointly log-normally distributed. To take into account the effect
of covariation between firm size and borrowing costs, we consider a more general framework, which
dispenses with the assumption of log-normality and which implies somewhat higher estimates of the
resource losses—about 3.5 percent of measured TFP. Counterfactual experiments indicate that dispersion
in borrowing costs must be an order of magnitude higher than that observed in the U.S. financial data,
in order for misallocation—arising from financial distortions—to account for a significant fraction
of measured TFP differentials across countries.


Simon Gilchrist                                      Egon Zakrajšek
Department of Economics                              Division of Monetary Affairs
Boston University                                    Federal Reserve Board
270 Bay State Road                                   20th Street & Constitution Avenue, NW
Boston, MA 02215                                     Washington, D.C. 20551
and NBER                                             egon.zakrajsek@frb.gov
sgilchri@bu.edu

Jae W. Sim
Division of Research and Statistics
Federal Reserve Board
Washington, DC 20551
Tel: 202-452-2670
Jae.W.Sim@frb.gov
1    Introduction
Economists have long emphasized that distortions in the allocation of resources across heteroge-
neous firms can have large adverse effects on aggregate productivity and on the gains from trade (cf.
Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993), Guner, Ventura, and Xu (2008), and Hopenyahn (2011)). Sim-
ilarly, Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) have argued that systematic and persistent differences in
the allocation of resources across production units of varying productivity may be an important
determinant of differences in income per capita across countries, a hypothesis that seems to be
borne out by the data. For example, using detailed microdata on manufacturing establishments
in China and India, Hsieh and Klenow (2009) estimate that resource misallocation accounts for 30
to 60 percent of the difference between the total factor productivity (TFP) in U.S. manufacturing
and the corresponding sectoral TFP in China and India.1
    In light of the enormous differences in the depth and sophistication of financial mar-
kets between developed and developing countries, a large literature has long stressed the
role of finance in economic development; see Matsuyama (2007) for a comprehensive review.
More recently, Amaral and Quintin (2010), Greenwood, Sanchez, and Wang (2010, 2012), and
Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011) have developed theoretical models, which show—in a quantitative
sense—that a large portion of cross-country differences in TFP may attributable to resource mis-
allocation arising from imperfect financial markets. In a recent paper, however, Midrigan and Xu
(2010) challenge these findings, arguing that financial distortions can account for only a modest
portion (on the order of 5 percent) of the difference in manufacturing TFP between Columbia and
South Korea, the latter being a benchmark country with highly developed capital markets. Thus,
the extent to which financial frictions lead to reductions in TFP through resource misallocation
appears to be an open question.
    Although the TFP accounting methodology developed by Hsieh and Klenow (2009) leads to a
persuasive conclusion that large differences in manufacturing TFP between advanced and develop-
ing economies reflect the dispersion in marginal revenue products across heterogeneous plants, it also
suggests that there are substantial measured TFP losses in U.S. manufacturing. At the same time,
Hsieh and Klenow (2009) are careful to ascribe such losses to potential measurement error rather
than to the underlying frictions hampering the process of allocation of resources across firms. This
tension raises an important question regarding the extent to which measures of dispersion based
on plant-level marginal revenue products paint an accurate picture of resource misallocation that
can be attributed directly to financial frictions, as opposed to alternative sources of frictions such
as policy-induced tax distortions; gaps between average and marginal products due to adjustment
costs; fixed production costs; or other measurement-related issues.
    In this paper, we address this tension by developing an alternative TFP accounting procedure,
   1
     As shown by Klenow and Rodrı́guez-Clare (1997) and Hall and Jones (1999) differences in income per capita
across countries are primarily accounted for by low TFP in poorer countries.



                                                      1
which relies on direct measures of firms’ borrowing costs to measure the implied resource misallo-
cation caused by distortions in credit markets. Specifically, we develop an accounting framework in
which observed differences in borrowing costs across firms can be mapped into measures of aggre-
gate resource misallocation that may plausibly be attributed to financial market frictions. Using a
log-normal approximation, we show that the extent of resource misallocation can be inferred from
cross-industry or cross-country information on the dispersion of borrowing costs.
   We apply our accounting framework to a panel of U.S. manufacturing firms drawn from the
Compustat database. Despite fairly large and persistent differences in borrowing costs across firms,
our estimates imply relatively modest losses in TFP due to resource misallocation—roughly on the
order of 3.5 percent of TFP in the U.S. manufacturing sector. This finding is consistent with the
recent work of Hopenyahn (2011), whose quantitative analysis also suggests modest TFP losses for
economically plausible degrees of micro-level distortions.
   Our results can be obtained directly from the log-normal approximation and information on the
dispersion of interest rates across firms. Nonetheless, our methodology also allows us to relax the
log-normal approximation and infer TFP losses using the joint distribution of sales and borrowing
costs. We find that the estimated losses under this approach closely match those obtained under
the assumption of log-normality. This finding demonstrates both the robustness of our results
and its applicability to a broader environment where firm-level data on the joint distribution of
sales and borrowing costs may not be readily available. We also compare the measured dispersion
in the observed user cost of capital to the dispersion in the user cost inferred from the realized
revenue products, an approach consistent with the methodology of Hsieh and Klenow (2009). We
find that using the latter approach, the dispersion in the implied user cost overstates the degree of
dispersion—and hence the degree of resource misallocation—by a factor of four, compared with an
approach that uses data on actual borrowing costs.
   In the wake of the recent financial crisis, research into business cycle fluctuations such as that
of Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajšek (2011), Khan and Thomas (2011), and Arellano, Bai, and Kehoe
(2012) has analyzed the importance of dispersion in productivity for resource misallocation in
environments where firms face imperfect financial markets. Contributing to this vein of research,
we document a significant increase in the overall dispersion in firms’ borrowing costs over the past
decade. Although our results indicate that the overall loss in measured TFP due to the dispersion
in borrowing costs is relatively small, this secular increase in the dispersion of borrowing costs
implies a reduction in the aggregate TFP growth on the order of 20 to 40 basis points per year over
the 2000–10 period. This finding suggests that increased heterogeneity in access to external finance
may indeed have important macroeconomic consequences, even in countries with well-developed
financial markets such as the United States.
   The road map for the remainder of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we present
some basic facts regarding the dispersion in observed borrowing costs for our sample of U.S. man-



                                                 2
ufacturing firms. In Section 3, we develop our accounting framework. Section 4 presents our main
empirical results along with several robustness exercises. Section 5 concludes.


2        Borrowing Costs and Firm Size: Some Some Stylized Facts
In this section, we briefly describe our unique data set on firm-level borrowing costs and present
some stylized facts about the relationship between the cross-sectional dispersion in borrowing costs
and firm size.

2.1       Data Description
Our main analysis focuses on a subset of U.S. manufacturing corporations. The distinguishing
characteristic of these firms is that they have access to the corporate bond market. For a panel
of such firms covered by the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) Compustat and the Center for Research
in Security Prices (CRSP), we obtained month-end secondary market prices of their outstanding
securities from the Lehman/Warga and Merrill Lynch databases.2 By limiting the sample to senior
unsecured issues with a fixed coupon schedule, we ensure that external borrowing costs of different
firms are measured at the same point in their capital structure.
        Using the secondary market prices of individual securities, we construct the corresponding
credit spreads—measured relative to risk-free Treasury rates—based on the methodology described
in Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012). To ensure that our results are not driven by a small number of
extreme observations, we eliminated all observations with credit spreads below 5 basis points and
greater than 1,000 basis points, cutoffs corresponding roughly to the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of
the credit spread distribution, respectively. In addition, we eliminated from our sample very small
corporate issues (par value of less than $1 million) and all observations with a remaining term-to-
maturity of less than one year or more than 30 years. These selection criteria yielded a sample
of 2,623 individual securities over the 1985:M1–2010:M12 period. We matched these corporate
securities with their issuer’s quarterly income and balance sheet data from Compustat and daily
data on equity valuations from CRSP, a procedure that yielded a matched sample of 496 firms,
split about equally between durable and nondurable goods manufacturing industries.
        Table 1 contains summary statistics for the key characteristics of bonds in our sample. Note
that a typical firm in our sample has only a few senior unsecured issues outstanding at any point
in time—the median firm, for example, has two such issues trading in any given month. This
distribution, however, exhibits a significant positive skew, as some firms can have many more issues
trading in the secondary market at a point in time. To calculate a firm-specific credit spread in
any given month, we simply average the spreads on the firm’s outstanding bonds in that month.3
    2
    These two proprietary data sources include secondary market prices for a vast majority of dollar-denominated
bonds publicly issued in the U.S. corporate cash market; see Gilchrist, Yankov, and Zakrajšek (2009) for details.
  3
    As a robustness check, we also computed firm-specific spreads as a weighted average of credit spreads on the


                                                        3
                            Table 1: Selected Corporate Bond Characteristics

         Variable                                                Mean      SD      Min      P50      Max
         No. of bonds per firm/month                             2.86     3.04     1.00    2.00      52.0
         Mkt. value of issue ($mil.)a                            358.9    360.1    1.22    260.4    5,628
         Maturity at issue (yrs.)                                12.8      9.2     1.0     10.0     40.0
         Term to maturity (yrs.)                                 10.8      8.5     1.0      7.7     30.0
         Duration (years)                                         6.42     3.36    0.92     5.92     15.8
         Credit rating (S&P)                                        -        -      D        A3     AAA
         Coupon rate (pct.)                                      7.06     1.97     1.70    6.85     15.25
         Nominal effective yield (pct.)                           6.80     2.20    0.46     6.71    19.89
         Credit spread (bps.)                                     170      157      5       116     1,000
        Note: Sample period: 1985:M1–2010:M12; Obs. = 141,770; No. of bonds = 2,623; No. of firms = 496.
       Sample statistics are based on trimmed data (see text for details).
       a
         Market value of the outstanding issue deflated by the CPI (2005 = 100).


    The distribution of the market values of these issues is similarly skewed, with the range running
from $1.2 million to more than $5.6 billion. The maturity of these debt instruments is fairly long,
with the average maturity at issue of almost 13 years; the average remaining term-to-maturity
in our sample is 10.84 years. In terms of default risk—at least as measured by the S&P credit
ratings—our sample spans the entire spectrum of credit quality, from “single D” to “triple A.” At
“A3,” however, the median observation is still solidly in the investment-grade category. An average
bond has an expected return of 170 basis points above the comparable risk-free rate, while the
standard deviation of 157 basis points reflects the wide range of credit quality in our sample.
    We focus on the 1985–2010 period because it is characterized by a growing tendency for U.S.
corporate borrowing to take the form of negotiable securities issued directly in capital markets.
The resulting deepening of the corporate bond market has led to a substantial degree of disinter-
mediation, as well as to the development of well-functioning markets in derivatives, in which credit,
interest rate, and currency risks, for example, can be readily hedged.
    A full-fledged corporate bond market tends to be also associated with sound financial reporting
systems, a thriving community of professional financial analysts, multiple credit rating agencies,
a wide range of corporate debt instruments demanding sophisticated credit analysis, and efficient
procedures for corporate reorganization and liquidation, factors that greatly facilitate the process
of price discovery for corporate debt claims.4 Indeed, a well-developed corporate bond market
is in a much better position than the banking system—which is heavily leveraged and subject
to regulatory imperfections—to exert a crucial disciplinary role exercised by market forces.5 As
firm’s outstanding bonds, with weights equal to the market value of each issue. This alternative weighting procedure
had no effect on any of the results reported in the paper.
   4
     For example, using high-frequency bond transaction prices of U.S. firms, Hotchkiss and Ronen (2002) find that
the informational efficiency of corporate bond prices is similar to that of the underlying stocks.
   5
     As shown by the theoretical work of Hakansson (1982), the financial system with a well-developed bond market
will—under fairly general conditions—Pareto-dominate a financial system in which banks do most of the lending.



                                                         4
                                   Figure 1: Growth of Real Sales in U.S. Manufacturing


                                                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                                                                       15
        Quarterly

                                                                                                                                       10


                                                                                                                                        5


                                                                                                                                        0


                                                                                                                                       -5


                                                                                                                                       -10


                                                                                                                                       -15


                                                                                                                                       -20
                           Firms with access to the corporate bond market
                           All publicly-traded firms
                                                                                                                                       -25


                                                                                                                                       -30
          1985      1987       1989      1991      1993       1995      1997       1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009
       Note: Sample period: 1985:Q1–2010:Q4. The solid line depicts the quarterly growth rate of real sales for
       our sample of 496 manufacturing firms that have access to the corporate bond market; the dotted line depicts
       the growth rate of real sales for all publicly-traded U.S. manufacturing firms in Compustat. The nominal
       sales are deflated by the implicit price deflator for the nonfarm business sector output (2005 = 100); all data
       are seasonally adjusted. The shaded vertical bars represent the NBER-dated recessions.




a result, the variation in our firm-specific interest rates likely reflects the dispersion in “true”
borrowing costs both across firms and over time.6
       Although our sample is restricted to manufacturing firms with the access to the corporate
bond market, these 496 firms account, on average, for about 50 percent of total sales in U.S.
manufacturing over the 1985–2010 period. Moreover, as shown in Figure 1, the cyclical fluctuations
in their sales closely match the growth of sales of all publicly-traded manufacturing firms in the
Compustat database. In combination with the fact that our sample of firms spans a wide range
of credit quality (see Table 1), these features of the data suggest that the dispersion in borrowing
costs for this subset of firms is likely representative of the manufacturing sector as a whole.
   6
     In fact, Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2007) use such firm-specific interest rates to construct the user cost of capital
for a large panel of U.S. nonfinancial firms. According to their results, investment spending is highly responsive to
fluctuations in the user cost of capital that utilizes firm-specific interest rates; moreover, their estimates of the long-run
elasticity of capital with respect to the user costs are very close to unity, a result consistent with the Cobb-Douglas
production technology.




                                                                               5
                            Figure 2: Distribution of Firm-Level Borrowing Costs


        Density
  0.6




  0.5




  0.4




  0.3




  0.2




  0.1




  0.0
                  0   100       200    300    400         500         600    700   800   900
                                              Credit spread (basis points)
   Note: The histogram depicts the distribution of firm-specific average credit spreads for our sample of
   496 manufacturing firms.




2.2     Firm-Level Borrowing Costs and Firm Size
To get a sense of the cross-sectional dispersion in firm-level borrowing costs, we calculate the average
credit spread for each firm over time, a measure of debt financing costs that abstracts from the
substantial cyclical variation that characterizes credit spreads at business cycle frequencies. The
resulting distribution is shown in Figure 2. The central tendency of the distribution—as measured
by its mean—is 240 basis points, while its standard deviation is about 160 basis points. Recall
that this specific sample trims the upper tail of the distribution of credit spreads at 1,000 basis
points, so the standard deviation of 160 basis points likely underestimates the true dispersion of
credit spreads in the U.S. manufacturing sector.
   To the extent that distortions in credit markets arising from agency conflicts between borrowers
and lenders—as evidenced by the persistent dispersion in credit spreads—influence the firms’ op-
timal input choices, we expect to see a negative relationship between firm size and credit spreads.
In Figure 3, we plot the average credit spread for each firm over time against the average firm size
as measured by real sales; the solid line shows the fitted values from regressing the firm-specific
average credit spread on a second-order polynomial function of the logarithm of real sales. The fact



                                                        6
                                              Figure 3: Firm-Level Borrowing Costs and Firm Size


                                  1000

                                   900

                                   800

                                   700
   Credit spread (basis points)




                                   600

                                   500

                                   400

                                   300

                                   200

                                   100

                                    0
                                         50               250                     1000                      5000   25000

                                                                Real sales ($millions, logarithmic scale)
               Note: The scatter plot depicts the relationship between firm-specific average credit spreads and average firm
               size, as measured by real sales, for our sample of 496 manufacturing firms. The nominal sales are deflated
               by the implicit price deflator for the nonfarm business sector output (2005 = 100).




that we are averaging over time implies that this relationship is capturing the long-term relation-
ship between firm size and borrowing costs in the U.S. manufacturing sector. The strong negative
relationship evident in the data is consistent with the notion that access to finance is an important
determinant of the allocation of resources across firms.
               As is well known, however, credit spreads capture both the likelihood of default and a residual
component that relates to firm-specific factors such as loss given default and pricing terms reflecting
individual firm characteristics.7 The likelihood of default is intimately related to leverage of the
firm. Thus, to the extent that smaller firms are more leveraged, they will be considered by investors
as being of lower credit quality and thus face higher spreads in the debt markets.
               To control for differences in default risk across firms, we estimate the following regression:

                                                                            2
                                                       sit = β1 DDit + β2 DDit + λt + ǫit ,
   7
     In the corporate finance literature, there is a well-known result—the “credit spread puzzle”—which shows that
less than one-half of the variation in corporate bond credit spreads can be attributed to the financial health of
the issuer (e.g., Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann (2001)). As shown by Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin
(2001), Houwelling, Mentink, and Vorst (2005), Driessen (2005), and Duffie, Saita, and Wang (2007), the unexplained
portion of the variation in credit spreads appears to reflect some combination of time-varying liquidity premium, to
some extent the tax treatment of corporate bonds, and a default-risk factor.




                                                                              7
                                                       Figure 4: Residual Credit Spreads and Firm Size


                                           500


                                           400
   Residual credit spread (basis points)




                                           300


                                           200


                                           100


                                             0


                                           -100


                                           -200


                                           -300
                                                  50             250                     1000                      5000   25000
                                                                       Real sales ($millions, logarithmic scale)
                   Note: The scatter plot depicts the relationship between firm-specific average residual credit spreads and
                   average firm size, as measured by real sales, for our sample of 496 manufacturing firms. The nominal sales
                   are deflated by the implicit price deflator for the nonfarm business sector output (2005 = 100).




where sit denotes the credit spread of firm i in month t, DDit is the distance-to-default for firm i,
and λt is the time fixed effect that controls for common cyclical shocks. The key feature of the
above specification is that the firm-specific (time-varying) default risk is captured by the distance-
to-default (DD), a market-based indicator of credit risk based on the contingent claims framework
developed in the seminal work of Merton (1974). Briefly, this option-theoretic approach assumes
that a firm has just issued a single zero-coupon bond of face value F that matures at date T . Ra-
tional stockholders will default at date T only if the total value of the firm VT < F ; by assumption,
the rights of the bondholders are activated only at the maturity date, as stockholders will maintain
control of the firm even if the value of the firm Vs < F for some s < T . Under the assumptions
of the model, the probability of default—that is, Pr[VT < F ]—depends on the distance-to-default,
a volatility-adjusted measure of leverage inferred from equity valuations and the firm’s observed
capital structure.8
   The regression fits the data quite well, explaining 55 percent of the variation in firm-specific
credit spreads. In Figure 4, we plot the firm-specific average residual credit spread (i.e., T1i Tt=1
                                                                                                P i
                                                                                                      ǫ̂it )
   8
    In addition to being used widely by the financial industry, our choice of the Merton DD-framework is also
motivated by the work of Schaefer and Strebulaev (2008), who present compelling micro-level evidence showing that
the DD-model accounts well for the default-risk component of corporate bond prices. To calculate the DDs for our
sample of firms, we employ a robust procedure developed by Bharath and Shumway (2008).



                                                                                     8
against the average firm size. Although the dispersion in credit spreads is reduced noticeably
once default risk is taken into account, we nevertheless still find a strong negative relationship
between the non-default component of credit spreads and firm size. Such permanent differences in
borrowing costs across firms imply that financial distortions play a potentially important role in
the misallocation of resources across firms.


3     The TFP Accounting Framework
In this section, we present the accounting framework that relates losses in TFP due to resource
misallocation to dispersion in firm-specific borrowing costs. Our procedure is derived from the
decreasing returns to scale production framework outlined in Midrigan and Xu (2010); it is also
directly related to the TFP accounting procedure emphasized by Hsieh and Klenow (2009).

3.1    The Production Environment
We assume that firms (indexed by i) employing capital (K) and labor (L) have access to a decreasing
returns to scale production function of the form:
                                                                   η
                                           Yi = A1−η
                                                 i   Ki1−α Lαi          ,

where 0 < η < 1 is the degree of decreasing returns in production and Ai is a firm-specific level of
productivity.9 Decreasing returns may be due to the managerial span of control as in Lucas (1978)
or, alternatively, due to monopolistic competition in an environment with Dixit-Stiglitz preferences
over heterogeneous goods.
    We further assume that firms must borrow at a firm-specific interest rate ri in order to obtain
both capital and labor inputs. Letting 0 < δ < 1 denote the rate of capital depreciation and W
the aggregate wage, the optimal choice of inputs implies that firms equate the marginal revenue
products of capital and labor to their respective costs:

                                                   Yi
                                         (1 − α)η        = ri + δ;
                                                  Ki
                                                   Yi
                                                αη       = (1 + ri )W,
                                                   Li

where the second equation captures the fact that we assume that labor costs reflect borrowing costs
as well as the aggregate wage.
   9
     We interpret output as value added and assume that materials inputs enter the gross-output production function
in a Leontief form; furthermore, we assume that firms do not face financing costs for materials inputs. We explore
alternative production structures below.




                                                        9
   In this framework, the optimal capital-labor ratio is given by
                                                                  
                                             Ki   1 − α (1 + ri )W
                                                =                    .
                                             Li     α     ri + δ

Solving for the labor input yields
                                                               (1−α)η
                     [(1 + ri )W ]       1−η 1 − α   (1 + ri )W
                                   Li = Ai                       Li       Lαη
                                                                           i ,
                          αη                   α       ri + δ

which implies the optimal input choices:
                                                                                                            
                                                                      1−(1−α)η                    (1−α)η
                                                                  −                         −
                          Li = cL Ai (1 + ri )         (ri + δ)         1−η                         1−η          ;

                                               − αη        − 1−αη
                                    h                             i
                          Ki = cK Ai (1 + ri ) 1−η (ri + δ) 1−η ,

for some positive constants cL and cK .
   Letting
                                                                                                    
                                                                 1−(1−α)η                   (1−α)η
                                                             −                          −
                             wil     ≡           (1 + ri )         1−η      (ri + δ)          1−η        ;           (1)
                                             h                  αη                   1−αη i
                                                             − 1−η               −
                             wik ≡               (1 + ri )            (ri + δ)       1−η      ,                      (2)

then optimal input choices are proportional to firm-level productivity adjusted for firm-specific
differences in factor input costs:

                                                      Li = cL Ai wil ;
                                                      Ki = cK Ai wik .

In this context, wil and wik denote labor and capital “wedges,” respectively, which induce distortions
in input choices relative to an efficient allocation of inputs. The efficient allocation of inputs across
firms is determined by setting wil = wl and wik = wk for all i.

3.2   Aggregation and TFP
Define aggregate labor and capital inputs according to
                                         Z                                            Z
                             L = cL              Ai wil di       and     K = cK             Ai wik di,

and define the wedge in the cost index as

                                                   wi = (wil )α (wik )1−α .


                                                                  10
The aggregate output may then be expressed as
                                                    Z                            Z
                                                                     αη (1−α)η
                                              Y =       Yi di = cL cK                 Ai wiη di.

Total factor productivity is measured as aggregate output relative to a geometrically-weighted
average of aggregate labor and capital inputs:

                                                            Ai wiη di
                                                          R
                                      Y
                             TFP = αη (1−α)η = R                                ,
                                              ( Ai wil di)αη ( Ai wik di)(1−α)η
                                                              R
                                  L K

or in logs,
                                      Z                              Z                                Z               
              log(TFP ) = log              Ai wiη di        − αη log        Ai wil di        − (1 − α)η        Ai wik di       .   (3)


   Assuming that Ai , wil , and wik are jointly distributed according to a log-normal distribution,

                                                                           σa2
                                                                                                    
                                log Ai                           a                   σa,wl      σa,wk
                                                                                       2
                             log wil  ∼ MVN  wl  ,  σa,wl                       σw        σwl ,wk  ,
                                                                                                  
                                                                                         l

                              log wik           wk       σa,wk                        2
                                                                                     σw             2
                                                                                                   σw
                                                                                        l ,wk         k


then the second-order approximations of the three terms in equation (3) are given by

                                                                                     σa2 η 2 α2 2     η 2 (1 − α)2 2
                 Z               
           log        Ai wiη di       = a + η [αwl + (1 − α)wk ] +                      +      σ wl +             σ wk
                                                                                     2      2                2
                                + η 2 α(1 − α)σwl ,wk + η [ασwl ,a + (1 − α)σwk ,a ] ;
                                                 2
                                          σ 2 σw
                 Z               
            log   Ai wil di   = a + wl + a + l + σwl ,a ;
                                           2     2
               Z                           2  σw 2
                                           σ
           log    Ai wik di   = a + wk + a + k + σwk ,a .
                                           2      2

Combining the above expressions and rearranging yields the second-order approximation of equa-
tion (3)

                                     σ2
                                       
                                          ηα(1 − ηα) 2     η(1 − α)[1 − η(1 − α)] 2
              log(TFP ) = (1 − η) a + a −           σ wl −                       σ wk
                                      2        2                      2                                                            (4)
                                      2
                                + η α(1 − α)Corr(wl , wk )σwl σwk .

   At this point, it is instructive to consider productivity gains that would arise from an efficient
allocation of resources in an economy with heterogeneous production units. Specifically, consider
a problem faced by a social planner, whose objective is to maximize aggregate output, subject to
the constraint that aggregate labor and capital are equal to the amounts used in the economy with


                                                                      11
dispersion in input costs. Formally, this problem is given by
                                                          Z
                                                                                      η
                                         YE = max             A1−η
                                                               i   Ki1−α Lαi               di,
                                                 Ki ,Li


subject to                               Z                              Z
                                             Li di = L        and           Ki di = K.

Letting λL and λK denote the Lagrange multipliers on the aggregate input constraints, then optimal
input choices imply constant factor input ratios across firms:

                                                 Yi                                  Yi
                                     (1 − α)η       = λK            and         αη      = λL .
                                                 Ki                                  Li

It is then straightforward to show that under this efficient allocation
                                                Z            (1−η)
                                         YE =         Ai di             K (1−α)η Lαη ,

and the corresponding measure of TFP is given by
                                                                        Z              (1−η)
                                                      YE
                                 TFPE =                             =           Ai di            .
                                                K (1−α)η Lαη

   In an economy with an efficient allocation of resources across heterogeneous production units, wik
and wil are constant (i.e., wil = wl and wik = wk for all i). In those circumstances, the second-order
approximation in equation (4) reduces to

                                                                   σa2
                                                                           
                                          log(TFPE ) = (1 − η) a +       .
                                                                   2

As the production environment in such an economy approaches constant returns-to-scale—that is,
η → 1—the aggregate TFP is equal to E[Ai ], which is normalized to unity. With 0 < η < 1, the
above expression captures gains in economic efficiency arising solely from the benefits of dispersion
in firm size in the diminishing returns-to-scale production environment.
   The relative TFP loss that is solely attributable to resource misallocation caused by the disper-
sion in input costs is given by
                                    
                              TFPE           ηα(1 − ηα) 2     η(1 − α)[1 − η(1 − α)] 2
                    log                  =             σ wl +                       σ wk
                              TFP                 2                     2                            (5)
                                             − η 2 α(1 − α)Corr(wl , wk )σwl σwk .

Because aggregate inputs are held constant across the two allocations, the relative TFP loss is
exactly equivalent to the relative loss in aggregate output due to the inefficient allocation of inputs


                                                               12
implied by the presence of dispersion in input costs across firms.
       Several comments about equation (5) are in order. First, this measure of TFP loss is an
increasing function of the dispersion in the labor and capital wedges σwl and σwk , respectively.
Second, up to a second-order (log-normal) approximation, the covariance between firm-level TFP
and the capital and labor wedges is irrelevant for the size—in percent terms—of the TFP loss due
to misallocation.10 And lastly, holding dispersion in the labor and capital wedges fixed, a high
correlation between the labor and capital wedges reduces the relative TFP loss due to resource
misallocation.
       To gain some intuition for this last point, it is helpful to express aggregate output and inputs
                                                                                                     Ki        wik
as functions of the scale distortion wi and the distortion in the input mix zi ≡                     Li    =   wil
                                                                                                                   .   That is,
                         Z                             Z                              Z
                                                                                                 (α−1)
                   Y =       (Ai wi )η di,    K=           Ai wi ziα di,   and   L=       Ai wi zi       di.

                                                                                    2 —and
We can then attribute the relative TFP loss to distortions in scale—as measured by σw
distortions in the input mix, as measured by σz2 :
                                                  
                                            TFPE           η(1 − η) 2   ηα(1 − α) 2
                                  log                  =           σw +          σz ,
                                            TFP               2             2

where

                      2
                     σw = α 2 σw
                               2
                                 l
                                   + (1 − α)2 σw
                                               2
                                                 k
                                                   + 2α(1 − α)Corr(wl , wk )σwl σwk ;
                      σz2 = σw
                             2
                               l
                                    2
                                 + σw k
                                        − 2Corr(wl , wk )σwl σwk .

In our framework, therefore, a high correlation between wk and wl is associated with increased scale
distortion but less variation in the input mix across firms. On net, the efficiency gain from reduced
variation in the input mix outweighs the efficiency loss owing to increased variation in firm size by
the amount η 2 α(1 − α)Corr(wl , wk )σwl σwk .

3.3      Resource Misallocation and the Dispersion in Interest Rates
To derive an approximate relationship between the dispersion in interest rates and TFP losses
due to the misallocation of resources, we first consider a case in which both the labor and capital
input choices are fully distorted by financial market frictions (i.e., capital input costs are ri + δ and
labor input costs are given by (1 + ri )W ). In that case, Corr(wl , wk ) = 1, and the log-labor and
  10
    Note that up to a second-order approximation, this implies that in percent terms, size-based distortions matter
to the extent that they create dispersion in the labor and capital wedges and not because they are based on size
per se. Thus, distortions brought about by frictions in credit markets, government policies, and other institutional
factors that influence the size distribution of firms, or that disproportionately distort the input mix across the size
distribution, have a negative effect on TFP, precisely because they induce variation in the input wedges.



                                                                13
log-capital wedges are given by

                                          1 − (1 − α)η                  (1 − α)η
                          log wil = −                   log (1 + ri ) −           log (ri + δ) ;
                                             1−η                          1−η
                                           αη                   1 − αη
                          log wik     = −       log (1 + ri ) −         log (ri + δ) .
                                          1−η                    1−η

The first-order approximations of the log-wedges around log(ri ) are then given by
                                                                                  
                                         1                    r                  r
                     log wil ≈ −              (1 − (1 − α)η)      + (1 − α)η         log(ri );
                                        1−η                  1+r             r+δ
                                                                      
                                         1         r               r
                     log wik        ≈ −       αη       + (1 − αη)        log(ri ).
                                        1−η      1+r              r+δ

Thus, the ratio of the standard deviation of the labor wedge relative to the capital wedge can be
approximated as
                                     σ wl   [(1 − (1 − α)η)(r + δ) + (1 − α)η(1 + r)]
                                          ≈                                           .
                                     σ wk         [αη(r + δ) + (1 − αη) (1 + r)]
We can then approximate the relative TFP loss as
                         "                                                             2                     #
             TFPE         η(1 − α) [1 − η(1 − α)] ηα(1 − αη)                       σ wl              2      σ wl    2
   log                  =                        +                                             − η α(1 − α)        σw   ,   (6)
             TFP                     2                 2                           σ wk                     σ wk      k




where                                                                      
                                                1        r               r
                                     σ wk =          αη     + (1 − αη)        σ     .
                                               1−η      1+r            r + δ log(r)
The first term in equation (6) reflects the direct effect of variation in wk on the resource misalloca-
tion. The second term captures the direct effect of variation in wl , while the third term is due to
the covariance between wl and wk .
   Now, consider the case where financial market frictions induce firm-level variation in the user-
cost of capital (ri + δ) but do not cause firm-level variation in labor input costs (1 + r)W . In
this case, the labor wedge wl varies across firms solely because of the induced variation in the
capital-labor ratio. As a result,
                                                           σ wl   (1 − α)η
                                                                ≈          ,
                                                           σ wk    1 − αη
and the relative TFP loss can be expressed as
                                         "                                                               2 #
                              TFPE         η(1 − α) [1 − η(1 − α)] ηα(1 − αη)                        σ wl           2
                    log                  =                        −                                                σw   ,   (7)
                              TFP                     2                 2                            σ wk             k




where                                                                     
                                                        (1 − αη)          r
                                               σ wk   =                        σ     .
                                                          1−η           r + δ log(r)


                                                                  14
Eliminating financial distortions in the labor market reduces the variability of the capital and labor
                                                                                             σwl
wedges (i.e., σwk and σwk ) and, for chosen parameter values, leaves the ratio               σwk   about unchanged.
The negative sign in front of the second term in equation equation (7) reflects the fact that, on
net, the labor-input distortion, as evidenced by σwl > 0, lowers the overall TFP loss by reducing
the variation in the input mix across firms.11 As we show below, eliminating financial distortions
in the labor market reduces TFP losses relative to the case where firms face borrowing constraints
in both labor and capital markets.


4         Results
In this section, we use our framework to provide some estimates of TFP losses for the U.S. man-
ufacturing sector implied by resource misallocation arising from financial market frictions. Specif-
ically, we use the information on the dispersion of firm-specific borrowing costs to calculate the
implied TFP loss, an approach that relies on the assumption of log-normality when computing the
second-order approximation of the relative TFP loss. By utilizing the corresponding information
on firm-level sales, we show that this approximation provides a reasonable estimate of TFP losses
due to resource misallocation.
         In our analysis, we assume that the firm-specific borrowing costs in quarter t—denoted by rit —
are equal to the real risk-free long-term interest rate rt∗ , augmented by the firm-specific premium
given by the credit spread sit :12
                                                   rit = rt∗ + sit .

For the real risk-free rate rt∗ , we use the difference between the 10-year nominal Treasury yield and
the average expected CPI inflation over the next 10 years, as measured by the Philadelphia Fed’s
Survey of Professional Forecasters. In all exercises, we set the depreciation rate δ = 0.06, the labor
share α = 2/3, and the degree of decreasing returns to scale η = 0.85, values that are standard in
the literature.
         Figure 5 depicts the time-series evolution of the cross-sectional distribution of real interest
rates for our sample of manufacturing firms with access to the corporate bond market. The shaded
band around the median real interest rate (the solid line) depicts the 90th (P90) and 10th (P10)
percentiles of the distribution of borrowing costs at each point in time. Over the 1985–2010 period,
the P90–P10 range has fluctuated in the range between 140 basis and 670 basis points, an indication
of a significant time-series variation in the dispersion of firm-level borrowing costs.
                                                                  l and log w k for each firm in our
         According to our accounting framework, we can infer log wit         it
sample using equations (1) and (2) and the firm-specific real interest rate rit . Given these wedges,
    11
     While this result is algebraically true for the case of no direct financial distortions in labor markets, numerical
computations show that it also holds in the more general case.
  12
     Quarterly credit spread sit is calculated as a simple average of the corresponding monthly credit spreads.




                                                          15
                  Figure 5: Dispersion of Firm-Level Borrowing Costs in U.S. Manufacturing


                                                                                                                         Percent
                                                                                                                                   12
      Quarterly
                                                    Median
                                                    P90-P10
                                                                                                                                   10




                                                                                                                                   8




                                                                                                                                   6




                                                                                                                                   4




                                                                                                                                   2




                                                                                                                                   0
        1985       1987   1989       1991   1993    1995      1997        1999   2001    2003   2005       2007   2009
     Note: Sample period: 1985:Q1–2010:Q4. The solid line depicts the median of real interest rates for our
     sample of 496 manufacturing firms that have access to the corporate bond market; the shaded band depicts
     the corresponding P90–P10 range. The shaded vertical bars represent the NBER-dated recessions.




we can compute their respective standard deviations σwl and σwk . Using equation (5), we can then
calculate the implied TFP loss due to resource misallocation arising from financial market frictions.
     The above procedure relies only on the dispersion in real interest rates to compute TFP losses
due to resource misallocation. Given data on firm-level (real) sales—denoted by Yit —and firm-
specific interest rates, it is possible to infer directly the implied capital and labor inputs, according
to
                                                  αηYit                            (1 − α)ηYit
                                       Lit =                    and        Kit =               .
                                               (1 + rit )W                            rit + δ
Summing over sales and the implied inputs yields

                           1 XX                          1 XX                                    1 XX
                   Y =          Yit ,              K=         Kit ,                and    L=          Lit ,
                          NT  t
                                                        NT  t
                                                                                                NT  t
                                 i                              i                                      i

which allows us to calculate the implied aggregate TFP:

                                                                          Y
                                                   TFP =                            .
                                                              (L)αη (K)(1−α)η



                                                                     16
   To infer the level of aggregate TFP that would prevail in the case of the efficient allocation of
resources, we first need to compute the firm-specific level of TFP using the relationship

                                                             Yit
                                                  Ait =          ,
                                                             wit

              l )αη (w k )(1−α)η is the geometrically-weighted average of the labor and capital
where wit = (wit      it
wedges. The efficient level of inputs (KitE , LEit ), along with the efficient level of output YitE , can
be obtained using the relationships:

                        KitE = cK Ait w̄k ,   LEit = cL Ait w̄l ,    and     YitE = Ait /w̄,

where w̄k and w̄l are the average capital and labor wedges observed in the data and w̄ = (w̄l )α (w̄k )1−α .
Letting

                   1 XX E                        1 XX E                                      1 XX E
           YE =         Yit ,           KE =          Kit ,                and       LE =         Lit
                  NT  t
                                                NT  t
                                                                                            NT  t
                        i                               i                                      i

denote the aggregate output, capital, and labor that would be obtained under the efficient allocation
of resources, the corresponding implied aggregate TFP—the level of TFP that would prevail in the
absence of dispersion in borrowing costs—is given by

                                                            YE
                                       TFP E =                          ,
                                                   (LE )αη (K E )(1−α)η

and the relative TFP loss due to resource misallocation by
                                                                                
                                                                         TFP E
                                  Relative TFP Loss = log                            .
                                                                          TFP

Importantly, by using data on firm-specific sales and borrowing costs, we can infer the relative
TFP loss due to resource misallocation without relying on the log-normal approximation. On the
other hand, to the extent that there are significant nonfinancial distortions that influence firm size,
the accounting procedure that relies on both borrowing costs and sales may, in fact, overstate the
true loss in TFP that may be attributable to financial distortions. Thus, we view the log-normal
approximation as a lower bound and the size-based measure as an upper bound to the potential
TFP losses that may be attributed to resource misallocation brought about by frictions in credit
markets.
   The results of these two exercises are summarized in Table 2. We calculate the implied TFP
losses for all 496 firms in our sample as well as for durable- and nondurable-goods producers
separately. The entries under the heading “Approximate” are the implied TFP losses (in percent)
calculated using only the dispersion in the firm-specific borrowing costs and rely on the log-normal


                                                        17
                        Table 2: TFP Losses due to Resource Misallocation
                  (Manufacturing Firms with Access to the Corporate Bond Market)

                                                                                         Relative TFP Loss

    Sector                               r̄     σr     [rP 10 , rP 90 ]   σ wl   σ wk   Approximate      Actual
    All Manufacturing                  2.43    1.66    [0.84, 4.71]       0.43   0.59       1.75          3.44
                                                                                           (1.40)           -
    Durable Goods Mfg.                 2.62    1.69    [0.92, 4.99]       0.43   0.60       1.77          3.23
                                                                                           (1.42)           -
    Nondurable Goods Mfg.              2.24    1.61    [0.73, 4.67]       0.42   0.58       1.69          3.63
                                                                                           (1.36)           -
   Note: Sample period: 1985:Q1–2010:Q4; No. of firms = 496; Obs. = 16,975. Real interest rates and the
  implied TFP losses are in percent. The approximate TFP losses use only the information on the dispersion of
  firm-specific average real interest rates and rely on the second-order log-normal approximation; the approximate
  TFP losses reported in parentheses are calculated under the assumption that financial market frictions distort
  only the choice of the capital input. The actual TFP losses employ information on the firm-specific real interest
  rates and the corresponding real sales (see text for details).


approximation; the entries under the heading “Actual” are the implied TFP losses that employ
information on both borrowing costs and sales. Columns labeled r̄, σr , and [rP 10 , rP 90 ] contain the
sample mean, the standard deviation, and the P90–P10 range, respectively, of the average firm-
specific borrowing costs, while σwl and σwk denote the estimates of the cross-sectional standard
deviation of the log labor and capital wedges used to compute the approximate TFP losses.
   The results in Table 2 indicate that the loss in U.S. manufacturing TFP due to resource mis-
allocation arising from financial market frictions is relatively modest. The losses implied by our
approximation method are about 1.7 percent for the manufacturing sector as a whole and for its
two main subsectors. As discussed in Section 3.3, the TFP loss in the model where financial fric-
tions distort labor and capital input costs exceeds the loss in the model where financing frictions
influence only the user cost of capital. In this latter case, the implied TFP loss for U.S. manufac-
turing, reported in parentheses, is 1.4 percent. Thus, financial frictions in both labor and capital
markets imply only a modest increase in TFP losses relative to the model in which such frictions
only influence the cost of capital inputs.
   The actual TFP losses—that is, losses computed using the information on firm-specific bor-
rowing costs and the corresponding sales—are around 3.5 percent for the manufacturing sector as
a whole; as before, the estimated losses are highly comparable across the two subsectors. From
an economic perspective, however, both methods imply TFP losses that are sufficiently close in
magnitude, which suggests that the log-normal approximation provides a reasonable estimate of
the TFP losses in the case where only information on the dispersion of borrowing costs across firms
is available.
   With these results in hand, we now consider the implications of two counterfactual scenarios,
both of which assume greater dispersion in borrowing costs than actually observed in the U.S. data.


                                                         18
                   Table 3: Counterfactual TFP Losses due to Resource Misallocation

              Scenario                                r̄     σr      [rP 10 , rP 90 ]   σ wl   σ wk   Loss
              S1: rit =   rt∗   + 2sit              4.84    3.30     [1.68, 9.41]       0.68   0.93    4.31
                                                                                                      (3.26)
              S2: rit = rt∗ + 10sit                 24.2    16.5     [8.38, 46.7]       1.57   1.95    19.9
                                                                                                      (11.0)
             Note: Real interest rates and the implied TFP losses are in percent. The approximate TFP
            losses use only the information on the dispersion of firm-specific average real interest rates and
            rely on the second-order log-normal approximation; the approximate TFP losses reported in
            parentheses are calculated under the assumption that financial market frictions distort only
            the choice of the capital input.


In the first scenario, we assume that
                                                    rit = rt∗ + 2sit ,

which roughly doubles the dispersion in firm-level real interest rates; the second scenario counter-
factually assumes that
                                                   rit = rt∗ + 10sit ,

which represents a ten-fold increase in the dispersion of borrowing costs.
       As reported in the S1 row of Table 3, doubling the dispersion in firm-specific credit spreads
implies an approximate loss in manufacturing TFP of 4.3 percent, assuming that financial market
frictions distort the firm’s choice of both the capital and labor inputs; assuming that financing
constraints apply only to the capital input implies a TFP loss of about 3.3 percent. According to
the S2 row, a ten-fold increase in the dispersion of firm-level borrowing costs implies a significant
loss in TFP as a result of resource misallocation. Under this counterfactual scenario, the implied
loss in TFP, according to our log-normal approximation, is almost 20 percent in the case in which
borrowing constraints apply to both the labor market and the market for physical capital.
       Note, however, that the ten-fold increase in credit spreads that underlies this counterfactual
scenario implies an average real interest rate of almost 25 percent, with the P90–P10 range of
8.38 percent to 46.7 percent, an extremely high and disperse distribution of borrowing costs com-
pared with the actual U.S. data. Indeed, one suspects that the first two moments of this counter-
factual distribution are high even relative to the mean and dispersion in borrowing costs that one
is likely to observe in developing economies, other than the very poor ones.13
  13
     Measuring borrowing costs in developing economies, especially for countries that are in early stages of develop-
ment, is complicated by the fact that a significant portion of credit to businesses and households is extended through
informal sources (i.e., relatives, small shopkeepers, and money lenders). Nevertheless, the available evidence indicates
that in the poorest countries, in addition to a very high average level of borrowing costs, there is a considerable degree
of dispersion in interest rates across borrowers; see Banerjee and Duflo (2005, 2010) and references therein for details.




                                                           19
4.1   Gross vs. Value-Added Output and the Role of Material Inputs
The accounting framework described above applies to value-added output and ignores the role of
material inputs in the production process, which in the manufacturing sector account for about
one-half of gross output. A common assumption in the production function literature (e.g., Basu
(1996)) is that material inputs and value-added output enter the gross-output production function
in a Leontief form:                                                    
                                                              Y i Mi
                                              Ỹi = min          ,           ,
                                                              θy θm

where Ỹi denotes gross output, Yi is value-added output, and Mi is the quantity of materials
input, while θy and θm capture the gross shares of value-added output and materials in production,
respectively. In this case, the profit function is given by
                                       
                               Y i Mi
                Πi = min          ,         − (ri + δ) Ki − (1 + ri ) W Li − (1 + rim ) Pm Mi ,
                               θy θm

where Pm denotes the price of the materials input and rim is the corresponding financing cost.
                                                                                          θm
   Given the Leontief production structure, optimality requires that Mi =                 θy Y i .   The optimal
choices of capital and labor are now modified to include the cost of material inputs in the production
process:

                                             Yi                      ri + δ
                                (1 − α)η          =             h        i            ;
                                             Ki         1
                                                            −       θm P m
                                                                           (1 + rim )
                                                       θy             θy
                                             Yi               (1 + ri )W
                                        αη        =          h       i           .
                                             Li         1
                                                            − θmθPy m (1 + rim )
                                                       θy


First, consider a situation in which the financing cost of the materials input is zero—that is,
rim = 0. In that case, the presence of the materials input in the production process only rescales
costs associated with capital and labor inputs and does not affect the dispersion of the two revenue
products. Hence, it has no implications for the measured TFP loss. Furthermore, gross output is
proportional to its value-added counterpart, and our TFP accounting procedure is valid for either
measure of output.
   Alternatively, suppose rim = ri , so that the financing cost of the materials input is the same
as that of capital and labor inputs. In this case, we need to modify the wedges to account for
the additional financing costs. Specifically, the presence of the materials input in the production
process will increase the dispersion of the wedges for a given dispersion in ri . With Pm = 1, the
share
   ofmaterials in gross outputof one-half
                                            implies that θy = θm = 0.5. Then, the cost of capital
    ri +δ                         1+ri
is 1−ri and the cost of labor is 1−ri W . Following the procedure outlined above, and ignoring
terms involving r2 , the first-order approximations of the log-wedges around log(ri ) are now given



                                                          20
                           Table 4: TFP Losses due to Resource Misallocation
                                   (Alternative Production Structures)

                           Capital Share (1 − α)                         (1)    (2)
                           1 − α = 1/6                                  0.73   1.26
                           1 − α = 1/3                                  1.76   2.55
                           1 − α = 1/2                                  3.16   4.19
                        Note: The implied TFP losses are in percent and are computed
                       using the second-order log-normal approximation. Column 1 re-
                       ports TFP losses under the assumption that financial frictions
                       distort both the labor and capital inputs but not the materials
                       input. Column 2 reports TFP losses assuming that the materials
                       input is combined with value-added output in a Leontief produc-
                       tion function to determine gross output.


by
                                                                       
                                 1                              r + δr
                 log wil    ≈ −       2(1 − (1 − α)η)r + αη                  log(ri );
                                1−η                           r + δ − δr
                                                                 
                                 1                        r + δr
                 log wik    ≈ −       2αηr + (1 − αη)                 log(ri ).
                                1−η                     r + δ − δr

Because δr is close to zero, the need to finance the materials input has a negligible effect on the
dispersion of wedges through its effect on the cost of capital. By contrast, it does roughly double
the dispersion of the labor wedge by increasing the dispersion in the cost of labor input.
     As an alternative to the Leontief production technology, suppose that the materials input is
substitutable with both labor and capital. Assuming a Cobb-Douglas production function, let Li
denote a composite labor-materials input bundle that must be financed at the cost of (1 + ri )W .
We may then interpret Yi as gross output and modify the capital share to reflect a gross-output
production function. If the materials input share of gross output is 1/2 and the capital share of
value added is 1/3, this implies that the capital share of gross output is 1/6. Thus to allow for
the materials input in a Cobb-Douglas production technology, it is sufficient to use the accounting
procedure outlined in Section 2 but lower the capital share appropriately.
     Table 4 reports the effect of allowing the materials input to enter the gross-output production
function in a Leontief form and the effect of varying the capital share on the second-order approx-
imation to the loss function. Column 1 reports the TFP loss associated with the baseline model,
a case in which the labor and capital input choices are distorted by financial frictions. Column 2
reports the TFP loss in the case where financial frictions also distort the choice of the materials
input. For each of these alternative production structures, we consider capital shares of 1/6, 1/3,
and 1/2.
     Assuming that gross output is a Leontief function of value-added output and the materials
input, the implied TFP losses increase—relative to the baseline case in which financial frictions
apply only to the capital and labor inputs—when we allow for financial frictions to influence the

                                                     21
choice of the materials input. The increase in the TFP loss, however, is modest. In particular,
when 1 − α = 1/3, a case that is most relevant in that comparison, the relative TFP loss increases
from 1.76 percent to 2.55 percent.
   To understand the effect of substitutability of inputs on the TFP losses, one should compare the
baseline model (Column 1) with 1−α = 1/6 to the model with the materials input (Column 2) with
1 − α = 1/3. The baseline model with 1 − α = 1/6 can be interpreted as a production structure
where gross output depends on capital, labor, and materials within a Cobb-Douglas production
function. The model with the materials input and 1 − α = 1/3, in contrast, can be interpreted as a
production structure where value-added output is a Cobb-Douglas function of labor and capital, and
the materials input enters the gross-output production function in a Leontief form. Switching from
unit elasticity to no substitutability for the materials input increases the TFP loss from 0.73 percent
to 2.55 percent. It is important to remember that the cost of capital is more sensitive to variation
in interest rates than the cost of labor and material inputs. Reducing the substitutability between
capital and other inputs magnifies the importance of financial friction on capital input choices and
increases the overall TFP loss. Nonetheless, these effects appear to be relatively modest even if one
completely eliminates any form of substitutability between value-added output and the materials
input.
   Overall, these results imply that our finding that dispersion in borrowing costs across firms
results in relatively modest TFP losses is robust to alternative assumptions regarding the production
structure and the various input financing choices. In general, TFP losses are highest in situations
where the capital share is high, substitutability among inputs is low, and financial frictions apply
to all inputs.

4.2      Comparison with Hsieh–Klenow Methodology
As noted in the introduction, the methodology proposed by Hsieh and Klenow (2009) implies sizable
TFP losses for the U.S. manufacturing sector due to misallocation. Their methodology relies on
measured dispersion in marginal revenue products of labor and capital, though they recognize that
plant-based marginal revenue products may contain substantial measurement error; indeed, they
argue against interpreting the implied TFP losses for the U.S. manufacturing sector as evidence
for resource misallocation. Although our data set contains manufacturing firms rather than plants
and does not include labor input choices, we can nonetheless gauge the implications of applying
their methodology to our data set by comparing the dispersion in the marginal revenue product
of capital—as measured by the sales-to-capital ratio—to the dispersion in the cost of capital as
measured by firm-specific interest rates. More specifically, the implied dispersion in the cost of
capital can be inferred directly from the measured dispersion in the log of the sales-to-capital ratio.
   Table 5 reports the dispersion in the log of the sales-to-capital ratio and the log of the cost
of capital as measured by log(rit + δ). The first row reports the overall standard deviation, while


                                                  22
                               Table 5: Comparison of Dispersion Measures

                                                                      Std. Deviation

           Dispersion Measure                                  log(rit + δ)   log(Sit /Ki,t−1 )     Ratioa
           Overall                                                0.149             0.690           4.629
           Industry adjusted                                      0.144             0.565           3.911
           Long-run/industry adjusted                             0.126             0.574           4.540
           Note: Sample period: 1985:Q1–2010:Q4; No. of firms = 496; Obs. = 16,975. Overall standard
          deviations are computed using raw data on log(rit + δ) and log(Sit /Ki,t−1 ); industry-adjusted
          standard deviations remove industry (3-digit NAICS) fixed effects from both measures; and
          long-run/industry-adjusted standard deviations remove industry fixed effects from firm-specific
          means of log(rit +δ) and log(Sit /Ki,t−1 ). In all cases, we assume the depreciation rate δ = 0.06.
          a
            The ratio of STD[log(rit + δ)] to STD[log(Sit /Ki,t−1 )].


the second row accounts for heterogeneity at the industry (3-digit NAICS) level by first removing
industry means from both variables. By construction, these two measures allow for variation across
firms and time. To focus on long-run differences, the third row first computes the firm-specific
means of both measures and then computes the standard deviation of these long-run firm averages
relative to their industry means.
   The results reported in the table indicate a much greater implied dispersion when the log of the
sales-to-capital ratio is used as a proxy for the user cost of capital, compared with the dispersion
based on observed interest rates. Depending on how one corrects for the inter-industry and within-
firm variation, we obtain dispersion measures based on measured marginal revenue products that are
about four times greater than those obtained using the cost of capital computed using observed firm-
specific interest rates. Focusing on the long-run measure, which likely captures the true average cost
of capital most accurately, these results imply that the Hsieh–Klenow methodology may significantly
overstate the TFP losses due to misallocation relative to the user-cost methodology in our data set,
provided that the misallocation mechanism is driven primarily by distortions in financial markets.

4.3   Time-Series Variation in Interest Rate Dispersion
A number of recent papers (Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajšek (2011), Khan and Thomas (2011), and
Arellano, Bai, and Kehoe (2012)) study the implications of increased dispersion in profitability on
resource allocation in macroeconomic models with various forms of financial market frictions. As
the severity of financial frictions increases, these models generally predict a greater dispersion of
financial outcomes across heterogeneous firms; for example, firms with low leverage and high cash
holdings can continue to borrow at relatively low cost, whereas those with high leverage and low
cash holdings can begin to face prohibitive borrowing costs during periods of financial turmoil.
   To explore time variation in the dispersion of interest rates, the solid lines in Figure 6 show
the cross-sectional standard deviation of log(rit ) over time and the quarterly growth rate of the
cyclically-adjusted total factor productivity as constructed by Basu, Fernald, and Kimball (2006).


                                                          23
                          Figure 6: Dispersion of Interest Rates and the Growth of TFP


       Percent                                                                                                            StdDev(log r)
  10                                                                                                                                      0.8
           Quarterly

                              TFP growth (left axis)
   8                          TFP growth trend (left axis)                                                                                0.7
                              Interest rate dispersion (right axis)
                              Interest rate dispersion trend (right axis)

   6                                                                                                                                      0.6



   4                                                                                                                                      0.5



   2                                                                                                                                      0.4



   0                                                                                                                                      0.3



  -2                                                                                                                                      0.2



  -4                                                                                                                                      0.1



  -6                                                                                                                                      0.0
            1985       1987        1989        1991        1993        1995   1997   1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009
   Note: The dotted black line depicts the (annualized) quarterly growth rate of cyclically-adjusted TFP and
   the solid black line depicts its corresponding H-P trend. The dotted red line depicts time path of the cross-
   sectional standard deviation of the logarithm of real interest rates for our sample of 496 manufacturing firms
   and the solid red line depicts its corresponding H-P trend.




To abstract from fluctuations at business cycle frequencies, the dotted lines show the two series
deviated from their respective local means using the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) (H-P) filter with
λ = 1, 600. According to the figure, the dispersion in real interest rates in U.S. manufacturing
was relatively low for the first decade or so of our sample period. In the late 1990s, however, the
dispersion of interest rates started to edge higher, increasing steadily through the 2001 economic
downturn and the aftermath of the bursting of the dot-com bubble. After leveling off in the mid-
2000s, interest rate dispersion again started to trend higher in 2007, increasing appreciably over
the remainder of the sample period.
   As the dispersion in interest rates increased in the post-2000 period, the trend growth of TFP
also slowed notably. Although one cannot assign causality to these developments on the basis of a
simple correlation, this comovement is consistent with the notion that financial distortions reflecting
the past two finance-driven cyclical downturns have increased the misallocation of resources in the
economy and thereby reduced the pace of TFP growth. Given our calibration, the increase in the
trend dispersion of interest rates since the start of the 2007 recession can account for about 25 basis
points of the step-down in the annual TFP growth, assuming that financial frictions apply to both
labor and capital inputs. Clearly, this represents a non-trivial portion of the overall slowdown in

                                                                                24
trend TFP growth that has materialized during this time period.


5    Conclusion
This paper develops a tractable TFP accounting framework that is used to compute the resource
loss due the misallocation of inputs in the presence of financial market frictions. To a second-order
approximation, our methodology implies that resource losses may be inferred directly from the
dispersion in borrowing costs across firms. Using a direct measure of firm-specific borrowing costs,
we show that for a subset of U.S. manufacturing firms, the resource loss due to such misallocation
is relatively small—between 1.5 and 3.5 percent of measured TFP. On the whole, our results are
consistent with those of Midrigan and Xu (2010) and Hopenyahn (2011), who argue that financial
market frictions are unlikely to imply large efficiency losses in an economy with relatively efficient
capital markets.
    It is important, however, to acknowledge several caveats to our methodology. First, to the extent
that firms experience direct credit rationing, the variation in observed interest rates understates
the true variation in the cost of capital. For our sample of publicly-traded manufacturing firms,
direct credit rationing seems rather implausible. Nonetheless, when measuring borrowing costs for
smaller firms in the U.S. economy or firms in developing countries, credit rationing may be of real
concern. Thus, while one might not directly observe the dispersion of interest rates that is ten
times greater than that observed in the U.S. financial data, credit rationing would certainly imply
greater dispersion in the shadow value of financial resources.
    In addition, our accounting framework abstracts from the entry and exit of firms, along with
the potential selection effects that financial distortions may induce on those margins. In the United
States, however, incumbent firms account for the overwhelming share of economic activity, so such
selection effects are unlikely to be important—nevertheless, they may be of concern in developing
economies. Moreover, distortions in credit markets may influence the decision to employ one’s
human capital in an entrepreneurial capacity, a source of resource misallocation that can have sig-
nificant consequences for aggregate TFP, according to the recent work of Buera, Kaboski, and Shin
(2011).
    Subject to these caveats, a clear advantage of our methodology is that it can easily be used to
study the question of what portion of the differences in TFP across countries may be attributable
to the misallocation of inputs arising from financial market frictions. Counterfactual experiments
indicate that a ten-fold increase in the dispersion in interest rates across firms implies a reduction—
through the effect of borrowing costs on resource allocation—in measured TFP of about 20 percent.
This finding implies that the dispersion in borrowing costs in developing countries must be an
order of magnitude greater than the dispersion of borrowing costs in the United States in order for
financial distortions to account for a significant share of the TFP differentials between developed
and developing economies.

                                                  25
   Moreover, it is well known that even in advanced economies such as the United States, there is
considerable dispersion in the observed marginal product of capital across production units. To the
extent that the dispersion in marginal products is not a result of measurement error, this implies
that the U.S. economy would realize significant productivity gains in response to optimal resource
allocation. However, the observed dispersion in the marginal product of capital in our data is four
times greater than the dispersion in the user cost of capital as measured by the firm-specific interest
rates. This divergence suggests that assigning all of the observed dispersion in factor input choices
to credit market distortions would substantially overstate the effect of financial frictions on resource
misallocation.



References
Amaral, P. S., and E. Quintin (2010): “Limited Enforcement, Financial Intermediation, and
 Economic Development,” International Economic Review, 51(3), 785–811.
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. J. Kehoe (2012): “Financial Markets and Fluctuations in
 Volatility,” Staff Report No. 466, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Banerjee, A. V., and E. Duflo (2005): “Growth Theory Through the Lens of Development
 Economics,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by S. N. Durlauf, and P. Aghion, vol. 1A, pp.
 473–522. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam.
         (2010): “Giving Credit Where It is Due,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(3), 61–80.
Basu, S. (1996): “Procyclical Productivity: Increasing Returns or Cyclical Utilization,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 111(3), 719–751.
Basu, S., J. G. Fernald, and M. S. Kimball (2006): “Are Technology Improvements Contrac-
 tionary?,” American Economic Review, 96(5), 1418–1448.
Bharath, S. T., and T. Shumway (2008): “Forecasting Default with the Merton Distance to
 Default Model,” Review of Financial Studies, 21(3), 1339–1369.
Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2011): “Finance and Development: A Tale of Two
 Sectors,” American Economic Review, 101(5), 1964–2002.
Collin-Dufresne, P., R. S. Goldstein, and J. S. Martin (2001): “The Determinants of
 Credit Spread Changes,” Journal of Finance, 56(6), 2177–2207.
Driessen, J. (2005): “Is Default Event Risk Priced in Corporate Bonds?,” Review of Financial
 Studies, 18(1), 165–195.
Duffie, D., L. Saita, and K. Wang (2007): “Multi-Period Corporate Default Prediction with
 Stochastic Covariates,” Journal of Financial Economics, 83(3), 635–665.
Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, D. Agrawal, and C. Mann (2001): “Explaining the Rate Spread
  on Corporate Bonds,” Journal of Finance, 56(1), 247–277.

                                                  26
Gilchrist, S., J. W. Sim, and E. Zakrajšek (2011): “Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and
 Investment Dynamics,” Working Paper, Dept. of Economics, Boston University.

Gilchrist, S., V. Yankov, and E. Zakrajšek (2009): “Credit Market Shocks and Economic
 Fluctuations: Evidence From Corporate Bond and Stock Markets,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 56(4), 471–493.

Gilchrist, S., and E. Zakrajšek (2007): “Investment and the Cost of Capital: New Evidence
 from the Corporate Bond Market,” NBER Working Paper No. 13174.

         (2012): “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,” American Economic Review,
  102(4), 1692–1720.

Greenwood, J., J. M. Sanchez, and C. Wang (2010): “Financing Development: The Role of
 Information Costs,” American Economic Review, 100(4), 1975–1891.

Greenwood, J., J. M. Sanchez, and C. Wang (2012): “Quantifying the Impact of Financial
 Development on Economic Development,” Forthcoming Review of Economic Dynamics. Available
 at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.red.2012.07.003.

Guner, N., G. Ventura, and Y. Xu (2008): “Macroeconomic Implications of Size-Dependent
 Policies,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 721–744.

Hakansson, N. H. (1982): “Changes in the Financial Market: Welfare and Price Effects and the
 Basic Theorems of Value Conservation,” Journal of Finance, 37(4), 977–1004.

Hall, R. E., and C. I. Jones (1999): “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
 per Worker than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1), 83–116.

Hodrick, R. J., and E. C. Prescott (1997): “Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An Empirical
 Investigation,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 29(1), 1–16.

Hopenhayn, H. A., and R. Rogerson (1993): “Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A General
 Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 101(5), 915–938.

Hopenyahn, H. A. (2011): “Firm Microstructure and Aggregate Productivity,” Journal of Money,
 Credit, and Banking, 43(5), 111–145.

Hotchkiss, E. S., and T. Ronen (2002): “The Informational Efficiency of the Corporate Bond
 Market: An Intraday Analysis,” Review of Financial Studies, 15(5), 1325–1354.

Houwelling, P., A. Mentink, and T. Vorst (2005): “Comparing Possible Proxies of Corporate
 Bond Liquidity,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 29(6), 1331–1358.

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
 India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403–1448.

Khan, A., and J. K. Thomas (2011): “Credit Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations in an Economy
 with Production Heterogeneity,” Working Paper, Dept. of Economics, The Ohio State University.




                                             27
Klenow, P. J., and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (1997): “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
 Economies: Has it Gone Too Far?,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by B. S. Bernanke,
 and J. J. Rotemberg, pp. 73–102. The MIT Press, Cambridge.

Lucas, R. E. (1978): “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics,
  9(2), 508–523.

Matsuyama, K. (2007): “Aggregate Implications of Credit Market Imperfections,” in NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and M. Woodford, pp. 1–60. The MIT
 Press, Cambridge.

Merton, R. C. (1974): “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates,”
 Journal of Finance, 29(2), 449–470.

Midrigan, V., and D. Xu (2010): “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence From Plant-Level Data,”
 Working Paper, Dept. of Economics, New York University.

Restuccia, D., and R. Rogerson (2008): “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with
 Heterogeneous Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 707–720.

Schaefer, S. M., and I. A. Strebulaev (2008): “Structural Models of Credit Risk are Useful:
  Evidence from Hedge Ratios on Corporate Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 90(1), 1–19.




                                              28
