NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUILDING CASTLES IN THE AIR:
EVIDENCE FROM INDUSTRY IPO WAVES
Zhi Da
Ravi Jagannathan
Jianfeng Shen
Working Paper 18555
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18555
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

This paper previously circulated as "Growth versus Margin and Castles in the Air: Evidence from
Industry IPO Waves." We thank Umit Gurun, Michael Hertzel, Byoung-Hyoun Hwang, Mudit Kapoor,
Ambrus Kecskes, Michelle Lowry, Jeremy Page, Jeff Pontiff, Jay Ritter, Michael Sher, Krishnamurthy
Subramanian, Yu Yuan, Tim Loughran, and participants at the 3rd Behavioral Finance Conference
at Queen’s University and seminars at Australia National University, Shanghai Advanced Institute
of Finance at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, University of New South Wales, and the Indian School
of Business for helpful comments. We thank Matt Cain, Bill McDonald, and Jay Ritter for making
their data available to us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Zhi Da, Ravi Jagannathan, and Jianfeng Shen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Building Castles in the Air: Evidence from Industry IPO Waves
Zhi Da, Ravi Jagannathan, and Jianfeng Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 18555
November 2012, Revised January 2013
JEL No. G02,G10,G12,G14,G17
ABSTRACT
We provide empirical support for the conventional wisdom that there are times when optimistic investors
tend to build their hopes into castles in the air, and pay a large premium over intrinsic value for stocks
of firms in the early stages of their life cycles with perceived growth opportunities. We use industry
IPO waves containing a set of firms in the same industry that went public at about the same time in
a cluster to identify those time periods and firms that are relatively homogenous and in the same early
growth stages of their life cycles. We find that three years after an industry IPO wave ends, among
the firms in the wave with relatively high historical sales growth rates, those with low gross margins
are over-valued relative to firms with high gross margins. They under-perform their industry IPO wave
peers by 0.92% per month, or about 12% per year, during the subsequent four-year period after adjusting
for risk and firm characteristics differentials. Further, the average future returns on these firms are
even below the corresponding risk-free returns. Our findings contribute to the literature on inefficient
capital markets by identifying situations when prices of some stocks are likely to be affected by bounded
rationality or biases in the way investors make decisions, and agency issues limit the ability of more
sophisticated arbitrageurs who have to rely on other people’s money from exploiting any resultant
profit opportunities.
Zhi Da
University of Notre Dame
239 Mendoza College of Business
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5646
zda@nd.edu
Ravi Jagannathan
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@northwestern.edu

Jianfeng Shen
School of Banking and Finance
University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
jianfeng.shen@unsw.edu.au

I. Introduction
Firms in the early stages of their lifecycle are typically resource constrained and face a
fundamental strategic tradeoff. They can focus their efforts on a growth strategy that involves
increasing sales at a rapid rate based on the view that the resultant increased market share will
give a permanent competitive advantage due to economies of scale. Alternatively, they can focus
on a margin strategy that involves improving profit margins assuming that higher margins reflect
increased customer satisfaction, leading to sustainable profitable growth over the long run. The
former choice becomes more attractive during periods when optimistic investors “tend to build
their hopes into castles in the air” 1 and are willing to pay a large premium for stocks with
perceived growth opportunities.
Aghion and Stein (2008) analyze such a tradeoff in a theoretical model that allows two-way
feedback between firms’ strategies and the market’s pricing rule. They show that at times
investors may pay too much for growth opportunities thereby encouraging managers to focus on
sales growth, and some may do so even at the expense of margins.2 They refer to those times as
growth equilibrium. In the bounded rationality version of their model where investors follow a
simple linear forecasting rule, they make the following prediction: “… in a growth equilibrium
the market fully impounds all growth-related information, but ignores margins-related
information. ... firms with weak profit margins will be overvalued (page 1051 op. cit.).” 3

1

Malkiel (2011), page 33.
The 'catering' by managers to market sentiment could be common if managers are interested in boosting short-run
share prices. See Polk and Sapienza (2008) for the evidence on managers' deviation from optimal investments in
response to investors' sentiment and mispricing in shares.
3
Hong, Stein and Yu (2007) discuss various reasons why investors sometime may oversimplify the information
structure and rely on simple univariate models for forecasting.
2

2

Testing such a prediction is challenging: among other things, it requires the identification of
a group of similar firms and time periods when the stock market is in a growth equilibrium and
over-fixated on sales growth numbers. In this paper, we address this challenge by focusing on a
set of firms in the same industry that went public at about the same time in a cluster, commonly
referred to as an industry IPO wave, for the following reasons.
(a) Firms that went public at about the same time in the same industry are likely to be
relatively homogeneous in the same early growth stage of their life cycles.
(b) According to the popular Boston Consulting Group Model (BCG, 1968), a firm should
maximize sales growth and market share early in its life cycle in order to create permanent cost
and customer relationship related advantages over their competitors.4 Hence there are a priori
reasons to believe that firms in an industry IPO wave are likely to focus on gaining market share.
Chemmanur and He (2011) argue that gaining market share is an important reason why these
firms go public together in an industry IPO wave.
(c) There is ample anecdotal evidence that over-emphasis on market share may lead some
managers to focus excessively on short-term sales growth in their early life cycle stage without
regard to costs and benefits, especially when facing intense product market competition. For
example, Adizes (1988) in his classical book on corporate life cycles mentions: “… the selling
orientation becomes addictive, with more meaning better… However, as they expand
uncontrollably, their cost accounting becomes useless. Eventually, they might be selling more,
but instead of making more profits, they might be losing money (page 35-36 op. cit.).”

4

See Spence 1977, 1979, and 1981 for related discussions in the industrial organization literature.

3

(d) Industry IPO waves often coincide with increasing valuation uncertainty (Pastor and
Veronesi, 2005). Given the likely large dispersion in the prior beliefs of investors regarding
which firms will be market leaders in an emerging industry, each firm is likely to develop a
clientele of optimistic investors who are fixated on the reported sales growth and ignore the
associated costs and sustainability of that growth.5
(e) Since firms can time when they go public, industry IPO waves are more likely to occur
when investors are optimistic and the market is in the Aghion and Stein (2008) type growth
equilibrium with some managers following the growth strategy.
(f) An industry IPO wave is likely triggered by major technological or demand shocks
affecting that industry as a whole and these shocks may take several years to play out, with
optimistic views prevailing for a long period of time. Hence the limits to arbitrage arguments in
Shleifer and Vishny (1997) are more likely to apply, and prevent arbitrageurs from correcting
mispricing immediately.
Our empirical results provide strong support for the Aghion and Stein (2008) prediction that
firms with weak margins will be overpriced in a bounded-rationality growth equilibrium. We
confirm that a low gross margin is a leading indicator of an industry IPO wave firm’s poor future
stock price performance.
ANSYS (NASDAQ: ANSS) and CSG System (NASDAQ: CSGS) help illustrate our findings.
They both went public in 1996 during an IPO wave in the computer software industry that started
5

Optimism is what leads to innovations and doing the impossible. For example, it is believed that Lord Kelvin
(President of the Royal Society) declared in 1895 that heavier than air flying machines are impossible -- but a mere
eight years later, the Wright brothers flew their machine in 1903! History is full of such examples. But not for the
Dot Com bubble we may not have eBay, Amazon, and Google. However, while humanity benefits from such
endeavors, an average investor may not, which is consistent with the findings in Ritter (2012) that per capita GDP
growth is negatively correlated with stock returns across countries.

4

in March 1995 and ended in January 1997. They differed in one important dimension: gross
margin. During the fiscal years 1998 and 1999, ANSYS had an average gross margin of 87% and
its sales grew annually at 14% on average. While CSG achieved a much higher average growth
rate of 33% per year, its average gross margin was only 51%. The future stock price path of the
two firms diverged. While ANSYS returned about 470% in the next four years, CSG lost more
than 60% of its market value over the same period.
When we trace all U.S. IPOs in industry IPO waves from 1980 through their initial firm life
cycle stages, we find that firms like CSG, i.e., those with relatively high sales growth but
relatively low gross margins, are associated with poor future stock price performance on average.
For each industry IPO wave, at the end of event year 3, where event year 0 denotes the year in
which the industry IPO wave ended, we do a two-by-two sequential sort of firms based on their
book-to-market equity ratios (BM) and the average gross margins (GM) in fiscal years 1 and 2.6
We find that low-BM-low-GM IPO firms underperform their industry peers by more than 30% in
the subsequent four years on average, translating to a loss of market capitalization of more than
$200 million per firm. In contrast, low-BM-high-GM IPO firms, while having an average initial
sales growth rate (45% per year in the fiscal years 1 and 2) and an average initial BM ratio (0.28
at the end of event year 3) that are about the same as their low-GM peers, do not underperform.
This event-time comparison delivers two key observations that are consistent with the
predictions in Aghion and Stein (2008): (1) IPO firms with high initial sales growth rates have
high market valuations (lower BMs) on average regardless of their initial GMs; (2) IPO firms

6

We allow for a minimum of 3-month lag for book values to be available after the end of the fiscal year. We use the
stock prices corresponding to the last day of the last calendar month in event year 3. We check the robustness of our
conclusions by allowing for a minimum of 12-month lag for book values to be available after the end of the fiscal
year.

5

with low GMs but similarly high valuations (lower BMs) are initially over-valued in the market,
leading to long-run underperformance.
We confirm our findings in the event-time analysis using both calendar-time analysis and
panel regressions. Calendar-time analysis suggests that, after risk adjustment, low-BM-low-GM
IPO firms underperform their industry benchmarks by more than 1% per month on average. This
underperformance is robust to various modifications to the empirical design of trading strategies
such as sample period, portfolio formation time, holding horizon, and the definition of industry
IPO waves. While replacing GM with other profitability measures such as profit margin and
return on assets produces qualitatively similar results, which is not surprising given the high
correlations among different measures, GM performs the best in separating the future losers from
their peers among low-BM IPO firms. Further, using sales growth rate instead of BM to identify
growth firms produces very similar underperformance (78 bps per month) of low-GM-highgrowth IPO firms.
Additional analysis reveals three more interesting observations that are consistent with the
predictions of Aghion and Stein (2008). First, it is crucial to condition our analysis on “industry
IPO waves” that control for an IPO firm's industry peers in the same growth equilibrium.
Grouping all IPOs in the same industry simply by calendar years generates a much weaker
underperformance of low-BM-low-GM IPO firms (only 29 bps per month). When all
CRSP/COMPUSTAT stocks are examined, the underperformance is almost economically
insignificant, a mere 6 bps per month. Second, we find the underperformance of low-BM-lowGM stocks to be much stronger among industries and during times with more competitive
product markets. Finally, we confirm that the stock price response for low-BM-low-GM IPO

6

firms to changes in sales growth rates is much stronger, even after controlling for changes in
earnings, but only during the first two years after the end of the wave.
Consistent with the bounded-rationality equilibrium of Aghion and Stein (2008), we find
evidence supporting the view that the investors of low-BM-low-GM IPO firms were too
optimistic about the long-run growth prospects of the firms. That may be due to the use of simple
linear models for forecasting as in Aghion and Stein (2008) without recognizing that high past
growth rates do not persist for very long into the future, especially when the firm is financially
weak as evidenced by relatively low gross margins. We find that the low-BM-low-GM IPO firms
do not achieve higher market share and improved profitability in the long run. Using analyst
forecasts, we find that their stock underperformance from event year 4 to 7 is primarily driven by
downward revisions in expectations about long-run earnings beyond event year 13.
We find that low-BM-low-GM IPO firms are associated with greater uncertainty about their
future. Their earnings forecasts are associated with significantly higher dispersions. Their
idiosyncratic volatilities are also higher. When conducting textual analysis of the Risk Factor
sections in the IPO prospectus available for a subset of IPO firms in our sample, we find that
low-BM-low-GM IPOs indeed witness more mentions of “Cost(s)” and “Profitability” in their
Risk Factors sections. In addition, we find that on average, low-BM-low-GM IPO stocks are held
significantly less by corporate insiders and mutual funds compared to their high-GM
counterparts. Overall, greater uncertainties and lower ownership by sophisticated, better
informed investors, in the presence of limits-to-arbitrage, may explain why the prices of such
stocks continue to fall over three to four years in the future. Limits-to-arbitrage may arise due to
direct as well as indirect short-selling costs, agency issues that make it difficult to access capital

7

markets during margin calls, and high idiosyncratic risk that makes it less attractive to riskaverse arbitrageurs with limited capital.
In a related paper, Novy-Marx (2012) shows that firms with high gross-profit-to-asset ratio
(GPA) earn higher returns going forward, even after controlling for their book-to-market ratios.
Since GPA is the product of gross margin (GM) and asset turnover (AT, i.e., sales / total assets),
keeping valuation and AT fixed, one should also expect GM to be positively related to average
returns in the cross-section. Our paper goes further in two important ways. First, we show that
GM is the key predictor of future returns among firms in their early life-cycle stages that initially
receive high valuations. Second and more importantly, while Brav, Geczy, and Gompers (2000)
and Brav, Michaely, Roberts, and Zarutskie (2009) argue that lower post-equity-issuance stock
returns could reflect lower risks, we find that average future returns on these low-BM-low-GM
firms are even below the corresponding risk-free returns. 7 Such a low return is difficult to
reconcile with a positive risk premium for bearing economy-wide systematic risk in an
informationally efficient market unless one can argue that realized returns were influenced by
unforeseen rare events.
The findings in our paper are related to but different from those in the voluminous literature
on IPO long-run underperformance (see Ritter (1991), Loughran and Ritter (1995), Brav, Geczy,
and Gompers (2000) among many others). One key distinction is the horizon over which IPO
performance is measured. While the IPO long-run underperformance literature mostly focuses on
the first three to five years immediately after the offering date, we focus on the horizon from
event years 4 to 7 after the ending year of an industry IPO wave. For example, using a clever

7

In the event time, the buy-and-hold excess return over the risk-free rate during the 4-year holding period is -6.24%
for the low-BM-low-GM portfolio.

8

empirical design, Purnanandam and Swaminathan (2004) find that IPOs, especially those with
high sales growth forecasts and lower profitability measures, are systematically overvalued at the
offer price relative to their valuations based on industry peer multiples, and the overvalued IPOs
provide high first day returns but low long-run (over the five years following the IPO) risk
adjusted returns. In contrast, we study the overvaluation of stocks three years after the IPO
fueled by their high post-IPO sales growth rates, and the overvalued IPOs underperform their
industry IPO wave peers over the following four years. We find that both the gross margin and
the conditioning on industry IPO waves are important for detecting future underperformance.
Pastor and Veronesi (2003) argue that the uncertainty associated with the IPO firms could result
in high initial valuation and the subsequent learning about profitability reduces the uncertainty
and valuation, thereby providing a rational explanation for the long-run underperformance of
IPOs. While such a learning mechanism is consistent with the long-run underperformance of
IPOs as a group, it should not drive the relative underperformance of low-BM-low-GM IPOs
within an industry IPO wave as we do not observe a greater reduction in uncertainty measures
over time on these low-GM firms relative to their high-GM counterparts.
Our paper also contributes to the broader literature on firm life cycle that includes Anthony
and Ramesh (1992), Berger and Udell (1998), DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Stulz (2006, 2010), and
Dickinson (2011). One challenge in studying firm life cycle arises from the fact that there is no
easy and objective way to classify firms into different life cycle stages. We get around this
problem by focusing on industry IPO waves, which presents a model-free way to identify a
sizable cohort of similar firms in the same initial growth stage of their life cycles. Over-fixation
on sales growth seems to drive the overvaluation of the growth firms during the initial growth
stage of their life cycle. Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994), La Porta (1996), La Porta,
9

Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997), and Sloan (1996) also mention extrapolation of past
performance and earnings fixation to explain the difference in returns between growth and value
stocks. Piotroski and So (2012) show that the predictable value/growth return spreads
concentrate among firms with ex ante identifiable errors in expectations about future
fundamental performance. We find over-fixation on sales growth and errors in expectations
about future growth and profitability are particularly prevalent for firms in the initial growth
stage of their life cycle.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows: Section II describes our sample of industry IPO
waves, Section III presents the evidence of the underperformance of growth firms with low gross
margin, Section IV reports the results of additional analyses about potential driving forces, and
finally Section V briefly concludes.
II. Data
Our sample consists of firms that went public in the same industry at about the same time.
We collect the data for U.S. IPOs covering the period 1970 to 2010 from Thomson Financial
Security Data Corporation (SDC) and keep only IPOs of only common shares with no attached
units (warrants) and no accompanying issue of other types of securities. We classify IPOs into
Fama and French (1997) 49 industries and drop the unclassified ones (those with missing
industry classification) and those classified into the 49th industry.8 We follow the procedure in
Chemmanur and He (2011) to identify industry IPO waves based on how clustered the IPOs are
in an industry. Specifically, for each industry i and each month t, we count the number of IPOs in
the 3-month window from t-1 to t+1. We then define an IPO hot month for industry i as one with

8

We use the updated industry classifications obtained from Ken French’s website.

10

the 3-month number of IPOs in the top quartile among all months from 1970 to 2010 with at
least one IPO in industry i. Finally, we classify IPOs in those consecutive hot months for
industry i as an industry IPO wave. We define the beginning month and the ending month of an
industry IPO wave, for industry i, as the first month and the last month in an unbroken sequence
of hot months for industry i. To avoid standalone IPOs being erroneously classified as a wave,
we require a minimum of 5 IPOs in total and 1 IPO every month on average in the wave period.
For each industry IPO wave, the calendar year in which the wave ends is denoted as event
year 0. We form portfolios within the wave at the end of event year 3, based on the book-tomarket equity ratio at the end of event year 3 (BM) and the average of gross margins (GM)
during the two fiscal years after event year 0. 9 Figure I plots the timeline of our portfolio
formation procedure. This procedure imposes additional filters. For an IPO firm to enter our final
sample, it has to: (1) exist in CRSP at the end of event year 3; (2) have positive book value at the
end of event year 3; and (3) have the necessary accounting information in COMPUSTAT
available during the two fiscal years after event year 0. In addition, we require at least 8 firms in
an industry IPO wave at the end of event year 3 to make sure that our portfolio-level result is not
driven by a single firm.10 These filters are based on information available by the end of event
year 3 and thus do not introduce look-ahead bias. In the end, 1425 IPOs going public during 68
industry IPO waves from 1980 to 2006 satisfy our portfolio formation requirements. In other

9

The market equity is measured at the end of event year 3, and the book equity is measured from the most recent
fiscal year ending at least 3 months before the end of event year 3. We also do a robustness check by defining the
book-to-market equity ratio as the book equity at the end of fiscal year 2 scaled by the market equity at the end of
event year 3. As can be seen from Panel B of Table IV, the results for calendar-time analysis using this alternative
BM measure are stronger than those in our baseline case. For gross margin, we do not use the number in fiscal year
3 since it may not be available yet at the time of portfolio formation, the end of event year 3.
10
To further avoid the undue influence of outliers, we value weight stocks within each portfolio for each wave and
then weight the portfolios across waves based on the number of IPOs at the end of event year 3. We also confirm
that equal-weighing stocks within each portfolio and/or across waves do not change our results qualitatively.

11

words, our final sample effectively covers the period from 1980 to 2010, including the portfolio
holding period.
Panel A of Table I reports summary statistics for IPOs and industry IPO waves during the
period 1980-2006. We start with 9,898 IPOs. Among them, 3,618 IPOs belong to industry IPO
waves (on-the-wave). When we require IPOs to appear in COMPUSTAT until the end of event
year 3, the number of IPOs drops to 8,751, and 3,069 of them are on-the-wave, among which
1,425 IPOs in 68 industry IPO waves enter our final sample. As shown in Panel B, the various
characteristics of the 68 industry IPO waves in our sample are comparable to those from a larger
sample reported in Chemmanur and He (2011).11 The top 5 industries contribute 26 industry IPO
waves to our sample. Panel C further shows the five biggest industry IPO waves in our sample,
coming from computer software, trading, and business services industries. Altogether, 895 firms
went public in these top 5 waves, among which 383 IPOs pass various portfolio formation filters
and account for about 27% of our final IPO sample.
Figure II documents the various characteristics of the industry IPO waves. In the first two
sub-plots, we plot the number of IPO waves and the fraction of stocks in the sample for all
Fama-French industries and all calendar years with IPO waves in our sample respectively. There
are significant variations across both industries and years in terms of their representativeness in
our sample, but no single industry or year dominates our sample. In the next sub-plot, we present
the histogram of the number of IPOs in our sample for 68 industry IPO waves. The minimum
number of IPOs in a wave is 8 as required for forming portfolios within a wave, and the
maximum number of IPOs in a wave is 102. Most industry IPO waves (40 out of 68 waves) have
11

We identify a total of 184 industry IPO waves using our wave identification procedure for all IPOs in SDC from
1970 to 2006. The statistics of these waves, such as IPO volume and duration, are very close to those reported in
Chemmanur and He (2011). More details are available upon request.

12

fewer than 16 IPOs included in our sample. In the final sub-plot, we present the histogram of the
wave duration. Five industry IPO waves in our sample lasted for as short as 2 months, while one
wave lasted for as long as 25 months. Most industry IPO waves (54 out of 68 waves) lasted for
less than 1 year, with the most common wave duration of 6 months (14 out of 68 waves).
III. Empirical results
III.A. Event-time analysis
Our analysis is first conducted in event time. In other words, we take a particular industry
IPO wave at a time and trace the performance of this cohort of IPO firms over time. It is well
recognized in the literature that the statistical inference based on event-time analysis is fraught
with difficulty and unreliability.12 Therefore in the next section (Section III.B) we will verify the
statistical validity of our conclusions based on event time analysis by using calendar-time
analysis.
The year in which the industry IPO wave ended is denoted as event year 0. At the end of
event year 3, we sort the remaining IPO firms in the wave first based on their book-to-market
equity ratios (BM) into high-BM and low-BM portfolios. The BM is computed using the yearend market capitalization and the book value for the most recent fiscal year that ends at least
three months before. Within each of the two portfolios, we further sort the firms into two
portfolios based on their average gross margins (GM) during the fiscal years 1 and 2. We do not
use the GM in fiscal year 3 since such accounting information is not available yet at the end of
event year 3 for many firms when we form the portfolios. Once we construct the four portfolios,

12

For related discussions on issues associated with long horizon event studies, see Barber and Lyon (1997), Kothari
and Warner (1997), Fama (1998), Lyon, Barber and Tsai (1999), Brav (2000), Mitchell and Stafford (2000), Eckbo,
Masulis and Norli (2006), Viswanathan and Wei (2008), and Jegadeesh and Kothari (2009). Kothari and Warner
(2006) provide a comprehensive review of literature on this topic.

13

we then examine their buy-and-hold abnormal returns, in excess of the value-weighted industry
portfolio returns, over holding horizons ranging from one year (event year 4) to four years (event
years 4 to 7). Stocks returns are value-weighted in each portfolio and proceeds from delisting are
reinvested in the same portfolio.13
Table II reports the abnormal buy-and-hold returns for each of the four portfolios, averaged
across all industry IPO waves. The average returns and their t-statistics are computed across
different industry IPO waves using the number of IPOs at the end of event year 3 in each wave
as the weight. We follow the approach in Jegadeesh and Karceski (2009) to estimate the tstatistics of the average returns from the time-series of event-time portfolio returns. This
approach allows for both heteroskedasticity and correlations in long-horizon buy-and-hold
returns across event firms, and is recommended as probably “the most appropriate to reduce
misspecification in tests of long-horizon event studies” by Kothari and Warner (2006) in their
survey paper. However, we call for caution in making inferences from these t-statistics because
of their unknown small sample distribution and lack of power as noted in Jegadeesh and
Karceski (2009). Finally, we will repeat our analysis in calendar time since inference based on
calendar time analysis is more robust. 14
Consistent with initial overvaluation, IPOs that achieved high valuation (low BM) at the end
of event year 3 with low gross margin (low GM) underperform in the next four years relative to
their industry benchmark. The cumulative underperformance from event year 4 to event year 7 is
more than -30% with a t-value of -1.87. The underperformance is most pronounced during the
13

We obtain the proceeds from delisting from CRSP monthly delisting file. If the delisting payment information is
not available, for performance-related delisting (delisting code in 500-599), we assume a delisting return as the
average delisting return for all performance-related delistings of the listed exchange (NYSE/AMEX or NASDAQ),
following the recommendation in Shumway (1997) and Shumway and Warther (1999). For delistings due to other
reasons, we assume a zero delisting return when the delisting payment information is not available.
14
See Fama (1998), Mitchell and Stafford (2000), Schultz (2003) and Viswanathan and Wei (2008).

14

first year after portfolio formation (event year 4). It is more than -16% with a t-value of -2.28. In
contrast, low-BM-high-GM stocks do not underperform, thus driving a considerable wedge
between the future performances of these two portfolios of growth stocks. Table II also reports
the stock performance of these two portfolios of growth stocks prior to the portfolio formation.
Low-GM and High-GM growth stocks performed similarly both from the IPO date and from the
end of event year 0, suggesting that the market was treating them similarly during the initial
years after IPO. Since the number of firms declines as we increase the holding period, the
statistical reliability of these observations may be low for longer horizons.15
When we look at the other half of our sample, we find both high-BM portfolios to
outperform the industry benchmark from even year 4 to event year 7. This outperformance is
stronger for the high-BM-low-GM portfolio. Importantly, we do not see a significant wedge
between the future performances of these two high-BM portfolios. Overall, event-time analysis
suggests that only low-BM-low-GM IPO firms are associated with underperformance in the long
run.
Table III reports various portfolio-level characteristics of the four portfolios during the IPO
(Panel A) and during the formation period (Panel B). When we examine the IPO characteristics
in Panel A, we do not see much difference between the low-GM and high-GM growth stocks
(see the last column for the significance test of differences). Green and Hwang (2012) document
15

Occasionally, there are some extreme values associated with the buy-and-hold excess returns, especially over
longer horizons. For example, in the low-BM-high-GM group, AMGEN Inc. (exchange ticker: AMGN) and
Surgical Care Affiliates Inc. (exchange ticker: SCAF) returned more than 14 times and 32 times over the 4-year
holding period. However, our results are robust to the winsorization of buy-and-hold returns on individual stocks at
the top and bottom 1 percentile values within each BM/GM group. For example, the weighted average industryadjusted buy-and-hold return from the end of event year 3 to the end of event year 7 is -33.01% (t-stat = -1.79) for
low-BM-low-GM stocks, 12.88% (t-stat = 0.68) for low-BM-high-GM stocks, 30.88% (t-stat = 1.19) for high-BMlow-GM stocks, and 29.07% (t-stat = 0.90) for high-BM-high-GM stocks. Finally, the point estimates change little if
we further drop those penny stocks with the price below $1 at the time of portfolio formation, the end of event year
3. For example, the point estimate of 4-year industry-adjusted buy-and-hold return remains almost identical, with
only changes in decimals, for all groups except for high-BM-high-GM group (Mean = 25.73%, t-stat = 0.85).

15

that lottery-like payoff associated with an IPO can contribute to its high first-day return and
long-run underperformance, but low-GM and high-GM growth stocks have similar first-day
returns. Brav and Gompers (1997, 2003) find that IPOs underperforming in the long run are
more likely not backed by venture capital and with lockup restrictions. There is some weak
evidence that low-GM growth stocks are more likely to have lockup restrictions in place. The
only significant difference, however, is that low-GM growth firms sold more new shares
(primary shares) during the IPO than high-GM growth firms, though the average offer prices are
not statistically different. This is consistent with the view that existing owners of the low-GM
growth firms are less optimistic about the future prospects of their firms and are willing to dilute
their ownership more at the offer price (see Myers and Majluf, 1984).
We then examine in Panel B price-related variables measured at the formation date (the end
of event year 3) and other variables measured using information during the first three event years
that is available at the formation date. Comparing the high-GM growth stocks to their low-GM
counterparts, the high-GM stocks not surprisingly are larger in terms of market capitalization but
do not have significantly lower BMs. By construction, they have higher gross margins, and since
gross margins are correlated with profitability, they also have significantly higher returns on
assets (ROA) in the first two fiscal years after the wave ending year.
IPO firms in our sample in general have high sales growth rates (39%) during the first two
fiscal years after the wave ending year. Among them, those classified as growth firms at the end
of event year 3 are indeed associated with even higher sales growth rates in the first two years.
Interestingly, low-GM and high-GM growth firms have similarly high initial sales growth rates
(46% vs. 45%). These sales numbers help to make three observations: (1) an industry IPO wave
contains similar firms in their initial growth stage of their life cycle; (2) market assigns high
16

valuations (low BMs) to firms with high sales growth rate on average; (3) IPO firms with low
GMs are “rewarded” with the same high valuations (low BMs) as otherwise similar IPO firms
with high GMs, as long as they also achieved high initial sales growth rates. All three
observations are consistent with the predictions from the growth equilibrium under bounded
rationality in Aghion and Stein (2008).
III.B. Calendar-time analysis
We repeat our analysis using calendar time methods in order to adequately control for
differences in systematic risk exposures and endogeneity of the firms’ decisions to go public
discussed in Schultz (2003) and Viswanathan and Wei (2008).16
As in the event-time analysis, for a particular industry IPO wave, we sequentially sort stocks
in the wave into four groups at the end of event year 3, based on BM at that time first and then
the average GM in the first two fiscal years after the wave ending year. Four value-weighted
BM/GM wave portfolios are formed within the wave and then held during the next four years.17
In each calendar year t, we form the four composite BM/GM portfolios at the beginning of the
year by aggregating the corresponding BM/GM wave portfolios across all industry IPO waves
ending in the period year t-7 to year t-4 and using the number of surviving IPOs in an industry
IPO wave at the end of event year 3 as the weight for BM/GM wave portfolios in that wave. The
four composite BM/GM portfolios are rebalanced at the beginning of every year t by adding
stocks in industry IPO waves ending in year t-4 and dropping stocks in industry IPO waves

16

Fama (1998) and Mitchell and Stafford (2000) also recommend the use of calendar portfolio approach to
adequately control for systematic risk exposures and address econometric issues underlying long-run event studies.
17
In the case of delisting, the proceeds from delisting are reinvested in the affiliated portfolio.

17

ending in year t-8. We compute the monthly returns of these four portfolios in excess of the
returns on the industry benchmark portfolio.18
We then regress the monthly excess returns on the Fama-French three factors (MKTRF,
SMB, and HML) and the Carhart’s momentum factor (UMD). The three Fama-French factors
represent economy wide pervasive risk. We use the Carhart factor in addition, to ensure that any
mispricing according to the Fama-French three factor model is not due to the well known
momentum anomaly. Panel A of Table IV reports the regression results for the four calendartime BM/GM double sorted portfolios. Confirming the results from event-time analysis, we find
low-BM-low-GM stocks to significantly underperform their industry benchmarks on a riskadjusted basis during the four-year holding period by more than 1% per month with a t-value of
4.36. Interestingly, none of the other three portfolios is associated with abnormal returns after
risk adjustment. As a result, we see a significant risk-adjusted spread between the high-GM and
low-GM growth stocks, but not between high-GM and low-GM value stocks.
As we follow Chemmanur and He (2011) to define IPO waves based on the full-sample IPO
distribution, our calendar-time portfolios are not tradable in real time. Though having a
profitable trading strategy is not the main objective of our study, we also examine an alternative
approach to form portfolios using only the IPO information available at the time of portfolio
formation. Specifically, for each industry i and each year y, we define a month t in that year as an
IPO hot month if the number of IPOs in the 3-month window from t-1 to t+1 is in the top

18

For BM/GM wave portfolios in an industry IPO wave, we use the returns on the value-weighted industry portfolio
as the return benchmark. We use the same weighting scheme across industry IPO waves in forming the composite
BM/GM portfolios to aggregate corresponding industry benchmark returns for individual industry IPO waves.

18

quartile among all months from 1970 to year y+3 with at least one IPO in industry i.19 We then
classify IPOs in those consecutive hot months for industry i as an industry IPO wave. We define
the beginning month and the ending month of an industry IPO wave, for industry i, as the first
month and the last month with at least one IPO in an unbroken sequence of hot months for
industry i. To avoid standalone IPOs being erroneously classified as a wave, we require a
minimum of 5 IPOs in total and 1 IPO every month on average in the wave period. Finally, once
we identify an industry IPO wave ending in year y, we follow our baseline trading strategy to
form and hold portfolios of stocks in this newly-defined industry IPO wave at the end of year
y+3.20 The untablulated results are almost identical to those reported in Table IV. Only low-BMlow-GM stocks significantly underperform their industry benchmarks on a risk-adjusted basis
during the four-year holding period (alpha = -1% per month with a t-value of -4.11). Further,
there is a significant risk-adjusted spread between the high-GM and low-GM growth stocks
(alpha = 0.83% per month with a t-value of 2.84), but not between high-GM and low-GM value
stocks. Since the results from our baseline portfolio construction do not seem to be driven by
any forward-looking bias, we continue to rely on the baseline strategy in the rest of the paper.
Next we focus on IPO firms with high initial valuation and low gross margins that are
associated with poor long-run performance. In our first set of additional analyses, we conduct a
battery of robustness checks to examine whether our main finding is driven by specific time
periods or the specific way we form and hold our portfolios. We report our findings in Panel B of
Table IV. First, when we divide the time series of portfolio returns into two halves: 1985-1997
19

We require a minimum of 10-year data and a minimum of 12 months with IPOs to obtain the distribution of the
number of IPOs. We also exclude the December in year y+3 from the estimation of distribution to avoid the use of
IPO information in January of year y+4.
20
The only minor modification is that for industry IPO waves ending exactly in December, year y, we treat them as
ending in year y +1 and start to include stocks in these waves in portfolios since year y +5 to avoid the look-ahead
bias. Knowing these waves actually ending in year y requires the knowledge of January, year y +1 not being a hot
month, which requires the information of IPOs in year y +4.

19

and 1998-2010, we find significant underperformance for the low-BM-low-GM IPOs in both
sub-periods. The underperformance is slightly stronger in the first half (-1.14% with a t-value of
-3.33) than in the second half (-0.87% with a t-value of -2.59). This sub-period analysis further
confirms that our findings are not driven by a few big industry IPO waves. As is shown in figure
II.2, the second sub-period witnesses more industry IPO waves than the first one. Panel C of
Table I also shows that that the top five industry IPO waves in our sample all ended in years after
1994 with the holding periods starting in years after 1998.
Second, we value weight all stocks both within and across waves to make sure that our
results are not driven by penny or micro-cap stocks and those thin waves with very few stocks.
We continue to find a significant underperformance of low-BM-low-GM stocks relative to both
their industry benchmarks and their low-BM-high-GM peers.21 Third, when we vary the holding
horizon from one year (event year 4) to seven years (event years 4 to 10), the underperformance
of low-BM-low-GM stocks is significant in all holding horizons. For simplicity we only report
the results of 1-year and 7-year holding horizons. The underperformance is stronger in the first
year after portfolio formation. Fourth, when we change the portfolio formation date to the end of
event year 2 or 4, the results do not change significantly. Fifth, when we combine waves in the
same industry with a gap less than 6 months in between into one wave, this coarser definition of
industry IPO waves does not change our main finding.22 Finally, to make sure that our sorting
variables do not introduce look-ahead bias, we measure the book-to-market equity ratio
alternatively as the ratio of book equity at the end of fiscal year 2 to the market equity at the end

21

When we weight all stocks equally both within and across waves, the alpha of low-BM-low-GM portfolio is
actually smaller (alpha = -0.61%, t-stat = -2.27), which provides further evidence that our results are not driven by
penny or micro-cap stocks or thin waves.
22
We also tried to combine waves with a shorter gap (3-month) or a longer gap (12-month). The underperformance
is presented in both analyses, though further longer gaps produce less precise industry IPO waves and weaker results.

20

of event year 3, and then form portfolios accordingly. The underperformance of low-BM-lowGM stocks is even stronger than that in our baseline case.
In the second set of additional analyses reported in Panel A of Table V, we repeat our
portfolio formation procedures and the calendar-time trading strategies but base on firm
characteristics other than BM and GM. We first replace GM with other measures related to
profitability such as profit margin (PM), asset turnover (AT), gross-profit to-asset ratio (GPA),
return on assets (ROA), and return on equity (ROE). Given that low gross margin is highly
correlated with low profitability, it is not surprising that low-BM-low-profitability firms also
significantly underperform their industry benchmarks. However, when we examine the riskadjusted return spreads between high- and low-profitability growth stocks, we find them to be
much smaller and less significant compared to that between high- and low-GM growth stocks. In
other words, if we want to separate out future losers from their peers among the current growth
IPO firms, the recent gross margin seems to be a better predictor than other measures of
profitability.
In a related paper, Novy-Marx (2012) shows that firms with high gross-profit-to-asset ratio
(GPA) earn higher returns going forward, even after controlling for their book-to-market ratios.
Since GPA is the product of gross margin (GM) and asset turnover (AT), the results in Panel A
show that a lower GM, not a lower AT, is driving the future underperformance of firms that
initially received high valuations in their early life-cycle stage. More importantly, our paper
differs from Novy-Marx (2012) in that we find average future returns on low-BM-low-GM firms
to be even below risk-free rates, but positive loadings on the three Fama-French factors that
capture economy wide pervasive risk. In the calendar time, the average excess return over the
risk-free rate during the 4-year holding period is -29 bps per month for the low-BM-low-GM
21

portfolio. Such a low return is difficult to reconcile with a positive risk premium for bearing
economy-wide systematic risk.
Instead, our finding is consistent with the view that that low-margin-induced high sales
growth fuels higher initial valuation under investor bounded rationality as in Aghion and Stein
(2008), resulting in long-run underperformance. As a direct check, we conduct a sales growth /
GM double sort instead of the usual BM / GM double sort. As shown in the bottom of Table V
Panel A, we again observe a significant future underperformance (from event years 4 to 7)
among stocks that experienced high sale growth but low gross margin during the first two fiscal
years after event year 0. The underperformance is 78 bps per month with a t-value of -2.88. The
smaller magnitude in underperformance is to be expected since we did not control for market
valuation (BM) explicitly.
Our hypothesis posits that some firms, in the face of product market competition, are induced
to sell their products at a lower margin in order to keep up the high sales growth rates. Naturally,
one would expect to see a bigger effect among industries with more intense product market
competition. We use two proxies for the degree of product market competition: Herfindahl index
of sales and the advertisement intensity in an industry. Herfindahl index of sales is the sum of
squared market shares across all firms in an industry. Industries with a lower Herfindahl index of
sales are generally viewed as being more competitive because market shares are less
concentrated. Advertisement intensity is measured as the industry total advertising expenses
scaled by the industry total sales. Industries with higher advertisement intensity are normally
expected to be more competitive as their products are more likely to be homogeneous.

22

In our third set of additional analyses, we partition all industry IPO waves in our sample into
two groups based on the median value of the average industry competition measure in the first
two fiscal years after the industry IPO wave ending year. Waves with above-median competition
measures are classified into the High-group. For each of the two competition measures, we
repeat the calendar-time portfolio analysis for the High- and Low-groups separately and report
the results in Panel B of Table V. Indeed we find the magnitude of future underperformance of
the low-BM-low-GM stocks to be much stronger in more competitive industries, as indicated by
a lower Herfindahl index of sales and a higher advertisement intensity. Further, the
underperformance of low-BM-low-GM stocks also exists among industry IPO waves in less
competitive industries, albeit in a smaller magnitude.
Our hypothesis applies to a cohort of similar firms in the same initial growth stage that are
facing product market competition. Industry IPO wave is a particularly useful way to identify
such firm cohorts since product market competition is one important driving force behind why
these firms went public together in the first place (Chemmanur and He, 2011). As a result, we
conjecture that if we do not condition our analysis on industry IPO waves, we should expect to
find weaker or no results. This is the fourth set of additional analyses whose results are reported
in Panel C of Table V.
If we define industry IPO waves by simply grouping IPOs in the same industry and the same
calendar year and repeat our portfolio formation procedures and calendar-time trading strategies,
we find a much weaker underperformance among low-BM-low-GM stocks. Under such a pseudo
industry IPO wave definition, low-BM-low-GM IPO stocks underperform less than 30 bps per
month, a significant drop from 103 bps per month in the case where we use a more precise
procedure to identify industry IPO waves (Table IV, Panel A). Moreover, when we repeat our
23

portfolio formation procedures and calendar-time trading strategies for all CRSP/COMPUSTAT
stocks, the underperformance of low-BM-low-GM stocks becomes economically insignificant, at
a mere 6 bps per month.
Overall, using both event-time and calendar-time analyses, we find strong empirical support
for our hypothesis that low-margin-induced high initial sales growth fuels optimism among
investors, resulting in overpricing of some growth firms in the initial growth stage of their life
cycle and leading to the long-run underperformance of these firms. We find that this key result is
robust to various modifications to our empirical design and that conditioning on industry IPO
waves is crucial to identify similar firms in an initial growth stage.
III.C. Panel regression analysis
In Table VI, we confirm our event-time and calendar-time portfolio results using panel
regressions which allow us to simultaneously control for other firm / IPO characteristics that
could potentially explain the abnormal performance.

.

∑

(1)

In regressions, we include the industry IPO wave fixed effects, and calculate the standard errors
from two-way clustering on both industry and year (Petersen, 2009).23 Our key variables of
interest are the two interaction terms of GMHigh with BMLow and BMHigh. BMLow (BMHigh) is the

23

Alternative ways to control fixed effects, such as industry fixed effects only or both industry and year fixed effects,
produce qualitatively similar results.

24

dummy variable for low (high) initial BM group, based on sorting all IPO stocks in an industry
IPO wave on BM at the end of event year 3. Consistent with our portfolio analysis, we measure
GM as the average gross margin in the first two fiscal years after the industry IPO wave ending
year. GMHigh is the dummy variable for high initial GM group, based on sorting all IPO stocks in
an industry IPO wave on GM within each BM group at the end of event year 3. Our dependent
variables are annual industry-adjusted stock returns in percentage points during event years 4 to
7.
In the first regression (Model 1), we control for annual stock characteristics such as size, BM,
past return, and turnover that have been shown to have predictive power about future returns in
the literature. Size is measured as the log market capitalization at the end of the previous year,
and BM is the ratio of book equity to market capitalization at the end of the previous year, where
book equity precedes the year end by at least 3 months. Turnover is the sum of monthly share
turnover in the previous year. We find a positive and significant coefficient on BMLow* GMHigh
(7.62 with a t-value of 2.03), suggesting that among growth IPO stocks, those with a low gross
margin in the initial years after IPO subsequently underperform their high gross margin peers by
7.62% per annum in the period event years 4 to 7, consistent with our hypothesis. Interestingly,
GM has no predictive power among IPO firms with relatively high book-to-market equity ratios
in the initial years after IPOs, consistent with earlier results in both event-time and calendar-time
portfolio analyses.
In the second regression (Model 2), we further control for a list of IPO characteristics that
may predict long-run IPO performance, including the IPO first-day return, a dummy variable that
equals 1 if the IPO has venture capital backing, a dummy variable that equals 1 if there is a lockup condition, and the percent of primary (new) shares sold in the IPO. Consistent with Brav and
25

Gompers (2003), IPOs with lockup restrictions are associated with significantly lower long-run
excess returns. There is very weak evidence that IPOs backed by venture capital are associated
with better long-run performance, which is also consistent with Brav and Gompers (1997)
although the coefficient is not statistically significant. After controlling for these IPO
characteristics, the coefficient on BMLow*GMHigh is almost unchanged and still significant. To
conclude, the panel regressions confirm that the underperformance of the low-BM-low-GM IPO
firms is significant both economically and statistically.
In the third regression (Model 3), we interact the BM dummies with a dummy variable
indicating high asset turnover (AT) instead of GM. Interestingly, while higher AT predicts
higher future performance, this predictive power is stronger among high-BM IPOs, although the
regression coefficient on neither interaction term is statistically significant.
Finally, in the fourth regression (Model 4), we interact the BM dummies with both high GM
and high AT dummy variables. The regression highlights the differential roles played by GM and
AT. AT is a significant predictor of future performance among high-BM IPOs. This relation
could be mechanical. To the extent that high-BM firms are associated with less growth options,
the utilization rate of their current assets, as measured by AT, is a good indicator of their future
cash flows. Holding valuation ratio (BM) constant, firms with higher ATs (thus higher future
cash flows) should then be associated with higher expected returns.
In contrast, lower GM is a stronger indicator of poor future performance among low-BM
IPOs. This result is unlikely to be mechanical. Untabulated results suggest that low-BM-low-GM
stocks have future average raw returns close to or even below the risk-free rates. Such a low
average return is difficult to reconcile with a positive risk premium for bearing economy-wide

26

systematic risk. Instead, a low GM could be associated with a risky pricing strategy for gaining
market share in the initial growth stage of a firm’s life cycle. Our findings thus suggest that the
prices of such firms may reflect the unfulfilled optimistic views of investors.
IV. Additional analysis
So far we have provided strong evidence supporting the prediction of Aghion and Stein
(2008) that low-GM firms in a growth equilibrium were initially overpriced and underperform in
the long run. In this section, we investigate a comprehensive list of characteristics on these firms
and their high-GM counterparts over time since IPO, aiming to shed further light on the
underlying economic mechanism that generated the initial overpricing. These analyses also help
to rule out several alternative explanations for our results.
IV.A. Price sensitivity to sales growth
A key ingredient to the growth equilibrium in Aghion and Stein (2008) is a market pricing
rule that over-fixates on sales growth numbers. We provide direct supporting evidence for such a
pricing rule by examining the market price response to surprises in earnings and sales growth.
Specifically, we run the following regressions following Anthony and Ramesh (1992):
,

(2)

where ExRetq is the quarterly industry-adjusted return over the 3-month period from the end of
the first calendar month of quarter q to the end of the first calendar month of quarter q+1. ΔSGq
is the change in sales growth rate from calendar quarter q-1 to q, where the sales growth rate in
quarter q is calculated as (Salesq - Salesq-4)/ Salesq-4. ΔIBq is the year-over-year change in
quarterly earnings, calculated as (IBq - IBq-4)/ MVq-4, where IBq is the income before
27

extraordinary items in quarter q and MVq is the market capitalization at the end of quarter q.
ΔCAPXq is the year-over-year change in quarterly capital expenditure, calculated as (CAPXq CAPXq-4)/ MVq-4, where CAPXq is the capital expenditure in quarter q. The regression
specification is for evaluating whether stock prices are responding to sales growth news after
controlling for earnings news and investment news. We run the regressions separately for each
BM/GM portfolio in each year during the 7 years after event year 0. Our hypothesis is that the
slope coefficient

should be positive and larger for low-BM-low-GM stocks when compared to

low-BM-high-GM stocks in the initial years after IPO as the investors who follow those stocks
are more likely to over-fixate on sales growth.
In Table VII, we report these sales growth response coefficients, which are the regression
coefficients on ΔSGq, and associated t-statistics. We also report the difference in the coefficients
between high and low GM groups and the associated t-statistics. All t-statistics are calculated
based on the standard errors clustered by industry. To obtain the industry benchmark of the sales
response coefficient, we run similar regressions for a sample of all stocks in the industry which
were listed at least 3 years before the ending year of the current industry IPO wave.
Consistent with the market’s over-fixation on sales, stock prices react significantly to sales
growth rates among all industry IPO wave stocks during the first two years after the wave ending
year, even after controlling for contemporaneous earnings surprises. This is more so for the lowGM stocks. In the first year after the industry IPO wave, a 1% increase in quarterly sales growth
rate translates to 8 basis points in the quarterly stock return. Interestingly, after event year 3, the
low-GM stocks no longer have significant sales growth response coefficients, which is consistent
with the notion that the market starts to notice the overpricing among the low-GM stocks and the
market price adjusts itself downward.
28

IV.B. Factors driving the long-run underperformance
Aghion and Stein (2008) models investor bounded rationality by assuming that they follow a
simple linear rule in forecasting future valuation relevant variables. Observing the initial high
sales growth rates on the low-GM firms, investors might over-estimate the firm’s earnings power
in the future. This optimism is likely amplified by the two-way feedback mechanism between
firms’ strategies and the market’s pricing rule, causing large initial overpricing. Over time,
correction in these errors-in-expectation leads to long-run underperformance. In this subsection,
we provide direct evidence for the initial investor optimism and detailed analysis of the price
correction process.
Table VIII shows additional portfolio-level characteristics over years after the industry IPO
wave ending year for the high-GM and low-GM growth portfolios, their differences, and the
same characteristics for the industry benchmark. Panel A reports the post-formation annual
frequencies for performance-related delisting. Consistent with the return results, low-BM-lowGM IPO firms experience significantly more delisting than their high-GM counterparts. More
than 18% of them were delisted by the end of event year 7 whereas less than 9% of the low-BMhigh-GM firms were delisted during the same period, confirming that growing sales at the
expense of profitability is indeed not a sustainable strategy.
Firms may deliberately keep prices and GM low in the early stages of their life cycle with the
expectation that it will help them gain market share and greater future profits via increased
pricing power and/or permanent cost advantages arising from economies of scale. Our findings
suggest that such expectations, if they were there to start with, were not fulfilled in our sample.
In Panel B, when we examine the market share of low-BM-low-GM IPO firms, it only grows

29

from 0.12 to 0.17 from event year 3 to 7. In contrast, the low-BM-high-GM IPO firms actually
grow their market share faster in the same period from 0.14 to 0.23. The lower market share,
coupled with a low GM, not surprisingly leads to a subpar operating performance of low-BMlow-GM IPO firms. Return on assets (ROA) of low-BM-low-GM firms is significantly worse
than their high-GM peers throughout the seven event years after the IPO wave ending year.
Overall, evidence in Panels A and B suggests that low-BM-low-GM firms have deteriorating
operating performance in the long-run relative to low-BM-high-GM firms, and investors who use
simple linear extrapolation in forecasting, are likely to be too optimistic at the beginning.
Stock returns are driven by revisions in future cash flow expectations rather the cash flow
realizations themselves. In what follows, we use analyst forecasts to examine cash flow
expectations for various horizons at the portfolio formation date (the end of event year 3) and
trace the revisions in these forecasts over time from event year 3 to event year 7. This analysis
provides additional insights on the exact source of error-in-expectation that drives the initial
overpricing.
Specifically, we proceed in the following steps to estimate the expectations of future cash
flows at the end of event year 3.
In the first step, we forecast future earnings of the value-weighted portfolio of all stocks in a
BM/GM portfolio in an industry IPO wave based on IBES forecasts of earnings and earnings
growth rate. The forecasted earnings for the first two years (event years 4 and 5) are taken from
IBES consensus (mean) earnings forecasts. Earnings are then assumed to grow in the next three
years (event years 6 to 8) at the IBES consensus (mean) long-term growth rate forecasts (LTG).
We take the value-weighted average of LTGs of all stocks in a portfolio to form the portfolio's

30

LTG. Finally, earnings growth rate is assumed to converge linearly to a steady growth rate (SGR)
in the next 10 years (event years 9 to 18). We use the median value of all long-term earnings
growth rate forecasts in IBES as the steady growth rate.
In the second step, we forecast the book equity values in future years. We first assume a
constant dividend payout ratio (DPR) relative to the cum-dividend book equity value, i.e., Dt =
(BEt-1 + Et)*DPR, where Dt is the estimated dividend in year t, BEt-1 is the estimated book equity
value in year t-1, and Et is the estimated earnings in year t. For simplicity, we assume a 5% value
for DPR based on the historical average values of all firms in COMPUSTAT. We then calculate
the forecasted book equity values assuming the clean surplus relation, i.e., BEt = BEt-1 + Et - Dt.
In the third step, we calculate the forecasted ROEs for all future years. Based on forecasted
earnings and book equity values in the next 15 years (event years 4 to 18), we calculate
forecasted ROEs in these years, FROEt = Et / BEt-1. Forecasted ROE for all years in the steady
state (SROE), i.e., those years after event year 18, is calculated as (1+SGR)/(1-DPR) - 1, based
on the equilibrium relationship among these parameters in the steady growth state.
In the final step, following Da and Warachka (2009), we form the future cash flow estimate
as the discounted sum of all future log ROEs,

∑

. Following

Vuolteenaho (2002) and Campbell and Vuolneenaho (2004), we assume a constant value, 0.95,
for , which is estimated from the historical values of market and book dividend yields of all
stocks in CRSP/COMPUSTAT.
At the end of event year 7, we update the cash flow estimate (ESUM) for each BM/GM
group in each industry IPO wave. Forecasted ROEs in event years 4 to 7 are replaced with the

31

realized values. For all other years after event year 7, the forecasted ROEs are updated, following
the same forecasting procedure described above.
We then compute the change in cash flow estimate (∆ESUM) from event year 3 to event year
7 for each BM/GM group in each industry IPO wave. Finally, we use the number of IPOs at the
end of event year 3 in a wave to weight across all industry IPO waves to estimate the final
statistics of each BM/GM group. We also break down ∆ESUM into three components: ∆ESUM47 which

is due to errors in short-run forecasted ROEs of event years 4 to 7, ∆ESUM8-12 which is

due to revision in medium-run forecasted ROEs of event years 8 to 12, and ∆ESUM13-inf which is
due to revision in long-run forecasted ROEs from event year 13 and beyond.
The results are reported in Panel C of Table VIII. For each BM/GM portfolio, we report the
weighted mean and the t-statistics for ∆ESUMs. We also report the difference in the mean and
the associated statistics between high and low GM groups for ∆ESUMs. We also obtain the
industry benchmarks of ∆ESUMs in the following steps. First, for each industry IPO wave, we
select all stocks in the same industry as those in the wave which were listed at least 3 years
before event year 0 to form the value-weighted control portfolio. Second, we estimate ∆ESUMs
for each wave control portfolio, following the same procedure for the industry IPO wave
portfolios. Finally, we use the number of IPOs at the end of event year 3 in the corresponding
industry IPO wave to weight across all wave control portfolios to estimate the final statistics of
the industry benchmark.
When we compare the low-GM firms to the high-GM firms in Panel C, we find that although
both groups experience downward revisions in cash flow expectations from event year 3 to event
year 7, the downward revisions are larger (in absolute term) for low-GM firms. In other words,

32

low-GM firms experience more negative cash flow news, which explains their relative
underperformance. Most interestingly, when we look at different cash flow forecast horizons, we
find that the revisions in cash flow forecasts for the very long-run horizon (event year 13 and
onwards) are significantly more negative for the low-GM firms. This result suggests that the
relative initial overpricing of low-GM firms is likely a result of optimism associated with the
firm earnings power in the very long run. This result also partly explains why the overpricing
takes so long (almost 4 years) to be corrected.
IV.C. Uncertainty measures
We have argued that industry IPO waves are a great setting for studying the growth
equilibrium in Aghion and Stein (2008). IPO firms have short tracking records to offer but are
associated with high potential growth rates at the same time. Due to the resulting uncertainty
associated with their future earning power, investors are more likely to over-fixate on sales
numbers in valuation at least initially, thus satisfying the key assumption in Aghion and Stein
(2008).
To test this key assumption we first examine the cash flow uncertainty associated with IPO
firms using textual analysis of the Risk Factors sections of the IPO prospectus. According to
Hanley and Hoberg (2010), “the Risk Factors section … is the only section that has significant
loadings on both positive and negative tone. This is consistent with its role in describing the
second moment of the outcomes (high and low), as its namesake suggests it should (pg 2857,
italics added).” Thus, more frequent occurrence of words related to “cost(s)” or “profitability”
may signal higher expected cash flow uncertainty in the future. Loughran and McDonald (2011)
carefully construct word lists that are particularly powerful in financial applications and

33

Loughran and McDonald (2013) update their lists for the IPO sample and show them to be useful
in explaining IPO first-day return and subsequent volatilities. As we are focusing on measuring
cash flow uncertainty within a specific section of IPO prospectuses, we do not use the more
general-purpose word lists in Loughran and McDonald (2013).
We obtain IPO prospectuses from SEC Edgar for stocks in industry IPO waves with an
offering date after 1994. For each IPO, we keep only the most recent filing during the window
from 1095 days before the IPO filing date to 30 days after the IPO filing date. Panel A of Table
IX reports preliminary results from the IPO prospectus for the four portfolios of industry IPO
wave stocks. More than half of our sample stocks have valid IPO prospectus and associated Risk
Factor sections. The coverage is similar across the four portfolios sorted on BM and GM.
Overall, low-BM-low-GM IPOs are indeed associated with more mentions of “Cost(s)” and
“Profitability” in their Risk Factors sections. While this is consistent with expected cash flow
uncertainty being higher among these IPOs, we need to keep in mind the limited precision
associated with these findings due to the fact that we were able to examine the prospectuses for
only a small subset of the IPOs. Higher cash flow uncertainty could lead to higher return
idiosyncratic volatility in the face of intense product market competition (see Irvine and Pontiff
(2009)), thus making it less attractive to risk-averse arbitrageurs to arbitrage away the initial
overvaluation.
We further examine two additional measures of uncertainty using the analyst forecasts and
stock prices after the IPO. Diether, Malloy and Scherbina (2002) find that stocks with higher
analyst forecast dispersion are likely to underperform in the future, compared with their peers
with lower forecast dispersion. They interpret their results as consistent with the argument

34

proposed in Miller (1977) that higher difference-of-opinion, combined with short-sales
constraints, could lead to temporary overvaluation. In light of the recent finding in Cheong and
Thomas (2011) that analyst forecast dispersion does not vary with scale, we measure the
dispersion as the standard deviation of analyst forecasts of current fiscal year's earnings per share
as reported by IBES. In Panel B of Table IX, we report the statistics on the measure of analyst
earnings forecast dispersion. Low-BM-low-GM IPO firms are consistently associated with
greater dispersion in their earnings forecasts, especially during the early years after the IPO,
which is consistent with the notion that the significant degree of uncertainty concerning these
growth firms could acerbate the initial overvaluation for firms pursuing unsustainable business
strategies.
We also report the idiosyncratic volatility of firms in Panel B. To estimate a firm's
idiosyncratic volatility in year t, following Ang, Hodrick, Xing and Zhang (2006), we first
regress its daily stock returns in year t on Fama-French three factors (MKTRF, SMB and HML)
and Carhart's momentum factor (UMD), and then calculate the standard deviation of the
residuals. To mitigate the skewness in the distribution, we take the natural log of the estimated
idiosyncratic volatility. Overall, low-GM growth firms are associated with much higher
idiosyncratic volatilities and these volatilities gradually decline over time after the IPO. Pastor
and Veronesi (2003) argue that the uncertainty associated with the IPO firms could result in high
initial valuation and the subsequent learning about profitability reduces the uncertainty and
valuation, explaining the IPO long-run underperformance. While such a learning mechanism
could be consistent with the long-run underperformance of IPOs as a group, it should not drive
the relative underperformance of low-BM-low-GM IPOs within an industry IPO wave as we do

35

not observe a greater reduction in idiosyncratic volatility over time for the low-GM growth firms
relative to their high-GM counterparts.24
IV.D. Investor type and limits to arbitrage
We obtain further insights about the overpricing of low-BM-low-GM IPO stocks by
examining the holdings by corporate insiders and mutual funds over years after IPO. Table X
reveals some interesting patterns about the holdings of these potentially better informed /
sophisticated investors on the two groups of growth IPO stocks. On average, low-BM-low-GM
IPO stocks are held significantly less by insiders and mutual funds (including those with a
growth-style) when compared to their high-GM peers, especially during earlier years.25 The lowBM-low-GM growth IPO firms seem to have developed a clientele for relatively more naïve
investors who are more likely to suffer from over-reliance on sales growth.
Overall, greater uncertainties and lower ownership by sophisticated / potentially better
informed investors, in the presence of limits-to-arbitrage such as direct or indirect short-selling
constraints and high idiosyncratic risk, may explain why it takes three to four years for the initial
over-valuation to disappear. Our findings are consistent with Stambaugh, Yu and Yuan (2012)
who find that asset pricing anomalies are generally stronger following high levels of investor
sentiment, and in long-short strategies that exploit anomalies, the short leg of the strategies is
more profitable following high investor sentiment.

24

The untabulated test shows that the reduction in log idiosyncratic volatility from event year 3 to event year 7 does
not differ significantly across two groups of firms.
25
We obtain the holdings of corporate insiders via Thomson Reuters Insiders Filing database and include the
holdings of insiders with relationship to firms up to level 3 (senior executives). We obtain the mutual fund holdings
via Thomson Reuters Mutual Fund Holdings database (S12), and classify mutual funds into different styles
according to their investment objective codes in S12, supplemented by the style information from CRSP mutual
fund data. Funds with a growth or aggressive growth style are classified as growth funds.

36

V. Conclusion
The predictability of stock returns based on valuation ratios, like E/P, P/B, and C/P etc., is
well documented in the literature. In a recent paper, Novy-Marx (2012) shows that firms with
high gross-profit-to-asset ratio (GPA) earn higher returns going forward, even after controlling
for their book-to-market equity ratios. However the debate as to whether such predictability is
evidence against market efficiency in economically important ways has been the subject of
continuing debate. Investors may well be aware of such predictability and still agree with the
market that the prices are right; the higher than average predicted returns on some stocks may be
compensation for risks that investors care about and may be difficult to identify using historical
data.
The papers in the more recent literature support the view that some (could be a small part) of
the predictability may reflect psychological biases built into the way investors make decisions,
and agency issues limit the ability of more sophisticated arbitrageurs who have to rely on other
people’s money from exploiting any profit opportunities that may arise from such
predictability. Our findings contribute to this literature by identifying situations when prices of
some stocks are likely to be affected by bounded rationality or biases in the way investors make
decisions.
Our findings support the hypothesis in Aghion and Stein (2008) that there are time periods
when market conditions are more favorable to growth firms, and during those times firms with
strong growth but weak margins will be overvalued. Taking advantage of industry IPO waves as
a natural setting for studying a homogenous group of firms in the same growth stage of their life
cycles, we find that among firms that went public during an industry IPO wave, those with
37

relatively high valuations and historical sales growth rates, but low gross margins during the first
three years after the wave under-perform their industry peers by more than 1% per month during
the subsequent four-year period, after adjusting for risk differentials. Greater uncertainties and
lower ownership by sophisticated, better informed investors associated with these firms, in the
presence of limits-to-arbitrage such as direct or indirect short-selling constraints and high
idiosyncratic risk, may explain why it takes so long for the initial over-valuation to disappear.

38

References
Adizes, I., Corporate lifecycles: How and why corporations grow and die and what to do about
it 1st ed. (NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998).
Aghion, P., and J. Stein, “Growth vs. margins: Destabilizing consequences of giving the stock
market what it wants,” The Journal of Finance, 63 (2008), 1025-1058.
Ang, A., R. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, “The cross-section of volatility and expected
returns,” The Journal of Finance, 61 (2006), 259-299.
Anthony, J. H., and K. Ramesh, “Association between accounting performance measures and
stock prices: A test of the life cycle hypothesis,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 15
(1992), 203-227.
Barber, B., and J. Lyon, “Detecting long-run abnormal stock returns: The empirical power and
specification of test statistics,” Journal of Financial Economics, 43 (1997), 341-372.
Berger, A. N., and G. F. Udell, “The economics of small business finance: The roles of private
equity and debt markets in the financial growth cycle,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 22
(1998), 613–673.
Brav, Alon, “Inference in long-horizon event studies: A Bayesian approach with application to
initial public offerings,” Journal of Finance, 55 (2000), 1979-2016.
Brav, A., C. Geczy, and P. Gompers, “Is the abnormal return following equity issuances
anomalous?” Journal of Financial Economics, 90 (2000), 209-249.
Brav, Alon, and Paul A. Gompers, “Myth or reality? The long-run underperformance of initial
public offerings: Evidence from venture and nonventure capital-backed companies,” The
Journal of Finance, 52 (1997), 1791-1821.
Brav, Alon, and Paul A. Gompers, “The role of lockups in initial public offerings,” Review of
Financial Studies, 16 (2003), 1-29.
Brav, Alon, Roni Michaely, Michael Roberts, and Rebecca Zarutskie, “Evidence on the trade-off
between risk and return for IPO and SEO Firms,” Financial Management, 38 (2009), 221252.
Campbell, J. Y., and T. Vuolteenaho, “Bad beta, good beta,” The American Economic Review,
94 (2004), 1249-1275.
Carhart, M. M., “On persistence in mutual fund performance,” The Journal of Finance, 52
(1997), 57-82.
Chemmanur, T. J., and J. He, “IPO waves, product market competition, and the going public
decision: Theory and evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 101 (2011), 382-412.
Cheong, F. S., and J. Thomas, “Why do EPS forecast error and dispersion not vary with scale?
Implications for analyst and managerial behavior,” Journal of Accounting Research, 49
(2011), 359-401.
Da, Z., and M. Warachka, “Cashflow risk, systematic earnings revisions, and the cross-section of
stock returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 94 (2009), 448-468.
DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and R. Stulz, “Dividend policy and the earned/contributed capital
mix: A test of the life-cycle theory,” Journal of Financial Economics, 81 (2006), 227-254.
DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and R. Stulz, “Seasoned equity offerings, market timing, and the
corporate lifecycle,” Journal of Financial Economics, 95 (2010), 275-295.
Dickinson, V., “Cash flow patterns as a proxy for firm life cycle,” The Accounting Review, 86
(2011), 1969-1994.

39

Diether, K. B., C. J. Malloy, and A. Scherbina, “Differences of opinion and the cross section of
stock returns,” The Journal of Finance, 57 (2002), 2113-2141.
Eckbo, B., R. Masulis, and O. Norli, “Seasoned public offerings: Resolution of the ‘New Issues
Puzzle',” Journal of Financial Economics, 56 (2006), 251-291.
Fama, E., “Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 49 (1998), 283-306.
Fama, E., and K. French, “Common risk factors in stock and bond returns,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 33 (1993), 3–56.
Fama, E., and K. French, “Industry costs of equity,” Journal of Financial Economics, 43 (1997),
153–193.
Fama, E., and K. French, “Profitability, investment and average returns,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 82 (2006), 491-518.
Green, T. C. and B. Hwang, “IPO as lotteries: Skewness preference and first-day returns,”
Management Science, 58 (2012), 432-444.
Hanley, K., and G. Hoberg, “The information content of IPO prospectuses,” Review of Financial
Studies, 23 (2010), 2821-2864.
Hong, Harrison, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jalin Yu, “Simple forecasts and paradigm shifts,” The
Journal of Finance, 62 (2007), 1207-1242.
Irvine, P., and J. Pontiff, “Idiosyncratic return volatility, cash flows, and product market
competition,” Review of Financial Studies, 22 (2009), 1149-1177.
Jegadeesh, N., and J. Karceski, “Long-run performance evaluation: Correlation and
heteroskedasticity-consistent tests,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 16 (2009), 101-111.
Kothari, S. P., and J. B. Warner, “Measuring long-horizon security price performance,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 43 (1997), 301-339.
Kothari, S. P., and J. B. Warner, “Econometrics of event studies,” in Handbook of Corporate
Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance (Volume 1), B. Espen Eckbo ed. (Amsterdam:
Elsevier/North-Holland, 2006).
La Porta, R., “Expectations and the cross-section of stock returns,” The Journal of Finance, 51
(1996), 1715-1742.
La Porta, R., J. Lakonishok, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, “Good news for value stocks: Further
evidence on market efficiency,” The Journal of Finance, 52 (1997), 859-874.
Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, “Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and risk,” The
Journal of Finance, 49 (1994), 1541-1578.
Loughran, T., and B. McDonald, “When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis,
dictionaries, and 10-Ks,” Journal of Finance, 66 (2011), 35-65.
Loughran, T., and B. McDonald, “IPO first-day returns, offer price revisions, volatility, and
Form S-1 language,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming (2013).
Loughran, T., and J. R. Ritter, “The new issue puzzle,” The Journal of Finance, 50 (1995), 23-51.
Lyon, J., B. Barber and C. Tsai, “Improved methods of tests of long-horizon abnormal stock
returns,” The Journal of Finance, 54 (1999), 165-201.
Malkiel, B., A random walk down wall street: The time-tested strategy for successful investing,
10th ed. (NY: W.W. Norton and Company Ltd., 2011).
Miller, E. M., “Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion,” The Journal of Finance, 32 (1977),
1151-1168.
Mitchell, M., and E. Stafford, “Managerial decisions and long-term stock price performance,”
Journal of Business, 73 (2000), 287-329.
40

Myers, S. C., and N. S. Majluf, “Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
information that investors do not have,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13 (1984), 187-221.
Novy-Marx, R., “The other side of value: The gross profitability premium,” Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming, 2012.
Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi, “Stock valuation and learning about profitability,” The Journal of
Finance, 58 (2003), 1749-1789.
Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi, “Rational IPO waves,” The Journal of Finance, 60 (2005), 17131757.
Petersen, M. A., “Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches,”
Review of Financial Studies, 22 (2009), 435-480.
Piotroski, Joseph D., and Eric C. So, “Identifying expectation errors in value/glamour strategies:
A fundamental analysis approach,” Review of Financial Studies, 25 (2012), 2841-2875.
Polk, Christopher, and Paola Sapienza, “The stock market and corporate investment: A test of
catering theory,” Review of Financial Studies, 22 (2008), 188-217.
Purnanandam, Amiyatosh K., Bhaskaran Swaminathan, “Are IPOs really underpriced?” Review
of Financial Studies, 17 (2004), 811-848.
Ritter, Jay R., “The long-run performance of initial public offerings,” Journal of Finance, 46
(1991), 3-27.
Ritter, Jay R., “Is economic growth good for investors?” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance,
24 (2012), 8-18.
Schultz, P. H., “Pseudo market timing and the long-run performance of IPOs,” The Journal of
Finance, 58 (2003), 347-381.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishney, “The Limits of Arbitrage”, The Journal of Finance, 52
(1997), 35–55.
Shumway, T., “The delisting bias in CRSP data,” The Journal of Finance, 52 (1997), 327-340.
Shumway, T., and V. A. Warther, “The delisting bias in CRSP’s Nasdaq data and its
implications for the size effect,” The Journal of Finance, 54 (1999), 2361-2379.
Spence, A. M., “Entry, capacity, investment and oligopolistic pricing,” The Bell Journal of
Economics, 8 (1977), 534-544.
Spence, A. M., “Investment strategy and growth in a new market,” The Bell Journal of
Economics, 10 (1979), 1-19.
Spence, A. M., “The learning curve and competition,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 12 (1981),
49-70.
Sloan, R. G., “Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about future
earnings?” The Accounting Review, 71 (1996), 289-315.
Stambaugh, Robert, Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, “The short of it: Investor sentiment and
anomalies,” Journal of Financial Economics, 104 (2012), 288-301.
Viswanathan, S., and B. Wei, “Endogenous events and long run risks,” Review of Financial
Studies, 21 (2008), 855-888.
Vuolteenaho, T, “What drives firm-level stock returns?” The Journal of Finance, 57 (2002), 233264.

41

Portfolio
Formation
Average GM during

Industry IPO Wave

Holding Period

FY1 and FY2

event

event

event

event

event

event

event

event

year 0

year 1

year 2

year 3

year 4

year 5

year 6

year 7

BM

Figure I
Timeline of our portfolio formation procedure

We follow the procedure in Chemmanur and He (2011) to identify industry IPO waves based on how clustered the IPOs are in an industry. For
each industry IPO wave, the calendar year in which the wave ended is denoted as event year 0. We form portfolios within the wave at the end of
event year 3, based on the book-to-market equity ratio (market price at the end of event year 3 and book equity preceding the market price by at
least 3 months) and the average of gross margins (GM) during fiscal years 1 and 2. We do not use the GM in fiscal year 3 since such accounting
information is not yet available at the end of event year 3 for many firms when we form the portfolios. In addition, we require at least 8 firms in an
industry IPO wave at the end of event year 3 to ensure that our portfolio-level result is not driven by a single firm. The portfolios are then held for
four years from event year 4 to event year 7.

42

II.1: The distribution of waves and stocks across industries

II.2: The distribution of waves and stocks across years

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Number of Waves

Number of Waves

Percent of Stocks

Percent of Stocks

II.4: The histogram of the wave duration

II.3: The histogram of the number of IPOs in the wave
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

10
8
6
4
2
0

Figure II
Selected statistics of industry IPO waves

Figures II.1 and II.2 plot the number of IPO waves and the fraction of sample stocks by industry and year respectively. Figures II.3 and II.4 plot
the histograms of the number of IPOs in the wave and the duration of the wave in months. In these two plots, the numbers on the horizontal axis
are possible values for the plotted variable, and those on the vertical axis are the frequencies of the corresponding values in our sample.

43

Table I
Descriptive statistics of industry IPO waves
Panel A: Number of IPOs

IPOs appearing in COMPUSTAT
within 3 years after IPO year

All IPOs
All

On-the-wave

Off-the-wave

All

On-the-wave

Off-the-wave

IPOs in the
sample

1980-1993

5,138

1,676

3,462

4,320

1,233

3,087

608

1994-2006

4,760

1,942

2,818

4,431

1,836

2,595

817

Total

9,898

3,618

6,280

8,751

3,069

5,682

1,425

Year

Panel B: Distributions of industry IPO waves in the sample across the Fama-French 49 industries
Duration of the wave
Number of IPOs
(months)
in the wave – all IPOs
Number
Industries name
of waves
Mean Median
Std.
Mean Median
Std.

Number of IPOs
in the wave – filtered sample
Mean

Median

Std.

Retail

7

5.83

4

6.46

23.14

23

7.60

15.43

18

5.26

Computer Software

6

2.82

2

1.83

96.17

39

100.85

45.00

23.5

41.52

Business Services

5

4.20

2

3.97

74.80

77

46.43

40.60

40

22.52

Pharmaceutical Products

4

3.80

2

4.13

29.00

28

17.42

23.00

22

12.41

Electronic Equipment

4

4.10

4

2.73

37.50

38

18.14

24.75

25

11.93

All others

42

5.20

4

4.14

29.93

18

35.38

15.55

12

10.73

Total

68

4.91

3

4.16

38.76

22

46.47

20.96

14

18.66

44

Panel C: Five of the Industry IPO waves with most number of IPOs in the sample
Number of IPOs
Number of IPOs
in the wave –
Industries name
in the wave - all IPOs
filtered sample

Beginning month

Ending month

Computer Software

230

102

Mar. 1995

Jan. 1997

Computer Software

222

94

Feb. 1999

Apr. 2000

Trading

211

63

Jul. 1992

Jul. 1994

Business Services

97

63

Aug. 1995

Dec. 1996

Business Services

135

61

May 1999

Sep. 2000

Note: This table presents the descriptive statistics of industry IPO waves. We define industry IPO waves by Fama-French 49 industries based on
how clustered the IPOs are in an industry. For each industry i and month t, we count the number of IPOs in the 3-month window from t-1 to t+1.
We then define a hot IPO month as a month with the 3-month number of IPOs in the top quartile of all IPO months from 1970 to 2010 in the
industry. Finally, we classify IPOs in those consecutive hot months as a wave. We define the beginning month and the ending month of a wave as
the first month and the last month with IPOs in that wave. To avoid the problem that standalone IPOs are erroneously classified as a wave, we
require a minimum of 5 IPOs in total and 1 IPO every month on average in the wave period. Our empirical analyses involve forming four
portfolios within each industry IPO wave three years after the wave ending year (event year 0), based on the book-to-market equity ratio at the end
of event year 3 and the average profitability in the first two fiscal years after event year 0. We require a minimum of 8 IPOs with non-missing
sorting variables at the portfolio formation time for a meaningful sort. After imposing these filters, 1425 IPOs going public during 68 industry IPO
waves in the period 1980 to 2006 enter our sample.
Panel A presents the distribution of IPOs on and off waves during our sample period. Columns 2-4 present the distribution for all IPOs in SDC,
excluding those in the 49th Fama-French industry or those not classified into any industry. Columns 5-7 present the distribution for those IPOs
appearing in COMPUSTAT within 3 years after the listing year. And the final column presents the number of IPOs in our sample. Panel B
presents the distribution of 68 industry IPO waves in our sample across Fama-French 49 industries, and the summary statistics for some wave
characteristics such as the duration of the wave, the number of all IPOs in the wave, and the number of IPOs in the wave entering our final sample.
Panel C presents the statistics for the five biggest waves in our sample.

45

Table II
Industry-adjusted buy-and-hold returns of event-time portfolios of stocks in industry IPO
waves formed on book-to-market equity ratio and gross margin
Formation period: return to the
end of event year 3 (%)
Raw return
Adjusted return
since
since the end of
IPO date
event year 0

Holding period: adjusted return since
the end of event year 3 (%)
Event
year 4

Event
year 5

Event
year 6

Event
year 7

167.35

-16.53

-22.53

-26.06

-31.04

1.16

1.53

-2.28

-2.12

-2.02

-1.87

Mean

481.50

190.09

-2.96

0.61

-4.65

19.59

t-stat.

1.30

1.66

-0.46

0.07

-0.41

0.80

Low BM
H-L GM

Mean

10.15

22.74

13.56

23.14

21.41

50.63

t-stat.

0.12

1.33

2.12

1.81

1.64

1.48

High BM
Low GM

Mean

-5.34

-54.75

8.13

27.14

21.98

36.99

t-stat.

-0.38

-1.43

0.80

1.17

0.84

1.23

High BM
High GM

Mean

-2.31

-61.87

9.18

13.12

19.94

29.39

t-stat.

-0.17

-1.64

1.12

1.03

0.87

0.91

High BM
H-L GM

Mean

3.03

-7.13

1.05

-14.03

-2.04

-7.60

t-stat.

0.40

-1.55

0.13

-0.71

-0.09

-0.28

Portfolio

Stat.

Low BM
Low GM

Mean

471.35

t-stat.

Low BM
High GM

Note: This table presents the industry-adjusted buy-and-hold returns of event-time portfolios of
stocks in industry IPO waves in 7 years after the wave ending year (denoted as event year 0). For
each industry IPO wave, we conduct a two-by-two sequential sort for IPOs in the wave on the
book-to-market equity ratio (BM) at the end of event year 3 and the average gross margin (GM)
in fiscal years 1 and 2. Four event-time BM-GM portfolios are formed across all industry IPO
waves. We first calculate buy-and-hold returns for each IPO stock in both the portfolio formation
period and the portfolio holding period, then calculate the value-weighted average returns within
a wave, and finally obtain the wave-size-weighted average returns across all waves. For
consistency of comparison, we use the market capitalization of individual stocks and the number
of IPOs in a wave at the time of portfolio formation, the end of event year 3, as weights for
individual stocks and waves respectively. The industry adjusted buy-and-hold returns are
calculated as the buy-and-hold returns in excess of the buy-and-hold value-weighted average
industry returns over the corresponding horizon. We report the average returns (%) and their
heteroskedasticity-and-correlation consistent t-statistics, calculated using the approach proposed
by Jegadeesh and Karceski (2009), for four BM-GM portfolios and the difference between high
GM and low GM portfolios within each BM group.

46

Table III
Summary statistics of IPO and firm characteristics for IPO stocks
Panel A: IPO characteristics
All IPOs
in SDC
Variable
(Mean/Std.)
Offer price
11.45
($)
(5.80)
Initial return
14.78
(%)
(28.75)
IPO proceeds
73.42
($ million)
(272.23)
Primary shares
90.82
(%)
(17.38)
15.28
Age
(21.00)
VC-backed IPOs
28.05
(%)
(44.92)
IPOs with lockup
46.88
period (%)
(49.90)

All IPOs
in sample
(Mean/Std.)
12.11
(5.18)
21.88
(37.58)
54.36
(134.99)
91.16
(15.91)
12.15
(15.88)
39.02
(48.80)
54.32
(49.83)

Low BM
low GM
(Mean/Std.)
11.93
(5.26)
24.24
(38.76)
55.27
(119.65)
93.27
(14.40)
11.83
(16.21)
45.07
(49.83)
56.42
(49.66)

Low BM
high GM
(Mean/Std.)
12.38
(5.27)
23.33
(38.29)
63.91
(217.14)
89.91
(16.52)
11.99
(16.02)
41.44
(49.33)
50.00
(50.07)

47

High BM
low GM
(Mean/Std.)
11.93
(5.27)
17.42
(36.03)
51.49
(79.91)
91.92
(15.18)
12.50
(16.24)
32.48
(46.90)
56.98
(49.58)

High BM
high GM
(Mean/Std.)
12.19
(4.95)
22.48
(37.01)
47.04
(71.53)
89.70
(17.07)
12.27
(15.13)
37.40
(48.45)
54.11
(49.90)

Low BM
H-L GM
(Mean/t-stat.)
0.44
(1.08)
-0.90
(-0.30)
8.64
(0.63)
-3.36
(-2.75)
0.16
(0.13)
-3.64
(-0.97)
-6.42
(-1.70)

Panel B: Firm characteristics in the portfolio formation period
All firms
Low BM
Low BM
High BM
in sample
low GM
high GM
low GM
Variable
(Mean/Std.) (Mean/Std.) (Mean/Std.) (Mean/Std.)
Log of
market cap
BM
Turnover
Gross margin
ROA
Sales growth
rate

High BM
high GM

Low BM
H-L GM

(Mean/Std.)

(Mean/t-stat.)

4.49

5.02

5.34

3.74

3.89

0.32

(1.86)

(1.73)

(1.77)

(1.73)

(1.70)

(2.40)

0.96

0.30

0.28

1.56

1.64

-0.01

(2.35)

(0.26)

(0.23)

(2.56)

(3.63)

(-0.72)

1.69

1.79

1.88

1.46

1.62

0.09

(1.63)

(1.47)

(1.96)

(1.47)

(1.55)

(0.69)

0.30

0.04

0.54

0.06

0.53

0.50

(0.45)

(0.51)

(0.27)

(0.44)

(0.24)

(15.85)

-0.08

-0.14

-0.04

-0.11

-0.04

0.10

(0.19)

(0.22)

(0.19)

(0.18)

(0.16)

(6.19)

0.39

0.46

0.45

0.33

0.34

-0.01

(0.49)

(0.57)

(0.44)

(0.50)

(0.44)

(-0.21)

Note: This table presents the summary statistics of variables for our sample. Columns 2-7 in panel
A present the mean and standard deviation of IPO variables for all IPOs in SDC, IPOs in our
sample, and IPOs in the four BM-GM portfolios respectively. The last column reports the
difference between high GM and low GM stocks in the low BM group and the t-statistics. Initial
return is the return on the first trading date. Age is the number of years since the founding year at
the time of IPO. Panel B presents the statistics of firm characteristics in the portfolio formation
period. Denoting the industry IPO wave ending year as event year 0, market capitalization and
BM are measured at the end of event year 3. Turnover is the average annual share turnover in
event years 1 to 3. Gross margin, ROA, and sales growth rate are measured as the average value
of the corresponding variable in fiscal years 1 and 2. We skip fiscal year 3 for accounting
variables to avoid the potential overlapping with the portfolio holding period.

48

Table IV
Monthly returns of calendar-time portfolios of stocks in industry IPO waves formed on
book-to-market equity ratio and gross margin
Panel A: The average monthly industry-adjusted returns, alphas and betas of BM-GM portfolios
Portfolio

Avg. Ret

Alpha

MKTRF

SMB

HML

UMD

Adj. Rsq

Low BM
Low GM

-0.87
(-3.03)

-1.03
(-4.36)

0.20
(3.66)

0.83
(11.17)

0.04
(0.52)

-0.11
(-2.30)

0.36

Low BM
High GM

0.11

-0.11

0.23

0.49

0.00

0.03

0.20

(0.40)
0.97

(-0.46)
0.92

(4.22)
0.04

(6.39)
-0.34

(-0.05)
-0.05

(0.61)
0.14

0.05

(3.46)

(3.25)

(0.56)

(-3.86)

(-0.47)

(2.44)

0.12
(0.36)
0.39

-0.06
(-0.20)
0.34

0.01
(0.10)
-0.01

1.08
(11.82)
0.85

0.27
(2.71)
0.23

-0.04
(-0.73)
-0.17

(0.90)
0.27
(0.59)

(0.80)
0.40
(0.83)

(-0.14)
-0.02
(-0.18)

(6.35)
-0.23
(-1.48)

(1.55)
-0.04
(-0.25)

(-1.93)
-0.13
(-1.26)

Low BM
H-L GM
High BM
Low GM
High BM
High GM
High BM
H-L GM

0.31
0.12
0.00

Panel B: Robust checks of the four-factor monthly alphas of low BM portfolios
Low GM

High GM

H-L GM

Alpha
t-stat.
Alpha
t-stat.
Alpha
Holding period: 1985-1997
-1.14
-3.33
-0.42
-1.09
0.72
Holding period: 1998-2010
-0.87
-2.59
0.15
0.51
1.02
Value-weighting across all stocks
-0.88
-3.44
-0.05
-0.16
0.83
Holding IPO stocks for 1 year from the end of event year 3
-1.08
-2.88
0.13
0.38
1.20
Holding IPO stocks for 7 years from the end of event year 3
-0.60
-3.11
0.24
1.16
0.85
Forming portfolios at the end of event year 2
-0.87
-3.57
0.03
0.13
0.90
Forming portfolios at the end of event year 4
-0.70
-2.99
-0.38
-1.50
0.32
Combining waves in the same industry with a gap less than 6 months in between
-0.82
-3.79
-0.11
-0.45
0.72
Measuring BM as BE_FYear2/ME_Year3
-1.12
-4.64
-0.12
-0.49
1.00

49

t-stat.
1.58
2.85
2.45
2.50
3.26
3.26
0.99
2.59
3.50

Note: This table presents the industry-adjusted monthly returns on calendar-time portfolios of
stocks in industry IPO waves in the holding period, event years 4 to 7, after the wave ending year
(event year 0). For each industry IPO wave, at the end of event year 3, we do a two-by-two
sequential sort for IPOs in the wave on the book-to-market equity ratio (BM) at that time and the
average gross margin (GM) in the fiscal years 1 and 2, and then hold these stocks during the
subsequent four years. In each calendar year t, four calendar-time BM-GM portfolios are formed
at the beginning of the year across all industry IPO waves ending in years t-7 to t-4. Within each
BM-GM portfolio, stocks in the same industry IPO wave are value-weighted first to form the
wave portfolio, and then wave portfolios are weighted by the number of IPOs at the end of event
year 3 for all waves entering into the trading strategy. The portfolios are rebalanced annually at
the beginning of each year.
In panel A, we report the average monthly industry-adjusted returns, the slope coefficients
(factor betas) for the three Fama-French factors and Carhart’s momentum factor, the four-factor
alphas and their t-statistics (below in parentheses). We consider four BM-GM sorted portfolios
and the long-short portfolios (long high gross margin stocks and short low gross margin stocks
within each BM group). In panel B, we present the four-factor monthly alphas for the two lowBM portfolios and the long-short portfolio with various modifications to the baseline trading
strategy: 1) splitting the whole holding period into two sub-periods; 2) value-weighting stocks
both within and across waves; 3) having alternative holding periods; 4) forming portfolios at
alternative time points, such as at the end of event year 2 based on BM at that time and GM in
fiscal year 1, and at the end of event year 4 based on BM at that time and the average GM in
fiscal years 1 to 3; 5) combining those waves in the same industry with a gap less than 6 months
in between to form a bigger wave, and then forming portfolios based on our baseline trading
strategy with the re-defined waves; and 6) measuring BM alternatively as the ratio of book equity
at the end of fiscal year 2 to the market equity at the end of event year 3.

50

Table V
Other results on monthly returns of calendar-time portfolios of growth stocks
Panel A: Alternative sorting variables using the industry IPO wave sample
Low

High

Alpha

t-stat.

High-Low

Alpha

t-stat.

Alpha

t-stat.

-0.97

0.66

1.95

-1.63

0.43

1.23

-1.97

0.35

0.97

-1.82

0.54

1.38

-2.20

0.41

1.06

-0.87

0.55

1.68

Sorting on BM and profit margin (PM)
-0.93

-3.20

-0.26

Sorting on BM and asset turnover (AT)
-0.85

-2.96

-0.42

Sorting on BM and gross-profit-to-asset (GPA)
-0.81

-2.42

-0.46

Sorting on BM and return on assets (ROA)
-1.00

-2.86

-0.46

Sorting on BM and return on equity (ROE)
-0.94

-2.68

-0.53

Sorting on sales growth rate and gross margin
-0.78

-2.88

-0.23

Panel B: Industry competition and the four-factor monthly alphas of low BM portfolios sorted on
BM and GM
Low GM
Alpha

High GM

t-stat.

Alpha

High-Low GM

t-stat.

Alpha

t-stat.

Industry competition measure: Herfindahl index of sales
Low

-1.03

-2.98

0.24

0.77

1.27

3.11

High

-0.58

-1.67

-0.29

-0.98

0.29

0.68

Industry competition measure: Advertisement intensity
Low

-0.72

-2.41

0.12

0.42

0.84

2.22

High

-1.20

-3.69

-0.40

-1.29

0.79

2.04

Panel C: Forming portfolios among non-IPO-wave samples based on BM and GM
Low GM
Alpha

High GM
t-stat.

Alpha

High-Low GM
t-stat.

Alpha

t-stat.

0.20

1.03

0.12

2.57

All IPOs in the same industry offered in the same year
-0.29

-1.84

-0.09

-0.70

All stocks in CRSP/COMPUSTAT in the same industry
-0.06

-2.19

0.05

1.71

51

Note: This table presents the four-factor monthly alphas in the 4-year holding period of portfolios
of growth stocks formed differently than our baseline trading strategy. In panel A, we form
portfolios of growth stocks among our industry IPO wave sample based on alternative sorting
variables. The first five sub-panels present the results of two-by-two sequential sorts on BM at the
end of event year 3 and the average value of other operating performance measures, such as profit
margin (PM), asset turnover (AT), gross-profit-to-asset (GPA), return on assets (ROA) and return
on equity (ROE), in fiscal years 1 and 2. The last sub-panel presents the result of a two-by-two
sequential sort on the average sales growth rate and the average gross margin in fiscal years 1 and
2. Similar to our baseline trading strategy, all these trading strategies form portfolios at the end of
event year 3 and hold them during the next four years.
In panel B, we partition the industry IPO waves into two groups based on competition
measures of their affiliated industries. For each selected industry competition variable, we take
the average value of the variable in the first two fiscal years after event year 0 as the proxy of
industry competition. The High-group (Low-group) refers to industry IPO waves with the value
of the industry competition measure above (below) the median value of the measure across all
waves in our sample. We then form BM-GM portfolios separately among IPOs in these two
groups of industry IPO waves, following the method in our baseline trading strategy. Herfindahl
index of sales is the sum of squared market shares across all firms in an industry. Advertisement
intensity is measured as the industry total advertising expenses scaled by the industry total sales.
In Panel C, we form BM-GM portfolios among non-IPO-wave samples, following methods
similar to that in the baseline trading strategy on our IPO wave sample. The first sub-panel
presents the results of forming portfolios among all IPOs in the same industry which were listed
in the same year. First, IPOs in an industry-year IPO cohort are assigned into four groups at the
end of the third year after the offering year based on a two-by-two sequential sort on the most
recent BM and the average GM in the first two fiscal years after the offering year. Then in each
calendar year t, we form four BM-GM portfolios at the beginning of the year across all industryyear IPO cohorts going public in years t-7 to year t-4. We first value-weight stocks within an
industry-year IPO cohort to form cohort portfolios and then weight cohort portfolios across all
industry-year IPO cohorts by the number of IPOs in each IPO cohort at the end of the third year
after the offering year. The portfolios are rebalanced annually at the beginning of each year. The
second sub-panel presents the results of forming portfolios among all stocks in
CRSP/COMPUSTAT in the same industry. First, at the end of each year t, we do a two-by-two
sequential sort within each industry based on the most recent BM and the average GM in the
previous two fiscal years. Then we form four BM-GM portfolios across all industries, valueweighting stocks within each industry to form industry portfolios and weighting industry
portfolios across all industries by the number of stocks in each industry, and hold portfolios
during the next four years. Each month in the holding period, the overlapping BM-GM portfolios
formed in the previous four years are equally weighted to calculate the final portfolio returns.

52

Table VI
Panel regression of annual industry-adjusted returns in the holding period on the average
GM in the portfolio formation period
Model 1

Model 2

Variable

Coef.

t-stat.

Coef.

t-stat.

BMLow*GMHigh

7.62

2.03

7.18

BMHigh*GMHigh

-0.64

-0.41

-1.22

Model 3
Coef.

t-stat.

Model 4
Coef.

t-stat.

1.96

9.98

2.65

-2.28

-2.89

-0.97

BMLow*ATHigh

2.05

0.67

-0.54

-0.18

BMHigh*ATHigh

7.49

1.22

10.43

1.73

Sizet-1

-7.13

-3.33

-7.70

-3.46

-6.76

-3.15

-7.30

-3.30

BMt-1

1.70

0.82

1.63

0.78

1.56

0.74

1.64

0.78

ExRett-1

-0.03

-2.22

-0.03

-2.22

-0.03

-2.27

-0.03

-2.28

Turnovert-1

-1.51

-1.96

-1.58

-2.01

-1.56

-2.07

-1.60

-2.08

Initial Return

0.05

0.73

0.05

0.79

0.06

0.82

VC

5.63

1.19

6.30

1.38

6.42

1.38

Lockup

-8.27

-1.81

-8.63

-1.91

-8.55

-1.86

Primary Shares

-0.10

-0.80

-0.07

-0.58

-0.07

-0.59

Fixed effects

wave

wave

wave

wave

Rsq (%)

4.48

4.61

4.59

4.75

Note: This table presents the result of the following panel regression for our industry IPO wave
sample,

∑
.
ExRett is the annual industry-adjusted return in year t in the holding period, the fourth to the
seventh years after the wave ending year (event year 0). BMLow is a dummy variable, equaling 1 if
the IPO stock is classified into the low BM group within an industry IPO wave based on the BM
at the end of event year 3, and zero otherwise, and BMHigh is the dummy variable for those IPO
stocks in high BM group in an industry IPO wave. GM and AT are the average values of gross
margin and asset turnover in the first two fiscal years after event year 0. GMHigh is a dummy
variable, equaling 1 if the IPO stock is classified into the high GM group within its BM group in
an industry IPO wave, and zero otherwise. ATHigh is a dummy variable, equaling 1 if the IPO
stock is classified into the high AT group within its BM group in an industry IPO wave, and zero
otherwise. Sizet-1 is the log of market capitalization at the end of year t-1. BMt-1 is the book-tomarket equity ratio at the end of year t-1, calculated as the book equity of the fiscal year ending at
least 3 months before the end of year t-1 to the market capitalization at the end of year t-1.
Turnovert-1 is the annual share turnover in year t-1. Initial Return is the first day return of IPOs.
VC is a dummy variable, equaling 1 if an IPO has venture capital backing, and zero otherwise.
Lockup is a dummy variable, equaling 1 for IPOs with a lockup condition, and zero otherwise.
Primary Shares is the percentage of primary (new) shares offered in the IPO. WaveDM j is a
dummy variable for the jth industry IPO wave in our sample.

53

The first two models include only interactions between BM dummies and high GM dummy,
controlling only annual stock characteristics in model 1 and further controlling IPO
characteristics in model 2. Model 3 includes only the interactions between BM dummies and high
AT dummy, controlling both the annual stock characteristics and IPO characteristics. Model 4
include all the interaction terms. T-statistics are calculated based on two-way clustered standard
errors by the Fama-French 49 industries and the calendar years.

54

Table VII
Sales growth response coefficients over time
Event
year 1

Event
year 2

Event
year 3

Event
year 4

Event
year 5

Event
year 6

Event
year 7

Coef.

0.08

0.05

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

t-stat.

2.07

3.03

0.84

0.58

0.50

0.31

0.54

Coef.

0.04

0.05

0.04

0.07

0.07

0.03

0.07

t-stat.

1.23

1.98

1.76

2.46

2.70

1.60

1.93

Coef.

0.02

0.02

0.03

0.02

0.03

0.02

0.03

t-stat.

4.71

3.97

4.88

4.37

3.31

4.59

2.80

Coef.

-0.04

0.00

0.03

0.05

0.06

0.03

0.06

t-stat.

-1.47

0.05

1.03

1.28

1.97

0.99

1.40

Portfolio
Low GM
High GM
Industry
benchmark
H-L GM

Note: The sales growth response coefficients are computed using the following regression,
ExRetq is the industry-adjusted quarterly return over the 3-month period from the end of the first
month of calendar quarter q to the end of the first month of calendar quarter q+1. ΔSGq is the
change in sales growth rate from calendar quarters q-1 to q, where the sales growth rate in quarter
q is calculated as (Salesq - Salesq-4)/ Salesq-4 and Salesq are the sales in quarter q. ΔIBq is the yearover-year change in quarterly earnings, calculated as (IBq - IBq-4)/ MVq-4, where IBq is the income
before extraordinary items in quarter q and MVq is the market capitalization at the end of quarter
q. ΔCAPXq is the year-over-year change in quarterly capital expenditure, calculated as (CAPX q CAPXq-4)/ MVq-4, where CAPXq is the capital expenditure in quarter q. We run the regressions
separately for the low-BM-low-GM group and the low-BM-high-GM group by event years in the
7-year period after event year 0 (the industry IPO wave ending year). We report the sales growth
response coefficient, which is the regression coefficient on ΔSGq, and its t-statistics for both low
and high GM growth firms. We also report the difference in the coefficient between high and low
GM groups and its t-statistics. We obtain the industry benchmark of the sales response coefficient
by running the same regression for a sample of all stocks in the same industry as those in industry
IPO waves which were listed at least 3 years before event year 0. All t-statistics are calculated
based on standard errors clustered by industry.

55

Table VIII
Operating performance and cash flow forecast revisions over time
Panel A: Fraction of stocks delisted due to poor performance (%)
Portfolio
Low GM
High GM
Industry
benchmark
H-L GM

Stat.

Event year 4

Event year 5

Event year 6

Event year 7

Mean

4.78

5.37

3.68

4.96

Std.

21.36

22.58

18.85

21.75

Mean

1.38

1.79

2.93

2.29

Std.

11.69

13.26

16.90

14.99

Mean

4.41

4.21

4.03

4.30

Std.

14.42

12.34

10.75

9.90

Mean

-3.39

-3.58

-0.74

-2.67

t-stat.

-2.57

-2.40

-0.50

-1.59

Panel B: Operating performance
Event
Portfolio
Stat.
year 1

Event
year 2

Event
year 3

Event
year 4

Event
year 5

Event
year 6

Event
year 7

Market share (%)
Low GM
High GM
Industry
benchmark
H-L GM

Mean

0.12

0.15

0.14

0.17

0.20

0.22

0.21

Std.

0.57

0.71

0.58

0.64

0.78

0.95

0.53

Mean

0.14

0.17

0.18

0.22

0.24

0.25

0.26

Std.

0.46

0.57

0.52

0.58

0.65

0.77

0.62

Mean

0.61

0.64

0.68

0.74

0.79

0.81

0.87

Std.

1.86

1.97

1.98

1.81

1.74

1.51

1.42

Mean

0.02

0.02

0.04

0.05

0.04

0.02

0.05

t-stat.

0.53

0.39

0.95

0.97

0.68

0.32

0.95

Mean

-12.76

-13.28

-9.53

-8.26

-4.67

-4.35

-3.78

Std.

32.07

33.29

32.87

32.35

23.78

24.87

22.88

Mean

-0.58

0.41

1.87

1.33

1.51

1.58

1.74

Std.

26.01

25.47

24.05

24.37

22.09

20.98

19.99

Mean

-0.73

-0.16

0.56

1.51

2.44

2.96

3.65

Std.

33.70

27.81

28.77

23.02

18.67

15.53

12.73

Mean

12.18

13.70

11.40

9.59

6.18

5.93

5.52

t-stat.

5.43

6.04

5.15

4.14

3.19

2.87

2.72

Return on assets (%)
Low GM
High GM
Industry
benchmark
H-L GM

56

Panel C: Cash flow forecast revisions from event year 3 to event year 7 (∆ESUM)
All years,
Short-run,
Medium-run,
event year 4
event years
event years
Portfolio
Stat.
onwards
4-7
8-12
Low GM
High GM
Industry
benchmark
H-L GM

Long-run,
event year
13 onwards

Mean

-0.83

-0.27

-0.35

-0.21

t-stat.

-7.83

-5.64

-7.99

-6.75

Mean

-0.6

-0.25

-0.25

-0.1

t-stat.

-6.16

-6.38

-5.55

-3.45

Mean

-0.26

-0.07

-0.09

-0.1

t-stat.

-6.4

-5.91

-4.91

-6.48

Mean

0.23

0.02

0.1

0.11

t-stat.

1.63

0.34

1.66

2.52

Note: This table presents characteristics of low-BM IPO stocks by event years in the 7-year
period after the industry IPO wave ending year (event year 0).
Panel A reports the fraction of stocks delisted due to poor performance, as indicated by the
delisting code between 500 and 599 in CRSP. Panel B reports the operating performance
measures including market share and return on assets (ROA). A firm's market share in year t is
calculated as its sales divided by the industry's total sales in year t. A firm's ROA in year t is
calculated as its operating income after depreciation and amortization (OIADP) in year t divided
by the average of total assets (AT) in years t and t-1. For each variable, we report its mean and
standard deviation for low-GM and high-GM growth firms. We also report the difference
between high and low GM groups and its t-statistics. We also report the industry benchmark for
each variable. For each industry IPO wave, we select those stocks in the industry which were
listed at least 3 years before the ending year of the current industry IPO wave, and then take the
mean value of a specific variable among these firms as the industry benchmark for stocks in the
wave. We then weight these industry benchmarks by the number of IPOs in the corresponding
industry IPO waves, and report the weighted mean and standard deviation.
Panel C reports the summary statistics of the change in future cash flow forecasts from event
year 3 to event year 7. For each BM/GM group of stocks in an industry IPO wave, we first
forecast future cash flows at the end of event year 3 in the following steps.
In the first step, we forecast future earnings of the value-weighted portfolio of all stocks in
the group based on IBES forecasts of earnings and earnings growth rate. The forecasted earnings
for the first two years (event years 4 and 5) are taken from IBES consensus (mean) earnings
forecasts. Earnings are then assumed to grow in the next three years (event years 6 to 8) at the
IBES consensus (mean) long-term growth rate forecasts (LTG). We take the value-weighted
average of LTGs of all stocks in a portfolio to form the portfolio's LTG. Finally, earnings growth
rate is assumed to converge linearly to a steady growth rate (SGR) in the next 10 years (event
years 9 to 18). We use the median value of all long-term earnings growth rate forecasts in IBES
as the steady growth rate.
In the second step, we forecast the book equity values in future years. We first assume a
constant dividend payout ratio (DPR) relative to the cum-dividend book equity value, i.e., Dt =
(BEt-1 + Et)*DPR, where Dt is the estimated dividend in year t, BEt-1 is the estimated book equity
value in year t-1, and Et is the estimated earnings in year t. For simplicity, we assume a 5% value
for DPR based on the historical average values of all firms in COMPUSTAT. We then calculate
the forecasted book equity values assuming the clean surplus relation, i.e., BEt = BEt-1 + Et - Dt.

57

In the third step, we calculate the forecasted ROEs for all future years. Based on forecasted
earnings and book equity values in the next 15 years (event years 4 to 18), we calculate forecasted
ROEs in these years, FROEt = Et / BEt-1. Forecasted ROE for all years in the steady state (SROE),
i.e., those years after event year 18, is calculated as (1+SGR)/(1-DPR)-1, based on the
equilibrium relationship among these parameters in the steady growth state.
In the final step, following Da and Warachka (2009), we form the future cash flow estimate
∑
as the discounted sum of all future log ROEs,
. Following
Vuolteenaho (2002) and Campbell and Vuolneenaho (2004), we assume a constant value, 0.95,
for , which is estimated from the historical values of market and book dividend yields.
At the end of event year 7, we update the cash flow estimate (ESUM) for each BM/GM group
in each industry IPO wave. Forecasted ROEs in event years 4 to 7 are replaced with the realized
values. For all other years after event year 7, the forecasted ROEs are updated, following the
same forecasting procedure described above.
We then compute the change in cash flow estimate (∆ESUM) from event year 3 to event year
7 for each BM/GM group in each industry IPO wave. Finally, we use the number of IPOs at the
end of event year 3 in a wave to weight across all industry IPO waves to estimate the final
statistics of each BM/GM group. We also break down ∆ESUM into three components: ∆ESUM4-7
which is due to errors in short-run forecasted ROEs of event years 4 to 7, ∆ESUM8-12 which is
due to revision in medium-run forecasted ROEs of event years 8 to 12, and ∆ESUM13-inf which is
due to revision in long-run forecasted ROEs of years after event year 13.
For each BM/GM portfolio, we report the weighted mean and the t-statistics for ∆ESUMs.
We also report the difference between high and low GM groups and its t-statistics. We also obtain
the industry benchmarks of ∆ESUMs in the following steps. First, for each industry IPO wave,
we select all stocks in the same industry as those in the wave which were listed at least 3 years
before event year 0 to form the value-weighted control portfolio. Second, we estimate ∆ESUMs
for each wave control portfolio, following the same procedure for the industry IPO wave
portfolios. Finally, we use the number of IPOs at the end of event year 3 in the corresponding
industry IPO wave to weight across all wave control portfolios to estimate the final statistics of
the industry benchmark.

58

Table IX
Measures of uncertainty over time
Panel A: Frequency of words in the "Risk Factors" section of IPO prospectuses
Number
Total
Number
of
% word
Total
word
of
stocks
count
Portfolio
Stat.
word
count
sample
with
of
count
of
stocks
Risk
"Cost"
"Cost"
Factors
Low BM,
Low GM

198

Low BM,
High GM

204

High BM,
Low GM

206

High BM,
High GM

209

102
112
111
117

Total
word
count
of
"Profitability"

%
word
count
of "
Profitability"

Mean

5,756.32

10.38

0.12

2.82

0.09

Std.

1,781.56

5.99

0.06

2.51

0.09

Mean

5,776.54

7.73

0.09

2.13

0.07

Std.

2,043.94

4.49

0.05

1.99

0.07

Mean

5,429.21

9.14

0.11

2.66

0.10

Std.

1,898.34

5.93

0.07

2.56

0.10

Mean

5,511.86

8.45

0.10

2.32

0.08

Std.

1,793.32

5.79

0.06

2.14

0.08

Low BM,
H-L GM

Mean

20.22

-2.65

-0.03

-0.69

-0.02

t-stat.

0.08

-3.63

-3.43

-2.21

-2.02

High BM,
H-L GM

Mean

82.65

-0.69

-0.01

-0.33

-0.01

t-stat.

0.34

-0.89

-1.01

-1.06

-1.13

59

Panel B: Other uncertainty measures
Event
Event
Portfolio
Stat.
year 1
year 2

Event
year 3

Event
year 4

Event
year 5

Event
year 6

Event
year 7

Analysts' earnings forecast dispersion
Low GM
High GM
Industry
benchmark
H-L GM

Mean

0.09

0.10

0.09

0.09

0.10

0.09

0.08

Std.

0.11

0.11

0.12

0.11

0.12

0.14

0.10

Mean

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.08

0.07

Std.

0.09

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.10

0.12

0.10

Mean

0.12

0.11

0.11

0.11

0.10

0.09

0.09

Std.

0.24

0.24

0.22

0.23

0.22

0.20

0.16

Mean

-0.02

-0.03

-0.03

-0.02

-0.02

-0.02

-0.01

t-stat.

-2.16

-3.53

-2.97

-2.77

-1.85

-1.23

-0.89

Mean

1.46

1.47

1.45

1.45

1.36

1.30

1.23

Std.

0.53

0.55

0.53

0.55

0.52

0.52

0.56

Mean

1.35

1.36

1.34

1.33

1.27

1.22

1.15

Std.

0.51

0.50

0.49

0.49

0.52

0.58

0.52

Mean

1.28

1.27

1.24

1.23

1.14

1.11

1.05

Std.

1.65

1.64

1.55

1.39

1.25

1.22

1.05

Mean

-0.11

-0.11

-0.11

-0.12

-0.09

-0.08

-0.08

t-stat.

-2.71

-2.70

-2.76

-2.95

-2.27

-1.72

-1.53

Idiosyncratic volatility
Low GM
High GM
Industry
benchmark
H-L GM

Note: Panel A presents the frequency of relevant keywords in the "Risk Factors" section of IPO
prospectuses for portfolios of stocks in industry IPO waves with an offering date after 1994. We
start with those IPOs in our industry IPO wave sample and going public after 1994. The first two
columns report the number of all IPOs in our sample and the number of IPOs with a valid "Risk
Factors" section in the IPO prospectus for each BM/GM group. The other columns present the
statistics of the following variables: 1) the count of all words in the IPO prospectus; 2) the count
of "Cost(s)" in the IPO prospectus; 3) the percentage of count of "Cost(s)" relative to the total
word count in the IPO prospectus; 4) the count of "Profitability" in the IPO prospectus; 5) the
percentage of count of "Profitability" relative to the total word count in the IPO prospectus. For
each variable, we report the mean and standard deviation for each BM/GM group, and the
difference in mean between high GM and low GM groups within each BM group and the
associated t-statistic.
Panel B reports other uncertainty measures including the dispersion of analyst earnings
forecasts and idiosyncratic volatility by event years in the 7-year period after the wave ending
year (event year 0). The dispersion of analyst earnings forecasts for a firm in year t is measured as
the average value of the standard deviation of annual earnings per share forecasts reported in
IBES monthly summary file in year t. To estimate a firm's idiosyncratic volatility in year t, we
first regress its daily stock returns in year t on Fama-French three factors (MKTRF, SMB and
HML) and Carhart's momentum factor (UMD), and then calculate the log value of the standard
deviation of the residuals. For each variable, we report its mean and standard deviation for low-

60

GM and high-GM growth firms. We also report the difference between high and low GM groups
and its t-statistics. We also report the industry benchmark for each variable. For each industry
IPO wave, we select those stocks in the industry which were listed at least 3 years before the
ending year of the current industry IPO wave, and then take the mean value of a specific variable
among these firms as the industry benchmark for stocks in the wave. We then weight these
industry benchmarks by the number of IPOs in the corresponding industry IPO waves, and report
the weighted mean and standard deviation.

61

Table X
Stock ownership over time
Portfolio

Stat.

Event
year 1

Event
year 2

Event
year 3

Event
year 4

Event
year 5

Event
year 6

Event
year 7

Percentage of shares outstanding held by insiders (%)
Low GM
High GM
Industry
benchmark
H-L GM

Mean

4.09

3.40

3.26

3.67

3.36

3.23

2.65

Std.

9.17

7.27

7.52

9.19

8.22

7.79

6.02

Mean

6.41

5.70

6.26

5.57

4.26

4.95

4.41

Std.

12.66

11.97

11.96

11.59

9.70

11.11

9.82

Mean

3.21

3.13

3.16

3.40

3.23

3.31

3.27

Std.

6.01

7.01

7.10

7.01

7.10

6.68

6.02

Mean

2.31

2.30

3.00

1.90

0.90

1.72

1.76

t-stat.

2.56

3.01

3.96

2.38

1.26

2.18

2.45

Percentage of shares outstanding held by mutual funds (%)
Low GM
High GM
Industry
benchmark
H-L GM

Mean

8.66

10.00

12.10

13.07

13.86

14.59

14.64

Std.

9.33

10.38

11.74

13.02

13.38

13.87

14.58

Mean

10.27

11.86

13.42

14.61

13.93

14.64

15.80

Std.

10.51

11.65

12.10

13.51

13.02

13.63

13.52

Mean

7.37

7.98

8.76

9.67

10.48

11.11

11.92

Std.

14.53

15.77

17.90

19.70

20.86

20.64

20.72

Mean

1.61

1.85

1.32

1.54

0.08

0.06

1.17

t-stat.

2.15

2.22

1.46

1.54

0.07

0.05

0.93

Percentage of shares outstanding held by growth-style mutual funds (%)
Low GM
High GM
Industry
benchmark
H-L GM

Mean

6.78

7.61

9.12

9.46

10.05

10.26

9.91

Std.

7.49

8.17

8.86

9.78

10.04

10.01

10.06

Mean

8.13

9.13

10.49

11.10

10.27

10.36

11.13

Std.

8.80

9.38

9.84

10.74

9.99

9.99

9.87

Mean

5.44

5.76

6.12

6.66

6.97

7.22

7.50

Std.

10.59

10.81

11.83

12.77

12.85

12.42

11.89

Mean

1.35

1.51

1.36

1.64

0.22

0.11

1.22

t-stat.

2.18

2.28

1.92

2.11

0.28

0.13

1.38

Note: This table reports the fraction of shares outstanding held by insiders, all mutual funds, and

the growth-style mutual funds at the end of each event year during the 7-year period after the
wave ending year (event year 0). We classify all mutual funds in the Thomson Reuters Mutual
Fund Holdings database into different styles based on the investment objective code,

62

supplemented by the style information from CRSP mutual fund historical style data. Growth
funds include those funds classified as growth style or aggressive growth style. For each variable,
we report its mean and standard deviation for low-GM and high-GM growth firms. We also
report the difference between high and low GM groups and its t-statistics. We also report the
industry benchmark for each variable. For each industry IPO wave, we select those stocks in the
industry which were listed at least 3 years before the ending year of the current industry IPO
wave, and then take the mean value of a specific variable among these firms as the industry
benchmark for stocks in the wave. We then weight these industry benchmarks by the number of
IPOs in the corresponding industry IPO waves, and report the weighted mean and standard
deviation.

63

