NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ACTIVE VS. PASSIVE DECISIONS AND CROWDOUT IN RETIREMENT SAVINGS ACCOUNTS:
EVIDENCE FROM DENMARK
Raj Chetty
John N. Friedman
Soren Leth-Petersen
Torben Nielsen
Tore Olsen
Working Paper 18565
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18565
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

We thank Christopher Carroll, James Choi, Gary Engelhardt, William Gale, Nathan Hendren, Lawrence
Katz, Patrick Kline, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, Jonathan Parker, James Poterba, Emmanuel
Saez, Andrew Samwick, Laszlo Sandor, Karl Scholz, Jesse Shapiro, Jonathan Skinner, Danny Yagan,
anonymous referees, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and discussion. Sarah
Abraham, Shelby Lin, Alex Olssen, Heather Sarsons , Michael Stepner, and Evan Storms provided
outstanding research assistance. This research was supported by The Danish Council for Independent
Research and by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #5 RRC08098400-05-00 to
the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium . The
findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of
SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. John Friedman is currently on leave from
Harvard, working at the National Economic Council. This work does not represent the views of the
NEC.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Soren Leth-Petersen, Torben Nielsen, and Tore Olsen. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowdout in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from
Denmark
Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Soren Leth-Petersen, Torben Nielsen, and Tore Olsen
NBER Working Paper No. 18565
November 2012, Revised January 2014
JEL No. E21,H3
ABSTRACT
Using 41 million observations on savings for the population of Denmark, we show that the impacts
of retirement savings policies on wealth accumulation depend on whether they change savings rates
by active or passive choice. Subsidies for retirement accounts, which rely upon individuals to take
an action to raise savings, primarily induce individuals to shift assets from taxable accounts to retirement
accounts. We estimate that each $1 of government expenditure on subsidies increases total saving
by only 1 cent. In contrast, policies that raise retirement contributions if individuals take no action
– such as automatic employer contributions to retirement accounts – increase wealth accumulation
substantially. We estimate that approximately 15% of individuals are “active savers” who respond
to tax subsidies primarily by shifting assets across accounts. 85% of individuals are “passive savers”
who are unresponsive to subsidies but are instead heavily influenced by automatic contributions made
on their behalf. Active savers tend to be wealthier and more financially sophisticated. We conclude
that automatic contributions are more effective at increasing savings rates than subsidies for three
reasons: (1) subsidies induce relatively few individuals to respond, (2) they generate substantial crowd-out
conditional on response, and (3) they do not increase the savings of passive individuals, who are least
prepared for retirement.
Raj Chetty
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
chetty@fas.harvard.edu
John N. Friedman
Harvard Kennedy School
Taubman 356
79 JFK St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
john_friedman@harvard.edu
Soren Leth-Petersen
Department of Economics
University of Copenhagen
Oster Farimagsgade 5
Building 26
DK-1353 Copenhagen K
Denmark
Soren.Leth-Petersen@econ.ku.dk

Torben Nielsen
University of Copenhagen
Department of Economics
Øster Farimagsgade 5, Building 25
DK-1353 Copenhagen K
torben.heien.nielsen@econ.ku.dk
Tore Olsen
University of Copenhagen and CAM
tolsen@nber.org

I

Introduction

Do retirement savings policies – such as tax subsidies, employer-provided pensions, and savings
mandates – raise total wealth accumulation or simply induce individuals to shift savings across
accounts? Despite extensive research, the answer to this question remains unclear, largely due to
limitations in data and research designs (Bernheim, 2002).
In this paper, we revisit this question using a panel data set with 41 million observations on
savings in both retirement and non-retirement accounts for the population of Denmark. We organize
our empirical analysis using a stylized model in which the government uses two policies to raise
saving: a price subsidy and an automatic contribution that puts part of an individual’s salary in a
retirement account. We analyze the impacts of these policies on two types of agents: active savers
and passive savers. Active savers make savings decisions by maximizing utility, taking into account
the subsidies and automatic contributions. Passive savers make fixed pension contributions that
are invariant to the automatic contribution and subsidy.
The model predicts that automatic contributions should have no impact on total saving –
total flows into non-retirement and retirement accounts – for active savers who can fully offset
the automatic contribution by reducing their own voluntary pension contributions. In contrast,
the impact of automatic contributions on total saving is ambiguous for passive savers. If passive
savers absorb the reduction in disposable income due to the automatic contribution by maintaining
a fixed consumption plan and running down their bank balance, automatic contributions have no
impact on total saving even though they increase savings within retirement accounts. But if passive
savers absorb the reduction in disposable income by reducing consumption and maintaining a fixed
savings target in non-retirement accounts, automatic contributions increase total saving. Price
subsidies have no impact on passive savers’ decisions. Subsidies induce active savers to save more
in retirement accounts, but their impacts on total saving are once again ambiguous and depend
upon the relative magnitude of price and wealth effects.
We analyze the impacts of price subsidies and automatic contributions empirically and estimate
the fraction of active vs. passive savers using Danish income tax records. These data provide deidentified information on savings for all Danish citizens from 1995-2009. The Danish pension system
– which has individual and employer defined-contribution accounts and a government definedbenefit plan – is similar in structure to that in the U.S. and other developed countries. The Danish
data and institutional environment have two primary benefits. First, they offer high quality, third-

1

party-reported information on savings for a much larger number of individuals than recent studies
based on survey data, which typically have fewer than 1,000 observations in their analysis samples
(e.g., Gelber, 2011). Second, a series of sharp reforms in Denmark provide quasi-experimental
research designs to identify the impacts of retirement savings policies.
We divide our empirical analysis into three sections. First, we analyze the impacts of definedcontribution employer pension plans and government mandates, both of which are “automatic
contributions” in the sense that they raise retirement saving if individuals take no action. Using
event studies of individuals who switch firms, we find that individuals’ total saving rises by approximately 80 cents (øre in Danish) when they move to a firm that contributes DKr 1 more to their
retirement account even if they could have fully offset the increase. Increases in compensation in the
form of automatic retirement contributions raise total saving much more than equivalent increases
in disposable earnings. Most individuals do not change voluntary pension contributions, savings
in taxable accounts, or liabilities at all when they switch to firms that contribute more to their
retirement account, consistent with passive behavior. The savings impacts are equally large when
we restrict attention to the subset of individuals who switch firms because of a mass-layoff at their
prior firm, showing that our estimates are not biased by endogenous sorting. The changes in savings
behavior persist for at least ten years after the firm switch and ultimately result in higher wealth
balances at the age of retirement. We complement our analysis of employer pensions by studying
the impacts of a government-imposed Mandatory Savings Plan (MSP) that required Danish citizens
above an income eligibility cutoff to contribute 1% of their earnings to a retirement savings account
starting in 1998. Using a regression discontinuity design, we show that the MSP raised total saving
by nearly 1% of earnings on average even for individuals who were previously saving more than 1%
of their earnings in voluntary retirement savings accounts. Overall, we estimate that at least 85%
of individuals respond passively to changes in automatic contributions, leaving their own pension
contributions and taxable saving unchanged when employer or government contributions rise.
In the second part of our empirical analysis, we study the impacts of subsidies for retirement
savings. Denmark has two types of tax-deferred savings accounts: capital pensions that are paid out
as a lump sum upon retirement and annuity pensions that are paid out as annuities. In 1999, the
government reduced the subsidy for contributing to capital pension accounts by 14 cents per Danish
Kroner (DKr) for individuals in the top income tax bracket. Using a difference-in-difference design
around the top tax cutoff, we find that capital pension contributions fell sharply for individuals in
the top income tax bracket. The aggregate reduction in capital pension contributions is entirely
2

driven by just 19% of prior contributors, most of whom stop making capital pension contributions
in 1999. The remaining 81% of prior contributors do not change their capital pension contributions.
Since utility maximization would call for some non-zero change in contributions when prices change
at an interior optimum, we infer that 81% of individuals behave passively with respect to changes
in subsidies.
Next, we investigate whether the changes in pension contributions induced by the subsidy change
led to changes in total wealth accumulation. We estimate two crowd-out parameters: the degree
of shifting between different pension accounts and the degree of shifting from pension accounts to
taxable savings accounts. First, we find that 57 cents of each DKr that would have been contributed
to capital pensions is shifted to annuity pension accounts (whose tax treatment was unchanged)
when the capital pension subsidy was reduced. Hence, total pension contributions fall by 43 cents
for each DKr of reduction in capital pensions. Second, focusing on this reduction in total pension
contributions, we estimate that 99 cents of each DKr contributed to retirement accounts comes
from money that would have been saved in a taxable account. This 99 cent crowd-out estimate
determines the overall impact of retirement savings subsidies on total saving and can be compared
to prior estimates (e.g., Engen, Gale and Scholz, 1996; Poterba, Venti and Wise, 1996). Based on
this estimate, we calculate that each DKr 1 of government expenditure on subsidies for retirement
saving generates less than 1 cent of net new saving. The upper bound on the 95% confidence
interval is 28 cents of new saving per DKr 1 of expenditure on subsidies.
In the final part of our empirical analysis, we investigate heterogeneity in responses across
individuals. We document three pieces of evidence which suggest that active vs. passive choice is
a key reason that automatic contributions and subsidies have very different effects on total saving.
First, the 1999 subsidy reduction has much larger effects on individuals starting a new pension in
that year relative to those making pension contributions in previous years, consistent with evidence
on inertial behavior in other domains (Samuelson and Zeckhauser, 1988; Ericson, 2012). Second,
individuals who actively change their pension contributions more frequently in other years are
more responsive to the price subsidy change and more likely to offset automatic contributions by
changing their own individual pension contributions. Third, individuals who are wealthier, older, or
have economics training are more responsive to price subsidies and more likely to offset automatic
contributions. In sum, “active savers” – those who are more responsive to price subsidies and less
influenced by automatic contributions – tend to be financially sophisticated individuals who plan
for retirement.
3

We conclude that the impacts of retirement savings policies on wealth accumulation depend on
whether they change behavior through active or passive choice. Policies that rely upon individuals
to take an action to raise savings have significantly smaller impacts on total saving than policies
that raise savings automatically even if individuals take no action.
Our results build on a large literature in public finance estimating crowdout in retirement savings
accounts reviewed by Poterba, Venti and Wise (1996) and Engen, Gale and Scholz (1996). Some
recent studies in this literature (e.g., Gelber (2011)) present evidence that increases in IRA or 401(k)
savings represent increases in total saving, while others (e.g., Benjamin (2003) and Engelhardt
and Kumar (2007)) find that much of the increase in 401(k) savings represents substitution from
other accounts. Although some of the difference between the results of these studies likely stems
from differences in econometric assumptions, the variation that drives changes in contributions to
401(k)’s could also explain the differences in results. For instance, increases in 401(k) contributions
by employers may generate less crowd-out than tax incentives or programs that require active
individual choice, an idea foreshadowed in early work by Cagan (1965) and Green (1981).
Our results also relate to a more recent literature in behavioral economics showing that defaults
significantly increase saving within retirement accounts (e.g., Madrian and Shea, 2001; Thaler and
Benartzi, 2004). This prior work has not investigated whether defaults raise total saving or simply
induce individuals to save less in non-retirement accounts. Our finding that policies that change
saving passively do raise total saving thus significantly strengthens the argument for policies such
as automatic enrollment and defaults if a policy maker’s goal is to increase savings rates.
Finally, our analysis provides three facts that could be useful to test between macroeconomic
models of household behavior. First, the marginal propensity of consumption (MPC) depends critically on the form of compensation: the MPC out of disposable income is an order of magnitude
larger than the MPC out of pension contributions. This finding is consistent with evidence that
consumption behavior departs from the predictions of frictionless life-cycle models (e.g., Johnson,
Parker and Souleles, 2006), but suggests that factors such as inattention (Reis (2006)) or unawareness may be as important as liquidity constraints and buffer stock behavior in explaining such
departures. Second, our findings are consistent with a model of “spenders” and “savers” (Campbell and Mankiw, 1989; Mankiw, 2000), in which some agents follow a rule-of-thumb based on
current disposable income and others optimize according to the life-cycle model. We estimate that
approximately 85% of individuals are rule-of-thumb spenders who make consumption choices based
on disposable income. Third, our results imply that the interest elasticity of savings is low, both
4

because the savings rates of active savers are inelastic with respect to net-of-tax interest rates and
because many individuals react passively with respect to changes in net-of-tax returns.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a stylized model to organize our reducedform empirical analysis. Section III describes the data and institutional background. Sections IV, V,
and VI present the empirical results on automatic contributions, price subsidies, and heterogeneity
across individuals, respectively. Section VII concludes.

II

Conceptual Framework

In this section, we set up a stylized two-type model of savings behavior and characterize its comparative statics to structure our empirical analysis.

II.A

Setup

Individuals live for two periods. They earn a fixed amount W in period 1, which they can either
consume or save in one of two risk-free accounts: a retirement account or a taxable savings account. Let r denote the net-of-tax interest rate that individuals earn in the taxable account. The
government offers a subsidy ψ that increases the return to saving in the retirement account to
r + ψ. To simplify notation, we abstract from income and capital gains taxes and let ψ represent
the net subsidy to retirement accounts taking all taxes into account. We assume that the subsidy
is financed by a tax on future generations or other agents outside the model. This assumption is
appropriate for our empirical application because the variation in ψ we study affects a small set of
agents and is financed out of general revenues.
Let Si represent the amount that individual i saves in the non-retirement (taxable) savings
account. Let PiI denote the amount that individual i contributes to the retirement account, P E
the amount his employer contributes to his retirement account, and P G the amount the government
requires the individual to contribute to a retirement account.1 Let Pi = PiI + P E + P G denote
total retirement saving. We treat P E and P G as exogenous parameters because our goal is to
characterize individual responses to exogenous changes in these policies. Both P E and P G are
“automatic contributions” in the sense that they are involuntary contributions that do not require
any active choice by the individual. We model P E and P G as coming out of gross earnings W ,
so that disposable income W − P E − P G remains to be allocated between consumption, taxable
1
To simplify notation, we assume that P E and P G do not vary across individuals in our model; in our empirical
analysis, we exploit variation in P E and P G across individuals for identification.

5

savings, and individual pension contributions.2 With this notation, a $1 increase in P E or P G
leads to a $1 reduction in disposable income, leaving total compensation fixed and eliminating
any income effects from changes in retirement benefits. Note that in our model, P E and P G
are interchangeable; however, we distinguish between employer and government contributions to
retirement accounts in our empirical analysis.
The individual chooses PiI and Si taking the policies {P E , P G , ψ} as exogenous. To eliminate
mechanical effects of changes in P E or P G that force individuals to save more, we assume that
there are no constraints on Si and PiI .3 Consumption in the two periods is given by
ci,1 (Si , PiI ) = W − Si − P G − P E − PiI

(1)

ci,2 (Si , PiI ) = (1 + r) Si + (1 + r + ψ) (PiI + P E + P G ).
In this two period setting, saving in the retirement account strictly dominates saving in taxable
accounts, and hence all individuals would optimally set Si = 0. In practice, retirement accounts are
illiquid and cannot be accessed prior to retirement, leading many individuals to save outside retirement accounts despite their tax disadvantage. We model the value of liquidity as a concave benefit
g(Si ) of saving in the non-retirement account.4 Accounting for the value of liquidity, individuals
have utility
u(ci,1 ) + δu (ci,2 ) + g(Si ).

(2)

where u(c) is a smooth, concave function and δ < 1 denotes the individual’s discount factor.
Active vs. Passive Savers. There are two types of agents, active savers and passive savers,
who differ in the way they choose Si and PiI . Let α denote the fraction of active savers. Active
savers choose Si and PiI to maximize utility (2) given {P E , P G , ψ} as in the neoclassical model.
Passive savers set retirement contributions at an exogenous level PiI = P̄i that does not vary with
{P E , P G , ψ}. There are several models in the literature for why individuals’ retirement savings
plans are insensitive to incentives, such as fixed costs of adjustment that generate inertia, hyperbolic
discounting that leads to procrastination in updating plans (Carroll et al., 2009), or a lack of
2

This is purely a notational convention because we can always redefine earnings as gross payments. For example,
if the individual receives a take-home salary of 20,000 and retirement benefits of PE = 1000, we would define
W = 21, 000.
3
In practice, individuals face a constraint of PI ≥ 0 and also a limit on total pension contributions. We focus
on the behavior of individuals in the interior of the choice set in our empirical analysis to obtain estimates that
correspond to parameters in our model.
4
Gale and Scholz (1994) develop a three period model in which individuals face uncertainty in the second period,
motivating them to keep some assets in a liquid buffer stock. Our model can be loosely interpreted as a reduced-form
of the Gale and Scholz model.

6

information. The results that follow do not depend upon which of these micro-foundations drives
passive behavior, and we therefore do not specify a particular model of passive choice.
Regardless of how passive savers make choices, they must satisfy the budget constraint in (1),
which can be rewritten as
I

ci,1 + Si = W − P G − P E − P̄i = W − Pi ,

(3)

i.e. consumption plus taxable saving equals income net of pension contributions. We assume that
passive savers choose Si (or, equivalently, ci,1 ) as a function of net income W − Pi , so that changes
in retirement savings policies affect behavior in period 1 only if they affect retirement contributions.
Again, we do not posit a specific model of how passive savers choose Si . Instead, we show how the
impacts of government policy depend upon the way in which passive savers adjust ci,1 and Si when
net income changes.

II.B

Comparative Statics

Table I summarizes the comparative static predictions of our model. We begin by characterizing
the impacts of automatic contributions in Columns 1 and 2 of the table. Because voluntary pension
contributions are a perfect substitute for automatic contributions, active savers will undo changes
in P E and P G 1-for-1 by reducing PiI . Automatic contributions therefore do not affect their total
contributions to retirement accounts Pi . In contrast, passive savers leave PiI fixed by definition and
hence their total retirement contributions Pi rise with P E and P G . Let P I , P , and S denote the
mean level of individual pension contributions, total pension contributions, and taxable saving in
the population. We refer to dP/dP E as the degree of “pass-through” of employer pensions to total
pensions (i.e., pass-through is one minus the rate of offset). We define pass-through of government
pensions dP/dP G analogously. If we restrict attention to individuals who are not constrained by a
corner, we can estimate the fraction of active savers directly from the rates of pass-through in the
population:
α
bE = 1 − dP/dP E
α
bG = 1 − dP/dP G
Next, consider impacts of automatic contributions on the mean level of total saving (P + S). The
total saving of active savers is unaffected by changes in P E and P G . The impact of P E and P G on
the total saving of passive savers depends on whether they cut consumption ci,1 or non-retirement
7

savings Si to meet the budget constraint in (3). Two cases span the potential responses. At one
extreme, if an individual has a fixed consumption plan c̄i,1 and does not pay attention to retirement
savings, he will end up with a smaller bank balance Si at the end of the year. In this case, changes
in P E and P G will have no impact on total saving. At the other extreme, if an individual has a
fixed target for his bank balance S̄i , he will absorb the reduction in disposable income by reducing
consumption ci,1 . In this case, a $1 increase in P E or P G will increase total saving by $1. These
extreme cases illustrate that existing evidence that automatic contributions increase saving within
retirement accounts (dP/dP E > 0) should not necessarily make us expect that such policies will
raise total saving. In general, we may observe d(P + S)/d(P E + P G ) ranging from 0 to 1 depending
upon the way in which passive savers set their budgets. If individuals are either pure consumption
or savings targeters, we can estimate the fraction of savings targeters as

d(P +S)
dP
/
,
d(P E +P G ) d(P E +P G )

i.e.

the fraction of passive savers who do not change S when P rises.
Next, we turn to the impacts of price subsidies (Columns 3 and 4 of Table I). By definition, price
subsidies have no impact on PiI for passive savers. The impacts of an increase in the price subsidy
on active savers have been characterized in prior work (e.g., Gale and Scholz, 1994; Bernheim, 2002).
Increases in the subsidy ψ affect PiI through three channels: (1) by reducing the price of PiI relative
to Si , leading to substitution across accounts; (2) by reducing the price of ci,2 relative to ci,1 , raising
total saving; and (3) by increasing total lifetime wealth, which raises period 1 consumption ci,1 and
hence reduces saving. Prior empirical work (e.g., Duflo et al., 2006; Engelhardt and Kumar, 2007)
consistently finds positive effects of subsidies on retirement contributions (dP I /dψ > 0), suggesting
that in practice the price effects dominate the wealth effect on average. Note that dPiI /dψ = 0 only
if the wealth effect exactly offsets the two price effects. Treating this as a measure zero knife-edge
case, we can obtain another estimate of the fraction of active savers based on responses to changes
in the subsidy:
α
bS = 1 − f rac(dPiI /dψ = 0)
where f rac(dPiI /dψ = 0) denotes the fraction of individuals who do not change their individual
pension contributions at all in response to changes in ψ.
Lastly, consider the impacts of the subsidy on total saving. Since changes in the subsidy rate ψ
have no impact on net income W − Pi in period 1 when individuals do not change PiI , they also do
not affect Pi + Si for passive savers. For active savers, the effects of price subsidies on total saving
Pi + Si are ambiguous. If the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) is small, the increase in
Pi induced by a price subsidy could come largely from shifting assets across accounts, with little
8

impact on total saving. If the EIS is large, an increase in ψ would increase total saving. Hence,
estimating d(P + S)/dψ is of interest for policy independent of estimating α
bS .
An important implication of this simple framework is that the degree to which pension contributions are offset by reduced saving in taxable accounts depends upon the policy instrument
used to increase retirement savings. Automatic contributions affect the pension contributions of
passive savers, whereas price subsidies affect the pension contributions of active savers. Because
active optimizers are likely to be cognizant of all the accounts in which they might save, they may
be more likely to re-optimize by shifting assets across accounts in response to a price subsidy than
are passive savers in response to an automatic contribution.
Our stylized two-type model predicts that an individual who is passive with respect to price
subsidies will also be passive with respect to automatic contributions, and hence that α
bE = α
bG =
α
bS . This strict prediction would not hold in a more general and realistic environment, as individuals
may fluctuate between being active and passive over time and individuals may be more cognizant of
some policies than others. Nevertheless, if the mechanism of active vs. passive choice is important
in driving differential responses to retirement savings policies, one would expect to see certain
correlations in the heterogeneity of responses across individuals. First, individuals who are currently
making active choices for other reasons – e.g. those who are starting new pension accounts – should
presumably be more responsive to price subsidies (e.g., Ericson 2012). Second, individuals who
actively respond to price subsidies should also be more likely to offset automatic contributions.
Third, typical micro-foundations for active vs. passive choice predict that active savers should have
higher levels of total saving Pi + Si . For instance, in Carroll et al.’s (2009) model, individuals
with low discount factors δ – who have low savings rates – tend to be passive savers because the
fixed up-front costs of planning for retirement outweigh their NPV gains from planning. More
generally, the same characteristics that make some individuals actively optimize with respect to
retirement savings incentives, such as financial literacy or attentiveness, are also likely to make these
individuals plan for retirement to begin with. This leads to the testable prediction that automatic
contributions should increase saving more for low-wealth individuals, while price subsidies should
generate larger responses among high-wealth individuals.
In the remainder of the paper, we analyze the impacts of retirement savings policies empirically,
focusing on three objectives that emerge from our conceptual framework: (1) estimating the fraction
of active vs. passive savers using the estimators developed above, (2) quantifying the impacts of
automatic contributions and subsidies on total saving, and (3) testing the mechanism of active vs.
9

passive choice by analyzing heterogeneity across individuals.

III

Data and Institutional Background

Institutional Background. This section provides institutional background relevant for the research
designs we implement below. See OECD (2009) or Bingley et al. (2007) for a comprehensive description of the Danish retirement system and Danish Ministry of Taxation (2002) for a description
of the income tax system. Note that over the period we study, the exchange rate was approximately
DKr 6.5 per US $1.
The Danish pension system consists of three components that are typical of retirement savings
systems in developed countries: a state-provided defined benefit (DB) plan (analogous to Social
Security in the U.S.), employer-provided defined contribution (DC) accounts (analogous to 401(k)’s
in the U.S.), and individual retirement accounts (analogous to IRA’s in the U.S.).
The defined-benefit pension in Denmark pays a fixed benefit subject to earnings tests. For
example, in 1999 the DB pension paid a benefit of DKr 95,640 (US $14,700) for most single
individuals over the age of 67. Because our analysis focuses exclusively on DC accounts, we do not
summarize the DB system further here. The structure of the DB pension system did not change
in a way that affects our analysis of DC accounts over the period we study.
Most jobs in Denmark are covered by collective bargaining agreements between workers’ unions
and employer associations. These agreements set wage rates and often include a pension plan
in which a fixed proportion of an individual’s earnings is paid into a retirement account that
is managed by an independent pension fund. Typically, 2/3 of the contribution to employeradministered pension accounts is made by the employer, with the remaining 1/3 deducted from the
individual’s paycheck (with no individual discretion). Because the distinction between these two
sources of payment has no bearing on our empirical analysis, we refer to the sum of the employer
(2/3) and worker (1/3) portions as the “employer-provided pension contribution,” denoted by P E .
Individual DC accounts are completely independent of employer accounts but have equivalent
tax properties. Individual contributions do not need to be updated once they are set up, and in
particular do not necessarily need to be changed as individuals change employers.
Within both the employer and individual DC pensions, there are two types of accounts: “capital
pension” accounts and “annuity pension” accounts.5 These two accounts have different payout
5
Annuity pensions can be further broken into two sub-categories labeled “rate” and “annuity” pensions, which
pay out over a different number of years. We use the term “annuity pension” for simplicity here to refer to both of
these accounts because the difference between these sub-categories does not matter for our empirical analysis.

10

profiles and tax consequences. Balances accrued in capital pension accounts are paid out as a
lump sum and taxed at 40% on payout. Balances accrued in annuity pension accounts are paid
out over several years – e.g., as a 10-year annuity or a lifetime annuity – and are taxed as regular
income. Contributions to both types of accounts are tax deductible at the time of contribution.
Capital gains in both capital and annuity retirement accounts are taxed at approximately 15%,
compared with an average of approximately 29% for assets in taxable accounts. Withdrawals prior
to retirement from either account incur a tax of 60% plus administrative fees prior to age 60; as a
result, only 2.2% of individuals in a given year withdraw money prior to age 60.
Employers set the amount that they contribute to capital and annuity pension accounts for
their workers. The sum of employer and individual contributions to each type of account is capped
at limits that have gradually increased over time. In 1999, total contributions to each account
(capital or annuity) were limited to DKr 34,000 (US $5,200); in 2009, the cap was DKr 46,000. The
cap binds for relatively few people. For example, conditional on having positive individual capital
pension contributions, 4.6% of individuals are at the contribution limit for capital pensions.
Sample and Variable Definitions. We merge data from several administrative registers – the
income tax register, the population register, and the Danish Integrated Database for Labor Market
Research (IDA) – to obtain annual information for the Danish population from 1995 to 2009. Starting from the population data set, we impose two restrictions to obtain our primary analysis sample.
First, we exclude observations in which individuals are below the age of 18 or over 60, at which point
early retirement schemes begin. Second, we exclude observations with self-employment income because business wealth and income are not measured precisely for the self-employed. This leaves us
with an (unbalanced) panel of approximately 41 million observations for 4 million individuals.
All income and savings variables are based on third-party reports. Earnings and pension contributions are reported directly by employers and pension funds to the tax authority. End-of-year
assets and liabilities in taxable accounts are reported directly to the tax authority by banks and
financial institutions. These wealth data are collected because Denmark levied a wealth tax until
1996; data collection continued after that point and the tax authorities use the third-party reported
wealth data to cross check if reported income is consistent with the level of asset accumulation.6
6

Prior to 1997, the tax authority also required individuals to self-report some components of their wealth to
administer the wealth tax. Leth-Petersen (2010) uses these wealth data in his analysis. Here, we use only thirdparty reported data, which are available starting in 1995. Kleven et al. (2011) conducted a randomized tax audit in
collaboration with the Danish tax authorities and found that tax evasion is negligible among wage earners. Their
finding suggests that the third-party reported information we use here are of high quality and accurately capture real
economic behavior.

11

We observe flows into retirement accounts in each year, but have no information on total wealth
balances in these accounts. In contrast, we observe total wealth balances in taxable accounts, but
not the flow of saving into such accounts. We therefore define a (noisy) measure of gross taxable
saving as the change in an individual’s taxable asset holdings.
We define net saving as gross savings minus the change in liabilities. Our measure of liabilities
covers all forms of secured and unsecured debt (such as credit cards) except home mortgages. We
use gross saving as our baseline measure because liabilities are measured with substantial noise,
yielding less precise estimates, particularly when analyzing heterogeneity; however, we show that
we obtain similar point estimates when using net saving in all cases in the full sample.
Our measures of taxable saving suffer from three limitations. First, because we do not directly
observe home equity wealth and mortgage debt, we miss investments in home improvements and
payments to home equity. We assess whether this is a significant source of bias by replicating our
analysis on the subsample of renters. Second, our definition of saving also does not account for
investments in other durables, such as cars or appliances. To test for intertemporal substitution in
durable goods purchases, we analyze policy impacts on savings behavior over several years. Third,
the wealth data exclude some assets such as cash holdings outside bank accounts and exotic assets
such as yachts. Such assets likely account for a small fraction of total wealth and are unlikely to
be the main substitutes for savings in retirement accounts.
We top code pension contributions above the 99th percentile to the 99th percentile in each
account in each year, as these values are above the contribution limit and hence may be erroneous.
In some specifications, we measure pension contributions and savings rates as a percentage of labor
income. To reduce the influence of outliers on these estimates, we code as missing all rates as
well as all measures of taxable saving that are below the 1st or above the 99th percentiles of their
distributions in the relevant estimation sample, as described in the notes to each table.
We use three concepts of income in our empirical analysis. First, we define “labor income” Yi,t as
labor earnings before the deduction of any taxes, excluding contributions to employer-administered
pensions. Second, we define “total compensation” Wi,t as labor earnings plus (both employer and
employee) contributions to employer-administered retirement accounts. This concept matches the
definition of total compensation W in the model in Section II. Third, we define “taxable income”
tax as labor income plus other forms of income (e.g., unemployment insurance payments) that
Yi,t

affect the computation of the individual’s tax liability.
We analyze income and saving at the individual (rather than household) level because Denmark
12

effectively has an individual tax system and thus the key incentives operate at the individual level.
The tax authority divides balances held in joint accounts equally among the account’s owners
to obtain measures of individual capital income for tax purposes, and we use these individualspecific measures to compute saving in our analysis. To ensure that our results are not biased by
resource pooling within couples, we directly test for offsets in the partner’s account and analyze
the subsample of individuals without partners.7
Summary Statistics. Table II presents summary statistics for the full sample and the “top
tax threshold sample” used in our analysis of price subsidies, which includes observations with
taxable income within DKr 75,000 of the top tax bracket cutoff. We report all monetary values in
nominal terms. The asset positions of individuals in our sample are similar to those of individuals
in the U.S. on average. The median savings rate (including pension contributions) in our sample
is 8.7%. The median savings rate for households in the U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics
is approximately 14% (Dynan et al., 2004). 18.7% of individuals own stock in non-retirement
accounts and 73.3% hold non-mortgage debt in Denmark; the corresponding fractions in the 2001
U.S. Survey of Consumer Finances are 21.3% and 75.1% (Aizcorbe et al., 2003).
A key feature of the data is that savings rates in taxable accounts vary considerably both
across individuals and over time for a given individual. The standard deviation of taxable savings
rates (as a percentage of labor income) in the full sample is 30.5%; the within-person standard
deviation of savings rates is 22.6% on average across individuals in the full sample. Savings rates
are highly variable despite the fact that our administrative records have little measurement error
for two reasons. First, fluctuations in asset returns generate noise in flow savings rates because we
measure saving as the difference in wealth in taxable accounts. Second, the timing of durable goods
and service purchases (e.g., a new fridge) and lumpy non-durables (e.g., an end-of-year vacation)
generate true fluctuations in balances and savings rates. This latter channel is very important
quantitatively: for individuals who own no stocks in taxable accounts, for whom the first channel is
essentially shut down, the within-person standard deviation of savings rates across years remains at
19.5%. The fluctuation in savings rates across years makes it challenging to obtain precise estimates
of policy impacts on saving in taxable accounts, a problem that is likely to arise in any empirical
analysis of savings behavior. The econometric methods we use are specifically designed to account
for such noise and maximize the precision of estimates of taxable saving responses.
7
Our definition of partners includes cohabitation, which is common in Denmark. The administrative records
identify partners as individuals who (1) are married, (2) live together and have one or more children together, or (3)
live together, are of opposite gender, differ in age by less than 15 years, and are not blood relatives.

13

IV

Impacts of Automatic Contributions

The ideal experiment to analyze the impacts of automatic pension contributions on saving would be
to randomize automatic contributions holding fixed total compensation. For example, we would set
up automatic pension contributions for a random subset of individuals of say DKr 1,000 and reduce
their take-home pay by DKr 1,000 so that total compensation is held fixed. We approximate this
ideal experiment using two quasi-experimental research designs: (1) changes in employer provided
pensions and (2) the introduction of a mandated government savings plan (MSP). The employer
pension variation provides much more precise estimates because it generates idiosyncratic variation
at the individual level, while the MSP is a purer approximation of the ideal policy experiment.

IV.A

Employer Provided Pensions

Contributions to employer-administered retirement accounts (PiE ) vary significantly across firms
because of differences in collective bargaining agreements. To isolate variation in PiE that is orthogonal to unobserved determinants of workers’ savings rates, we study changes in workers’ savings
rates when they switch jobs.8 Although job changes are endogenous, they generate high-frequency
changes in employer pension contributions that are plausibly orthogonal to tastes for saving, which
presumably evolve more smoothly over time. We evaluate this orthogonality condition in detail
after presenting a set of baseline results.
Throughout this subsection, we restrict attention to the subgroup of individuals who switch
between firms at some point in our sample. We define an individual as switching firms in year t if he
has earnings from two distinct firms in year t and t−1.9 To limit the sample to individuals switching
between full-time jobs rather than entering or exiting the labor force, we exclude observations in
which earnings either fell by more than half or more than doubled, which account for approximately
25% of the switches in our sample.10 This leaves us with 4.10 million job-switches in the data.
8
An alternative source of variation is changes in firm pension policies over time. Firm-level policy changes were
very gradual and relatively small on an annual basis during the period we study, making it difficult to disentangle
the causal impacts of changes in firms’ policies from other confounding factors that trend over time. Arnberg and
Barslund (2012) correlate changes in savings rates with changes in employer pensions and, consistent with our results,
find little evidence of crowd-out. We also studied changes in individual saving rates when they first start receiving
employer pension contributions, following Gelber (2011). We estimate a pass-through rate exceeding 90% using
this design, which is similar to our estimates below based on job changes and indicates that most individuals are
unresponsive to changes in their employer’s pension policies.
9
The firm identifiers were changed in 2003, 2005, and 2007; we therefore define the firm switch variable as missing
for observations in these years. For individuals who hold multiple jobs within a single year, we define a firm switch
as having a different “primary job” in the next year. We also confirm that our results hold for the subsample of
individuals who have only one job in each year.
10
Our results are insensitive to this restriction provided that we exclude the 1% of individuals who experience
earnings changes exceeding 250% or below -80%.

14

Because firms’ pension contributions are typically denominated as a percentage of worker’s salaries,
we scale all variables in this subsection as a percentage of labor income Yi,t . We begin by illustrating
the research design using event studies around firm switches and then present regression estimates
that pool all the available variation and control for income effects.
Event Studies. Figure Ia plots an event study of individuals who move to a firm that contributes
at least 3 percentage points more of labor income to retirement accounts than their previous firm.
Let year 0 denote the year in the sample that an individual switches firms and define all years
relative to that year (e.g., if the individual switches firms in 2001, year 1998 is -3 and year 2003
is +2). To hold sample composition fixed across years, we include only individuals with at least 4
years of data both before and after the year of the switch. The series in squares in Figure Ia plots
employer contributions (to capital plus annuity accounts) for these individuals. By construction,
employer pensions jump in year 0, by an average of 5.57% of labor income for individuals in this
sample.
How does this jump in employer pensions affect individual pension contributions? The series in
triangles in Figure 1a plots individual pension contributions (PiI ) around the firm switch. Individual
pension contributions fall by 0.11% of income from year -1 to year 0. Under the identification assumption that the distribution of individual pension contributions would have remained unchanged
between periods t and t − 1 absent the change in employer pensions, we infer that a DKr 1 increase
in P E causes a 0.11/5.57=2 cent reduction in individual contributions P I .
Under the assumptions of our stylized two-type framework in Section II, the 2 cent estimate
would imply that α
bE = 2% of individuals are active savers who offset the increase in employer
contributions by reducing individual contributions to retirement accounts. However, the stylized
model ignores the fact that individuals face limits in the amount they can contribute to retirement
accounts, which affect the estimation of α
bE for two reasons. First, 62.2% of individuals in Figure
I
Ia are at the lower corner (Pi,t=−1
= 0) prior to the firm switch. These individuals cannot offset

the increase in employer pensions even if they want to do so. Second, 7.6% of the individuals in
I
E
Figure Ia have total contributions at the contribution limit (Pi,t−1
+ Pi,t−1
= Pmax ) prior to the

switch.11 In this subgroup, even passive individuals who are not actively responding to changes
in PiE are forced to reduce PiI to meet the contribution limit after the firm switch.12 The first
11
More precisely, 7.6% of individuals are at the corner in either annuity or capital pension accounts and hence may
be constrained.
12
This adjustment occurs automatically because individuals receive the tax deduction only for pension contributions
up to the limit, and we measure P I in our data as the tax-deductible portion of individual pension contributions.

15

constraint makes the 2% cent figure an underestimate of the degree of active behavior, while the
second works in the opposite direction.
Because of these corners, the increase in total pension contributions in Figure Ia is driven by
a combination of mechanical effects – i.e., being forced to save more in pensions – and passive
behavior, i.e. not offsetting increases in automatic employer contributions even when it is feasible
to do so. The mechanical effect is determined by the fraction of individuals at the corner with
respect to a particular policy change, whereas the degree of passive behavior is likely to be relevant
for predicting behavioral responses to policy changes more broadly. We use two methods to isolate
passive behavior: conditioning on positive lagged contributions and studying thresholds instead of
levels.
Figure Ib replicates Figure Ia, restricting the sample to individuals who make positive individual
I
pension contributions in the year before the firm switch (Pi,t=−1
> 0). In this sample, only 12.1%

of individuals make zero contributions in year 0 after the firm switch, but the rate of pass-through
remains high at 1 − 0.56/5.64 = 90%. This result shows that most individuals do not offset the
increase in employer pensions even if they are able to do so, but still does not yield a point estimate
of the fraction of active savers α
bE that is completely unaffected by corners.
To obtain such a point estimate, we analyze whether individuals in the interior of the choice
set change PiI when PiE rises. In particular, we calculate the fraction of individuals whose total
pension contributions PiI + PiE exceed the new level of employer pensions (measured in levels):
I
E
E
ft = Ei [Pi,t
+ Pi,t=−1
> Pi,t=0
] for t < 0
I
E
E
ft = Ei [Pi,t
+ Pi,t=0
> Pi,t=0
] for t ≥ 0

For example, for individuals whose employer pension contribution rose from DKr 2000 to 5000
in year 0, ft is the fraction whose total pension contributions exceed DKr 5,000 in each year t.13
Because the change in employer pensions is inframarginal relative to this threshold, the fraction of
individuals with total contributions of more than DKr 5,000 should be unaffected by this increase
in employer pensions if all individuals are active savers, irrespective of corners.
Figure Ic plots ft for the same sample as in Figure Ia. The fraction ft jumps at t = 0, implying
that the distribution of total pension contributions shifts upward in the interior of the choice set
13
E
E
When defining ft , we fix employer pensions at Pi,t=0
for all t > 0 rather than using the current level of Pi,t
because there are fluctuations in employer pensions over time due to changes in policies and subsequent firm switches
E
that can affect ft even if the individual does not change his own contributions. We fix employer pensions at Pi,t=−1
for all t < 0 for the same reason.

16

when P E rises. To quantify the degree of pass-through implied by this treatment effect, we calculate
the extent to which ft would rise if everyone were a passive saver under the maintained assumption
that the distribution of PiI is stationary between periods t = −1 and t = 0. We calculate the
predicted change in ft under 100% pass-through as
I
E
E
I
E
E
∆ftpred = Ei [Pi,t=−1
+ Pi,t=0
> Pi,t=0
] − Ei [Pi,t=−1
+ Pi,t=−1
> Pi,t=0
].

The dashed line in Figure Ic depicts the predicted change ∆ftpred between periods -1 and 0. We
calculate the degree of pass-through as the ratio of the actual change in period 0 to the predicted
change under full pass-through, ∆ft /∆ftpred . This statistic measures how far between the extremes
of all active savers (with ∆ft = 0) and all passive savers (with ∆ft = ∆ftpred ) the data lie. In
the two-type model in Section II – in which individuals either fully offset the change in PiE to the
extent possible or make no change at all – this estimate corresponds to the mean rate of passthrough dP/dP E . We present evidence below which indicates that individuals’ responses follow
this binary form in practice. We obtain an estimate of dP/dP E = ∆ft /∆ftpred = 0.948 using the
threshold estimator, implying that only α
bE = 5.2% of individuals who are not constrained by a
corner respond actively to changes in PiE .
Next, we analyze whether individuals offset the increase in pension contributions by saving less
in taxable accounts. The series in circles in Figure Ia plots taxable saving Si . There is little change
in the level of taxable saving, implying that the increase in employer pension contributions raises
total savings rates. Figure Ib shows that we obtain similar results when we restrict the sample
to individuals who were making voluntary individual pension contributions in the year before the
switch.
In Figure Ic, we implement the threshold approach by analyzing whether total saving – including both retirement and taxable non-retirement accounts – exceeds the new level of employer
pension contributions. When defining total saving, one must account for the difference in the tax
treatment of saving in retirement and non-retirement accounts. Because pension contributions are
tax-deductible, one has to reduce consumption by only (1 − M T Rit )Pit to save Pit in a retirement
account, where M T Rit is the individual’s marginal tax rate. In contrast, one must reduce consumption by Sit to save Sit in a taxable savings account. Hence, total saving – the amount of disposable
income an individual chooses not to consume – is (1 − M T Rit )Pit + Sit in post-tax dollars. Because
we measure pension contributions in pre-tax dollars (as in prior work), we measure total saving in

17

pre-tax dollars as well and define total saving as
Sittot = PitE + PitI + Sit /(1 − M T Rit ).
The series in triangles in Figure Ic plots the fraction of individuals ft with total saving Sittot above
E .14 The fraction of individuals with total
the new level of employer pension contributions, Pi,t=0

saving above this amount jumps sharply after the firm switch. Comparing the observed change to
the predicted change with no offset, pass-through to total saving is dS tot /dP E = 0.618.
As noted above, the identification assumption underlying our research design is that an individual’s preferences for saving would not have jumped sharply in year 0 in the absence of the change
in firm policies. Two pieces of evidence suggest that the identification assumption is likely to be
satisfied. First, there is no trend toward higher individual pension contributions prior to year 0 in
Figure Ia, as one would expect if individuals’ tastes for saving were changing around the job switch.
Second, many individuals literally do not change their individual pension contributions at the
time of the job switch. This is illustrated in Figure Id, which plots histograms of percentage changes
in individual contributions from the year before the firm switch to the year of the firm switch for
two groups of individuals who were making voluntary contributions prior to switching firms. The
first group consists of those whose employer pension contribution increases by at least 3 percentage
points, the same individuals as in Figure 1b. The second group consists of individuals whose
employer pension contributions changed by less than 0.5 percentage points when they switched jobs.
In the latter group, 52% of individuals leave their individual pension contributions unchanged when
they switch jobs, compared with 42% in the former group. The fact that individuals’ propensity to
adjust their pension contributions rises by only

1−0.42
1−0.52

− 1 = 21% when they switch to a firm with

much higher employer contributions implies that most individuals behave passively with respect
to changes in P E . For these individuals, total pension contributions change by exactly the same
amount as the change in employer contributions, strongly suggesting that the increase in saving at
t = 0 reflects the causal effect of employer pensions rather than other factors.15
Regression Estimates of Pass-Through. We now estimate regression models that generalize the
event studies in Figure I to include changes in employer pension contributions of varying sizes and
control for income effects. Let ∆zi = ∆Zi /Yi,t=−1 denote the change in a variable Zi from the year
14

E
E
As above, when defining ft , we fix employer pensions at Pi,t=0
for all t > 0 and Pi,t=−1
for all t < 0.
Given switching costs and search frictions, it is unlikely that individuals who want to save say 3.3% more of
their labor income in a given year could manage to switch to firms that contribute exactly 3.3% more to retirement
savings. Moreover, because individual and employer contributions have identical tax benefits, there is no reason to
switch firms to save more; it would be much easier to simply raise one’s own contributions to the same retirement
accounts.
15

18

before to the year after a firm switch, scaled as a percentage of labor income Yi,t=−1 prior to the
switch. We quantify pass-through by estimating variants of the following regression specification
using OLS:
E
∆zi = β0 + φE ∆pE
i + β1 ∆wi + βX Xi + εi

(4)

where ∆zi denotes the change in total pension contributions or savings rate, ∆pE
i denotes the
change in the employer pension contribution rate, ∆wi denotes the change in total compensation
as a percentage of per-switch labor income, and Xi denotes a vector of covariates. In this equation,
φE represents the impact of a DKr 1 increase in employer pensions while holding total compensation
fixed (i.e., by reducing labor income by DKr 1), as in the ideal experiment described at the beginning
E
of this section. Under the identification assumption Cov(εE
i , ∆pi ) = 0, estimating (4) using OLS

yields an unbiased estimate of φE . If individuals are not at a corner, the pass-through rate φE =
1 − αE identifies the fraction of passive savers.
Table III reports estimates of (4). We restrict the sample to individuals switching firms and
use only data from the year before and the year after the firm switch (years -1 and 0). We cluster
standard errors by destination firm to account for the correlation in employer pensions across
employees of the same firm.
We begin in Column 1 of Table III by analyzing impacts on total pension contributions (P E +
P I ). We estimate three variants of this regression. In Panel A, we estimate (4) without any
additional controls (no X vector). To reduce mechanical effects due to corners, we restrict the
I
sample to individuals who are making individual pension contributions (Pi,t=−1
> 0) prior to the

firm switch.16 We estimate that total pension contributions P E + P I rise by 94.9 cents on average
when employer pensions are increased by DKr 1. In contrast, a DKr 1 increase in labor income
(i.e., an increase in total compensation holding PiE fixed) increases saving by only 0.7 cents.
Figure IIa presents a binned scatter plot that is the non-parametric analog of the linear regression in Column 1 of Table IIIA. This figure plots changes in total pension contributions (∆(pI +pE ))
from year -1 to year 0 vs. changes in employer pension contributions ∆pE , controlling for changes
in total compensation. To construct this figure, we first regress ∆(pI + pE ) and ∆pE on total
compensation ∆w (using two separate OLS regressions) and calculate residuals. We then divide
the residuals of ∆pE into twenty equal-sized groups (vingtiles) and plot the mean of the ∆(pI + pE )
16

I
Importantly, we condition only on per-switch pension contributions being positive; we do not condition on Pi,t=0
,
which is endogenous to the change. For completeness, we estimate pass-through to total savings in the full sample
in Column 1 of Appendix Table I. As expected, the pass-through estimates are similar in the full sample, since
individuals at a corner must behave like passive savers.

19

residuals in each bin against the mean of the ∆pE residuals in each bin. This binned scatter plot
provides a non-parametric representation of the conditional expectation function of ∆(pI + pE )
given ∆pE , controlling for ∆w. The regression coefficient and standard error reported in this and
all subsequent binned scatter plots are estimated on the microdata using OLS regressions as in (4).
Figure IIa shows that changes in employer pensions increase total pension contributions throughout the distribution. Large changes (e.g. +/-5% of earnings) continue to have significant impacts
on savings behavior, challenging models of rational inattention (Cochrane, 1991; Browning and
Crossley, 2001; Reis, 2006; Chetty, 2012). At the least, the costs of attention are large enough such
that in the policy-relevant domain – which is unlikely to include automatic retirement contributions
of more than 10% of income – most individuals behave passively.
In Panel B of Table III, we replicate the specification in Panel A, adding the following vector
of covariates Xi : age, gender, marital status, an indicator for attending college, and two-digit
occupation indicators. Not surprisingly, the coefficient is virtually unchanged, as the sharp change
in employer pensions at the time of the job switch is essentially orthogonal to these covariates.
Finally, in Panel C, we use a threshold-based approach to obtain an estimate of the fraction
of active savers that is not biased by corners, as in Figure Ic. To implement this approach in a
regression that pools both increases and decreases in pension contributions, we define the threshE ,PE
old as P̄ = max(Pi,t=0
i,t=−1 ). We define the change in an indicator for having total pension

contributions greater than this threshold:
I
E
I
E
∆θi = I[Pi,t=0
+ Pi,t=0
> P̄ ] − I[Pi,t=−1
+ Pi,t=−1
> P̄ ].

We then define an analogous variable measuring whether an individual would cross the same threshold if he behaved passively and left P I at the year t − 1 level:
I
E
I
E
∆θipred = I[Pi,t=−1
+ Pi,t=0
> P̄ ] − I[Pi,t=−1
+ Pi,t=−1
> P̄ ].

We estimate a regression of the following form on the full sample of all firm switchers using 2SLS:
E
∆θi = β0 + φE ∆θipred + β1 ∆wi + β2 [∆pE
i > 0] + εi ,

(5)

instrumenting for the predicted change ∆θipred with the change in employer pension rate ∆pE
i . The
resulting 2SLS coefficient is an estimate of pass-through analogous to that in Figure Ib. Intuitively,
the 2SLS coefficient is the ratio of the fraction of agents who actually cross the threshold to the
fraction who would cross the threshold if they were totally passive. This is equivalent to the
20

fraction of agents who undo the change in employer pensions in a model with two types, implying
that φE = 1 − α
bE . The resulting estimate is φE = 93.9 cents of pass-through to total pensions per
DKr 1 of employer contributions.
Next, we turn to impacts on total saving (S tot ), including saving in taxable non-retirement
accounts. Column 2 of Table III replicates the same triplet of specifications using changes in
total savings rates instead of total pension contributions as the dependent variable. In Panel A,
we condition on having liquid wealth of more than 10% of income or having positive individual
pension contributions in the year before the firm switch to reduce the influence of corners.17 We
estimate that a DKr 1 increase in P E , holding fixed total compensation W , increases total saving
by 77.7 cents. A DKr 1 increase in labor income raises total saving by only 11.8 cents. Comparing
the coefficients on ∆pE in Column 2 and Column 1, we infer that 77.7/94.9 = 82% of passive savers
target a fixed level of taxable saving rather than consumption in a two-type model. The fact that
most individuals have fixed savings targets in taxable accounts that are invariant to P E explains
why automatic contributions are very effective in increasing total saving. Panels B and C show
that we obtain similarly high rates of pass-through to total saving when we include controls or use
the threshold approach to account for corners.
Figure IIb replicates Figure IIa for total saving, using the sample in Column 2 of Panel A.
Consistent with the regression estimates, we observe systematic pass-through of changes in employer
pensions to total saving throughout the distribution. Figure IIc presents a binned scatter plot of
the change in total savings rates vs. changes in total compensation ∆w, controlling for changes
in employer pension contributions ∆pE . This figure confirms that the marginal propensity to save
out of labor income is substantially smaller than the marginal propensity to save out of automatic
employer pension contributions. As a result, automatic contributions that reduce disposable income
lead to reductions in consumption and increase total saving.
In Column 3, we address potential concerns about endogenous sorting by limiting the sample
to individuals who left their old firm in a mass layoff, which we define as more than 90% of workers
leaving a firm that had at least 50 employees in a single year.18 By this measure, 1.8% of the
17

Because early withdrawal penalties make retirement savings illiquid, individuals may seek to maintain a buffer
stock in taxable accounts in an environment with uncertainty (Carroll, 1997). Since there is no exogenously defined
wealth constraint in a buffer-stock model, we use 10% of income as a baseline definition of the lower corner for liquid
wealth. Samwick (2003, Table 5b) calibrates a life-cycle model and shows that individuals with high discount rates
maintain approximately 10% of income in non-retirement financial wealth as precautionary savings when they have
access to tax-deferred retirement accounts. Our results are robust to alternative definitions of this threshold because
very few individuals change taxable saving when P E changes. Moreover, our estimates using the interior threshold
approach in Panel C do not rely on this assumption.
18
To ensure that such mass layoffs are not simply a relabeling of the firm ID, e.g. due to a change in ownership,

21

firm-switches occur because of mass layoffs. In this sample, we estimate pass-through of employer
contribution changes to total saving of approximately 0.82, similar to the estimate in the full sample.
Since those who lost their jobs in a mass layoff are unlikely to be switching firms purely because of
their pension plans, this result supports the validity of our research design.
In Column 4, we replicate the baseline specification in Column 2 for individuals who are within
DKr 75,000 of the top tax cutoff, the sample we use to identify the impacts of subsidies in Table
VI below. The pass-through rates of employer pensions to total saving remain very similar in this
subgroup, showing that the differences we document below between the impacts of price subsidies
and automatic contributions are not due to differences in sample composition.
Column 5 replicates the baseline specification in Column 2 with savings net of liabilities as the
dependent variable. The pass-through estimates are virtually unchanged, implying that changes
in employer pensions do not have significant effects on debt. We assess the robustness of our
findings to additional measures of total saving in Appendix Table I. First, our baseline measure
of net saving does not include mortgage debt. In Column 2 of Appendix Table I, we replicate the
specification in Column 2, Panel A for the subsample of renters. Pass-through rates again remain
similar, indicating that changes in the rate of home mortgage repayment do not drive our findings.
Second, our baseline measure of savings is defined at the individual level; if individuals respond
to employer pensions by changing savings in their partner’s account, we would understate crowdout. In Column 3, we define total saving at the household level (summing individual savings for
partners). In Column 4, we replicate the baseline specification but restrict the sample to individuals
who do not have a partner. In both columns, the pass-through estimates remain similar, allaying
the concern that resource pooling in couples leads us to understate crowd-out.
Long-Term Impacts. In Figure III, we investigate the persistence of the increases in saving
over time. Figure IIIa replicates the regression specification in Column 2 of Table IIIA at various
horizons. To simplify computation, we only include the first firm switch for each individual in the
sample. Each point in this figure is the regression coefficient φE,t from a regression of the form in
(4), where ∆pE
i is measured as the change in employer pensions from the year -1 before the switch
to year t. The first point, φE,0 = 0.784, corresponds to the one-year pass-through estimate to total
saving shown in Column 6 of Table IIIA. The remaining points show that there is no discernible
trend in pass-through over the subsequent 10 years.
we also restrict to firm closures in which no more than 50% of workers from the old firm end up at the same new
firm in the next year.

22

Figure IIIb shows the consequence of this persistent change in savings behavior on wealth when
individuals begin to retire. This figure restricts attention to the subset of individuals whose first
firm-switch occurs between ages 46-54 and who reach age 60 within our sample frame. We define
total wealth accrued from the date of the switch up to age 60 as the cumulative sum of savings in
retirement and non-retirement accounts.19 Figure IIIb plots total accrued wealth vs. the change in
employer pensions at the time of the switch. Individuals who happened to switch to firms that had
employer pension contribution rates that were 5 percent higher end up accruing additional wealth
equivalent to more than 25% of annual labor income when they reach age 60.20 Column 7 of Table
III replicates this specification and shows that it is robust to controlling for the standard vector
of covariates. This is perhaps the most direct evidence that automatic employer contributions
raise total saving in the long run: they substantially increase the amount of wealth with which
individuals enter retirement.

IV.B

Government Mandatory Savings Plan

We complement our analysis of employer pensions by studying a government policy that directly implemented automatic pension contributions by reducing individuals’ earnings. In 1998, the Danish
government introduced a Mandatory Savings Plan (MSP) with the goal of reducing consumption
to lower the risk of an “overheating” economy (Green-Pedersen, 2007).21 The MSP took 1% of
individuals’ labor income and automatically allocated it to a separate retirement savings account
managed by an independent pension fund. Individuals with labor incomes below DKr 34,500 (US
$5,300) were exempted from the program in 1998. The MSP accounts were distinct from other
retirement accounts, but functioned like individual capital pension accounts when they were set
up. Individuals received annual notifications of the balances in their MSP accounts as for other
retirement savings accounts; see Appendix Figure I for an example.
Methodology. We analyze the impacts of the MSP on savings using a regression discontinuity
design. Figure IVa illustrates the design by plotting MSP contributions in 1998 (PiG ) vs. labor
income (Yi ), the income base used to determine the MSP, in DKr 1,000 income bins. Individuals
19

This measure of wealth accrued includes investment returns in taxable accounts (because our definition of savings
in taxable accounts is computed based on changes in wealth in those accounts), but does not include investment returns
in retirement accounts because we only observe flows into retirement accounts.
20
The increase in accrued wealth is smaller than what one would predict based on the mean age at the point of the
firm switch (51) and the 90% pass-through estimate in Figure IIIa: (60 − 51) · 5% · 90 = 41%. This is because not all
individuals stay at the same firm after the initial switch, and thus the actual increase in employer contribution rates
shrinks on average over time.
21
The government’s intention of reducing consumption is consistent with our empirical findings and suggests that
policymakers implicitly viewed most individuals as passive savings-targeters.

23

who earn just below DKr 34,500 make no contribution to the MSP; individuals who earn DKr
34,500 are forced to make a contribution of DKr 345 out of their own income. The size of the
contribution then increases linearly (with a slope of 1%) with income.
We estimate the impacts of the MSP on savings using OLS regressions of the following form:

∆Zi = β0 + φG · 345 · [Yi ≥ 34, 500] + β1 Yi + β2 (Yi − 34, 500) · [Yi ≥ 34, 500] + βX Xi + εG
i

(6)

where ∆Zi denotes the change in total pension contributions or savings (measured in levels) from
1997 to 1998, Yi denotes individual i’s labor income in 1998, and Xi denotes a vector of covariates.
We estimate this regression on the sample of individuals who have labor income within DKr 25,000
of the MSP cutoff in 1998.22 We cluster standard errors by DKr 1,000 income bins to account for
specification error in the control function (Card and Lee, 2008).
In (6), φG represents the pass-through of government pension contributions to saving, as identified from the discontinuous jump in the level of MSP contributions of DKr 345 at the cutoff.23
Unlike with employer pensions, there is no need to account for income effects here because the
government mandate was financed by reducing the individual’s disposable income by an equivalent
amount. Hence, the MSP policy change corresponds exactly to the ideal experiment described
above and we can identify the fraction of passive savers directly from φG .
The identification assumption underlying (6) is that unobserved determinants of savings rates
εG
i evolve smoothly around the MSP eligibility cutoff. Following standard practice (e.g., Imbens
and Lemieux 2008), we evaluate this assumption by first analyzing the density of the running
variable (labor income) around the cutoff. Figure IVb plots a histogram of the income distribution
around the eligibility cutoff. There is no evidence of manipulation of income around the cutoff,
consistent with prior evidence that individuals are typically unable to sharply manipulate their
wage earnings to take advantage of even much larger tax incentives (Chetty et al., 2011, 2013). We
also test whether observable characteristics such as age and gender are smooth around the cutoff
and find no evidence of discontinuities in these variables (not reported). These tests support the
identification assumption underlying the RD design.
22

Certain Ph.D. students in Denmark received a stipend of exactly DKr 48,987.50 in 1998. This creates a mass
point at DKr 48,987.50 with very different demographics and savings rates in the window used to estimate the control
functions for the RD design. We exclude this group of 401 observations in this section.
23
One could also identify the impact of the policy from the change in the marginal propensity to save (β2 − β1 ) at
the cutoff. This approach yields similar results; we only report estimates based on the discontinuity in levels in the
interest of space.

24

Results. We begin by analyzing whether the MSP was offset by reductions in contributions
to individual or employer pension accounts. In Column 1 of Table IV, we estimate (6) with total
pension contributions (Pi = PiI + PiE + PiG ) as the dependent variable Zi . We condition on having
I
E
positive pension contributions in the year before the MSP was implemented (Pi,1997
+ Pi,1997
> 0)

to reduce the mechanical effect of corners. In this group, 22% of individuals are at the lower corner
in 1998, so the neoclassical model would predict pass-through of at most 0.22. We estimate passthrough of mandated savings to total pensions of φG = 0.88, similar to the estimates obtained
from the variation in employer pensions. Column 2 shows that including the control vector used
in Panel B of Table III does not change this estimate significantly. Column 3 shows that using a
quadratic control function instead of a linear control function for income Yi when estimating (6)
yields similar estimates.
To obtain an estimate of pass-through that is unaffected by corners, we implement a threshold
approach similar to that in Panel C of Table III. We first define an indicator θi for having total
pension contributions Pi > P̄ = DKr 1,265, the mean level of total pension contributions for individuals within DKr 5,000 of the MSP eligibility cutoff. Figure IVc shows the fraction of individuals
with Pi > P̄ jumps by 3.3% at the eligibility cutoff.
To translate this impact into a measure of the degree of pass-through, we estimate the increase
in the fraction above the threshold that would have occurred if no one offset the increase in the
MSP. We construct this counterfactual by adding 1% of income to observed pension contributions
below the cutoff to estimate what the level of pension contributions would be if the MSP were
passed through 1-for-1 into Pi . We then re-estimate the linear control function below the cutoff –
shown by the dashed line in the figure – and calculate the size of the jump that would be predicted
at the cutoff with no offset (see Online Appendix A for details). Under the binary response model
in Section II, pass-through φG is the observed increase in θi at the eligibility cutoff divided by
predicted increase. The resulting estimate is φG = 84.5%, as shown in Column 4 of Table IV.
Intuitively, pass-through is very close to 1 because the observed increase in the fraction above the
threshold in Figure IVc is similar to the predicted increase if no one were to offset the MSP.
In Column 5, we analyze the impacts of the MSP on total saving Sittot = Pit + Sit /(1 − M T Rit ),
measured in pre-tax dollars as in Table III. We follow exactly the same methodology as in Column
4, defining the threshold based on whether total saving exceeds S = DKr 1,371, which is the mean
level of total saving for individuals within DKr 5,000 of the eligibility cutoff. This approach yields
estimated pass-through of the MSP to total saving of φG = 1.268, with a standard error of 0.363.
25

Figure IVd presents the graphical analog of this regression, constructed in the same way as Figure
IVc. Consistent with the regression estimate, the fraction of individuals above the threshold jumps
at the MSP eligibility cutoff by an amount similar to what one would predict under full pass-through
based on the observations below the cutoff.
In Column 6, we replicate the specification in Column 5, but exclude employer pension contributions PiE from total saving to ensure that individuals are not forced over the threshold by
employer contributions that are outside their direct control. The pass-through estimate remains
high, implying that the MSP raised total saving even for individuals who could have fully offset
the change themselves by reducing PiI or Si .
Finally, in Column 7, we replicate the specification in Column 5, defining the threshold based
on whether the individual has positive net saving (gross saving net of non-mortgage debt). We
continue to find substantial pass-through in this specification, although the noise in liabilities makes
the estimate less precise. We assess the robustness of our estimate of φG to additional measures of
total saving in Panel B of Appendix Table I. We replicate the specification in Column 5 using the
same variants described above in the analysis of employer pensions. Across all the specifications,
we find estimates of pass-through that are significantly above 0 and not statistically distinguishable
from 100%.
The RD design indicates that few individuals offset the MSP by saving less in other accounts.
However, this analysis is based on the behavior of individuals around the MSP eligibility cutoff, who
have very low incomes. In Online Appendix A, we analyze responses at higher income levels using
a difference-in-differences (DD) design that compares changes in savings around the introduction
of the MSP in 1998 and its termination in 2003 for individuals with different income levels. We
find that the pass-through of MSP to total pension contributions remains high across the income
distribution: few individuals act to offset the MSP by reducing voluntary pension contributions
irrespective of their income levels.
Using our preferred threshold specifications, the analysis of employer pensions yields an estimate
of α
bE = 1 − 93.9%=6.1%, while the analysis of the government mandate yields an estimate of
α
bG = 1-84.5%=15.5%. Both designs imply that only a small group of individuals – at most about
15% – respond actively to changes in automatic contributions in our two-type model. We now turn
to the impacts of price subsidies on saving and analyze whether a similar degree of active response
is observed in that domain.

26

V

Impacts of Price Subsidies

As described in Section III, there are two types of retirement savings accounts in Denmark: capital
pensions (paid out as a lump sum) and annuity pensions (paid out as annuities). Starting in 1999,
the deduction for capital pensions was reduced from 59 cents per DKr to 45 cents per DKR for
individuals in the top income tax bracket. The top tax cutoff was DKr 251,200 (US $38,600) in 1998,
roughly the 80th percentile of the income distribution. The deduction was unchanged for those in
lower tax brackets. The tax treatment of annuity pension contributions was also unchanged. The
reform did not change the tax treatment of payouts or capital gains within either account and thus
had no effect on the value of existing balances.
We divide our analysis of price subsidies into three parts. First, we analyze the impacts of the
1999 reform on mean contributions to capital pension accounts. Second, we analyze the distribution
of responses at the individual level to quantify the amount of active response to the subsidy change.
Finally, we investigate crowd-out: how much of the change in capital pension contributions was
offset by changes in contributions to other pension accounts and savings in non-retirement accounts?

V.A

Effect of Subsidies on Capital Pension Contributions

Figure Va illustrates the impact of the 1999 top-bracket subsidy reduction by plotting mean capital
pension contributions vs. taxable income (Yitax ).24 We restrict the sample to workers whose taxable
incomes place them within DKr 75,000 of the top income tax cutoff. To construct the figure, we
first group individuals into DKr 5,000 income bins based on their current taxable income relative
to the top tax cutoff, demarcated by the dashed vertical line. We then plot the mean capital
pension contribution in each bin in each year from 1996 to 2001 vs. income. The relationship
between income and capital pension contributions is stable from 1996 to 1998, the years before the
reform. In 1999, the marginal propensity to save in capital pension accounts falls sharply for those
in the top bracket: each DKr of additional income leads to a smaller increase in capital pension
contributions.
We quantify the impacts of the capital pension subsidy reduction on individual capital pension
contributions using two difference-in-differences estimators. The first estimator compares the level
24

The income base that determines the individual’s position relative to the top tax cutoff includes labor income
as well as capital income if it is positive, subject to certain rules on the allocation of capital income across spouses.
The mean level of max(Capital Income,0) is DKr 895 for the individuals in Figure Va and 13.8% of these individuals
have positive capital income. For simplicity, we do not include capital income in our definition of Yitax , creating a
small amount of misclassification around the top tax cutoff.

27

of capital pension contributions, which we denote by PiI,C , for individuals above vs. below the top
tax cutoff before vs. after the 1999 reform. The second estimator compares the marginal propensity
to save (MPS) as income rises (dP I,C /dYitax ) for individuals below vs. above the top tax cutoff
before vs. after the reform. Intuitively, our first estimator identifies the impacts of the subsidy
change from the change in the average level of contributions for individuals above the top tax cutoff
in Figure Va. The second estimator identifies the impacts of the subsidy change from the change in
the slope of pension contributions with respect to income in Figure Va. We obtain similar results
using both approaches for impacts on pension contributions, but the MPS estimator yields more
precise estimates of impacts on taxable saving for reasons described below.
Note that Figure Va shows the impact of the reform on total capital pension contributions,
including both employer and individual contributions. Because our primary goal is to characterize
individuals’ savings behavior, we focus exclusively on voluntary individual pension contributions
in the remainder of this section. In Appendix Table II, we replicate the analysis that follows for
employer pensions and show that the subsidy reduction induced employers to shift from capital to
annuity pensions, leaving total employer pension contributions unchanged.
Estimator 1: Changes in the Level of Contributions. Figure Vb illustrates the levels DD estimator. For each year between 1996 and 2001, we plot mean individual capital pension contributions
P I,C for two groups: those with current taxable incomes between DKr 25,000 to 75,000 below the
top tax bracket cutoff and those with incomes between DKr 25,000 to 75,000 above the top tax
bracket cutoff. The first group constitutes a “control group” in that their incentives to contribute
to capital pensions remained unchanged around the 1999 reform. The second is the “treatment”
group, whose incentives to contribute to capital pensions fell sharply in 1999.25 Capital pension
contributions fall sharply for the treated group relative to the control group in 1999, consistent
with Figure Va.
We quantify the treatment effect on pension contribution levels by estimating regressions of the
following form, including all individuals in the treatment and control groups defined above:
I,C
Pi,t
= β0 + β1 posti,t + β2 treati,t + µL
S posti,t · treati,t + βX Xi,t + εi,t

(7)

where PitI,C denotes capital pension contributions, posti,t denotes an indicator for the years including
tax > Ȳ ,
and after 1999, treatit is an indicator for having taxable income above the top tax cutoff Yi,t
t

and Xi,t denotes a vector of controls. We restrict the sample to the three years before and after the
25

The set of individuals in these two groups varies across years due to income fluctuations.

28

reform (1996-2001) when estimating this equation. We cluster standard errors at the DKr 5,000
income bin level to allow for correlated errors by income group over time. Under the identification
assumption that unobserved determinants of pension contributions εit do not change differentially
on average across the treatment and control groups around the reform, the parameter µL
S represents
the causal effect of the subsidy reduction on the level of capital pension contributions.
Column 1 of Table V implements (7) without any additional controls (no X vector). We
estimate that the reduction of the capital pension subsidy reduced capital pension contributions
by µL
S = −2, 449 relative to a pre-reform mean of DKr 5,113 for individuals with incomes DKr
25,000-75,000 above the top tax cutoff. This 48% reduction is significantly different from 0 with
p < 0.001. Column 2 of Table V shows that adding the standard vector of controls used in Panel
B of Table III to this specification does not change the estimate.
Estimator 2: Changes in the Marginal Propensity to Save. Figure Vc illustrates the MPS DD
estimator. To construct this figure, we first run an OLS regression of the following form for each
year t between 1996 and 2001 separately, including all individuals with income within DKr 75,000
of the top tax cutoff:
I,C
tax
tax
Pi,t
= β0,t + β1,t treati,t +β2,t Yi,t
+ γt Yi,t
· treati,t + εi,t

(8)

where PitI,C again denotes individual capital pension contributions. The coefficient γt measures
the difference between the marginal propensity to contribute to retirement accounts for individuals
above the top tax cutoff (the treatment group) versus those below the top tax cutoff (the control
group) in year t. Figure Vc plots the coefficient estimates γt . The marginal propensity to contribute
to capital pensions falls sharply after 1999 in the treatment group relative to the control group,
consistent with the sharp change in slopes above the top tax cutoff in 1999 in Figure Va.
To quantify the magnitude of the change in the MPS due to the subsidy, we estimate OLS
regressions of the following form, including all individuals with income within DKr 75,000 of the
top tax cutoff:
PitI,C =β0 + β1 posti,t + β2 treati,t + β3 posti,t · treati,t +
tax
tax
tax
β0s Yi,t
+ β1s posti,t · Yi,t
+ β2s treati,t Yi,t
+

(9)

PS
tax
posti,t · treati,t · Yi,t
+ βX Xi,t + εi,t
µM
S
P S is a DD estimate of the impact of the subsidy reduction on the the
In this equation, µM
S
P S is the change in
marginal propensity to save (MPS) in capital pensions. In particular, µM
S

29

I,C
tax for individuals in the top bracket relative to those below the top bracket when the
dPi,t
/dYi,t

capital pension subsidy is removed in 1999. We again restrict the sample to the three years before
and after the reform (1996-2001) and cluster standard errors at the DKr 5,000 income bin by year
level to allow for correlated errors by income group over time. Under the identification assumption
tax ) do not change differentially across the
that unobserved determinants of the MPS Cov(εi,t , Yi,t
P S represents the causal effect
treatment and control groups around the reform, the parameter µM
S

of the subsidy reduction on the marginal propensity to save in capital pension accounts.
We implement (9) in Column 3 of Table V. The null hypothesis that the change in the subsidy
had no impact on the MPS in capital pension accounts is rejected with p < 0.001. The coefficient
P S = −0.021 implies that a DKr 1,000 increase in income led to DKr 21 of additional saving
of µM
S

in capital pensions when the additional 13.6 cent subsidy was in place before 1999. The MPS in
the treatment group prior to the policy change was β0s + β2s = 0.019 + 0.0058 = 0.025. The subsidy
reduction thus reduced the marginal propensity to save in capital pensions by 0.021/0.025=84%.
Again, adding controls does not affect this estimate (Column 4).

V.B

Estimating the Degree of Active Response

The aggregate reduction in individual capital pension contributions masks substantial heterogeneity
in responses across individuals. Figure VIa plots the distribution of changes to individual capital
pension contributions (as a fraction of lagged contributions) for those in the treatment group in
Figure Vb who were contributing to capital pensions in the prior year. We plot the distribution
of changes in contributions from 1998 to 1999, the year of the treatment, as well as from 1997 to
1998 as a counterfactual. The difference between the two distributions shows that a substantial
fraction of individuals exited capital pensions completely when the subsidy was reduced, i.e. they
reduced contributions by 100%. The reform also reduced the fraction of individuals who leave their
contributions unchanged across years.
Figure VIb replicates Figure VIa for the control group (individuals DKr 25-75K below the top
tax cutoff). The distributions of changes are virtually identical in 1998 and 1999 for individuals
who were unaffected by the 1999 tax reform, supporting the view that the difference between the
distributions in Figure VIa reflects the causal impact of the subsidy reduction.
We use the distributions in Figure VIa to estimate the fraction of individuals who deliberately
reoptimize their pension contributions in response to the 1999 subsidy reduction. To begin, note
that 26.1% of the individuals in the treatment group in Figure VIa leave their capital pension

30

contributions literally unchanged in 1999.26 As discussed in Section II, every active saver should
cut capital pension contributions by some non-zero amount at an interior optimum. Hence, at
least 26.1% of individuals respond passively to the subsidy change. This estimate provides a lower
bound on the fraction of passive savers with respect to incentives (1 − α
bS ) because the changes
in retirement account contributions made by the remaining 74% of individuals are not necessarily
driven by reoptimization in response to the subsidy change.27
To go beyond the upper bound of α
bS < 74% and obtain a point estimate of α
bS , we first
estimate the impact of the subsidy on the fraction of individuals who leave their capital pension
I,C
I,C
contributions unchanged relative to the previous year (Pi,t
= Pi,t−1
). We estimate this impact
I,C
I,C
using the DD equation in (7) with the dependent variable as an indicator for having Pi,t
= Pi,t−1
.

We restrict the sample to individuals contributing to capital pensions in the prior year (t − 1) and
to t ∈ {1998, 1999}, the years shown in Figure VI. Column 5 of Table V shows that the fraction of
individuals who leave their capital pension contributions unchanged relative to the previous year
falls by 3.3 percentage points when the subsidy is reduced in 1999. In 1998, 29.2% of individuals
in the treatment group did not change their capital pensions at all relative to their 1997 levels. It
follows that an additional 3.3/29.2 = 11.3% respond actively to the subsidy change among those
who would not have changed their pensions at all absent the reform.
The 11.3% figure can be interpreted as an estimate of α
bS among the subgroup of individuals
who do not actively change their pensions for non-tax reasons in 1998. One might expect that
the fraction who respond to the subsidy will be larger among those who reoptimize their portfolios
for other reasons, a conjecture that we confirm empirically in Section VI below. To estimate α
bS
in the full sample, we must measure the rate of active response among the average individual
relative to those who did not change their pension contributions in 1998. To do so, we develop a
marker for individuals who are almost certainly responding to the reform: those who exit capital
pensions and raise annuity pension contributions (the closest substitute) at the same time. Only
1.2% of individuals change pensions in this way in the control group in 1999 and the treatment
group in 1998. In contrast, in the treatment group after the reform in 1999, 13.5% of individuals
exit capital pensions and raise annuities at the same time. Hence, this measure of “extensive
margin substitution” identifies active responders with a very low Type-I (false positive) error rate.
26
This figure is lower than the 43.0% at 0 in 1999 in the histogram in Figure VIa because the 0 bin in the histogram
includes those with changes between 0% and 5%.
27
For example, 4% of individuals in the treatment group have an increase of exactly DKr 900 in 1998 and 1999,
which is the change in the nominal cap on capital pension contribution between 1997 and 1998. These individuals
appear to follow a systematic rule of maximizing capital pension contributions each year.

31

However, this measure may have a large Type-II error rate, as individuals can respond without
exiting capital pensions entirely or raising annuities.
We exploit the low Type-I error rate in this marker of active response to identify the relative rate
of response in the full sample compared with those who do not adjust their pensions in prior years.
Using the same DD specification as in Column 5 of Table V, Column 6 shows that the subsidy
change increased the rate of extensive margin (capital to annuity) substitution by 11.6 percentage
points on average among treated individuals. Column 7 of Table V replicates this specification for
I,C
I,C
the subset of individuals who did not change their pensions in the previous year (Pi,t
= Pi,t−1
).

As predicted, the degree of active response is smaller in this subgroup: 6.8% of those who kept
capital pension contributions fixed between 1997 and 1998 exit capital pensions and raise annuities
in 1999. Finally, under the assumption that the rate of extensive margin substitution response is
proportional to the overall latent rate of active response to the subsidy, we estimate the fraction
of individuals who respond actively to the change in subsidy as α
bS = 11.3 ×

11.6
6.8

= 19.3%. That

is, the aggregate reduction in individual capital pension contributions from 1998 to 1999 shown in
Figure Vb is accounted for by just 19.3% of individuals who actively reoptimize in response to the
subsidy reduction.
The vast majority of these 19.3% of individuals respond by completely exiting capital pensions.
Using the DD specification in (7), in Column 8 of Table V we estimate that 15.9% of individuals
exit capital pensions because of the reform. Hence, only a small portion of the response occurs on
the intensive margin: most individuals either recognize the subsidy change and stop contributing to
capital pensions entirely or do nothing at all. The response to price subsidies may be concentrated
on the extensive margin because gains from reoptimization are second-order (i.e., small) on the
intensive margin but first-order (large) on the extensive margin (Chetty, 2012).
One natural question is whether the fraction of individuals who respond to the subsidy (b
αS )
rises over time. We study the dynamics of response at the individual level in Figure VIc, which plots
the fraction of individuals contributing to capital pensions by year for those who were contributing
in 1998, the year before the reform. To construct this figure, we first compute the difference in
the fraction of individuals contributing to capital pensions in the treatment (above top tax cutoff)
and control (below top tax cutoff) groups to remove secular trends due to mean reversion when
selecting on contribution in 1998. We then plot one plus this difference to show the causal impact
of the reform over time on the fraction of individuals contributing to capital pensions. As with the
response to changes in employer pensions in Figure IIIa, there is very little adjustment over time:
32

8.7% of individuals exit immediately in 1999 and an additional 4.2% exit in 2000, leaving 87.1%
still contributing one year after the reform. Ten years later, the fraction contributing remains at
81.5%.

V.C

Crowd-out in Retirement and Taxable Savings Accounts

When active savers reduce capital pension contributions following the 1999 reform, what do they
do with this money? We estimate two crowd-out parameters, each of which is relevant for different
policy questions: the degree of shifting between different types of retirement accounts and the
degree of shifting from retirement accounts to taxable accounts. Again, we restrict attention to
the impacts of changes in individual pension contributions rather than employer contributions.28
We follow the same methodology as above, estimating the impacts of the subsidy change in other
accounts using two estimators: one based on levels of contributions and another based on the
marginal propensity to save.
Crowd-out Within Retirement Accounts. We first estimate the extent to which individuals shift
assets from capital pensions to annuity pensions when the subsidy for capital pensions was reduced
in 1999. This parameter is relevant for assessing the impacts of changes in the tax treatment of
one type of retirement account – such as increasing 401(k) subsidies – while leaving the treatment
of other retirement accounts (such as IRA’s) unchanged.
We begin by using the levels estimator to identify the impacts of the 1999 reform on contributions
to annuity pension accounts. Figure VIIa plots the time series of individual annuity contributions
for the treatment (income DKr 25K-75K above the top tax cutoff) and control (DKr 25-75K below
the cutoff) groups, as in Figure Vb. The pattern is the mirror image of that in Figure Vb. There is a
sharp increase in annuity pension contributions for the treated group in 1999, showing that some of
the reduction in capital pension contributions is offset by increased annuity pension contributions.
To quantify the degree of crowd-out, we estimate IV regressions that use the DD levels equation
in (7) as a first stage for capital pension contributions. The second stage is specified as:
I,C
Z i,t = β0 + β1 posti,t + β2 treati,t + φL
S Pi,t + βX X + εi,t

(10)

I,C
where Zi,t denotes a measure of individual pension contributions and Pi,t
is individual i’s contriI,C
using the interaction posti,t ·treati,t
bution to the capital pension in year t. We instrument for Pi,t
28
We are able to ignore employer contributions when estimating crowd-out of individual pensions because the reduction in employer capital pension contributions is fully offset by increases in employer annuity pension contributions,
leaving total employer contributions unchanged, as shown in Appendix Table II.

33

to isolate changes in capital pension contributions that are induced by the subsidy change. The
coefficient φL
S identifies the crowd-out parameter of interest under the assumption that unobserved
determinants of the level of annuity pension contributions do not change differentially on average in
the treatment and control groups. This 2SLS coefficient is simply the treatment effect on annuity
contributions (the reduced form) – which can be estimated using a DD specification analogous to
(7) – divided by the treatment effect on capital pensions φL
S (the first stage). As above, we cluster
standard errors at the DKr 5,000 income bin level.
Table VI presents estimates of (10). In Column 1, we use individual annuity pension contributions as the dependent variable and obtain an estimate of φL
S = −0.57. That is, individuals shift
57 cents of each DKr they would have contributed to capital pension accounts to annuity pensions
instead. In Column 2, we use total pensions as the dependent variable. This specification confirms
that pass-through to total pensions is 100-57=43 cents per DKr of capital pension contributions.
Column 3 shows that the inclusion of the standard vector of controls does not change this estimate
significantly.
One can also estimate crowd-out using changes in the MPS in annuity accounts instead of mean
contribution levels. The series in circles in Figure VIIb plots the difference in the MPS in annuity
accounts for individuals above vs. below the top tax cutoff by year. This series is constructed in
exactly the same way as Figure Vc, using individual annuity pension contributions instead of capital
pension contributions as the dependent variable in (8). The change in the MPS in capital accounts
is replicated in this figure (in triangles) as a reference to interpret magnitudes. The reduction in
the capital pension subsidy in 1999 leads to a sharp increase in the marginal propensity to save in
annuity accounts, again consistent with shifting across accounts.
To quantify the degree of crowd-out using the change in the MPS, we again estimate IV regressions, this time using the DD in MPS equation in (9) as the first stage for capital pension
contributions. Here, the second stage is specified as:
Zit =β0 + β1 posti,t + β2 treati,t + β3 posti,t · treati,t +
tax
tax
tax
β0s Yi,t
+ β1s posti,t · Yi,t
+ β2s treati,t · Yi,t
+

(11)

P S I,C
φM
Pi,t + βX Xi,t + εi,t
s
tax to isolate changes in the MPS
We instrument for PitI,C using the interaction posti,t · treati,t · Yi,t
P S corresponds to the
in capital pensions induced by the subsidy change. This 2SLS coefficient φM
S

treatment effect on the MPS in annuity accounts (the reduced form) – which can be estimated
34

using a DD specification analogous to (9) – divided by the treatment effect on the MPS in capital
P S (the first stage). We cluster standard errors at the DKr 5,000 income bin level as
pensions φM
S

above.
Columns 4-6 of Table VI report 2SLS estimates of crowd-out for the same dependent variables
used in Columns 1-3 using the MPS specification in (11). Consistent with the results of the levels
specification, we find that the reduction in capital pension contributions was partially offset by
increased contributions to annuity pensions. The specification without controls in Column 4 yields
P S = −0.47, implying that individuals shift 47 cents of each DKr they would
an estimate of φM
S

have contributed to capital pension accounts to annuity pensions.
Crowd-out of Taxable Saving. Next, we analyze whether the changes in pension contributions
documented above are offset by changes in saving in taxable (non-retirement) accounts, which has
been the focus of the prior literature on crowd-out. The degree of shifting between retirement
accounts and taxable saving is of interest because it determines how subsidies that apply to all
tax-deferred accounts affect total wealth accumulation. We use the change in the capital pension
subsidy as an instrument for total pension contributions P I to estimate crowd-out in non-retirement
accounts.
As discussed above, when analyzing shifting between retirement accounts and taxable accounts,
one must account for the difference in the tax treatment of the two forms of saving. The literature
on crowd-out has addressed this issue by measuring crowd-out in taxable accounts in two ways.
One definition, used e.g. by Poterba, Venti and Wise (1996), is ρ1 =

dS
,
dP I

the fraction of retirement

account balances that come from reduced taxable saving. This definition includes the subsidy
from the government to the individual in the denominator and is bounded in magnitude between
0 and 1-MTR if individuals do not offset $1 of post-tax pension contributions by more than $1
of taxable saving. An alternative definition, used e.g. by Engen, Gale and Scholz (1996), is
ρ2 =

dS
,
dP I ×(1−M T R)

the fraction of retirement account contributions net of the government subsidy

that come from taxable saving. The first definition is the relevant concept for determining what
fraction of retirement balances are “new” savings from the individual’s perspective. The latter
definition is the relevant concept for determining the increase in total national savings, as the
subsidy itself is a transfer from the government to individuals that does not affect consumption or
total national savings.29 We report estimates of ρ2 here by measuring taxable saving in pre-tax
29
The latter definition also corresponds to our definition of total saving S tot above: a 1 DKr increase in P I raises
S tot by 1 + ρ2 . If the subsidy does not affect the individual’s consumption, ρ2 = −1 and hence the change in S tot = 0.

35

dollars (Si,t /(1 − M T R)), where M T R = 60% denotes the marginal income tax rate in the top tax
bracket. One can calculate ρ1 by multiplying the crowd-out estimates we report by 0.4.
We can estimate crowd-out in taxable saving accounts using IV regressions paralleling those in
I,C
(10) and (11) above, replacing the endogenous variable Pi,t
with total individual pension contribuI and the dependent variable with taxable saving S /(1 − M T R). The levels specification
tions Pi,t
i,t

in (10) yields very imprecise estimates of crowd-out in taxable savings – rejecting neither full crowdout nor zero crowd-out – because the MPS in taxable accounts fluctuates substantially across years
(see Online Appendix B for details). We therefore focus on the MPS estimator for the remainder
of this section.
Figure VIIIa illustrates the estimation of crowd-out in taxable accounts using changes in the
MPS. This figure plots the difference in the marginal propensity to save in retirement accounts and
taxable accounts for individuals above vs. below the top tax cutoff. We construct these series as
in Figure VIIb, using total pension contributions (P I ) and taxable saving (Si,t /(1 − M T R)) as the
dependent variables in (8). When the subsidy is reduced in 1999, the MPS in retirement accounts
falls sharply for individuals in the top tax bracket (the treatment group) relative to individuals
below the top bracket (the control group). The MPS in taxable accounts jumps in the treatment
group relative to the control group by almost the same amount. Hence, individuals appear to have
simply shifted the money they were saving in retirement accounts into taxable saving accounts
when the retirement savings subsidy was cut in 1999.
To quantify the degree of crowd-out in taxable saving, we use the 2SLS specification as in
(11), using taxable saving as the dependent variable and total pension contributions PiI as the
endogenous variable. We obtain an estimate of ρ2 = −1.2 using this specification, as shown in
Column 1 of Table VII.30 Although we reject the hypothesis of zero crowd-out with p = 0.05, the
95% confidence interval for the crowd-out estimate is wide, spanning (−2.40, 0). This imprecision
is because the distribution of taxable saving has large outliers.
We use two approaches to obtain more precise estimates. First, we trim extreme values. In
Column 2 of Table VII, we replicate the specification in Column 1, recoding taxable saving values
in the top decile to the 90th percentile and values in the bottom decile to the 10th percentile.
We obtain a point estimate of ρ2 = −0.98, implying that 98 cents of each DKr 1 withdrawn
from retirement savings accounts is shifted to taxable savings accounts. The standard error of the
30
Crowd-out can in principle exceed 100% in neoclassical models because of wealth effects (Gale, 1998); intuitively,
individuals may choose to save less when offered a pension subsidy if they are targeting a fixed level of wealth in
retirement.

36

crowd-out estimate in this specification is 0.267, less than half that of the untrimmed estimate.
An alternative method of improving precision is to analyze medians instead of means, as in
Engen et al. (1994) and Poterba et al. (1995). We first characterize the reduced-form impact of
the subsidy reduction on median taxable saving and then translate this reduced-form impact to a
crowd-out estimate. Figure VIIIb illustrates the impact of the subsidy on median savings levels in
taxable accounts. This figure shows the difference in the median level of taxable saving within each
DKr 5,000 income bin around the top tax cutoff in the 3 years after the reform (1999-2001) relative
to the three years before the reform (1996-1998). The sharp increase in the slope of this series at
the top tax cutoff implies that the MPS in taxable accounts increased for the treated group relative
to the control after the subsidy was reduced in 1999.
To estimate the magnitude of the change in the MPS in Figure VIIIb, one would ideally estimate a quantile regression using the reduced-form specification in (9). Unfortunately, estimating
a quantile regression with 7 million observations proved to be infeasible. As a computationally
tractable alternative, we follow Chamberlain (1994) and use a least-squares approximation to the
conditional quantile function. We calculate the median level of taxable saving within each DKr
5,000 income bin around the top tax cutoff in each year from 1996-2001. Using the binned dataset
of medians, we then estimate (9) using OLS with the median level of taxable saving in each year by
income bin as the dependent variable, weighting by the number of observations in each bin. This
approach is analogous to running an OLS regression using the binned data in Figure VIIIb rather
than on the microdata, with standard errors clustered by bin.
Column 3 of Table VII shows that the reduced-form coefficient obtained from this approach is
0.010, i.e. the subsidy reduction increased the MPS in median taxable saving by 1% of income.
The magnitude of this change is similar to the reduction in the MPS in retirement accounts of
-0.012, suggesting that much of the reduction in retirement saving was offset by increased saving
in taxable accounts. We confirm this finding in Column 4 by replicating Column 3 using median
I,tot
I as the dependent variable. The reduced-form
total individual saving Si,t
= Si,t /(1 − M T R) + Pi,t

change in the MPS in median total saving is 0.0003 (s.e. = 0.0030), showing that the subsidy
reduction induced little or no change in median total savings rates.
To quantify the degree of crowd-out implied by the reduced-form change in median taxable
saving, one would ideally estimate (11) using a quantile instrumental variables specification. As a
computationally tractable alternative, we use a threshold approach that can be implemented using
OLS. We measure crowd-out based on the extent to which individuals cross the median level of
37

taxable saving relative to the number who would cross this threshold if they were to fully offset
the mean change in pension contributions. Let S̄ = DKr 1,062 denote the median level of taxable
saving for individuals in the top tax bracket and θi denote an indicator for having taxable saving
above this cutoff. Based on the density of the taxable saving distribution around this threshold,
the fraction with above-median savings would increase by 1.84 percentage points if a DKr 1,000
reduction in pension contributions were entirely offset by increasing taxable saving. We estimate
the actual impact using the 2SLS specification in (11), with θi as the dependent variable. The
resulting estimate implies that a DKr 1,000 increase in pension contributions reduces the number
of individuals with above-median taxable savings by 1.83 percentage points. The ratio of the actual
change to the predicted change (-0.994) is the threshold-based estimate of crowd-out ρ2 reported
in Column 5 of Table VII.31 The confidence interval for this estimate is (-1.47,-0.52).
Column 6 of Table VII shows that the threshold-based crowd-out estimate remains similar when
we include the standard control vector used above. In Column 7, we replicate the specification in
Column 5 using taxable saving net of changes in liabilities as the dependent variable. The point
estimate is consistent with substantial crowd-out, but the confidence interval is wider because of
the substantial fluctuation in debt holding across years.32 We assess the robustness of the crowdout estimates to additional definitions of taxable saving in Panel C of Appendix Table I. Column 2
replicates the threshold specification in Column 5 for renters. Column 3 defines taxable saving at the
household level and Column 4 restricts the sample to single individuals. Across all specifications,
we find estimates of crowd-out that are significantly different from 0 but not from the baseline
estimates of crowd-out close to 100%.
In summary, once we reduce the influence of outliers, we obtain point estimates of crowdout exceeding 90% and a lower bound on the 95% confidence interval of approximately 50%. As
a robustness check on the precision of these estimates, we conduct permutation tests in Online
31

This approach yields a consistent estimate of crowd-out under two assumptions: (1) the impact of the subsidy
reduction on the MPS in retirement accounts does not vary across the distribution of taxable saving and (2) the
degree of crowd-out ρ2 does not vary with taxable savings locally around the median. The second assumption is a
regularity condition which requires that mean crowd-out rates do not vary with the distance to the threshold (S̄)
for individuals who would cross the threshold if they were to fully offset the change in pension contributions. The
first assumption is a substantive restriction that allows us to use the mean treatment effect on pension contributions
to predict the degree of offset one would expect under 100% crowd-out around the median level of taxable saving.
Although this is a strong assumption, we note that the estimates of crowd-out in Columns 1 and 2, which are based
on comparisons of means, do not rely on this assumption. Hence, this estimate complements the estimates obtained
using other approaches.
32
In order for the subsidy to have an impact on net saving despite having no effect on gross saving, active savers
would have to shift money from taxable savings accounts to retirement accounts when subsidies rise and then reduce
debt holding. There is no reason to expect such behavior in existing neoclassical or behavioral models, supporting
the view that the subsidy has little impact on net saving.

38

Appendix B. We choose placebo values for the top income tax cutoff and the year of the reform and
re-estimate the baseline specifications in Columns 2 and 6 using these placebo values. The p values
obtained from the permutation test (i.e., based on the empirical CDF of the placebo distribution)
are closely aligned with the p values based on our standard errors clustered by DKr 5,000 income
bin. Moreover, the t-statistic for the actual treatment in Column 6 is smaller than all 309 placebo
t statistics, confirming that the subsidy reduction increased taxable saving significantly.
Note that even after accounting for outliers, our estimates of the impact of automatic contributions on total saving in Table III remain an order of magnitude more precise than the estimated
impacts of the subsidy. The reason is that automatic contributions vary differentially across individuals over time, whereas the subsidy varies only at the aggregate level across broad income
groups in a single year. Because fluctuations in taxable saving are correlated across individuals due
to aggregate shocks, research designs that exploit individual-level variation yield greater precision.
Using such variation to estimate the impacts of subsidies on total saving (e.g. via firm matches)
would be a valuable direction for future work.

V.D

Impacts of Tax Expenditures on Total Saving

We now use the preceding estimates to calculate the savings impact of each DKr of government
expenditure on subsidies for retirement savings. This “bang-for-the-buck” measure can be directly
compared to the marginal cost of public funds or the benefits of other government expenditures.
First, based on the estimates in Column 1 of Table V and Column 5 of Table VI, the 1999
subsidy reduction resulted in a DKr 2, 449 × 0.529 = 1, 295 reduction in total pension contributions
among treated individuals, raising post-tax disposable income by DKr 1, 295 × (1 − 0.6) = 518. The
estimate in Column 5 of Table VII implies that taxable saving rose by DKr 0.994 × 518 = 515 as a
result, so that the net reduction in post-tax savings due to the subsidy change was DKr 3.
We estimate that the 1999 subsidy reduction raised the present value of government revenue
by DKr 883 on average across individuals in the treatment group, taking into account the impacts
of deferred taxation and differential treatment of capital gains in retirement accounts (see Online
Appendix C). The capital pension subsidy reduction therefore reduced total saving by 3/883, less
than 1 cent per DKr reduction in tax expenditure on the subsidy. At the upper bound of the 95%
confidence interval for the crowd-out estimate in Column 2, we obtain an estimate of 28 cents of
savings per DKr of tax expenditure on the subsidy. If we include the fiscal cost of the subsidy for
employer pensions, which as we show in Appendix Table II has no effect on total employer pension

39

contributions, the point estimate remains below 1 cent per DKr of tax expenditure and the upper
bound of the 95% confidence interval is 10 cents. The subsidy has small impacts on total saving
because (1) it is an infra-marginal transfer that has no impact on the behavior of passive savers
and (2) the active savers who respond to the subsidy exhibit a low interest elasticity of saving.
The preceding analysis considers only the direct impacts of subsidies on individual saving.
Subsidies could potentially raise total saving indirectly by increasing the efficacy of automatic
contributions by employers or the government. For instance, individuals might be less likely to
undo defaults when large subsidies make the default attractive. To evaluate this possibility, we
test whether pass-through rates of employer pensions to total pensions fall after the 1999 subsidy
reduction for individuals in the top tax bracket. Using the specification in Column 1 of Table IIIa
for individuals in the top tax bracket, we find a pass-through rate of 0.826 (s.e. = 0.005) when
limiting the sample to 1996-1998 vs 0.885 (s.e. = 0.004) when limiting the sample to 1999-2001.
Hence, the size of the subsidy appears to have little effect on the impact of automatic contributions
in practice.

VI

Heterogeneity: Identifying Active and Passive Savers

In this section, we test whether the differences between the impacts of automatic contributions
and subsidies are driven by active vs. passive choice by studying the heterogeneity of responses
across individuals. We organize our analysis around the three testable predictions on heterogeneity
described in Section II.B.
First, we test whether individuals currently making active choices are more responsive to price
subsidies. We proxy for active choice by focusing on individuals who are starting a new pension
account. Define “new contributors” in year t as those who contribute to either individual annuity
I > 0) but did not contribute to either account in year t − 1
or capital pensions in year t (Pi,t
I
I > 0)
(Pi,t−1
= 0). Conversely, define prior contributors as individuals who contribute in year t (Pi,t

and were already contributing to an individual pension account in year t − 1. Are new contributors
more sensitive to the change in the relative subsidy for capital vs. annuity pensions in 1999? To
I,C
answer this question, we regress an indicator for contributing to capital pensions (Pi,t
> 0) on an

indicator for the 1999 reform, an indicator for being a new pension contributor, and the interaction
of the two indicators. We limit the sample to individuals whose taxable incomes are between DKr
25,000 and 75,000 above the top tax cutoff, the treatment group in Figure Vb, and use data from
1998 and 1999. The estimates are reported in Column 1 of Table VIII. The reduction in the subsidy
40

for capital pensions reduces the probability of contributing to the capital pension by 15 percentage
points for prior contributors. For new contributors, the impact is an additional 23 percentage
points. These estimates are not sensitive to the inclusion of controls, as shown in Column 2 of
Table VIII.
Second, we test for differences in responsiveness across individuals by correlating the response to
the 1999 subsidy reduction with the frequency of changes in pension contributions in other years.
We identify individuals who responded to the 1999 subsidy change using the sharp indicator of
response developed in Section V.A: exiting capital pensions and increasing annuity contributions.
In Column 3 of Table VIII, we regress this indicator for extensive margin substitution in 1999 on
the fraction of other years in which the individual changes his pension contributions, restricting
the sample to the treatment group in 1999 (see Online Appendix Figure VIa for the corresponding
non-parametric binned scatter plot). We find a highly significant positive relationship: roughly 20%
of individuals who adjust their pensions in every year respond to the 1999 reform by exiting capital
pensions and raising annuities, compared with less than 5% of individuals who never adjusted their
pensions in other years. Column 4 shows that this result is robust to controls.
Next, we test if frequent reoptimizers are also more likely to offset automatic employer contriE by reducing their individual pension contributions P I . In Column 5 of Table VIII, we
butions Pi,t
i,t

replicate the specification in Column 1 of Table IIIa, interacting the change in employer pensions
∆pE
i and total compensation ∆wi with the fraction of other years in which the individual changes
his pension contributions. The coefficient on the interaction effect of -0.096 implies that the passthrough rate from employer pensions to total pensions is 9.6 percentage points lower for individuals
who reoptimize their pension contributions every year relative to those who never change their
contributions.33 Column 6 verifies that this result is again robust to the inclusion of controls. Together, the results in Table VIII support the view that automatic contributions have larger effects
on total wealth than price subsidies because they change the total savings rates of passive rather
than active savers.
Finally, we study the observable characteristics of active and passive savers in Table IX. In
33

See Online Appendix Figure VIb for a non-parametric graphical analog to this regression. There are two explanations for why pass-through rates remain relatively high even for individuals who reoptimize very frequently.
First, the frequency of changes in pension contributions is a noisy proxy for active response. Even among those who
change contributions in every other year, the rate of active response to the subsidy change is only about 20% (Online
Appendix Figure VIa). This suggests that the degree of crowd-out among active savers could be up to 40 percentage
points larger than passive savers. Another explanation is that those who respond actively to subsidy changes may still
be passive with respect to employer pensions. For instance, tax advisers frequently advertise subsidies for retirement
contributions but information about employer pension contributions may be less salient.

41

Panel A, we regress the indicator for exiting capital pensions and raising annuities in 1999 on
various observable characteristics. In this panel, we limit the sample to prior capital pension
contributors who were in the treatment group in 1999. In Panel B, we include all individuals in
our firm switchers sample who were not at a corner prior to the switch (as in Table IIIA) and
regress the change in total savings rate on the change in employer pensions and the change in total
compensation at the time of the firm switch, both interacted with the characteristics analyzed in
each column.
Column 1 of Table IX shows that individuals with higher wealth/income ratios – total financial
assets in non-retirement accounts divided by labor income in the prior year – are more responsive
to the subsidy change and have lower pass-through rates of employer pensions to total saving. The
probability of response to the subsidy change is roughly twice as large for those who have liquid
assets equal to or more than their annual income relative to individuals with little or no wealth
(Online Appendix Figure VIIa). The pass-through of employer pensions to total saving is close to
0 for those with wealth in the top 5% of the distribution (Online Appendix Figure VIIb). Column
2 shows that these results are robust to including the standard vector of controls.
Column 3 shows that older individuals are more responsive to the change in the subsidy and
are more likely to offset changes in employer pensions. These patterns are consistent with recent
evidence that older individuals make financial decisions more actively (Agarwal et al., 2009).
Columns 4 and 5 assess heterogeneity by education. Column 4 shows that individuals with a
college education are 4.6 percentage points more responsive to the change in price subsidies. Column
5 shows that individuals who majored in economics, accounting, or finance in their terminal degree
are 5.2 percentage points more likely to respond to the subsidy change than those with other
college degrees. While we cannot determine whether this effect is caused by learning economics or
the sorting of active savers to such courses, the correlation supports the view that active response
to financial incentives is correlated with financial sophistication and literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell,
2007; Gale, 1998; Bernheim and Scholz, 1993). However, we find little systematic relationship
between education and pass-through rates from employer pensions to total savings, suggesting that
even well informed individuals may not be attentive to automatic changes in pension contributions.
Finally, in Column 6, we replicate Column 5 and include gender, marital status, and two-digit
occupation indicators. The heterogeneity of treatment effects remains similar when we include
these additional controls.34 Overall, the results in Table IX indicate that price subsidies tend to
34

We do not control for wealth because wealth is endogenous to education and age.

42

affect individuals who are already planning for retirement, while automatic contributions increase
saving more amongst those who are less prepared for retirement.

VII

Conclusion

Our analysis shows that price subsidies are less effective than automatic contributions in increasing
savings rates for three reasons. First, approximately 85% of individuals are passive individuals who
save more when induced to do so by an automatic contribution but do not respond at all to price
subsidies. As a result, much of the subsidy is an inframarginal transfer to pension contributors that
induces little change in behavior at the margin. Second, individuals who respond do so primarily by
shifting savings across accounts rather than raising the total amount they save. Third, the active
savers who respond to price subsidies tend to be those who are planning and saving for retirement
already. Hence, price subsidies are not effective in increasing savings amongst those who are least
prepared for retirement. In contrast, automatic contribution policies that influence the behavior
of passive savers have lower fiscal costs, generate relatively little crowd-out, and have the largest
impacts on individuals who are paying the least attention to saving for retirement.
It is natural to ask whether these conclusions apply to other economies, such as the United
States. Prior research has shown that individuals in the U.S. exhibit similar patterns of active and
passive choice within retirement accounts, where high-quality data are available in both Denmark
and the U.S. In particular, studies using U.S. data have also found that automatic employer contributions raise total pension balances (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Card and Ransom, 2011), subsidies
induce relatively few individuals to contribute to retirement accounts (Duflo et al., 2006; Engelhardt and Kumar, 2007), and higher socio-economic status households are more likely to change
pension defaults (Beshears et al., 2012). The similarity of behavior within retirement accounts
between the U.S. and Denmark suggests that the qualitative lessons on crowd-out in taxable savings accounts from the Danish data are likely to apply to the U.S. However, there is no substitute
for directly studying the economy of interest empirically and further research on crowd-out using
administrative data on savings in the U.S. and other countries would be very valuable.
Our results also raise several other questions for further research. We have provided a positive
analysis of the impacts of retirement savings policies on total saving, but have not compared the
welfare consequences of these policies. Such a normative analysis would be a natural next step
in understanding the optimal design of retirement savings policies. Beyond retirement savings, a
broader implication of our empirical results is that changing quantities directly through defaults
43

or regulation may be more effective than providing price incentives to change behaviors such as
the consumption of sin goods or the use of preventive healthcare. Because incentives require
active reoptimization, they may be less cost-effective and may end up missing the least attentive
individuals whose behavior one might want to change most. Comparing price and quantity policies
in models where agents make optimization errors is an interesting direction for future research.
Although further work is needed to evaluate the generality of our results and their normative
implications, the findings in this study call into question whether subsidies for retirement accounts
and reductions in capital income taxation are the best way to increase savings rates. Our findings
strengthen recent arguments for using “nudges” such as automatic payroll deductions instead of
such policies (e.g. Thaler and Sunstein, 2008; Iwry and John, 2009; Madrian, 2012)

44

ACTIVE VS. PASSIVE DECISIONS AND CROWD-OUT IN RETIREMENT SAVINGS
ACCOUNTS: ONLINE APPENDICES

A. Supplementary Results on Mandated Savings Plan
This appendix has two objectives. First, we formalize how we estimate pass-through using the
threshold approach in Columns 4-7 of Table IV. Second, we show that the impacts of the MSP
reported in Section IV.B using an RD design for individuals with labor income around DKr 34,500
are similar for higher income individuals using a difference-in-differences design.
Threshold-Based Estimator. We estimate pass-through in Column 4 of Table IV as follows.
I
E
First, we define an indicator θipred = I[Pi,1998
+ Pi,1998
+ 0.01Yi > P̄ ] and run a regression of the

following form using the observations in Figure IVc below the eligibility cutoff (Yi < 34, 500):
θipred = β0 + β1 Yi + εi .

(12)

pred
Let θcut
denote the predicted value from this regression at the eligibility cutoff Yi = 34, 500. Next,

we repeat (12) with θi as the dependent variable and compute the predicted value at the cutoff,
θcut . Finally, we replicate the RD specification in Column 1, changing the dependent variable to
the indicator θi for having Pi > P̄ , and report the resulting regression coefficient divided by the
pred
predicted increase under no offset, θcut
−θcut . Columns 5-7 are estimated using the same approach,

changing the measure of saving used to define the indicator variables.
Difference-in-Difference Estimates. We exploit the variation in the level of MSP contributions
across income levels to implement a difference-in-differences design. To illustrate the design, we
divide the population into three terciles based on their current individual labor income. Appendix
Figure IIa plots the mean level of MSP contributions from 1995 to 2005 for these three groups.
Individuals in the top tercile (incomes above DKr 280,400) were forced to contribute approximately
DKr 3,480 on average between 1998 and 2003 to the MSP. Individuals in the middle tercile were
forced to contribute DKr 2,320 on average, while individuals in the bottom tercile were forced to
contribute only DKr 930 on average.
I + P G ) for the same three income
Appendix Figure IIb plots individual retirement saving (Pi,t
i,t

terciles. The introduction and termination of the MSP have sharp effects on total contributions
45

to retirement accounts that correspond to the magnitudes of the changes in the MSP.35 To quantify pass-through to total retirement savings, we first divide the sample into cells of DKr 25,000
G ) and total individual
income groups for each year and calculate mean government mandated (Pg,t

pension contributions (Zg,t ) in each group g in year t. We then estimate the following regression
specification, weighting by the number of observations in each cell:

G
∆Zg,t = βt + φG · ∆Pg,t
+ εg,t

(13)

where ∆Zg,t denotes the change in mean total individual contributions from year t − 1 to year t
G is defined analogously, and β is a year fixed effect. We limit the sample to
in each cell, ∆Pg,t
t

t = 1998 and t = 2004, the years in which the MSP was introduced and terminated.36 We obtain
a pass-through estimate of φG = 0.81, as shown in Appendix Figure IIb.
Appendix Figure IIc uses a threshold approach to confirm that these increases in pension contributions are not driven by individuals who make zero individual contributions and are unable to
offset the MSP. It plots the fraction of individuals whose total individual (non-employer) pension
contributions exceed 1.5% of income, the mean individual pension saving rate in the sample. Because the MSP was only 1% of income, any changes in this indicator must be driven by individuals
who are not at the corner. The MSP again clearly increased the fraction of individuals saving more
than 1.5% of their income in pension accounts between 1998 and 2003. To estimate pass-through,
we repeat the regression in (13) with the dependent variable defined as change in the fraction of
individuals whose total individual pension contributions exceed 1.5% of income. To calculate passthrough, we divide this coefficient by the change one would have obtained by mechanically adding
the changes in the MSP to prior-year individual pension contributions. The resulting estimate,
shown in Appendix Figure IIc, is 96.6%.
35

From 1999-2001, the MSP had a redistributive element, so that MSP balances were fixed even though contribution
amounts still varied with income as shown in Appendix Figure IIa. The fact that the series in Appendix Figure IIb
show no breaks around 1999 and 2001 implies that individuals’ pension contributions are unaffected by MSP balances
even though they should change in a neoclassical model. This is not surprising given that individuals do not appear
to respond to even the changes in the level of contributions in 1998 and 2004.
36
This synthetic cohort approach isolates variation in MSP due to the law changes in 1998 and 2004; changes in
MSP at the individual level confound variation driven by changes in income and changes in the law. An alternative
approach is to instrument for the changes at the individual level by simulated changes in MSP due to the law. We
find that this approach yields much less stable estimates because the results are sensitive to the control function
used to capture mean reversion at the individual level, a well known problem in the literature on estimating taxable
income elasticities (Saez, Slemrod and Giertz, 2012).

46

Unfortunately, when we replicate the analysis in Appendix Figures IIb and IIc for total saving,
we obtain very noisy and unstable results. The year-to-year income-specific shocks to taxable saving
levels are sufficiently large that we cannot reject pass-through to total saving of 0 or 1. We explain
why estimates based on comparing the level of taxable saving across income groups are so imprecise
in Appendix B.

B. Supplementary Results on Crowd-out in Taxable Saving
This appendix presents three sets of supplementary results on the degree of crowd-out in taxable
saving accounts caused by the 1999 subsidy reduction. First, we explain why the levels specification
in (10) yields statistically uninformative estimates of crowd-out in taxable saving. Second, we
present permutation tests for the MPS specification in (11) to show that our statistical inferences
using that specification are valid. Finally, we explain why the income effect created by the 1999
subsidy reduction is unlikely to affect our crowd-out estimates.
Levels Estimates. Appendix Figure IIIa illustrates the levels DD estimator of crowd-out in
taxable saving accounts. This figure plots the mean level of taxable saving (measured in pre-tax
dollars) in the control (25-75K below the top tax cutoff) and treatment (25-75K above the top
tax cutoff) groups. There are very large differential fluctuations in the level of taxable saving
across income groups over time relative to the size of the treatment effect on total contributions to
individual pension accounts (P I ), shown by the dashed line.
The differential fluctuations in levels in Appendix Figure IIIa are partly due to fluctuations in
the marginal propensity to save in taxable accounts across years. This is illustrated in Appendix
Figure IIIb, which plots the MPS (the coefficient in an OLS regression of taxable saving on taxable
income) for individuals below and above the top tax cutoff. The MPS fluctuates significantly across
years in a manner that is correlated with the level of taxable savings. Intuitively, in years with
good asset returns or a booming economy, everyone saves more and earns higher returns in taxable
accounts, with larger increases for higher income individuals. To see why these shocks to the
MPS generate imprecision in the levels estimate, observe that the levels DD estimator essentially
compares mean taxable saving for those above the top tax cutoff Y , whose mean taxable income
is YH , with mean taxable saving for those below the top tax cutoff, whose mean taxable income is
YL . If the marginal propensity to save M P St does not vary with income in year t, the difference
47

between the level of taxable saving for these two groups is

tax
tax
tax
tax
E[Si,t |Yi,t
> Y t ] − E[S,it |Yi,t
< Y t ] = M P St · (YH − YL ) + E[εi,t |Yi,t
> Y t ] − E[εi,t |Yi,t
< Y t ].

This equation shows that fluctuations in M P St contribute to the difference in savings levels across
income groups and raise the variance of the error term in the levels DD estimator in (10).37 However,
the same fluctuations in the MPS are netted out of the error term in the MPS DD estimator
because that estimator directly compares the difference in the MPS across low and high income
individuals around the reform. Importantly, Appendix Figure IIIb shows that the MPS does not
vary differentially across income groups over time prior to the reform. The MPS in taxable saving
rises sharply in the treated group relative to the control group only in 1999, the year of the reform.
That is, the common trends assumption is satisfied for the MPS, whereas it is not for levels of
taxable saving. This is why one obtains more precise and robust estimates of crowd-out in taxable
saving accounts using the MPS estimator in (11) than the levels estimator in (10).38
We quantify our power to reject the null hypothesis of no change in taxable saving using the
levels estimator using a permutation test. Let tp denote a year between 1999 and 2006 and Ȳpt a
placebo cutoff for the top tax bracket. We consider a grid of values for Ȳpt from DKr 200,000 below
to DKr 200,000 above the actual top tax cutoff in year t in increments of DKr 10,000. For each
combination of {tp , Ȳpt }, we estimate the baseline levels DD reduced-form model, restricting the
sample to 3 years before and after the placebo reform year and incomes 25-75K above or 25-75K
below the placebo top tax cutoff in those years:
pretax
Si,t
= β0 + β1 postplaceboi,t + β2 treatplaceboi,t + µL
S postplaceboi,t · treatplaceboi,t + εi,t (14)
37

Using individuals who are closer to the top tax cutoff to define the treatment and control groups reduces noise
due to fluctuations in βt by reducing WH − WL . However, the magnitude of the first-stage treatment on pension
contributions also diminishes at the same rate, and thus narrowing the window does not yield more precise estimates
of crowd-out. Conceptually, the subsidy reduction generates a change in the slope of saving with respect to income
rather than a change in the level of saving in both retirement and non-retirement accounts. The levels specification
therefore yields imprecise estimates irrespective of the bandwidth used to estimate the means given fluctuations in
the MPS.
38
In contrast, there is little or no variation in the MPS in retirement saving accounts across years in the control
group, as is evident in Figure Va. This is why the levels and MPS estimator yield very similar estimates of responses
within retirement accounts. The observed MPS may fluctuate more in taxable accounts because we directly observe
flows in retirement accounts (and thus the MPS is unaffected by fluctuations in asset returns) and because cyclical
fluctuations in durable purchases may have greater impacts on balances in taxable accounts.

48

pretax
where Si,t
= Si,t /0.4 denotes taxable saving measured in pre-tax dollars, postplaceboit denotes

an indicator for the 3 years including and after the placebo treatment year tp , and treatplaceboit
tax > Ȳ .
is an indicator for having taxable income above the placebo top tax cutoff Yi,t
p,t

Appendix Figure IVa plots the empirical distribution of coefficient estimates µL
S from this regression for all the placebos, excluding the coefficients from 1999 with Ȳp,t within DKr 100,000
of the true cutoff to avoid biasing the placebo tests with the true treatment effect. Under the
assumption that the treatment of the subsidy reduction is exchangeable across the year by top tax
cutoff pairs (Rosenbaum, 1996), this empirical CDF represents the distribution of coefficients one
would obtain under the null hypothesis that the subsidy has no impact on taxable saving. The
vertical line shows the change in taxable saving one would see under perfect crowd-out (ρ2 = −1)
given the size of the treatment effect on total individual pension contributions P I , which is DKr
1,058. The permutation test shows that the chance of observing a coefficient µL
S exceeding this
value is greater than 48%. Appendix Figure IVb replicates Appendix Figure IVa using a trimmed
measure of taxable saving (the dependent variable in Column 2 of Table VII). Trimming reduces the
dispersion of the estimates, but the chance of observing a coefficient µL
S exceeding DKr 1058 is still
24%. These results show that the levels estimator does not have adequate power to discriminate
between the extremes of perfect crowd-out and no crowd-out, i.e. it is not informative about the
degree of crowd-out in taxable savings accounts.
Precision of MPS Estimates. Next, we implement a set of permutation tests analogous to those
above to ensure that the MPS approach does in fact yield more precise estimates than the levels
approach. Using the same combinations of {tp , Ȳp,t } above, we re-estimate the 2SLS specification
for crowd-out in Column 2 of Table VII. Appendix Figure Va plots an empirical distribution of the
t-statistics obtained from the set of placebo regressions, computed using standard errors clustered
at the DKr 5,000 income bin level as in Table VII. The t-statistic corresponding to the actual
treatment is shown by the vertical line. Appendix Figure Vb repeats this analysis for the threshold
specification in Column 5 of Table VII. In both cases, the actual t-statistic falls at or below the
first percentile of the empirical CDF of placebo t-statistics, confirming that we can reject the null
of no crowd-out at conventional levels of significance.
Appendix Figures Vc and Vd plot the empirical CDF of placebo p values corresponding to
these two regressions. Under the assumption of exchangeability, the p values should have a uniform
49

distribution if inference based on the clustered standard errors is valid. The CDF of the p values is
in fact very close to the 45 degree line, indicating that our baseline approach of clustering standard
errors by DKr 5,000 income bins gives valid p values for the MPS specifications.39
Income Effects. The increased taxation of capital pension contributions after the 1999 reform
reduces disposable income for those who continued to make capital pension contributions after the
reforms. This change in disposable income has a negligible impact on our crowd-out calculation
because the 100 − 19.3=80.7% of passive savers who do not respond to the reform also do not
change taxable saving significantly when their disposable income changes, as shown by the results
in Section V. The 19.3% of individuals who respond to the subsidy change do so primarily by
exiting capital pensions entirely, and thus their tax liabilities are unaffected by the change in the
tax rate on capital pensions. As a result, our crowd-out estimate is driven purely by the behavior
of the active savers: the passive savers affect neither the numerator (change in taxable saving),
nor the denominator (change in pension contributions). If a small fraction of passive savers do
reduce consumption when their disposable income falls after 1999, we would understate the degree
of crowd-out, as the increase in taxable saving after 1999 would have been even larger absent this
income effect.

C. Revenue Gain from 1999 Subsidy Reduction
In this appendix, we calculate the impact of the 1999 capital pension subsidy reduction on government revenue. The capital subsidy reduction in 1999 changed the current tax rate on contributions,
but did not affect rates on withdrawal or accrual. The primary determinant of the fiscal gain from
the 1999 reform is therefore simply the mechanical revenue gain from reducing the subsidy on current contributions by 13.6 cents per DKr (ignoring any behavioral responses). Given that mean
per capita contributions to capital pensions were DKr 5196 in 1998 in the treatment group, the
mechanical subsidy reduction of 13.6 cents per DKr yields a fiscal gain of DKr 5196 × 0.136 = 707
per individual in the top bracket.
The 1999 subsidy reduction induced individuals to reduce contributions to capital pensions
39

Interestingly, the same is not true for the levels estimator: standard errors clustered at the DKr 5,000 income
bin level yield a p value below 0.01 in the baseline 2SLS specification. However, a permutation test reveals that
40% of the p values from placebo tests fall below 0.01, indicating that these standard errors substantially overstate
the precision of the estimate. This is because there is substantial correlation in the level of taxable saving across
individuals within a year that is not accounted for by clustering at the DKr 5,000 income bin level.

50

by DKr 2449 (Table V, Column 1). This behavioral response induced individuals to shift DKr
0.529 × 2449 = 1296 from retirement accounts to taxable savings accounts (Table VI, Column
5). Because retirement accounts are tax subsidized, this behavioral response further increased
government revenue. The revenue gain due to behavioral responses depends upon the net subsidy
to capital pensions relative to taxable savings accounts. Calculating this net subsidy requires
various assumptions on individual behavior, as it requires accounting for not just the impact of the
behavioral response on current tax revenues but also the present value of impacts on revenue when
the money is withdrawn from retirement accounts, adjusting for the accrual of capital gains.
We estimate the average value of the net subsidy to capital pension accounts using the following
calculation. Assume that the representative individual invests at age 40 and earns a 5% nominal
return per year, of which 40% (i.e., 2 percentage points) is realized in each year (e.g., through
dividends, interest payments, or capital gains from asset reallocation) and reinvested. The money
stays in the account until age 60, when it is withdrawn. Retirement accounts are subsidized in two
ways. First, individuals pay an effective tax rate of 20% on capital gains within the retirement
account, as compared with 40% in non-retirement accounts.40 Second, withdrawals from nonretirement accounts are taxed as regular income, at an average rate of 45.9%; withdrawals from the
capital pension retirement account are taxed at 40%. Taking these two tax benefits into account,
we calculate that the subsidy to capital pension contributions is equivalent to an up-front subsidy
of 19.4 cents per DKr in 1999, after the reform. Hence, the revenue gain from individuals shifting
money out of capital pensions and into taxable accounts is DKr 1296 × 0.194 = 176.
Combining the mechanical revenue gain and the gain from the behavioral response, we estimate
that the 1999 reform generated an NPV fiscal gain of DKr 707+176 = 883 on average across treated
individuals. 80% of the fiscal savings came from the first-order mechanical effect of reducing the
subsidy on infra-marginal capital pension contributions; hence our estimate of the revenue gain is
not very sensitive to the assumptions made when calculating the net subsidy above. Note that
the DKr 883 figure understates the true fiscal gain because it ignores the revenue gain that comes
from shifting of assets from capital to annuity accounts in 1999 (substitution within retirement
accounts).
40

In 1999, savers paid 33.8% tax on real (that is, inflation adjusted) capital gains in retirement accounts. Assuming
a 5% nominal return and 2% inflation, this is equivalent to a 20% nominal tax rate.

51

Repeating these calculations including employer pensions generates larger revenue gains. Mean
per capita contributions to firm capital pensions were DKr 12, 088 in 1998 in the treatment group,
so that the mechanical subsidy reduction of 13.6 cents per DKr yields an additional fiscal gain of
12, 088 × 0.136 = 1644. The 1999 subsidy induced firms to switch contributions from capital to
annuity pensions, which we ignore to be conservative, but did not change total employer pension
contributions. Therefore, the total fiscal gain for the government from the 1999 subsidy reduction,
including employer contributions to retirement accounts, is DKr 1644 + 883 = 2527 per individual
in the top bracket.

52

References
Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. 2009. “The Age
of Reason: Financial Decisions over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 40 (2): 51–117.
Aizcorbe, Ana M., Authur B. Kennickell, and Kevin B. Moore. 2003. “Recent Changes in
U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal
Reserve Bulletin.
Arnberg, Søren and Mikkel Barslund. 2012. “The Crowding-Out Effect of Mandatory Labour
Market Pension Schemes on Private Savings: Evidence from Renters in Denmark.” Working
Paper 2012:1, Danish Economic Council.
Benjamin, Daniel J. 2003. “Does 401(k) Eligibility Increase Saving? Evidence from Propensity
Score Subclassification.” Journal of Public Economics, 87, 1259–1290.
Bernheim, B. Douglas. 2002. “Taxation and Saving.” in A. J. Auerbach and M. Feldstein, eds.,
Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3, Elsevier, p. 1173–1249.
Bernheim, B. Douglas and John Karl Scholz. 1993. “Private Saving and Public Policy.” in
James M. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 7 of NBER Chapters, Cambridge,
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, p. 73–110.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2012. “Default Stickiness among Low-Income Individuals.” RAND Working Paper WR-926-SSA, RAND
Corporation.
Bingley, Paul, Nabanita Datta Gupta, and Peder J. Pedersen. 2007. “Fiscal Implications of
Reforms in Retirement Systems in Denmark.” in Jonathan Gruber and David A. Wise, eds., Social
Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Fiscal Implications of Reform, NBER
Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, p. 119–154.
Browning, Martin and Thomas F. Crossley. 2001. “The Life-Cycle Model of Consumption
and Saving.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15 (3): 3–22.
Cagan, Philip. 1965. The Effect of Pension Plans on Aggregate Saving: Evidence from a Sample
Survey, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
53

Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1989. “Consumption, Income and Interest
Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence.” in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, Vol. 4, National Bureau of Economic Research,
p. 185–246.
Card, David and David S. Lee. 2008. “Regression discontinuity inference with specification
error.” Journal of Econometrics, 142 (2): 655–674.
Card, David and Michael Ransom. 2011. “Pension Plan Characteristics and Framing Effects
in Employee Savings Behavior.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93 (1): 228–243.
Carroll, Christopher D. 1997. “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (1): 1–55.
Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew
Metrick. 2009. “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124 (4): 1639–1674.
Chamberlain, Gary. 1994. “Quantile Regression, Censoring and the Structure of Wages.” Advances in Econometrics, pp. 171–209.
Chetty, Raj. 2012. “Bounds on Elasticities With Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro
and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica, 80 (3): 969–1018.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Using Differences in Knowledge
Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.” American Economic
Review, 103 (7): 2683–2721.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. “Adjustment
Costs, Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish
Tax Records.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (2): 749–804.
Cochrane, John H. 1991. “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance.” Journal of Political Economy, 99 (5): 957–76.
Danish Ministry of Taxation. 2002. Skatteberegningsreglerne for personer - før og nu.

54

Duflo, Esther, William Gale, Jeffrey Liebman, Peter Orszag, and Emmanuel Saez. 2006.
“Saving Incentives for Low- and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment with
H&R Block.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (4): 1311–1346.
Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2004. “Do the Rich Save
More?” Journal of Political Economy, 112 (2): 397–444.
Engelhardt, Gary V. and Anil Kumar. 2007. “Employer matching and 401(k) saving: Evidence
from the health and retirement study.” Journal of Public Economics, 91 (10): 1920–1943.
Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz. 1994. “Do Saving Incentives
Work?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 25 (1): 85–180.
Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz. 1996. “The Illusory Effects of
Saving Incentives on Saving.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10 (4): 113–38.
Ericson, Keith M. Marzilli. 2012. “Consumer Inertia and Firm Pricing in the Medicare Part
D Prescription Drug Insurance Exchange.” NBER Working Paper 18359, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Gale, William G. 1998. “The Effects of Pensions on Household Wealth: A Reevaluation of Theory
and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (4): 706–723.
Gale, William G. and John Karl Scholz. 1994. “IRAs and Household Saving.” American
Economic Review, 84 (5): 1233–60.
Gelber, Alexander M. 2011. “How Do 401(k)s Affect Saving? Evidence from Changes in 401(k)
Eligibility.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3 (4): 103–22.
Green, Francis G. 1981. “The Effect of Occupational Pension Schemes on Saving in the United
Kingdom: A Test of the Life Cycle Hypothesis.” The Economic Journal, 91 (361): 136–44.
Green-Pedersen, Christoffer. 2007. “Denmark: A ‘World Bank’ Pension System.” in Ellen M.
Immergut, Karen M. Anderson, and Isabella Schulze, eds., The Handbook of West European
Pension Politics, New York: Oxford University Press, p. 454–495.
Imbens, Guido W. and Thomas Lemieux. 2008. “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide
to Practice.” Journal of Econometrics, 142 (2): 615–635.

55

Iwry, Mark J. and David C. John. 2009. “Pursuing Universal Retirement Security Through
Automatic IRAs.” Retirement Security Project Paper, Brookings Institute.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2006. “Household Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001.” American Economic Review, 96 (5): 1589–1610.
Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, Martin B. Knudsen, Claus Thustrup Kreiner, Søren Pedersen, and Emmanuel Saez. 2011. “Unwilling or Unable to Cheat? Evidence From a Tax Audit
Experiment in Denmark.” Econometrica, 79 (3): 651–692.
Leth-Petersen, Soren. 2010. “Intertemporal Consumption and Credit Constraints: Does Total
Expenditure Respond to an Exogenous Shock to Credit?” American Economic Review, 100 (3):
1080–1103.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007. “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
54 (1): 205–224.
Madrian, Brigitte C. 2012. “Matching Contributions and Savings Outcomes: A Behavioral
Economics Perspective.” NBER Working Paper 18220, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (4): 1149–1187.
Mankiw, N. Gregory. 2000. “The Savers-Spenders Theory of Fiscal Policy.” American Economic
Review, 90 (2): 120–125.
OECD. 2009. “Pension Country Profile: Denmark.” in “OECD Private Pensions Outlook 2008,”
Paris: OECD Publishing.
Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. 1995. “Do 401(k) Contributions
Crowd Out Other Personal Saving?” Journal of Public Economics, 58 (1): 1–32.
Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. 1996. “How Retirement Saving
Programs Increase Saving.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10 (4): 91–112.
Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. 1998. “Personal Retirement Saving
Programs and Asset Accumulation: Reconciling the Evidence.” in “Frontiers in the Economics
of Aging” NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, pp. 23–124.
56

Reis, Ricardo. 2006. “Inattentive Producers.” Review of Economic Studies, 73, 793–821.
Rosenbaum, Paul R. 1996. “Observational Studies and Nonrandomized Experiments.” Design
and Analysis of Experiments, pp. 181–97.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth H. Giertz. 2012. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income
with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature, 50
(1): 3–50.
Samuelson, William and Richard Zeckhauser. 1988. “Status Quo Bias in Decision Making.”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1 (1): 7–59.
Samwick, Andrew. 2003. “Patience, Pensions, and Saving.”

http://www.dartmouth.edu/

˜samwick/adp samwick.pdf.
Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health,
Wealth, and Happiness, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Thaler, Richard H. and Shlomo Benartzi. 2004. “Save More Tomorrow (TM): Using Behavioral Economics to Increase Employee Saving.” Journal of Political Economy, 112 (S1):
S164–S187.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 1990. “Have IRAs Increased U.S. Saving? Evidence from
Consumer Expenditure Surveys.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105 (3): 661–98.

57

TABLE I
Predicted Impacts of Retirement Saving Policies for Active vs. Passive Savers
Automatic Contribution

Price Subsidy

Raises Total
Pension
Contributions?

Raises Total
Saving?

Raises Total
Pension
Contributions?

Raises Total
Saving?

Active Savers
(Neoclassical)

No

No

Yes

Uncertain

Passive Savers

Yes

Uncertain

No

No

Notes: This table summarizes the predictions of the stylized model in Section II, which assumes that individuals are at an
interior optimum and do not face any corners in choosing pension contributions (PiI ) or taxable saving (Si ). Active savers follow
the neoclassical life-cycle model when choosing PiI and Si . Passive savers set PiI at a fixed level irrespective of government
and employer policies.

58

TABLE II
Summary Statistics for Analysis Dataset
Variable

Full Sample

Top Tax Threshold Sample

Mean

Median

SD

Mean

Median

SD

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Labor Income (Y )

202,981

207,475

171,439

277,585

278,525

71,964

Total Compensation (W )

250,506

232,164

168,319

310,554

304,738

71,336

tax )

217,284

202,474

139,375

264,698

261,173

53,800

Fraction with Individual Pension Contribs.

27.6%

Individual Pension Contribution (P I )

3,081

0

8,786

4,007

0

9,586

Individual Pension Contribution Rate

1.2%

0.0%

2.9%

1.2%

0.0%

2.7%

Individual Capital Pension Contribution (P I,C )

1,868

0

5,817

2,589

0

6,661

0

5,674

1,417

0

5,908

Income

Taxable Income (Y
Assets and Saving

36.0%

Individual Annuity Pension Contribution

1,213

Fraction with Employer Pension Contribs.

60.4%

Employer Pension Contribution (P E )

15,205

6,314

21,375

21,220

19,722

19,255

Employer Pension Contribution Rate

5.8%

5.5%

5.2%

7.0%

7.5%

5.0%

14,400

109,102

62,706

20,312

112,227

Fraction with Any Pension Contribution

68.3%

Non-Pension Assets (not incl. home equity)

54,431

83.0%

90.0%

Non-Pension Assets > 10% of Labor Inc.

52.1%

Non-Pension Assets/Labor Inc. Ratio

37.0%

8.2%

99.2%

20.8%

6.9%

37.6%

Taxable Saving (S)

4,921

306

43,665

6,482

976

48,756

(S tot )

29,920

13,544

98,980

39,974

26,112

109,629

Total Savings Rate

12.8%

8.7%

57.6%

13.8%

9.6%

37.7%

Liabilities (not incl. home mortgage)

78,995

34,644

111,440

95,444

59,635

116,175

Change in Liabilities

5,892

0

47,668

5,567

0

54,609

Net Savings Rate

0.9%

8.8%

103.6%

9.3%

11.4%

63.1%

38.3

38.0

11.8

40.5

40.0

10.2

Total Saving

41.7%

Demographics
Age
Female

52.0%

44.3%

Married

49.4%

57.7%

Has Partner

63.7%

73.0%

Homeowner

52.9%

68.0%

College Degree

29.3%

44.8%

Economics Major in Terminal Degree

4.0%

4.0%

Number of Individuals

4,001,015

1,345,753

Number of Observations

41,159,806

16,457,106

Notes: This table presents means, medians, and standard deviations of key variables in the full sample and for those with taxable
income within DKr 75,000 of the top tax threshold. All monetary values are reported in nominal Danish Kroner; the exchange rate was
approximately 6.5 DKr per US $1 during the period we study. We top code all pension contribution levels at the 99th percentile. We
trim taxable savings measures and all pension contribution rates (measured as a percentage of income) at the 1st and 99th percentiles.
Labor income is total pre-tax wage earnings before pension contributions. Total compensation adds employer pension contributions to
labor income. Taxable income adds non-labor taxable income to labor income. Non-pension assets are measured at the end of each
calendar year and exclude home equity. Taxable saving is the change in non-pension assets relative to the previous year. Total saving
is the change in non-pension assets (measured in pre-tax dollars, i.e. divided by (1-MTR)) plus pension contributions in each year. All
rates are calculated relative to a base of labor income. Liabilities measures total non-mortgage debt, including other secured debt and
unsecured debt. Net savings rate is defined as total saving minus the change in liabilities (also measured in pre-tax dollars) divided by
labor income. Age is measured at the end of the calendar year. An individual has a partner if he/she is married or cohabitates with
any non-blood relative of the opposite gender that is within fifteen years of age. An individual is a home-owner if he or his partner has
positive home equity. Economics major is an indicator for majoring in economics, accounting, or finance in one’s terminal degree.

59

TABLE III
Employer Pensions: Pass-Through Estimates
Sample:

Dep. Var.:

All Firm
Switches

All Firm
Switches

Mass
Layoffs

Top Tax
Sample

All Firm
Switches

First
Switches

Switches
Age 46-54

∆ Tot.
Pension
Rate
(1)

∆Tot.
Savings
Rate
(2)

∆Tot.
Savings
Rate
(3)

∆Tot.
Savings
Rate
(4)

∆ Net
Savings
Rate
(5)

∆ Tot.
Savings
Rate
(6)

∆
Accrued
Wealth
(7)

Panel A: Lagged Saving >0
∆ Employer
Pension Rate

0.949
(0.0015)

0.777
(0.0224)

0.828
(0.1865)

0.750
(0.0376)

0.745
(0.0372)

0.784
(0.0403)

4.541
(0.4255)

∆ Total
Compensation

0.007
(0.0002)

0.118
(0.0033)

0.178
(0.0250)

0.133
(0.0069)

0.059
(0.0048)

0.078
(0.0053)

0.089
(0.0042)

Observations

867,075

1,890,220

37,432

876,922

1,880,642

727,372

54,147

Panel B: Lagged Saving >0 with Controls
∆ Employer
Pension Rate

0.949
(0.0015)

0.762
(0.0228)

0.816
(0.1883)

0.753
(0.0371)

0.715
(0.0374)

0.762
(0.0393)

4.603
(0.4289)

∆ Total
Compensation

0.007
(0.0002)

0.127
(0.0032)

0.178
(0.0239)

0.141
(0.0068)

0.076
(0.0047)

0.102
(0.0049)

0.082
(0.0041)

Observations

867,075

1,890,220

37,432

876,922

1,880,642

727,372

54,147

Panel C: Threshold Approach
∆ Employer
Pension Rate

0.939
(0.0025)

0.936
(0.0131)

0.817
(0.0447)

0.887
(0.0316)

0.977
(0.0236)

0.910
(0.0108)

∆ Total
Compensation

0.030
(0.0006)

0.150
(0.0033)

0.200
(0.0152)

0.181
(0.0097)

0.114
(0.0025)

0.150
(0.0030)

Observations

3,582,391

3,582,391

65,554

1,655,486

3,565,267

1,306,354

Notes: This table presents estimates of the impact of changes in employer pension contribution rates around firm switches
on total pension contributions and total saving. Panel A and B report OLS estimates using the specification in (4); Panel
C reports 2SLS estimates using the specification in (5). In Panel A, all independent and dependent variables are measured
as a percentage of labor income in the year before the switch. The independent variables are the change in the employer
contribution rate from the year before to the year of the switch (∆pE ) and the change in total compensation over the same
period (∆w). In Column 1, the dependent variable is the change in the total pension contribution rate (∆pE + ∆pI ). In
this specification, we include only individuals not at a corner in individual pensions (defined as positive lagged individual
pension contributions) at t = −1. In Columns 2-6, the dependent variable is the change in savings rate (∆stot ) over the
same period. We include only individuals not at a corner in individual savings (defined as either positive lagged individual
pension contributions or lagged wealth greater than 10% of current labor income) at t = −1. Column 3 repeats Column 2,
restricting to the sample of workers whose firm switch is classified as coming from a mass layoff. We define mass layoffs as
more than 90% of workers leaving a firm with more than 50 employees within a single year, with no more than 50% of the
original employees ending up at the same new firm. Column 4 repeats Column 2 for the “top tax cutoff” sample described in
Table II, i.e. individuals within DKr 75,000 of the top tax cutoff. Column 5 repeats Column 2 using saving net of liabilities
as the dependent variable instead of gross saving. Column 6 repeats Column 2 restricting to the first firm switch for each
individual. The dependent variable in Column 7 is the cumulative change in total saving between the time of the first firm
switch and age 60 for those workers switching before age 55 and reaching 60 in our data. Panel B replicates Panel A controlling
for age, marital status, gender, college attendance, and two-digit occupation indicators. Panel C replicates Panel A using the
threshold approach to calculate pass-through described in the text. In Column 1, we regress the change in an indicator for
having a total pension contribution rate above the threshold (defined as the maximum of the employer contributions at the
new and old firm) on the change in total compensation and the change in an indicator for crossing the same threshold if the
pass-through rate were 100% and savings in other accounts stayed at their year t − 1 level. We instrument for the change in
the indicator with the change in the employer contribution rate and include an indicator for having a positive change in the
employer contribution rate as a regressor in these specifications. The remaining columns in Panel C repeat this procedure
using the relevant dependent variable and subsample. In all specifications, we exclude individuals with ∆w < -50% or ∆w >
100% and, within this group, those with ∆pE or ∆stot in the top or bottom 1% of the distribution. Standard errors, reported
in parentheses, are clustered by the firm to which the individual switches.

60

TABLE IV
Government Mandated Savings Plan: Pass-Through Estimates

Dep. Var.:

∆ Total Pensions

Total
Pension
Threshold

Total
Saving
Threshold

Total Ind.
Saving
Threshold

Net
Saving
Threshold

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Pass-Through RD

0.883
(0.204)

1.052
(0.200)

0.801
(0.310)

0.845
(0.113)

1.268
(0.363)

1.336
(0.349)

2.188
(0.587)

Income Control
Function

Linear

Linear

Quadratic

Linear

Linear

Linear

Linear

158,229

148,380

148,380

128,988

Controls
Observations

X
35,578

35,578

35,578

Notes: This table presents pass-through estimates using an RD design based on the eligibility cutoff for the Mandated Savings
Program (MSP) in 1998. All cells report estimates from regression specifications with separate linear or quadratic control
functions above and below the eligibility cutoff, using the specification in (6). In Columns 1-3, the dependent variables are the
change in the level of total pension contributions P I + P E from 1997 to 1998. The estimates reported are for the discontinuity
at the threshold divided by DKr 345 (the increase in mandated saving at the threshold) and hence can be interpreted as
pass-through estimates φG . Column 1 estimates the specification with no controls. Column 2 replicates Column 1 controlling
for age, marital status, gender, college attendance, and two-digit occupation indicators. Column 3 replicates Column 1 using
a quadratic rather than a linear control function for income. We restrict the sample to individuals who are making positive
total pension contributions in 1997 in Columns 1-3. Columns 4-7 use the threshold approach described in the text to estimate
pass-through in the full sample. In Column 4, the dependent variable is an indicator for having total pension contributions
above DKr 1,265, the mean level of total pension contributions for individuals within DKr 5,000 of the MSP eligibility cutoff.
The coefficient reported, which can be interpreted as an estimate of φG , is the discontinuity divided by the counterfactual
effect of the policy under full pass-through, which is calculated by mechanically increasing savings on the left-hand side of the
discontinuity by 1% and estimating the predicted jump at the eligibility cutoff (see Online Appendix A for details). Columns
5, 6, and 7 replicate Column 4 with total saving (S tot ), total saving excluding employer pensions (S I,tot ), and net saving as
the dependent variables. The thresholds in those cases are DKr 1,317, DKR 1,078, and DKr 0. In all specifications, we exclude
observations with individual pension contributions below the 1st or above the 99th percentile of the estimation sample. We
also exclude 401 Ph.D. students that earn exactly DKr 49,987.50. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by
DKr 1,000 income bin in all specifications.

61

TABLE V
Impact of 1999 Subsidy Reduction on Capital Pension Contributions

Dep. Var.:

Above Cutoff
×Post

Individual Capital Pension Contributions

(1)

(2)

-2,449
(121)

-2,342
(115)

Income×Above
Cutoff×Post
Mean of Dep.
Var. for Treated
Pre 1999

5,113

Controls

5,113

(3)

(4)

-0.021
(0.002)

-0.022
(0.002)

5,113

5,113

X

No
Change
in Indiv.
Contrib.

Ext. Margin
Ext.
Substitution,
Margin
No Change in
Substitution
Prior Year

Indiv.
Exits
Capital
Pension

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.033
(0.003)

0.116
(0.005)

0.068
(0.004)

0.159
(0.007)

0.292

0.012

0.005

0.087

X

Years Included

1996-2001

1996-2001

1996-2001

1996-2001

1998-1999

1998-1999

1998-1999

1998-1999

Observations

4,707,788

4,707,788

7,026,187

7,026,187

536,612

536,612

196,768

536,612

Notes: This table characterizes the response to the 1999 reduction in the capital pension subsidy on savings behavior within
individual capital pension accounts. In Columns 1-4, the dependent variable is individual capital pension contribution P I,C .
Column 1 presents an estimate of the effect of the 1999 reform on the level of capital pension contributions using the levels
specification in equation (7). In this column, the treatment group includes individuals with taxable income between DKr
25,000 and DKr 75,000 above the top tax threshold; the control group includes individuals with taxable income between DKr
75,000 and DKr 25,000 below the threshold. The reported coefficient is the interaction between between in the treatment
group and the post-reform indicator, which measures the change in the level of pension contributions for those above the top
tax cutoff relative to those below the top tax cutoff around the 1999 reform. Column 3 presents an estimate of the effect of the
1999 reform on the marginal propensity to save in capital pension accounts using all individuals with taxable income within
DKr 75,000 of the threshold, estimated using the specification in equation (9). The reported coefficient is the triple interaction,
which measures the change in the MPS for those above the top tax cutoff relative to those below the top tax cutoff around
the 1999 reform. Columns 2 and 4 replicate Columns 1 and 3 controlling for age, marital status, gender, college attendance,
and two-digit occupation indicators. In Columns 5-8, we report estimates of the impact of the reform on various indicators
for individual response, using only data from 1998-1999 and restricting to individuals with positive lagged capital pension
contributions. These specifications use the levels DD specification in Column 1 with different dependent variables. In Column
5, the dependent variable is an indicator for leaving capital pension contributions unchanged relative to the previous year.
In Column 6, the dependent variable is “extensive margin substitution,” defined as decreasing capital pension contributions
to zero while increasing annuity pension contributions. Column 7 replicates Column 6, restricting to individuals who did
not change their capital pension contributions in the previous year. In Column 8, the dependent variable is an indicator for
decreasing capital pension contributions to zero. In all specifications, we exclude individuals with taxable saving below the
1st and above the 99th percentile for consistency with Table VII. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by
DKr 5,000 income bin in all specifications.

62

TABLE VI
Crowd-Out within Retirement Accounts Induced by Capital Pension Subsidy
Estimates Based on Levels
Dep. Var.:

Individual Capital
Pension Contrib.

Annuity
Contrib.

Total
Pension
Contrib.

Total
Pension
Contrib.

Annuity
Contrib.

Total
Pension
Contrib.

Total
Pension
Contrib.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.568
(0.019)

0.432
(0.019)

0.387
(0.019)

-0.471
(0.056)

0.529
(0.056)

0.558
(0.045)

X

Controls
Observations

Estimates Based on MPS

4,707,788

4,707,788

4,707,788

X
7,026,187

7,026,187

7,026,187

Notes: This table presents estimates of the degree to which changes in individual capital pension contributions induced by the
1999 subsidy reduction were offset by increases in individual annuity pension contributions. All specifications are estimated
using data from 1996-2001. The independent variable of interest in all specifications is the level of individual capital pension
contributions P I,C . The dependent variables are the level of individual annuity pension contributions (Columns 1 and 4)
or total individual pension contributions (Columns 2-3 and 5-6). Columns 1-3 use the levels estimator in (10) to estimate
crowd-out using 2SLS. In these specifications, we instrument for capital pension contributions with the double interaction
term shown in equation (7) and restrict the sample to individuals with DKr 25,000-75,000 either below or above the top tax
cutoff. Columns 4-6 use the MPS estimator in (11) to estimate crowd-out using 2SLS. In these specifications, we instrument
for capital pension contributions with the triple interaction term shown in equation (9) and include all individuals within DKr
75,000 of the top tax cutoff. Columns 3 and 6 replicate Columns 2 and 5 controlling for age, marital status, gender, college
attendance, and two-digit occupation indicators. In all specifications, we exclude individuals with taxable saving below the
1st and above the 99th percentile for consistency with Table VII. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at
the DKr 5,000 income bin level.

63

TABLE VII
Crowd-Out of Taxable Saving Induced by Subsidy

Dep. Var.:

Individual Pension
Contributions

Taxable
Saving

Trimmed
Taxable
Saving

Median
Taxable
Saving

Median
Total
Saving

Taxable
Saving
Threshold

Taxable
Saving
Threshold

Net
Saving
Threshold

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-1.200
(0.588)

-0.984
(0.267)

-0.994
(0.241)

-0.940
(0.215)

-1.462
(0.379)

0.0098
(0.0025)

Above Cutoff ×Post×Y tax

0.0003
(0.0030)

Controls
Observations

X
7,026,187

7,026,187

7,026,187

7,026,187

7,026,187

7,026,187

7,026,187

Notes: This table presents estimates of the degree to which the reductions in individual pension contributions induced by
the 1999 subsidy reduction were offset by increases in taxable saving. The independent variable of interest in columns 1-2
and 5-7 is the level of individual pension contributions P I . Column 1 uses the MPS estimator in (11) to estimate crowd-out
using 2SLS. We instrument for total individual pension contributions P I with the triple interaction term shown in equation
(9) and include all observations with taxable income within DKr 75,000 of the top tax cutoff. The dependent variable in
Column 1 is taxable saving, measured in pre-tax dollars given the marginal tax rate of 60% in the top income tax bracket
(S tot = S/(1 − 0.6)). Column 2 replicates Column 1, winsorizing taxable saving at the 10th and 90th percentile. Column 3
presents estimates from a least-squares approximation to a median regression. We compute medians of taxable saving within
DKr 5,000 income bins centered around the top tax cutoff in each year (as shown in Figure VIIIb). We then estimate a
specification analogous to that in (9) using OLS, with the median in each bin as the dependent variable, weighting by the
number of observations in each bin. The resulting coefficient estimate can be interpreted as the reduced-form impact of the
subsidy change on the marginal propensity to save in taxable accounts at the median. Column 4 replicates Column 3, changing
the dependent variable to median total saving (S tot ) instead of median taxable saving within each DKr 5,000 bin. Column
5 implements the threshold approach described in the text to estimate crowd-out. We first replicate the 2SLS specification
in Column 1, changing the dependent variable to an indicator for having taxable saving above the median level of taxable
saving for individuals in the top tax bracket. We then divide the coefficient from this regression by the predicted change if
the reduction in pension contributions were entirely offset by increasing taxable saving, based on the density of the taxable
saving distribution around the threshold. The resulting estimate reported in the table can be interpreted as an estimate of
crowd-out (see text for details). Column 6 replicates Column 5 controlling for age, marital status, gender, college attendance,
and two-digit occupation indicators. Column 7 replicates Column 5 using net taxable saving instead of gross taxable saving
to define the dependent variable. All specifications are estimated using data from 1996-2001. In all specifications, we exclude
individuals with taxable saving below the 1st and above the 99th percentile. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are
clustered at the DKr 5,000 income bin level.

64

TABLE VIII
Active vs. Passive Choice and Responses to
Subsidies and Employer Pensions
Dep. Var.:

Contributes to
Capital Pension
(1)

(2)

Post 1999

-0.150
(0.0057)

-0.151
(0.0058)

Post 1999 ×New Saver

-0.226
(0.0073)

-0.225
(0.0079)

New Saver

-0.052
(0.0037)

-0.065
(0.0041)

Extensive Margin
Substitution in 1999
(3)

(4)

∆ Employer Pension
Fraction of Other Years
with Change in Pension

0.176
(0.0059)

0.159
(0.0054)

∆ Employer Pension
×Fraction of Other Years
with Change in Pension
Mean of Dep. Var. pre
1999

0.871

Controls
Observations

0.871

0.015

X
146,256

0.015

∆ Total Pension
Contrib. Rate
(5)

(6)

0.996
(0.0016)

0.996
(0.0015)

-0.005
(0.0001)

-0.005
(0.0002)

-0.096
(0.0044)

-0.096
(0.0044)

0.091

0.091

X

146,256

64,783

64,783

X
864,482

864,482

Notes: Column 1 regresses an indicator for positive individual contributions to capital pensions on a post-1999 indicator, a new
saver indicator, and the interaction of these two variables. The new saver variable is an indicator for making zero individual
annuity and capital pension contributions in the prior year. We use data from 1998 and 1999 and include only individuals
with taxable income between DKr 25,000 and DKr 75,000 above the top tax cutoff who are currently contributing to either
capital or annuity pensions. Column 3 regresses an indicator for extensive margin substitution in response to the 1999 capital
pension reform, defined as exiting capital pensions and raising annuity pension contributions, on the fraction of other years
in which an individual changes individual capital or annuity pension contributions relative to the prior year. We use data
from 1999 and restrict the sample to individuals with taxable income between DKr 25,000 and DKr 75,000 above the top tax
cutoff who made positive contributions to individual capital pensions in 1998 in this regression. Column 5 replicates Column
1 of Table IIIA to measure the pass-through of changes in employer pension contribution rates to total pension contribution
rates, except that we include an interaction of the change in the employer pension contribution rate ∆pE with the fraction
of other years (excluding the year of the firm switch) in which an individual adjusted the level of annuity or capital pension
contributions. We also include the interaction between this variable and the change in total compensation ∆w. Columns 2, 4,
and 6 replicate Columns 1, 3, and 5 controlling for age, marital status, gender, college attendance, and two-digit occupation
indicators. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. In Columns 1-4, we cluster standard errors at the DKr 5,000 income
bin level; in Columns 5-6, we cluster by the firm to which the individual switches.

65

TABLE IX
Observable Heterogeneity in Responses
to Subsidies and Employer Pensions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A: Capital Pension Subsidy Reduction
Dep. Var.:
Wealth/Inc. Ratio

Exit Capital Pensions and Raise Annuity Pensions in 1999?
0.078
(0.0043)

0.062
(0.0047)
0.003
(0.0001)

Age

0.055
(0.0042)

College
Economics Education
Controls
Observations

0.002
(0.0002)

0.002
(0.0003)

0.046
(0.0040)

0.020
(0.0056)

0.052
(0.0050)

0.048
(0.0041)

35,561

35,561

0.927
(0.0887)

0.923
(0.0886)

-0.006
(0.0026)

-0.006
(0.0026)

0.093
(0.0582)

0.096
(0.0584)

0.048
(0.1009)

0.048
(0.1009)

X
63,905

X

63,905

63,905

35,561

Panel B: Pass-Through of Employer Pensions
Dep. Var.:

∆ Total Saving Rate

∆ Employer Pension
Rate

0.864
(0.0229)

0.868
(0.0230)

∆ Emp. Pen. Rate
× Wealth/Inc.

-0.435
(0.0048)

-0.446
(0.0049)

1.052
(0.0730)

∆ Emp. Pen. Rate
× Age

0.740
(0.0321)

-0.008
(0.0021)

∆ Emp. Pen. Rate
× College

0.074
(0.0540)

∆ Emp. Pen. Rate
× Econ. Ed.
Controls
Observations

X
1,855,357

X

1,855,357

1,890,220

1,177,561

1,177,561

1,177,561

Notes: This table investigates observable heterogeneity in response to the 1999 capital pension reform (Panel A) and changes
in employer pension contribution rates (Panel B). In Panel A, we regress an indicator for extensive margin substitution in
response to the 1999 capital pension reform, defined as exiting capital pensions and raising annuity pension contributions, on
various individual characteristics. We use 1999 data for individuals with taxable income between DKr 25,000 and DKr 75,000
above the top tax cutoff. The lone independent variable in Column 1 is the lagged ratio of non-pension assets to labor income.
Column 2 replicates Column 1 with controls for age, marital status, gender, college, and two-digit occupation indicators. In
Column 3, the lone independent variable is age; in Column 4, it is an indicator for college attendance. Column 5 includes both
age and the college attendance indicator, as well as an indicator for having some training in economics, either in college or
at lower levels if the individual did not attend college. Column 6 replicates Column 5 adding controls for marital status and
gender and two-digit indicators for occupation. Columns 4-6 additionally restrict to those observations with non-missing data
for college attendance. Panel B replicates the specification in Column 2 of Table IIIA, including interactions of the individual
characteristics listed in each column with the change in employer pension contribution rate at the time of the firm switch ∆pE
and the direct effect of the same characteristics. All regressions include interactions between the change in total compensation
∆w and the individual characteristics listed in each column. The additional controls in columns 2 and 6 are not interacted
with the changes in employer pensions or total compensation. All interacted characteristics except indicators are demeaned,
so that the raw effect of the change in the employer pension contribution rate can be interpreted as the pass-through rate for
individuals with mean values of the continuous variables and all indicator variables equal to zero. In all specifications in Panel
B, we exclude individuals with taxable saving below the 1st and above the 99th percentile. We topcode the wealth/income
ratio at the 99th percentile in both panels. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. We cluster standard errors in Panel
A at the DKr 5,000 income bin level; we cluster standard errors in Panel B by the firm to which the individual switches.

66

FIGURE I
Effects of Employer Pensions on Savings Rates: Event Studies
b) Switchers with Positive Individual Pension Contributions

a) Switchers to Firms with ≥ 3% Increase in Employer Contribution

Contribution or Taxable Saving Rate (% of income)
0
4
8
12

Contribution or Taxable Saving Rate (% of income)
0
4
8
12

Prior to Switch

ǻ Employer Pensions = 5.57
ǻ Individual Pensions = -0.11
ǻ Taxable Savings = -0.11

-4

-2
Taxable Saving

0

2

Year Relative to Firm Switch
Employer Pensions

4

ǻ Employer Pensions = 5.64
ǻ Individual Pensions = -0.56
ǻ Taxable Savings = 0.02

-4

Individual Pensions

-2
Taxable Saving

0
Year Relative to Firm Switch
Employer Pensions

2

4
Individual Pensions

d) Changes in Individual Pension Contributions in Year of

Contribution

Firm Switch for Individuals Contributing Prior to Switch

50

0.8

c) Fraction Saving More than New Level of Employer Pension

Percent of Individuals
40
20
30

Change required to
offset 3% increase

0

0

10

0.2

0.4

0.6

ǻ Total Pensions = 25.8%
Predicted = 27.2%
ǻ Total Savings = 21.0%
Predicted = 34.0%

-4

-2

0

2

4

-3

Year Relative to Firm Switch
Total Pension Contribs.
Predicted with Full Pass-Through
Total Saving
Predicted with Full Pass-Through

-2
-1
0
1
2
∆ Individual Pension Contributions as a Percentage of Labor Income

3

3% Increase in Employer Pension at Job Change
No Change in Employer Pension at Job Change

Notes: Panels A and B are event studies of pension contribution and taxable savings rates when workers switch firms. We
include only the first firm switch for individuals in our data in these figures; hence, t = 0 denotes the first year in which the
primary firm ID in the data changes for an individual. Panel A plots an individuals mean taxable savings rate (Sit ), individual
pension contribution rate (PitI ), and employer contribution rate (PitE ), all measured as a percentage of current labor income
Yit . We include only workers whose employer pension contribution rate increased by at least 3 percentage points of labor
income at t = 0. We also limit the sample to workers for whom data is available for event years [-4, +4] so that the sample is
constant through the figure. Panel B replicates Panel A, restricting further to the sample of workers with positive individual
I
pension contributions prior to the switch (Pi,t=−1
> 0). Panel C plots the effect of changes in employer pensions on total
pension contributions and total saving using a threshold approach. The lower series (in red triangles) plots the fraction of
individuals in Panel A with total pension contributions (PitI + PitE ) greater than the level of firm pension contributions at t = 0.
To isolate changes in individual pension contributions, we fix employer pension contributions at the t = −1 level for t < 0 and
at the t = 0 level for t > 0. The dashed line plots the predicted change in this threshold measure if there were no change in
tot
individual pension contributions. The upper series (in green squares) repeats the lower series using total saving (Sit
) rather
than total pension contributions to define the fraction above the threshold. The solid line in Panel D plots a histogram (with
bin width of 0.1%) of the change in individual pension contributions P I , as a percentage of lagged contributions, from t = −1
to t = 0, for the sample in Panel B. The dashed line in Panel D replicates this histogram, limiting attention to workers whose
employer pension contributions changed by less than 0.5 percentage points of labor income in absolute value at t = 0.

67

FIGURE II

b) Changes in Total Savings Rates vs.

Changes in Employer Pensions

Changes in Employer Pensions

Total Pensions
Pass-Through Rate:

= 94.9%
(0.2%)

5
0

0

5

Change in Total Savings Rate (% of income)

10

10

a) Changes in Total Pension Contribution Rates vs.

Total Savings
Pass-Through Rate:

= 77.7%
(2.2%)

-5

-5

Change in Total Pension Contributions (% of income)

Effects of Employer Pensions on Saving: Binned Scatter Plots

-5

0

5

10

-5

Change in Employer Pension Contributions (% of income)

0

5

10

Change in Employer Pension Contributions (% of income)

50
0

Marginal Propensity to Save: ȕ = 11.8%
(0.3%)

-50

Change in Total Savings Rate (% of income)

100

c) Changes in Total Savings Rates vs. Changes in Labor Income

-50

0

50

100

Percent Change in Labor Income

Notes: These figures display binned scatter plots corresponding to the estimates from Table III. ∆pE . All dependent and
independent variables are measured as a percentage of gross labor income in the year prior to the switch. Panel A plots the
relationship between the changes in total pension contribution rates ∆(pI + pE ) and employer pension contribution rates ∆pE ,
controlling for the change in total compensation ∆w. This plot corresponds to Table IIIA, Column 1; see notes to that table
for sample definitions and further details. Panels B and C correspond to Table IIIA, Column 2 and use the same sample
and definitions as in that column. Panel B plots the relationship between ∆stot and ∆pE , controlling for the change in total
compensation ∆w. Panel C plots the relationship between ∆stot and ∆w, controlling for the change in total compensation.
To construct each figure, and all binned scatter plots that follow, we first residualize the y- and x-variables with respect to the
control vector using an OLS regression estimated on the underlying regression sample. We then divide the x-variable residuals
into twenty ranked equal-sized groups (vingtiles) and plot the mean of the y-residuals against the mean of the x-residuals
in each bin. The best-fit line, as well as the coefficient and the standard error reported in parentheses (which is clustered
by destination firm in this figure), are calculated from multivariate regressions on the micro-data (corresponding to those in
Table III in this figure). The coefficients reported in Panels A and B can be interpreted as the pass-through rate of employer
pension rate changes to total pensions and savings, holding fixed total compensation. The coefficient reported in Panel C can
be interpreted as the marginal propensity to save out of disposable income.

68

FIGURE III
Long-Term Impacts of Employer Pensions on Wealth Accumulation

1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0

Pass-Through of Employer Pensions to Total Savings

a) Pass-Through of Employer Pension to Total Savings by Years Since Firm Switch

0

2

4

6

8

10

Years Since Firm Switch

b) Wealth Accrued at Age 60 vs. Changes in Employer Pension Rates at Switch

20
0

ǻ Accrued Wealth / ǻ Emp. Pension = 4.54
(0.43)

-20

Total Wealth Accrued From Switch to Age 60

40

for Individuals who Switch Jobs Before Age 45

-5

-2.5

0

2.5

5

7.5

Change in Employer Pension Contributions (% of income)

Notes: These figures show the long-term impacts of changes in employer pension contribution rates at the time of firm
switches. Panel A plots the pass-through coefficients of changes in employer pension contribution rates to total saving at
different horizons, replicating the specification in Table IIIA, Column 6 in each year after the event. For instance, the
coefficient for t = 1 represents the coefficient in a regression of the change from t = −1 to t = 1 in the total savings rate on the
change in employer pension rates over the same horizon, controlling for the change in total compensation over that horizon.
The dashed lines represent the boundaries of the 95% confidence interval, using standard errors clustered by destination firm.
Panel B is a binned scatter plot of the relationship between the change in employer contribution rates and total wealth accrued
between the firm switch and age 60, corresponding to Table III, Panel A, Column 7. See notes to Table III for further details
on the specifications and sample definitions; see notes to Figure II for further details on construction of the binned scatter
plot.

69

FIGURE IV
Impact of Government Mandated Savings Plan: Regression Discontinuity
Estimates
b) Balance Test: Income Distribution Around Eligibility Cutoff

5000
4000
3000
2000

Number of Taxpayers in Income Bin

0

1000

400
200
0

Mandated Savings (DKr)

600

6000

a) Mandated Savings Around Eligibility Cutoff in 1998

14.5

24.5

34.5

44.5

54.5

14.5

24.5

Income (DKr 1000s)

44.5

54.5

d) Total Saving Around Eligibility Cutoff

= 85%
(11%)

52
48

Total Savings
Pass-Through Rate:

= 127%
(36%)

40

10

Total Pensions
Pass-Through Rate:

44

15

20

25

Percent with Total Savings > DKr 1371

30

c) Total Pension Contributions Around Eligibility Cutoff
Percent with Total Pension Contribution > DKr 1265

34.5
Income (DKr 1000s)

14.5

24.5

34.5

44.5

54.5

14.5

24.5

Income (DKR 1000s)
Empirical

34.5

44.5

54.5

Income (DKR 1000s)
Empirical

Predicted with 100% Pass-Through

Predicted with 100% Pass-Through

Notes: These figures present a regression discontinuity analysis of the impacts of the Mandated Saving Program (MSP) on
total pension contributions and saving in 1998. All panels present the data in DKr 1,000 income bins relative to the threshold,
so that the dot at DKr -500 includes all individuals with income in the range [-1000,0). Panel A shows the contributions
mandated by the program. Individuals with income below DKr 34,500 were not required to make any contributions; those
earning more than this threshold were required to contribute 1% of income. Panel B plots the count of individuals in each bin
around the threshold. Panel C plots the fraction of individuals in each bin with total pension contributions (P = P E +P I +P G )
above DKr 1,265, the mean level of total pension contributions for individuals within DKr 5,000 of the threshold. Panel D
plots the fraction of individuals in each bin with total saving (S tot = P + S/(1 − M T R)) above DKr 1,371, the mean level of
total saving for those within DKr 5,000 of the threshold. The solid lines plot the linear best-fit to the actul data above and
below the threshold. The dashed lines plot the counterfactuals we use to calculate the increase one would observe under full
pass-through (see Online Appendix A for details). We estimate pass-through in Panels C and D using the specifications in
Columns 4 and 5 of Table IV.

70

FIGURE V
Impact of 1999 Subsidy Reduction On Capital Pension Contributions

10000
5000
0

Capital Pension Contribution (DKr)

15000

a) Total Contributions vs. Taxable Income, 1996-2001

-75000

-50000

-25000

0

25000

50000

Income Relative to Top Tax Cutoff (DKr)
1996
1997
1999
2000

75000

1998
2001

6000

b) Individual Contributions Above vs. Below Top Tax Cutoff by Year

5000

= -2,449
(121)

3000

4000

Subsidy for Capital
Pension Reduced

2000

Capital Pension Contribution (DKr)

Diff-in-Diff:

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Year
Below Top Tax Cutoff

Above Top Tax Cutoff

0

.005

Diff-in-Diff:

= -0.021
(0.002)

-.015

-.01

-.005

Subsidy for Capital
Pension Reduced

-.02

Difference in MPS Above vs. Below Top Tax Cutoff

.01

c) Difference in MPS for Individuals Above. vs. Below Top Tax Cutoff in Capital Pension Accounts by Year

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Year

Notes: These figures illustrate the impact of the 1999 capital pension subsidy reduction on capital pension contributions.
Panel A plots average total (individual plus employer) capital pension contributions for individuals with income in each DKr
5,000 income bin within DKr 75,000 of the top tax threshold, in each year 1996-2001. Panel B plots average individual capital
pension contributions in each year for two income groups: those with income in the range DKr 75,000 to DKr 25,000 below
the top tax threshold (control group), and in the range DKr 25,000 to DKr 75,000 above the top tax threshold (treatment
group). Panel C plots the difference in the marginal propensity to save (MPS) in capital pension accounts between individuals
above and below the top tax cutoff in each year. We estimate this difference in MPS in each year using equation (8). The
coefficients reported in Panels B and C correspond to the specifications in Columns 1 and 3 of Table V.

71

FIGURE VI
Impact of 1999 Subsidy Reduction on Distribution of
Individual Capital Pension Contributions
b) Individuals Below Top Tax Cutoff

40
0

20

Percent of Individuals

40
20
0

Percent of Individuals

60

60

a) Individuals Above Top Tax Cutoff

-100

-50

0

50

-100

100

-50

0

50

100

Percent Change in Capital Pension Contributions

Percent Change in Capital Pension Contributions
1997 to 1998
1998 to 1999

1997 to 1998

1998 to 1999

c) Effect of 1999 Reform on Rate of Capital Pension Contributions

80
60
40
20
0

Percent Still Contributing to Capital Pension

100

for Individuals Contributing Prior to Reform

0

2

4

6

8

10

Years Since 1999 Reform

Notes: Panel A plots the distribution of changes to individual capital pension contributions, as a fraction of lagged individual
pension contributions, for individuals who are DKr 25-75K above the top tax cutoff in 1998 and 1999 (the treatment group).
Panel B replicates Panel A for those DKr 25-75K below the top tax cutoff (the control group). Both panels include only
individuals with positive lagged individual pension contributions. The dots represent the floor of bins of 5% width, so that
the dot at 0% represents individuals with changes in the range [0%, 5%). Panel C shows the long-term dynamics of response
to the 1999 reform for those who were contributing to capital pensions in 1998. To construct this figure, we first calculate
the fraction of individuals with positive individual capital pension contributions in each post-reform year in the treatment
and control groups. We then plot the difference between this fraction in the treatment and control groups and add 1 to
facilitate interpretation of the scale. For instance, the dot at 91.3 in year 0 implies that the reform induced 8.7 percent of
those contributing in 1998 to stop contributing in 1999. The dashed lines represent the boundaries of the 95% confidence
interval, estimated from a DD regression analogous to (7), with standard errors clustered at the DKr 5,000 income bin level.

72

FIGURE VII
Crowd-out Within Retirement Accounts Induced by Subsidy to Capital Pensions

2500
1500

2000

Crowd-out:

= 56.8%
(1.9%)

1000

Subsidy for Capital
Pension Reduced

500

Annuity Pension Contribution (DKr)

3000

a) Level of Individual Annuity Pension Contributions Above vs. Below Top Tax Cutoff by Year

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Year
Below Top Tax Cutoff

Above Top Tax Cutoff

.025

= 47.1%
(5.6%)

.01

Crowd-out:

-.005

Subsidy for Capital
Pension Reduced

-.02

Difference in MPS Above vs. Below Top Tax Cutoff

b) Difference in MPS for Individuals Above. vs. Below Top Tax Cutoff in Capital and Annuity Accounts by Year

1996

1997

1998

1999

Year
Annuity Pension

2000

2001

Capital Pension

Notes: Panel A replicates Figure Vb, plotting mean individual annuity (rather than capital) pension contributions in the
treatment and control groups by year. The series in circles in Panel B replicates Figure Vc, plotting the difference in the
marginal propensity to save (MPS) in annuity (rather than capital) accounts between those above vs. below the top tax
cutoff. The series in triangles in Panel B replicates the series in Figure Vc exactly as a reference. See notes to Figure V for
further details on the construction of these figures. The crowd-out coefficients reported in the figures are estimated using the
specifications in Columns 1 and 4 of Table VI, with standard errors clustered at the DKr 5,000 income bin level.

73

FIGURE VIII
Crowd-out of Taxable Saving Induced by Subsidy

.02
.01
0

Subsidy for Capital
Pension Reduced

-.01

Crowd-out:

= 120%
(59%)

-.02

Difference in MPS Above vs. Below Top Tax Cutoff

a) Difference in MPS for Individuals Above. vs. Below Top Tax Cutoff in Retirement and Taxable Savings Accounts by Year

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Year
Retirement Accounts

Taxable Savings Accounts

1000

b) Change in Median Taxable Saving After Subsidy Reduction by Income Group

500
0
-500

Change in Taxable Saving (DKr)

Change in Slope at Cutoff: 0.010
(0.003)

-75000

-50000

-25000

0

25000

50000

75000

Taxable Income Relative to Top Tax Cutoff (DKr)

Notes: Panel A is constructed in the same way as Figure Vc. The series in circles plots the difference in the marginal propensity
to save (MPS) in retirement accounts (capital plus annuity) between individuals above and below the top tax cutoff in each
year. We estimate this difference in MPS in each year using equation (8). The series in triangles repeats this exercise for saving
in non-retirement (taxable) accounts, showing the difference in the MPS in taxable accounts for individuals above the top tax
cutoff vs. those below the top tax cutoff in each year. Retirement account contributions are total individual contributions PI .
Taxable saving is measured in pre-tax dollars (S/(1 − 0.6), using the marginal income tax rate of 60% in the top tax bracket.
The crowd-out estimate reported in Panel A is based on the specification in Column 1 of Table VII. Panel B plots median
taxable saving (again measured in pre-tax dollars) in the post-reform years (1999-2001) minus pre-reform years (1996-1998)
in each DKr 5,000 taxable income bin. The solid lines show the best linear fits to the points below the cutoff and above the
cutoff, estimated on the underlying microdata. The difference in the slopes of these lines can be interpreted as an estimate of
the change in the MPS in taxable accounts when the subsidy was reduced for individuals in the top tax bracket in 1999. The
coefficient for the change in slope at the threshold reported on the figure is estimated in Column 3 of Table VII.

74

APPENDIX TABLE I
Robustness Checks of Pass-Through Estimates
Full Sample
Including Corners

Renters

Household Saving

Single Individuals

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel A: Effect of Employer Pensions on Total Saving (Table IIIA, Column 2)

∆ Employer Pension Rate

0.747
(0.015)

0.818
(0.027)

0.739
(0.024)

0.775
(0.034)

Observations

3,582,391

841,398

1,840,435

708,579

Panel B: Effect of MSP on Total Saving (Table IV, Column 5)

Pass-Through RD

1.021
(0.051)

1.577
(0.410)

1.328
(0.508)

1.769
(0.571)

Observations

155,735

119,033

148,380

92,647

Panel C: Subsidy Change and Crowd-out of Taxable Saving (Table VII, Column 5)

Total Pension Contrib.

-1.215
(0.453)

-0.907
(0.314)

-1.409
(0.528)

Observations

2,327,951

7,026,187

1,897,831

Notes: This table replicates key specifications using alternative samples or dependent variables to evaluate the robustness of
the results. Panel A replicates the specification in Table IIIA, Column 2, measuring the effect of a change in the employer
pension contribution rate on total saving at the time of a firm switch. Panel B replicates the specification in Table IV, Column
5, measuring the effect of the Mandated Savings Plan on total saving using a threshold indicator for having above-average
saving. Panel C replicates the specification in Table VII, Column 5, measuring the effect of the 1999 capital pension subsidy
reform on crowd-out in taxable saving using a threshold indicator for having taxable saving above the median. See notes to
the earlier tables for further details on each specification. In Column 1, we replicate the specifications in the first two panels
including all individuals, not just those who are not at the lower corner in saving in the prior year. In Column 2, we replicate
the three original specifications exactly, restricting to individuals who do not own homes (i.e., have zero home equity). In
Column 3, we replicate each specification including partner’s taxable assets in our savings measure where present. In Panel A
of Column 3, the dependent variable is the change in the household saving rate (measured as a percentage of the individual’s
own labor income, with observations below the 1st or above the 99th percentile of the distribution excluded); in Panels B and
C, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for having household saving (or household taxable saving) above the relevant
sample mean or median. In Column 4, we replicate the three original specifications exactly, restricting to individuals who do
not have a partner, defined as in the notes to Table II.

75

APPENDIX TABLE II
Employer Responses to 1999 Capital Pension Subsidy Reduction
Dep. Var.:

Above Cutoff ×Post

Capital Pension
Contribs.

Annuity
Crowd-out

Total Pension
Pass-Through

Total Pension
Pass-Through.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-1.011
(0.041)

-0.011
(0.041)

-0.078
(0.035)

-2645
(173)

Capital Pension
Contrib.

X

Controls
Observations

4,707,788

4,707,788

4,707,708

4,707,708

Notes: Column 1 presents estimates of the impact of the 1999 subsidy reduction on employer contributions to capital pension
accounts. This column replicates Column 1 of Table V, changing the dependent variable to employer capital pension contributions. Columns 2-4 replicate Columns 1-3 of Table VI, changing the dependent variables to employer pensions instead of
individual pensions and replacing the endogenous independent variable with employer capital pensions instead of individual
capital pensions. As in Table VI, we instrument for the endogenous variable with the DD interaction term. All specifications
are estimated using data from 1996-2001. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the DKr 5,000 income
bin level.

76

APPENDIX FIGURE I
Mandated Savings Account Balance Notification Letter

Notes: This figure presents a pension balance notification letter sent to a Danish citizen in 2004. These letters were sent
annually by ATP, Denmark’s largest pension company, giving citizens information about the balance in their mandated
savings account.

77

APPENDIX FIGURE II
Impact of Mandated Savings Plan: Difference-in-Differences Design

1000

2000

3000

1% MSP
Terminated

1% MSP
Introduced

0

Mandated Savings (DKr)

4000

a) Mandatory Pension Contributions by Income Group

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year
Bottom Tercile

Middle Tercile

Top Tercile

10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0

Individual Private Pension Contributions (DKr)

b) Total Non-Employer Pension Contributions by Income Group

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year
Bottom Tercile

Middle Tercile

Top Tercile

30
20
10

Percent of Individuals

40

c) Percent of Individuals Contributing More than 1.5% of Income to Pensions

1995

2000
Bottom Tercile

2005
Year
Middle Tercile

2010
Top Tercile

Notes: These figures present the effect of the Mandated Savings Plan (MSP) on total non-employer pension contributions. In
all three panels, we split the data into terciles based on labor income in each year. Individuals may therefore switch groups
across years. We include only observations with positive labor income. Panel A plots the average contribution to the MSP
in each year for these three groups (P G ). Panel B plots the average total non-employer pension contribution (P I + P G )
in each year for the three groups. Panel C plots the fraction of individuals in each group with total non-employer pension
contributions greater than 1.5% of income, which is the mean total non-employer contribution rate for the sample across all
years.

78

APPENDIX FIGURE III
Levels and Marginal Propensity to Save in Taxable Accounts Around 1999
Subsidy Change

20000
15000
10000
5000

Taxable Saving (DKr)

25000

a) Mean Levels of Taxable Saving Above vs. Below Top Tax Cutoff by Year

1996

1997

1998

1999

25-75K Below Top Tax Cutoff

2000

2001

25-75K Above Top Tax Cutoff

.1
.08
.06
.04

Marginal Propensity to Save

.12

b) Marginal Propensity to Save in Taxable Accounts for Individuals Above vs. Below Top Tax Cutoff by Year

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Year
Below Top Tax Cutoff

Above Top Tax Cutoff

Notes: Panel A plots the mean level of taxable savings for individuals 25-75K above the top tax cutoff (the treatment group) and
25-75K below the top tax cutoff (control group) by year. It replicates Figure Vb, replacing mean capital pension contributions
with mean taxable saving levels (measured in pre-tax dollars using the top bracket marginal tax rate, S/(1 − 0.6)) as the
y variable. The dashed series plots the impact on total pension contributions as a reference (on a separate y scale). Panel
B plots the marginal propensity to save in taxable savings accounts for individuals above vs. below the top tax cutoff. We
construct this figure by regressing taxable saving (S/(1 − 0.6)) on taxable income separately for each year and for individuals
DKr 0-75K below the top cutoff and those DKr 0-75K above the top tax cutoff. We then plotting the resulting regression
estimates for the two groups. Note that the lower series in Figure VIIIa is simply the difference between the series plotted in
Panel B of this figure.

79

APPENDIX FIGURE IV
Permutation Tests for Levels Estimator of Crowd-out in Taxable Saving
1

a) Empirical Distribution of Reduced-Form Placebo Coefficients for Taxable Saving

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

CDF of Placebo Coefficients

0.8

Predicted Impact with
100% Crowd-Out

-10000

-5000

0

5000

10000

Placebo Treatment Effect Estimate on Taxable Saving

1

b) Empirical Distribution of Reduced-Form Placebo Coefficients for Trimmed Taxable Saving

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

CDF of Placebo Coefficients

0.8

Predicted Impact with
100% Crowd-Out

-4000

-2000

0

2000

4000

Placebo Treatment Effect Estimate on Taxable Saving

Notes: Panel A shows an empirical CDF of estimated impacts of placebo subsidy changes on taxable saving levels. We
construct this figure as follows. Let tp denote a year between 1999 and 2006 and Ȳpt a placebo cutoff for the top tax bracket.
We consider a grid of values for Ȳpt from DKr 200,000 below to DKr 200,000 above the actual top tax cutoff in year t in
increments of DKr 10,000. For each combination of {tp , Ȳpt }, we estimate the levels DD reduced-form model shown in (14),
using the level of taxable saving measured in pre-tax dollars (S/(1 − 0.6)) as the dependent variable. We restrict the sample
to 3 years before and after the placebo reform year and incomes 25-75K above or 25-75K below the placebo top tax cutoff
in those years. The figure plots the cumulative distribution function of coefficient estimates for all the placebos, excluding
the coefficients from 1999 with Ȳpt within DKr 100,000 of the true cutoff to avoid biasing the placebo tests with the true
treatment effect. The vertical line shows the treatment effect one would observe under 100% crowd-out, i.e. if the change in
taxable saving (in pre-tax dollars) were equal to the reduction in individual pension contributions shown by the dashed line
in Appendix Figure IIIA. Panel B replicates Panel A, winsorizing the taxable saving measure at the 10th and 90 percentiles,
as in Column 2 of Table VII.

80

APPENDIX FIGURE V
Permutation Tests for MPS Estimator of Crowd-out in Taxable Saving
b) CDF of Placebo t-statistics for Crowd-out Estimates: Threshold

Means

Estimates

1

1

a) CDF of Placebo t-statistics for Crowd-out Estimates: Trimmed

Estimate for Actual Reform

0.6
0.4
0.2

0

0

CDF of Placebo t-statistics

0.8

CDF of Placebo t-statistics
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

Estimate for Actual Reform

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

-4

t-statistic on Placebo Taxable Saving Crowd-out Estimate

-2
0
2
4
t-statistic on Placebo Taxable Saving Crowd-out Estimate

6

d) CDF of Placebo p values for Crowd-out Estimates: Threshold

Means

Estimates

1

1

c) CDF of Placebo p values for Crowd-out Estimates: Trimmed

Estimate for Actual Reform
Permutation-Based P value = 0.0027

0.6
0.2

0.4

CDF of Placebo p-value

0.6
0.4
0

0

0.2

CDF of Placebo p-value

0.8

0.8

Estimate for Actual Reform
Permutation-Based P value = 0.0010

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

0

1

p-value on Placebo Taxable Saving Crowd-out Estimate

.2
.4
.6
.8
p-value on Placebo Taxable Saving Crowd-out Estimate

1

Notes: Panel A shows an empirical CDF of estimated t statistics for the impact of placebo subsidy changes on the crowd-out in
taxable savings accounts per DKr change in individual pension contributions estimated using the MPS specification in Table
VII. We construct this figure as follows. Let tp denote a year between 1999 and 2006 and Ȳpt a placebo cutoff for the top tax
bracket. We consider a grid of values for Ȳpt from DKr 200,000 below to DKr 200,000 above the actual top tax cutoff in year
t in increments of DKr 10,000. For each combination of {tp , Ȳpt }, we re-estimate the MPS specification in (11) using 2SLS,
redefining the regressors based on the placebo variables and restricting the sample to 3 years before and after the placebo
reform year and incomes within DKr 75K of the placebo top tax cutoff in those years. As in the baseline specification, standard
errors are clustered at the DKr 5,000 income bin level. The figure plots the cumulative distribution function of t-statistics
for all the placebos, excluding the coefficients from 1999 with Ȳpt within DKr 100,000 of the true cutoff to avoid biasing the
placebo tests with the true treatment effect. The vertical line shows the actual t-statistic obtained in Column 2 of Table VII.
Panel B replicates Panel A, using the threshold specification in Column 5 of Table VII instead. Panels C and D plot the
empirical CDF of p values corresponding to the t-statistics in Panels A and B. These two panels also show the 45 degree line
as a reference; under the exchangeability assumption, the p values should cluster around this 45 degree line if inference based
on the parametric clustered standard errors is valid. Both figures also report the non-parametric permutation-based p value,
computed using the empirical cdf.

81

APPENDIX FIGURE VI
Active vs. Passive Choice and Responses to Subsidies and Employer Pensions
a) Extensive Margin Substitution from Capital to Annuity Pensions in 1999

25
20
15
5

10

ȕ = 17.6%
(0.6%)

0

% Extensive Margin Substitution in 1999

30

by Frequency of Pension Changes in Other Years

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentage of Other Years with Change in Pension Contributions

b) Pass-Through of Employer Pensions to Total Pensions for Firm Switchers

100
98
96
94
90

92

ȕ = -0.096
(0.004)

88

Pass-Through of Emp. Pensions to Total Pensions

by Frequency of Pension Changes in Other Years

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentage of Other Years with Change in Individual Pension Contributions

Notes: Panel A is a binned scatter plot. The y variable is an indicator for extensive margin substitution in response to the
1999 capital pension reform, defined as exiting capital pensions and raising annuity pension contributions. The x variable is
the fraction of other years in which an individual changes individual capital or annuity pension contributions relative to the
prior year. This plot corresponds to the regression in Column 3 of Table VIII; see notes to Table VIII for further details of
sample specification and notes to Figure II for details on construction of binned scatter plots. The best-fit line, coefficient,
and standard error in Panel A come Column 3 of Table VIII. Panel B plots pass-through from employer pensions to total
pensions vs. the same x axis variable as in Panel A. To construct this figure, we first split individuals into vingtiles based on
the fraction of other years in which an individual changes individual capital or annuity pension contributions relative to the
prior year (note that this procedure results in fewer than 20 groups because of point-masses in the distribution). We then
estimate and plot the pass-through coefficient of employer pensions to total pensions, estimated from a separate regression in
each bin using the specification in Table IIIA, Column 1. This figure is a non-parametric version of the regression in Column
5 of Table VIII; we report the coefficient and standard error from that specification. See notes to Table VIII for further details
on sample and variable definitions.

82

APPENDIX FIGURE VII
Heterogeneity in Responses to Subsidies and Employer Pensions by Wealth
a) Extensive Margin Substitution from Capital to Annuity Pensions in 1999

20
15

ȕ = 7.8%
(0.5)

10

% Extensive Margin Substitution in 1999

25

by Wealth/Income Ratio

0

0.5

1.0

1.5

Wealth/Income Ratio in 1998
b) Pass-Through of Employer Pensions to Total Pensions for Firm Switchers

80
60
40
20

ȕ = -0.435
(0.005)

0

Pass-Through of Employer Pensions to Total Savings

by Wealth/Income Ratio

0

0.5

1.0

1.5

Wealth/Income Ratio in Year Prior to Switch

Notes: These figures show the heterogeneity by wealth/income ratios in extensive margin substitution in response to the
reduction in the subsidy (Panel A) and pass-through of employer pensions to total saving (Panel B). The two panels replicate
Panels A and B of Appendix Figure VI, changing the x axis variable to the wealth/income ratio, measured as non-pension
assets divided by labor income. In Panel A, we measure the wealth income ratio in 1998, the year before the subsidy reduction;
in Panel B, we measure it before the firm switch. In Panel B, we measure pass-through to total saving (rather than total
pension contributions, as in Appendix Figure VI). See notes to Appendix Figure VI for additional details on construction of
these figures. Panel A corresponds to Table IXa, Column 1, while Panel B is a non-parametric analog of the regression in
Table IXb, Column 1. See notes to Table IX for further details on sample and variable definitions.

83

