                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   CURRENCY UNIONS, PRODUCT INTRODUCTIONS, AND THE REAL EXCHANGE
                                RATE

                                          Alberto Cavallo
                                           Brent Neiman
                                          Roberto Rigobon

                                        Working Paper 18563
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18563


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




Previously circulated as "Product Introductions, Currency Unions, and the Real Exchange Rate." We
thank the editors, Robert Barro and Andrei Shleifer, as well as four anonymous referees for very helpful
suggestions. We benefited from comments by Mark Aguiar, Fernando Alvarez, Maria Coppola, Steve
Davis, Charles Engel, Joe Gruber, Chang-Tai Hsieh, John Huizinga, Erik Hurst, Anil Kashyap, Pete
Klenow, Randy Kroszner, Emi Nakamura, and Kathryn Spier. Ariel Burstein, Mario Crucini, and Gita
Gopinath gave excellent discussions. Diego Aparicio, Eric Hernandez, Lionel Potier, and David Sukhin
provided outstanding research assistance. This research was supported in part by the Neubauer Family
Foundation at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The Appendix that accompanies
the paper can be found on the authors' web pages. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18563.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Alberto Cavallo, Brent Neiman, and Roberto Rigobon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Currency Unions, Product Introductions, and the Real Exchange Rate
Alberto Cavallo, Brent Neiman, and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 18563
November 2012, Revised November 2013
JEL No. E3,F3,F4

                                               ABSTRACT

We use a novel dataset of online prices of identical goods sold by four large global retailers in dozens
of countries to study good-level real exchange rates and their aggregated behavior. First, in contrast
to the prior literature, we demonstrate that the law of one price holds very well within currency unions
for tens of thousands of goods sold by each of the retailers, implying good-level real exchange rates
often equal to one. Prices of these same goods exhibit large deviations from the law of one price outside
of currency unions, even when the nominal exchange rate is pegged. This clarifies that the common
currency per se, and not simply the lack of nominal volatility, is important in reducing cross-country
price dispersion. Second, we derive a new decomposition that shows that good-level real exchange
rates in our data predominantly reflect differences in prices at the time products are first introduced,
as opposed to the component emerging from heterogeneous passthrough or from nominal rigidities
during the life of the good. Further, these international relative prices measured at the time of introduction
move together with the nominal exchange rate. This stands in sharp contrast to pricing behavior in
models where all price rigidity for any given good is due simply to costly price adjustment for that
good.


Alberto Cavallo                                       Roberto Rigobon
MIT - Sloan School of Management                      MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-512                              100 Main Street, E62-516
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Cambridge, MA 02142
acavallo@mit.edu                                      and NBER
                                                      rigobon@mit.edu
Brent Neiman
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
brent.neiman@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction
For hundreds of years, international economists have taken great interest in cross-country dif-
ferences in the prices of identical goods (or baskets of goods) when translated into a common
currency. The “Law of One Price” (LOP) for traded goods across countries is a fundamental
building block of standard models in open-economy macroeconomics. Minor deviations from the
LOP are not surprising in a world with barriers to arbitrage such as transport costs. A large
literature, however, documents its surprisingly large failure for many traded goods and tries to
explain the resulting volatility in the relative price of consumption across countries, or the real
exchange rate (RER).1 This paper uses a novel dataset of online prices for identical traded goods
sold in several dozen countries to shed light on the determinants of good-level and aggregate
RERs and their dynamics.
    We demonstrate that the LOP holds very well within the euro zone for tens of thousands of
goods, implying traded RERs approximately equal to one. We show this holds for four different
global retailers in three unrelated industries. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
documentation of the LOP holding internationally for a wide variety of differentiated goods, and
we show it holds across multiple countries with different and time-varying tax rates. Physical
distance, political and tax territories, language, and culture are all often thought of as forces that
segment markets. Our results imply, by contrast, that the choice of currency units is far more
important for defining the boundaries between markets for some goods.
    Deviations from the LOP are significantly larger for these same products for countries with
different currencies, even if their nominal exchange rate (NER) is pegged. For example, prices
in the euro zone typically differ from those in Sweden, which has a floating exchange rate, and
also from those in Denmark, which pegs its currency to the euro. This clarifies that the common
currency per se, and not simply the lack of nominal volatility, is important in reducing cross-
country price dispersion. We complement this evidence by showing that the LOP with the United
States holds more for dollarized countries like Ecuador and El Salvador than for countries like
Hong Kong or Jordan, which have their own currency but peg it to the U.S. dollar.
    We introduce a framework to decompose the good-level RER into the RER at the time a good
is introduced, a component reflecting price stickiness together with NER volatility, and a residual
component due to heterogeneous passthrough which we refer to as reflecting changes in demand.
   1
     Cassel (1918) first used the term “Purchasing Power Parity” (PPP) to describe the condition in which there
are no such cross-country differences in the price of consumption and therefore the RER equals one. See Rogoff
(1996) for a history and overview of the high persistence and volatility of the RER, what has been termed the
“PPP puzzle.”



                                                      1
We find that the majority of LOP deviations occur at the time a good is introduced, rather than
emerging subsequently due to price changes or due to price stickiness and NER movements. As a
corollary, typical measures of the traded RER that are constructed using only price changes may
differ significantly from the underlying object they are designed to capture.
       Given the importance of the good-level RER at the time of product introduction, we next
study how relative introduction prices evolve with the NER. We find that the RER at the time
of introduction largely moves together with the nominal rate. This is evidence against a model in
which previous temporary shocks to the RER are fully eliminated at the time of a price change
as, after all, a price change inherently occurs when a new product is introduced.
       Our data include daily prices for all products sold by Apple, IKEA, H&M, and Zara through
their online retail stores in each country. We use the last recorded price in each week to form a
weekly dataset that spans various subsets of 85 countries and various time periods from October
2008 to May 2013. Studying online prices has the obvious advantage of allowing for the collection
of enormous amounts of data at very high frequency. Online sales already represent a large and
growing share of total global consumption, but we believe our results are no less informative even
if a reader cares only about offline sales for these stores. We provide evidence that online prices
are representative of offline prices for all of our retailers. The customer service departments for all
four companies state that the online and offline prices are identical up to shipping costs and, in
limited instances, local taxes or store-specific special promotions. We also visited several physical
retail stores in the United States to confirm this to be the case.
       The pricing patterns we identify cannot be oddities associated with a particular firm’s, indus-
try’s, or country’s characteristics. These companies are among the world’s very largest retailers,
are headquartered in three different countries, and cover three different industries which account
for more than 20 percent of U.S. consumption expenditures in goods.2 Further, we corroborate
using a smaller cross-section of prices that the same qualitative relationship between price dis-
persion and currency regime also holds for four additional large global retailers in apparel and
technology: Adidas, Dell, Mango, and Nike. Together, this gives us confidence that inference
from our data is appropriately applied to the broader basket of branded and traded goods and is
relevant for understanding international macroeconomic dynamics.
   2
    At the time of writing, Apple, an American company, is the world’s largest company by market capitalization.
According to the research firm Euromonitor International (the source for all the market research described in this
paragraph), Apple accounted in 2011 for 5.4 percent of the $800 billion global consumer electronics market. This
makes it the third largest global firm by sales in that industry. Since at least 2007, more than half of Apple’s
total retail sales came from online sales. IKEA was founded in Sweden and is the world’s largest furniture retailer,
accounting for 4.9 percent of the $500 billion global furniture market. H&M, also a Swedish company, and Zara,
from Spain, are the world’s fourth and third largest clothing retailers respectively. The combined sales of H&M
and Zara exceed $30 billion globally.


                                                         2
       Our results are important for a variety of reasons and are relevant for multiple research areas.
First, they shed light on the determinants of market segmentation and the pricing problem faced
by international retailers. Second, they improve our understanding of traded RER dynamics
and carry significant policy implications. For example, the theory of optimal currency areas
stresses that a common currency for two countries makes more sense when inflationary shocks
in those countries are more synchronized. Our results suggest this synchronization may emerge
endogenously to the choice of currency regime.3 Relatedly, because traded good prices within a
common currency area may respond less to country-specific shocks, our results are informative
about the nature and efficacy of “internal devaluations.” Third, our finding that NERs and RERs
move together even at the time of product introduction suggests that local currency pricing may
be the most appropriate modeling assumption, even for periods of time longer than the life of a
typical product.4 This result argues in support of models with variable flexible price markups and
stands in sharp contrast to the pricing behavior in models where all price rigidity for any given
good is due simply to costly price adjustment for that good. In this sense, our results are also
important for closed-economy macroeconomic models aiming to understand pricing dynamics and
monetary non-neutrality.
       The results are also suggestive of the potential value of incorporating consumer psychology,
firm organizational frictions, and market norms into macro models of price setting. For example,
firms may equalize prices within currency unions but not outside of them, including in pegged
regimes, for fear of angering customers that can easily compare prices across borders. In this
sense, the fact that these firms sell both in stores and through the Internet, which facilitates
such price comparisons, may have played an important role in generating these pricing strategies.
Alternatively, perhaps establishing pricing departments within large multinational firms involves
a very large fixed cost. Firms therefore treat countries that peg their exchange rates differently
from those in a currency union because there is a greater likelihood of a future regime change that
would then require paying additional costs. None of these possibilities can on their own explain
all of our results, but many of our findings argue that these considerations should feature more
prominently in the macroeconomics price-setting literature.
       Our work builds on a long literature studying sources of RER movements and relating this
   3
     Before the euro’s introduction in 1999, popular discussion and academic research on its potential impact
often focused on increased competition and the cross-country convergence of prices. For example, Goldberg and
Verboven (2005) find some evidence of convergence in auto prices after the introduction of the euro, while Parsley
and Wei (2008) and Engel and Rogers (2004) do not find such evidence in price data on the Big Mac and other
consumer goods.
   4
     Our empirical results offer further motivation for Berka, Devereux, and Engel (2012), which argues that local
currency pricing undermines traditional arguments made in favor of flexible exchange rates.



                                                        3
movement to the choice of currency regime. Mussa (1986), using aggregate price indices, showed
that RER volatility increased markedly with the breakdown of the Breton Woods system of
fixed exchange rates. Engel (1999) demonstrated that movements in the RER did not reflect
the relative price within countries of traded and non-traded goods, as in Balassa (1964) and
Samuelson (1964). Rather, Engel showed that the bulk of RER volatility comes from movements
in the traded-good component, a striking result that holds at horizons ranging from 1 month to
30 years.5 Motivated in part by this result, much of the literature has focused on explanations
for RER movements among traded goods, and we follow in this tradition.
    Many papers have focused on the LOP deviations that emerge among traded goods due to
movement in the NER in models with price stickiness, as in Devereux, Engel, and Storgaard (2004)
and Devereux and Engel (2007). Crucini, Shintani, and Tsuruga (2010) adds sticky information
to a sticky price model to match the persistence of good-level LOP deviations. Others have
focused on models with exchange rate passthrough and pricing to market even after prices change,
including Atkeson and Burstein (2008) and Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010).
    Some papers have looked at disaggregated price data, including in levels. Gopinath, Gourin-
chas, Hsieh, and Li (2011), Broda and Weinstein (2008), and Burstein and Jaimovich (2009) doc-
ument large cross-country price differences for identical goods sold in United States and Canada.6
Crucini, Telmer, and Zachariadis (2005) examined prices across Europe from 1975-1990 for several
thousand narrowly defined categories of goods such as “Dried almonds” or a “Record player”.
They conclude that the distribution of LOP deviations are generally centered around zero and
increase in dispersion the less tradable the good is and the more non-traded inputs are used to
produce the good. Crucini and Shintani (2008) use similar data to find that the persistence of
LOP deviations in the cross-section increases with the importance of the distribution margin.
    Finally, Baxter and Landry (2012) also study IKEA products by using 16 years of catalog
prices in 6 countries. They detail a rich set of statistics on prices, passthrough, and product
creation and destruction. They do not report our finding that the LOP is far more likely to hold
within currency unions, but they do find that LOP deviations for France and Germany move
closely together. They additionally note that the scale of LOP deviations is similar for new and
continuing goods and use annual data to demonstrate a large covariance between the nominal
exchange rate and real exchange rate for goods that are new in both countries that year. These
   5
     See also Rogers and Jenkins (1995), which emphasizes the larger role of LOP deviations in the traded sector
compared with the relative price of traded and non-traded goods.
   6
     A large literature focuses on the contribution international borders make to price dispersion. See, for example,
Parsley and Wei (2001) and Engel and Rogers (1996) as well as more recent work including Gorodnichenko and
Tesar (2009), Borraz, Cavallo, Rigobon, and Zipitria (2012), and Cosar, Grieco, and Tintelnot (2012).



                                                         4
facts are closely related to and consistent with our documentation of the co-movement of the
RER and NER at the time of product introductions. The implications of this co-movement for
the measurement of RERs closely relates to Nakamura and Steinsson (2012) and Gagnon, Mandel,
and Vigfusson (2012).


2         Scraped Online Prices from Global Retailers
Our dataset is comprised of prices scraped off the Internet by The Billion Prices Project, an
academic research initiative at MIT. These pricing data are introduced in Cavallo (2012) and
also used in Cavallo and Rigobon (2012), though neither paper compares the prices of identical
goods across multiple countries, the focus of this paper. The bulk of our analyses study prices
for four global retailers for which we can precisely match prices of identical goods sold in many
geographies. We are able to match over one hundred thousand unique items across dozens of
countries because the firms’ web pages organize products using their own company-wide product
ID codes.
        The data include daily prices for the four retailers in some subset of 85 countries during some
subset of the period from October 2008 to May 2013. Prices are generally quoted inclusive of
taxes and exclusive of within-country shipping costs.7 In the absence of occasional errors in
our scraping algorithm and idiosyncratic in-store specials, our dataset includes all products sold
online by these stores for the relevant countries and time periods and also reflects sale prices.
Table 1 gives a basic description of the country, product, and time coverage in our data. Row (i)
indicates that we track prices for nearly 120,000 products, including more than 11,000 for Apple,
69,000 for IKEA, 14,000 for H&M, and 22,000 for Zara during varying subperiods of the time
ranges listed in row (iv). IKEA has significantly more products than the other retailers and Zara
covers significantly more countries.8
        Scraping errors or changes in these companies’ web pages occasionally create missing price
observations. We fill in the gaps between observed prices using the assumption that prices re-
mained unchanged during the missing period. This procedure may cause us to miss some price
    7
     The United States and Canada are the exceptions. We adjust all U.S. and Canadian prices upward by 6.5 and
12 percent, respectively, to reflect the average local tax rates in 2012. We obtain information on state sales tax
rates for the United States from The Tax Foundation, on province sales tax rates for Canada from the TMF group,
and on VAT rates for other countries from Deloitte. For countries other than the United States and Canada, the
same sales (or value added) tax typically applies throughout the entire country. Shipping costs do not appear to
be a hidden source of price discrimination. A limited test we conducted for Apple products, for example, showed
that the same shipping cost was charged for all destinations within the euro zone.
   8
     There are a number of small countries in which Zara has local stores and a country-specific web page, but
does not actually make online sales. Zara representatives confirmed that the online prices also equal the offline
prices in these countries.


                                                        5
changes, particularly when there are sale prices that revert back to their prior value. This concern
applies differently for Apple and IKEA compared to the apparel retailers. Apple and IKEA have
the most historical data and the longest periods with scraping gaps. In principle, therefore, our
treatment of gaps in the data could be of greatest concern for these companies. However, as we
elaborate below, their prices are highly sticky and do not typically exhibit high frequency sales
behavior seen in other pricing contexts. Though the prices of long-lived apparel items are far less
sticky (for example, roughly all apparel items in our data for more than a year have experienced
at least one price change), clothing items typically have durations in our data about one-fifth as
long as the non-apparel items, reflecting both more recent scraping of their web pages and the
importance of seasonality in apparel. As such, though the procedure for filling in gaps in the data
may incorrectly omit some temporary price changes, the impact of these errors would likely be
short-lived in apparel retailers.
   We do not have purchase quantities or individual product weights, so all our quantitative
analyses apportion equal weight to all goods within each retailer and country pair and equal
weight to all country pairs within each retailer. When we aggregate across retailers, we give
equal weight to each available store-pair combination. For example, if a country pair has twice
as many IKEA goods as Apple products, then each individual IKEA price would be treated as
containing less information for that country pair than each individual Apple price. When we
aggregate across countries and pairs, however, one store may be given more total weight as its
products may be available for more bilateral country pairs. We exclude the roughly 2 percent
of goods for which we observe implausibly large price changes or for which the good’s relative
price across countries is implausibly large. Additional details on the data coverage, web-scraping
process, and our assembly and cleaning of the data are included in the Appendix, which can be
found on the authors’ web pages.
   Relative to prior studies that use manufacturing or traded good price indices to understand
RER levels or movements, our dataset offers several clear benefits. First, by matching the iden-
tical product, we avoid the concern that RER movements misleadingly reflect heterogeneity in
the basket of goods or biases that emerge due to the aggregation across goods as highlighted in
Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn, and Rey (2005). Second, by comparing the same product and retailer com-
bination, we can distinguish cross-country pricing differences from cross-chain pricing differences,
which Nakamura, Nakamura, and Nakamura (2011) argue explains a large share of total variation
in price dynamics. Third, by observing price levels at the date of introduction we are able to
reveal what turns out to be the largest component of the RER in our data, a component which
is by definition ignored by matched model price indices that are constructed only using observed

                                                 6
price changes for continuing goods. Finally, in measuring prices at a very high frequency, we can
more confidently pinpoint the role of nominal rigidity in contributing to the RER.
       Compared to prior work that matched goods at the barcode level, we emphasize that our data
allow for significantly more cross-country comparisons, variation that proves essential to uncover
our results on the role of currency unions. Further, a typical large bilateral country pair in our
data will have half of the total products available across both countries also available in each
country, which gives confidence that composition differences are not driving our key results. By
comparison, these previous studies typically match less than 5 percent of the total goods.
       There are three primary concerns that may arise from our focus on the online prices of four
retailers. First, one might reasonably worry that prices posted online differ from prices paid in
physical stores and outlets. Internet transactions are not only a large and growing share of the
market, but online prices are highly representative of offline prices. We contacted each of the
companies over email or by phone and received confirmation that online and physical stores have
identical prices for all four retailers, with only occasional deviations for in-store specials. We also
checked this ourselves by sending research assistants to two Apple stores, two H&M stores, two
Zara stores, and the only IKEA store near Boston and confirmed for 10 randomly selected items
in each store that the online and offline prices (excluding taxes) were exactly identical.9 There is
strong direct and indirect evidence that Internet prices in our data are highly representative of,
and typically identical to, prices in physical stores.
       Second, one might believe that these companies are unusual in that they typically list a single
price per country, a finding in juxtaposition to much of the literature on price dispersion. In fact,
if one excludes groceries and related products, the policy of offering a single price per country is
the norm for large retailers that sell online. Of the 10 largest U.S. retailers, only Walgreens and
Walmart use zip codes to localize prices shown over the Internet.10 We scraped the web pages
of these two retailers and found that only 15 percent of the items sold by Walgreens are labeled
with “prices vary by store,” implying that at least 85 percent of Walgreens’ products sold online
have the same price throughout the United States. A similar analysis suggests that more than 90
   9
      In fact, this also held true for the one item in those 10 from IKEA which happened to be selling at a discount.
Figure 1(a) shows a screen shot of that product on IKEA’s U.S. website, a “HEMNES coffee table, gray-brown.”
The price is clearly marked as $99.99, and one can see the previous higher price of $119.00 listed above the new
price and crossed off with a black line. Figure 1(b) shows a photograph of the price tag of the identical object
found in a physical IKEA store on the same day, listed at the same $99.99 price.
   10
      According to Deloitte (2013), the remaining 8 “top-10” U.S. retailers include Kroger, Costco, Home Depot,
Target, CVS, Best Buy, Lowe’s, and Amazon.com. None of these companies requests zip code information before
quoting online prices (Kroger is the only one that does not offer any prices online). We also matched online and
offline prices for about 200 total items from these stores and found that a bit more than half had identical prices
and most deviations were quite small.



                                                         7
percent of items sold online by Walmart have the same price throughout the country. We further
looked at a list of the top 100 retailers by U.S. revenues according to the U.S. National Retail
Federation and found that of the 70 retailers that sell online, only 21 require customers to enter
a zip code to see local prices, and 13 of these 21 are grocery stores.
       Third, one may wonder about the extent to which our results are representative of the broader
basket of tradable goods. Our data may not allow us to better understand the cross-country
pricing policies of small firms, to study pricing of commodities or intermediate goods, or to learn
about practices in, say, the automobile market. Branded technology, furniture, and apparel goods,
however, are particularly interesting to study because they are often produced in one plant or
location, are sold in many countries by the same retailer, and exhibit significant price stickiness
relative to homogeneous goods.11 The companies included in our data are among the very largest
technology, furniture, and clothing companies in the world and on their own might constitute
a non-trivial share of total expenditures on traded goods. Further, we demonstrate with more
limited data that the key qualitative patterns we identify also hold in prices from other large
global retailers in these sectors including Adidas, Dell, Mango, and Nike. Using CPI weights
from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, we calculate that these three industries cover more
than 20 percent of final consumption expenditures on goods.


3        The Law of One Price and Exchange Rate Regimes
We now introduce notation and define good-level RERs. We start by showing that log good-level
RERs deviate significantly from zero (i.e. LOP fails) outside of currency unions, even when the
NER is pegged. By contrast, we then demonstrate that the LOP holds well within the euro zone
and frequently holds between countries that use the U.S. dollar as legal tender. We show this
result is robust to restrictions on the value of the goods, to conditioning on other plausible drivers
of good-level RERs, to consideration of goods that are not branded by the retailer, and to the
use of prices from several additional retailers for which we have a more limited set of data.
       Let pi (z, t) denote the log price in local currency of good z in country i. We define eij (t) to
be the log of the value of one unit of country j’s currency translated into country i’s currency.
The log good-level RER qij (t) is defined as the difference between prices in countries i and j after
  11
    IKEA, H&M, and Zara generally sell their own branded goods. Of all the products sold by Apple, however,
only a (highly visible) minority are Apple branded items. We demonstrate below that our results also hold for
Apple’s sales of non-Apple brands.




                                                     8
being translated into a common currency:

                               qij (z, t) = pi (z, t) − eij (t) − pj (z, t) .

It equals zero when the LOP holds exactly.
   Figure 2 plots the distribution of the log good-level RERs qij pooling all goods z and weeks t for
various countries i with country j fixed as the United States. The y-axes indicate the percentage
of observations corresponding to each bin of x-axis values. Values concentrated around zero
indicate goods which, after being translated into common currencies, have the same price. The
histograms include all available weekly relative prices in our dataset other than those exceeding
0.75 log point in magnitude, a set of outliers typically representing about one percent of the total
prices. Frequency weights are used so that the total contribution of goods from each store is
equalized. The vertical red dotted line indicates the average value (using these same weights) of
qij across all products.
   While patterns vary across bilateral relationships, the scale and frequency of LOP deviations
are striking. Even when comparing identical branded and tradable products sold by the same
firm, one routinely finds goods with prices in other countries that differ from the U.S. price by
0.25 log point or more. The distributions are generally centered near zero, but it is not uncommon
to find countries like Japan where prices average nearly 20 percent more than prices in the United
States. Note that even in Canada or China, whose NERs with the U.S. dollar have been relatively
stable, good-level log RERs diverge significantly from zero. Across all the bilaterals, no individual
RER bin accounts for more than 10 percent of the total observations.
   Figure 3 shows these same histograms but separately for each of the stores and demonstrates
that these patterns are broadly representative. Some bilateral pairings, such as Mexico and the
United States for IKEA, are missing due to lack of store data or matched price observations. There
are pricing differences across stores, and the dispersion in good-level RERs clearly seems largest
for IKEA and smallest in the apparel companies. All, however, exhibit significant deviations from
the LOP and share other common regularities such as the higher average prices in Japan.
   By contrast, we find compelling evidence that the LOP generally holds in European countries
that share a single currency and also holds quite frequently between countries that use U.S. dollars
as their domestic currency.




                                                     9
3.1       The Euro Zone
In Figure 4 we plot the distribution of the log good-level RERs for many European countries
(plus the United States) relative to Spain. Together with Spain, countries including Austria,
Germany, Finland, France, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, and Portugal are members in the euro
zone, a single currency area. The prices for most of the tens of thousands of distinct products
sold in those countries are identical and we therefore see huge mass at zero in these histograms
(note the differences in scales of the y-axes).12 This is the first evidence that we are aware of
documenting the LOP holding across countries for a wide variety of identical traded differentiated
goods.
       Prices in Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland (not shown), by contrast, do not ex-
hibit this same adherence to the LOP. These countries are outside of the euro zone, and their
histograms look similar to that of the United States. This is despite the fact that they are all
parts of continental Europe with similar geographies and demand structures. Denmark and Swe-
den are members of the European Union and are subject to the same tariffs and product market
regulations as is Spain. In addition, Denmark has a strong peg against the euro. This demon-
strates that being in the euro zone per se, rather than simply eliminating nominal volatility, is
important for good-level RERs.
       A large share of these goods are likely produced in a single plant at the same marginal cost.13
Therefore, the dispersion of good-level RERs in Figures 2 and 4 suggest that companies price to
market and have desired markups which differ significantly across countries, even across similar
countries like Sweden and Finland. However, companies forgo this markup variation within the
euro zone.14 This implies that the crucial factor defining companies’ abilities to charge different
prices may not be shipping frictions, national border effects, or cultural or regulatory boundaries.
After all, the differences in physical, cultural, and political distance between Spain and Finland
seem highly similar to these differences between Spain and Sweden or Denmark. Rather, it implies
  12
      It is not the case that consumers in one country can simply order directly from another country’s web page.
If a shipping address in Madrid is inputted into Apple’s German webpage, for example, the customer is either
automatically re-routed to Apple’s Spanish webpage or is simply not permitted to enter Spain as the country of
the delivery address.
   13
      For example, Apple’s 2011 annual report states (on page 9) that “substantially all of the Company’s hardware
products are manufactured by outsourcing partners primarily located in Asia.”
   14
      We reiterate that these prices are inclusive of sales taxes, which exhibit variation across time and space,
further implying that companies are forgoing otherwise desirable markup variation within the euro zone. Prices
inclusive of tax rates are generally identical in the euro zone even though value added tax rates varied from 19
percent in Germany to 23 percent in Portugal. Similarly, there have been many tax changes in our data, such as
Spain’s increase from 16 percent in 2008 to 18 percent in 2010 and to 21 percent at the end of our data. These
country-specific changes do not appear to have produced changes in the degree to which the LOP held for prices
(inclusive of taxes) in the euro zone.



                                                       10
that companies believe that having to consider a price with different currency units is the most
salient friction, even if the different currency units can be translated at a fixed rate as with the
Danish krone and the euro.
   We use Spain as the base country because we have more data for it across the four stores
we study. Zara, however, divides the euro zone into two regions: one with Spain and Portugal
and the other with the remaining euro zone countries other than Greece and Andorra. The LOP
generally holds within each of those regions, though prices differ by about 25 percent between
the regions (they are lower in Spain/Portugal). This is why there are similar masses of LOP
deviations near 0.25 log point in the histograms for most euro zone countries in Figure 4. In this
sense, Figure 4 understates the degree to which prices are equalized within the euro zone.
   Figure 5 shows that this phenomena is not specific to a particular store and in fact holds for
all four of the retailers. The LOP holds very well for tens of thousands of goods sold by Apple,
IKEA, and H&M across most of the euro zone. We split the results for Zara into its two euro zone
pricing blocks. The left two columns of Figure 5(d) underneath the text “vs. Spain” shows that
the LOP holds perfectly for Zara between Spain and Portugal. The right two columns underneath
the text “vs. Germany” shows that the LOP holds perfectly for Zara between Germany and euro
zone countries other than Spain and Portugal. When data are available comparing prices in Spain
and Norway or Sweden or Denmark, however, the LOP never holds to a meaningful extent and
the distributions generally look similar to those between Spain and the United States.
   We note that, conveniently, this result corroborates our matching algorithm and reduces con-
cern about measurement error. One might have worried that the huge dispersion in good-level
RERs between the United States and Spain followed simply from the difficulty in matching iden-
tical products. The fact that LOP holds so frequently for the bulk of these products within the
euro zone would be too coincidental if these were not in fact identical goods.


3.2    Dollarization
Given the large quantity of data on prices of multiple retailers in Europe, we view the results
for the euro zone as the most robust demonstration of the importance of currency unions for
LOP. After seeing these results, though, the natural question is whether the euro zone itself is
critical for LOP as opposed to common currency areas more generally. We now present results
comparing dollarized countries (i.e. countries that use the U.S. dollar as their currency) with
countries that have their own currencies which are pegged to the U.S. dollar. We demonstrate,
consistent with the euro zone results, that LOP holds significantly better between dollarized
countries than between dollar pegs.

                                                11
    In particular, we compare the distribution of good-level RERs with the United States for
Ecuador and El Salvador, countries where prices are quoted and goods transacted in U.S. dollars,
with the equivalent distributions for Bahrain, Hong Kong, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Oman,
Panama, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates, countries with their own currencies
that are strongly pegged to the U.S. dollar.15 Figure 6 shows the distribution of weekly log good-
level RERs for these countries relative to the United States. The histograms for Ecuador and El
Salvador are the only ones that spike distinctly at zero, with substantial mass where the LOP
holds almost perfectly. Of the products sold in countries with their own currencies that are pegged
to the U.S. dollar, less than 10 percent have a log RER with the United States with an absolute
value less than 0.01. Of those sold in Ecuador and El Salvador, more than 40 percent do.16
    The evidence from dollarized countries corroborates the evidence from the euro zone. Currency
unions have striking implications for good-level RERs that do not simply emerge due to the lack
of nominal volatility.


3.3     Competition Policy
Can competition policy explain our finding that prices are generally equalized within currency
unions? We find this possibility to be highly unlikely for four reasons. First, there is no European
Union (EU) law requiring retail prices to be equalized across member countries.17 According to
Bailey and Whish (2012), “The Court of Justice in United Brands v. Commission ruled that ‘it
was permissible for a supplier to charge whatever local conditions of supply and demand dictate,
that is to say that there is no obligation to charge a uniform price throughout the EU.’”
    Second, even if firms mistakenly believed there to be such a law, it would apply at the EU
level, not at the euro zone level. This would be inconsistent with our finding that all four of
our companies generally charge the same price in the euro zone and a different price in Denmark
and Sweden, both of which are within the EU. Third, while we show that most goods obey
  15
     Most of these countries match at least several thousand items with the United States, with Zara products
typically constituting their majority (or entirety). For some of these countries, Zara’s web page does not allow
for online purchases but rather advertises the prices that customers would pay offline in that country. We label
Panama as “Dollarized (Weaker Form)” because both the U.S. dollar and Panamanian balboa coins are legal
tender, and Zara’s prices are quoted there in balboas.
  16
     For this analysis only, we use the U.S. price exclusive rather than inclusive of taxes to highlight that these
spikes are then located at precisely zero. As we discuss below, it is intriguing that the LOP holds among euro
countries inclusive of taxes and appears to hold exactly for the dollarized countries exclusive of U.S. taxes. In
the quantitative work that follows, we instead use values shifted about 0.06 relative to those plotted in these
histograms to account for the value after including U.S. taxes. In this sense, one might consider our subsequent
quantitative analyses as understating the degree to which LOP holds in the dollarized countries.
  17
     We further confirmed this by consulting antitrust lawyers and the appropriate division of the European Com-
mission.



                                                        12
the LOP for most bilaterals in the euro zone, all four of the companies have a large number of
exceptions. As we showed in Figure 5(d), Zara charges different prices in Spain and Portugal
compared with the rest of the euro zone countries. Fourth, competition policy cannot explain our
results for dollarized countries as Ecuador and El Salvador are clearly outside the jurisdiction of
U.S. antitrust authorities.


3.4       A Quantitative Analysis
To summarize quantitatively our conclusions on the importance of exchange rate regime for good-
level RERs, we start by characterizing the unconditional mean of the absolute value of good-level
log RERs by currency regime.18 We consider different subsets of goods based on the absolute
level of prices to demonstrate that our findings are not driven by cheap items. Next, we report
the percentage of items for which the LOP holds in each currency regime. Finally, we introduce
other observables that likely influence relative prices and run regressions to report the conditional
mean magnitude of good-level log RERs by currency regime.

3.4.1      Average Absolute Values of Good-Level RERs
                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                  P
We calculate the average absolute value of the log RER for each good over all weeks t,               t ktk |qij   (z, t) |,
and report the unconditional mean of these good-level log RERs in Panel A of Table 2. As above,
we use weights that equalize the contribution of each country-pair and store combination. Rows
(i) to (iii) report the average values from our full sample. The first column of those rows shows
that the typical magnitude of good-level log RERs equals about 8 percent within currency unions,
12 percent for pegged regimes, and 19 percent for floating exchange rate regimes. Consistent with
the histograms presented earlier, countries in a currency union have significantly smaller LOP de-
viations than countries with their own currencies, including those with nominal pegs. Further, the
scale of LOP deviations in currency unions are smaller than for pegged regimes, and significantly
smaller than for floating regimes, in all four stores. The gap between average good-level RERs in
currency unions compared with floats equals 9 percentage points for IKEA, 10 percentage points
for Zara, and 12 percentage points for Apple and H&M.
       These important differences in good-level RERs are not driven by cheap items with very low
  18
     We consider as currency unions bilateral pairs among euro zone countries, Andorra, Monaco, and Montenegro
as well as bilateral pairs among the United States, Ecuador, El Salvador, and Panama. Dollar pegs include
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, China (before June 2010), Honduras (before June 2012), Hong Kong, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Macao, Kazakhstan, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria (before September 2011), UAE, Ukraine, and
Venezuela. Euro pegs include Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Denmark, Lithuania, and Latvia. These include
all countries in our data with exchange rate code “1” from the “course” classification in Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and
Rogoff (2008).


                                                       13
price levels. In rows (iv) to (vi) we report the same statistics when calculated only on goods
where the average price, after translating into U.S. dollars, exceeds $50, and in rows (vii) to (ix)
we repeat the exercise on goods with average prices exceeding $200. The general patterns are
highly robust across stores and price levels.

3.4.2   Share of Goods Obeying the Law of One Price

In rows (x) to (xii) of Panel B of Table 2, we report the share of goods with an absolute value of
log RER less than 0.01, a level of similarity of prices that we refer to here as obeying the LOP.
Across all currency union pairs and stores in our data, more than 60 percent of the goods satisfy
the LOP, whereas only 7 percent do so for pegged pairs and less than 5 percent do so for country
pairs with a floating bilateral exchange rate. Consistent with the histograms in Figure 5(d), there
is some variation across stores in the degree to which currency unions generate identical prices.
The effect is weakest in IKEA, where roughly one-third of prices are equalized in currency unions,
and is strongest for H&M, where 90 percent of the prices are equalized in currency unions. For
all four retailers, however, a substantial percentage of goods obey the LOP in pairs that share a
currency, and this percentage is in all cases significantly larger than the equivalent statistic for
pegged and floating regimes.

3.4.3   Regression Analyses

Next, we correlate this average absolute value of each good’s log RER with indicators of the
currency regime, NER volatility, and other potentially important generators of law of one price
deviations (the data sources of which are detailed in the Appendix). Table 3 shows results from
a regression of the average absolute value of log good-level RERs on (i) an indicator labeled
“Outside of Cur. Union” which equals zero for pairs in a currency union and one for others,
(ii) an indicator equaling one for “Pegged NER” regimes, (iii) a variable capturing the log NER
volatility experienced during the life of the good, (iv) the log bilateral distance between each
country pair, (v) a variable called “Abs. Relative Income” that equals the absolute value of
the log ratio of per-capita PPP GDP, and (vi) a variable called “Abs. Relative Taxes” that
equals the absolute value of the difference in value-added tax rates. We also include a dummy
variable for each country and for each store. We run these regressions pooling all stores as well
as separately for each store (and we weight to equalize the contribution of each store and country
pair combination), clustering standard errors by the interaction of store and country pair.
   The first column of row (i) of Table 3 reports that goods outside of currency unions, conditional
on other observable differences, are expected to have log RERs with absolute values 0.123 higher

                                                14
than equivalent goods within currency unions. The pooled and store-specific regressions all include
two columns, one which includes all covariates and country dummies and another which drops
all covariates and dummies other than the exchange rate regime variables. The average increase
in absolute value of good-level RERs when moving from a currency union to a floating exchange
rate, reported in row (i), averages roughly 6 to 13 percent across stores. The effects are precisely
estimated, with the small standard errors reported in parentheses.
   If pegged exchange rate regimes had the same implications for good-level RERs as currency
unions, the coefficients in row (ii) should equal the opposite of those in row (i) since pegged regimes
are also considered “Outside of Cur. Unions.” Indeed, all the coefficients in row (ii) are negative
other than one near-zero value, suggesting that LOP deviations are in fact smaller in pegged than
floating regimes. The magnitudes of these estimates, however, are typically significantly smaller
than those in row (i), confirming that pegged regimes look different from currency unions in terms
of their impact on qij . For example, the first column with the pooled results suggests that currency
unions involve LOP deviations that are about 9 percentage points smaller (0.086 = 0.123 − 0.037)
than with a pegged regime and about 12 percentage points smaller than with a floating regime.
   Several other covariates are statistically significant for “All Stores,” though none have magni-
tudes that are economically important relative to the currency regime. Doubling exchange rate
volatility on average reduces LOP deviations by about 3 percentage points. Doubling the distance
between country pairs on average increases their LOP deviations by about 1.3 percentage point.
Relative taxes differentials range from 0 to 0.27, which means that wider tax differentials may
plausibly increase LOP deviations by a couple of percentage points. The final three columns run
the regressions separately for the set of country pairs with flexible NERs, with pegged NERs, and
within currency unions with each other. Outside of currency unions, distance and taxes remain
statistically significant determinants of average RER magnitudes. Within currency unions, none
of the covariates is statistically significant.


3.5    Goods Not Manufactured by the Distributor
Many of the goods distributed by these companies are also manufactured or branded by them.
Relatedly, many of these brands are not carried by other retailers. For example, the large majority
of goods found in IKEA stores are IKEA branded goods, and one cannot buy IKEA products
from other furniture retailers. We can get some insight into whether this characteristic influences
these companies’ pricing strategies by focusing on the case of Apple, where we can observe the




                                                  15
distinction between the Apple branded products and the non-Apple products that they sell.19
       More than half of all products sold by Apple are not Apple branded products. These goods
include, for example, Epson printers, Michael Kors travel totes, Canon digital cameras, and
various cables and adapters by brands like Apogee, Belkin, and Kanex. When we separately
calculate the unconditional average absolute deviations reported in Subsection 3.4.1 for the Apple
and non-Apple branded products sold by Apple, we find highly similar results. The average
absolute value of log good-level RERs for currency unions equals 0.020 for non-Apple branded
goods and 0.032 for Apple branded products. Pegged regimes have log good-level RERs with
average absolute values of 0.082 and 0.093 respectively in these two groups, and floats have values
of 0.139 and 0.147. The patterns in the share of goods for which LOP holds is also very similar
for Apple and non-Apple branded products. Regardless of whether the products are branded by
Apple or not, it sells with far reduced price dispersion for currency unions, even relative to pegged
regimes.


3.6       Evidence from Additional Retailers
While we do not have extensive time-series data that can be matched across countries for retailers
beyond Apple, IKEA, H&M, and Zara, we additionally collected a more limited cross-section of
prices for Adidas, Dell, Mango, and Nike.20 Panels A through C of Table 4 report the statistics
offered in Tables 2 and 3 for these additional stores. The share of goods obeying the LOP
in currency unions averages closer to 40 than to 60 percent, but the qualitative patterns are
essentially identical to those found in the primary data set. Rows (i) to (iii) of the first column
show that good-level log RERs in these additional stores have an average magnitude of 0.086
compared with 0.154 for pegs and 0.201 for floats.


3.7       Evidence in Price Level Indices
Finally, we demonstrate that this pattern is observable even in the more aggregated and publicly
available data on price level indices (PLIs), which are constructed by Eurostat as part of the
Eurostat-OECD PPP Programme and are studied in papers such as Berka and Devereux (2013).
The data include for various categories the average annual price in each country relative to an EU
  19
     We separate the products by brand using the first letter of the product ID code. We sampled 100 goods each
whose codes began with the letters “H” and “T” and found that all 200 were non-Apple products. Further, all
goods we sampled with codes beginning with the letters “M” and “D” were Apple branded goods. The remaining
category, codes beginning with “D”, appears to include Apple software products.
  20
     For Adidas, Dell, and Nike, pairs involving a euro zone country and Denmark are the only peg observations,
but more pegged bilaterals exist in the Mango data. Online prices from Mango were used by Simonovska (2011)
to study the relationship between average prices and per-capita income.


                                                      16
average. We focus on 7 non-overlapping categories that most resemble the industries covered by
the individual retailers studied above: “Audio-visual, photographic and information processing
equipment,” “Clothing”, “Electrical and optical equipment”, “Fabricated metal products and
equipment (except electrical and optical equipment)”, “Footwear”, “Furniture and furnishings,
carpets and other floor coverings”, and “Software”. In parallel to our analyses of the micro data,
we categorize each bilateral relationship in the Eurostat data as either a currency union, a peg,
or a float, and we calculate the absolute value of the category-level log RER as the log of the PLI
in one country less that in another.21
       Table 5 shows that the euro zone has lower price dispersion than pegs and floats in six of the
seven categories, and this result remains in regressions which use time and sector fixed effects
to account for entry and exit into the sample.22 These results are consistent with the possibility
that the patterns we found in our micro data have an observable influence even on far more
aggregated price indices. We emphasize that multiple forces are likely additionally important in
generating these patterns in the Eurostat data, particularly differences in the composition and
quality of products, which may be more homogeneous within the euro zone than within Europe as
a whole. The analyses using our micro data are valuable precisely because we can identify mass
points where the LOP holds exactly, observe at high frequency how the nominal exchange rate
influences relative prices, and feel confident we are comparing the prices of identical products.


4        Decomposing the Real Exchange Rate
Section 3 demonstrated that good-level log RERs are often close to zero in currency unions but
are generally large and heterogeneous outside of them. These non-zero values for log RERs may
emerge from multiple sources. For example, there might be large LOP violations between Spain
and Norway while there are none between Spain and Portugal because (i) markups are initially
set to different levels, (ii) subsequent price changes are of different sizes, or (iii) Spain and Norway
have bilateral nominal volatility from the exchange rate while Spain and Portugal do not.
  21
      We pool all observations, drop those with an implied log RER that exceeds 0.75, and limit the analysis to
the 35 European countries. Pairs involving a euro zone country and Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Denmark,
Latvia, and Lithuania, or pairs among these latter countries, are considered to be pegged. The data at this sector
level begin in 2003 and end in 2012.
   22
      Eurostat also provides a more disaggregated level of data that, for example, separates “Clothing” into three
subsectors covering men’s, women’s, and children’s clothing. Though publicly available and studied in papers such
as Berka, Devereux, and Engel (2012), Eurostat does not allow results to be published with sector labels at this
finer level. We analyze these data using the same methodology, however, and find that the mean absolute value
of subsector level log RERs is lower in euro zone pairs than in pegged and floating pairs in the vast majority
of comparable categories. Fixed effects regressions with time and industry dummies indicate that the average
absolute value of subsector-level log RERs is roughly 12 percent higher in pegs and 13 percent higher in floats
than in currency unions.

                                                       17
       We now turn to a disaggregation framework useful for separating out these channels. We start
by documenting the short duration of products and the long duration of prices in our data. We
next derive a novel decomposition of good-level RERs. Given the short product duration, one
important component of the decomposition is the RER at the date of product introduction. Given
the long duration or stickiness of prices, another term captures RER variation due to nominal
exchange rate movements. Finally, a residual component captures the impact of differential price
adjustment across countries during the life of the good. We demonstrate that the component
capturing the RER at the time of product introduction is by far the most salient component of
good-level RERs.


4.1       Product Duration and Price Stickiness
Panel A of Table 6 reports the typical life span of products in our data. We list in rows (i) and
(ii) the mean and median duration in weeks for all products in any country in our data (each
product and country is considered a distinct good) as well as the duration of products in the
United States.23 Durations for the world listed in row (i) are systematically lower than those for
the United States listed in row (ii), presumably due to the longer span of our data for the United
States. The mean duration of 37 weeks (roughly 3 quarters) is significantly greater than the 15
week median duration, reflecting skewness in the distribution. About 10 percent of the goods for
the United States, for example, exist in the data for at least 2 years. These values which pool
across stores obscure significant differences among the retailers. IKEA goods on average last 78
weeks (18 months) in the United States compared to average durations of about 1 quarter in the
apparel companies. Though the product lives vary, these data suggest that goods are frequently
entering and exiting countries’ consumption bundles and suggests that product introductions may
be important for understanding RERs.
       Next, in Panel B of Table 6, we report the percent of products with any observed price changes.
Again, we separately consider in rows (iii) and (iv) all products in our data set as well as only
the U.S. data and use the same weighting scheme as in Panel A. Since price changes are of course
more likely for longer-lived products, we additionally report this statistic for the set of goods with
  23
    We drop goods which appear for less than 1 month and we weight such that there is an equal contribution from
each country and store combination. There is left- and right-censoring plus occasional scraping gaps, which can of
course bias downward the duration statistics. We generated alternative estimates that excluded goods introduced
on the initial date of scraping, on subsequent dates following scraping gaps, or on days when our algorithm detects
a highly unusual volume of new introductions, as well as goods observed on the last date of scraping in each
country. Since this restricted set of goods in fact had durations that were about 20 percent shorter (presumably
because we excluded the longest-lived types of goods), we simply report the unfiltered results here and note that
these duration estimates are likely biased downward.



                                                        18
at least 12 and 24 months of data. Only 15 percent of goods in the data experience price changes.
This clearly reflects, however, the very short lives of most apparel products as well as the short
tenure of many smaller countries in our data. If instead we focus on goods in our dataset for
greater than 12 months, we see that more than half experience at least one price change, including
essentially all apparel items with sufficient data. The fact that many goods experience no price
changes, however, even when they exist for more than one year in the data, suggests nominal
volatility may play an important role in RER volatility.


4.2      Introduction, Demand, and Stickiness
To connect the frequency of product introductions and stickiness of prices to good-level RERs,
we now derive a decomposition that will attribute each good-level RER into a component from
the time of introduction, a component due to price stickiness, and a residual component owing to
differential price adjustment across countries. Let ii (z) denote the time that good z is introduced
in country i and let p̄i (z) = pi (z, ii (z)) denote the log of the price at introduction. We assume
that prices are characterized by nominal rigidity and so we write the log price of good z in country
i at time t > ii (z) as:
                                                                 l (z,t)
                                        pi (z, t) = p̄i (z) + ∆iii (z) pi (z) ,

where we define li (z, t) as the date of the last price change prior to t and where we introduce
                                                                                                       l (z,t)
the multi-period difference operator ∆ts v = v (t) − v (s) for any variable v. The ∆iii (z) pi (z) term
can be positive or negative and represents the accumulation of one or more price changes. If the
good has experienced no price changes since its introduction, then ii (z) = li (z, t) for all t and
pi (z, t) = p̄i (z).
    It will prove convenient to write the price of this good when translated into country k currency
units, pi (z, t) − eik (t), as:
                                                                h                          i
                                                                   l (z,t)
         pi (z, t) − eik (t) = [p̄i (z) − eik (ii (z))] +         ∆iii (z) (pi (z) − eik )       − ∆tli (z,t) eik .   (1)
                               |         {z           }         |            {z            }       | {z }
                                  Price at Introduction                                              Stickiness
                                                            Cost/Demand Shocks and Passthrough


The price of good z expressed in units of currency of some country k at time t can be disaggregated
into three terms. The first term on the right hand side of (1) equals the price of good z at the
date it was introduced and translated into country k currency units (“Price at Introduction”).
The second term captures the extent to which changes in the country i currency price changed
along with the NER between countries i and k during a price spell that ended with a price change.
We expect price changes in country i to reflect cost or demand shocks as well as the degree to


                                                          19
which these shocks are passed through into prices (“Cost/Demand Shocks and Passthrough”).
Finally, the country k currency unit price may also fluctuate simply due to the interaction of
sticky currency i prices combined with a continuously fluctuating NER (“Stickiness”).
   Combining expression (1) with the equivalent expression for the same good z in country j, we
obtain the following disaggregation of the log good-level RER:

     qij (z, t) =     [p̄ (z) − eik (ii (z)) − p̄j (z) + ejk (ij (z))]
                      |i                       {z                    }
                                  Good-Level RER at Introduction
                        h                                               i h                             i
                            li (z,t)                     lj (z,t)           t               t
                     + ∆ii (z) (pi (z) − eik ) − ∆ij (z) (pj (z) − ejk ) − ∆li (z,t) eik − ∆lj (z,t) ejk . (2)
                        |                           {z                  } |              {z             }
                                           Changes in Demand                                 Stickiness


One contributor to the log good-level RER at time t is the log good-level RER when the good was
first introduced into the two countries (“Good-Level RER at Introduction”). Next, there may be
country-specific subsequent demand shocks. Assuming that good z is produced in a single plant,
production cost shocks on their own cannot influence the RER unless there are also heterogeneous
rates of passthrough from the producer country to prices in i and j. For instance, if a 10 percent
cost shock is fully passed through to prices in country i but only half of it is passed through to
prices in country j, this can generate movement in the good-level RER. Since heterogeneous rates
of passthrough without heterogeneity in the underlying production structure reflect heterogeneity
in demand conditions, we attribute this second term to demand (“Changes in Demand”). Finally,
even when the local currency prices are not moving, the changing exchange rates with k imply
qij (z, t) will change (“Stickiness”).
   Note that this disaggregation is specific to the choice of country k, though the sum of the
terms will be equal for all k. Variation in the disaggregation across countries k is entirely a result
of asymmetries in the timing of good introductions and price changes. For example, if both goods
are introduced on the same date ii (z) = ij (z) and have their last price change on the same date
li (z, t) = lj (z, t), then (2) reduces to:
                                                         h                                 i
                                                           l (z,t)
        qij (z, t) = [p̄i (z) − eij (ii (z)) − p̄j (z)] + ∆iii (z) (pi (z) − pj (z) − eij ) − ∆tli (z,t) eij ,
                     |               {z               } |                 {z               } | {z }
                      Good-Level RER at Introduction                                                Stickiness
                                                                 Heterogeneous Demand


which has no dependence on country k.
   It is an undesirable property for the disaggregation of the good-level RER between countries
i and j to reflect the NER of a third and potentially unrelated country, so we consider the two
special cases when k = i and when k = j. We then use as our disaggregation of the good-level



                                                         20
RER an equally weighted average of the two resulting expressions in these two cases:
                                                                                                  
                                        1              1                1 t             1 t
        qij (z, t) = p̄i (z) − p̄j (z) − eij (ii (z)) − eij (ij (z)) − ∆li (z,t) eij + ∆lj (z,t) eij
                                        2              2                2               2
                     |                     {z                       } |              {z              }
                                                               I
                                                 Introduction qij                                            S
                                                                                                 Stickiness qij
                                                                                                  
                                 l (z,t)               l (z,t)           1 li (z,t)    1 lj (z,t)
                        +       ∆iii (z) pi   (z) −   ∆ijj (z) pj   (z) − ∆ii (z) eij − ∆ij (z) eij .                       (3)
                                                                         2             2
                            |                                         {z                           }
                                                                        D
                                                                Demand qij


We use the three terms “Introduction,” “Demand,” and “Stickiness” to represent the three com-
ponents of the RER in (3) and write them as:

                                       qij (z, t) = qijI (z, t) + qijD (z, t) + qijS (z, t) .                               (4)

       This disaggregation, of course, is not the unique one that allows us to study the relative con-
tribution of the introduction price or nominal rigidities to good-level RERs.24 We choose the
definition in (3) as our baseline because it allocates the pricing behavior for good z in country
i independently of what occurs with that same good in country j. In other words, it uses infor-
mation on introduction prices and stickiness similarly for a good sold in one country, regardless
of the timing of introduction or price changes in the other country of the pair. We consider all
new product ID codes appearing for each store in a given country to be a new good. For all
subsequent analyses, we restrict our attention to goods introduced to both countries within a 15
week span to ensure an intuitive interpretation of the introduction term.
       In the top left panels (labeled “a”) of Figures 7 and 8 we once again plot histograms of good-
level RERs qij for selected bilateral relationships with the United States and Spain respectively,
and in the remaining three panels we plot qijI (in panel “b”), qijD (in panel “c”), and qijS (in
panel “d”). Starting with the case of the United States in Figure 7, one immediately notes that
the largest share of variation comes from the component at introduction.25 Nominal rigidity or
  24
      As detailed in the Appendix, our results do not change qualitatively if instead we consider any of the following
three alternative decompositions. First, we can re-define the introduction term to be qij (z, i∗ij (z)), where i∗ij (z) =
max{ii (z), ij (z)} is the later of the two introduction dates, and keep the definition of the stickiness term unchanged.
Second, we can instead re-define the stickiness term to equal −∆tt∗ (z,t) eij , where t∗ij (z, t) = max{li (z, t), lj (z, t)} is
                                                                       ij
the most recent observed price change in either country, and keep the definition of the introduction term unchanged.
Third, we can combine both of the previous two adjustments, which implies that all three terms change relative
to our baseline definition.
   25
      In the Appendix, we more formally demonstrate the contribution of the introduction term to cross-sectional
variation in good-level RERs by decomposing the variance in qij at any date t into the three RER components,
allocating the covariance terms equally among the two relevant terms. We report the results of the decomposition
and emphasize that the introduction term typically contributes about three-quarters of all cross-sectional variation
in the LOP distributions. This result does not qualitatively change if we consider only a reduced sample of goods
which are in the data for more than one year and which at some point experience at least one price change.


                                                                     21
stickiness contributes a moderate amount. Surprisingly, given the large attention it has received
in the literature, the changes in demand channel contributes only a small amount to international
relative prices for these products. This term equals zero by construction when there are no price
changes and so the lack of support in the distributions of qijD is to some extent equivalent to
observing that prices are highly sticky for this class of goods.
    Similar results are seen in Figure 8 for the case of Spain. We saw in Figure 4 that countries
outside of the euro zone violated the LOP for goods that were priced identically within the euro
zone. In principle, these violations could have reflected LOP violations at introduction, different
timing or scales of price changes on existing goods, or could have reflected nominal volatility and
price stickiness. In practice, one sees the largest component coming at introduction along with a
moderate contribution from nominal rigidities. Note that Denmark pegs to the euro and therefore
has qijS = 0 for all goods. But its good-level RER distribution at introduction qijI continues to
look completely different from the euro zone countries.


5     Measurement and Product Introductions
Section 4 highlighted the importance of relative prices at the time of product introductions for
understanding good-level RERs. In this section, we explain why the importance of relative prices
at introduction may cause conventional measurements of the aggregate RER to deviate from the
true aggregate RER. In particular, if good-level RERs at introduction do not co-move with the
NER – as would be the case if the LOP always held at the time prices were set or adjusted – the
measured aggregate RER may be volatile and persistent even if the true aggregate RER is not.
This potential explanation for the PPP puzzle, however, does not find support in our data. We
demonstrate that qijI generally moves together with the log nominal exchange rate eji .
    We start by defining the “true” aggregate real exchange rate (in logs), which we will refer
to as RERT , as the average of qij (z, t) over all z. Assuming preferences are homothetic and
symmetric across countries, the same goods are available everywhere, and goods have equal
expenditure weights, then growth in RERT approximates the relative growth in the price of
aggregate consumption in countries i and j. In standard open-economy macro models, this
notion of aggregate exchange rate growth is critically related to objects of interest such as the
degrees of shock transmission and risk sharing.
    Standard empirical practice is to use price indices to construct an approximation of the true
aggregate real exchange rate and we will refer to these “measures” as RERM . The indices typically
used to construct growth in RERM , such as the consumer price index, are generally calculated


                                                  22
as the average price change for continuing goods and ignore the prices of newly introduced and
exiting goods. Under the above assumptions governing preferences, constructed series of RERM
and RERT will differ due to differences in qij (z, t) of entering and exiting goods. Ignoring product
introductions generates measurement error.26
       In fact, if the average good-level RER at introduction qijI (z, t) remains constant over time,
RERM can drift arbitrarily up or down even if the more economically meaningful object RERT
does not. To see this, consider an economy in which prices are completely sticky, the distribution
of qijI (z, t) is stationary with an expected value of q̃, and all goods frequently enter and exit
the market. The RERM will perfectly track the NER and need not mean revert because, by
construction, ∆ts qij (z) = ∆ts qijS (z) = ∆ts eji for the set of continuing goods. The RERT , however,
cannot arbitrarily deviate from the value q̃. Every time a product exits, regardless of its good-
level RER at the time of exit, it would be replaced by a new good with an expected log RER of
q̃. In this sense, taking product introduction prices into account might plausibly have solved (or
explained much of) the PPP puzzle.27
       We do not find support for this hypothesis. Rather than finding that the log good-level RER
at the time of introduction is constant (or has a constant expected value, as in the example
above), we find that it strongly co-moves with the log NER. While there are still likely important
episodes in particular countries where RERT and RERM diverge due to product introductions,
the co-movement of qijI and eji implies that this measurement problem is not as systematic as
would be required to resolve the PPP puzzle.
       Figure 9 plots the weekly weighted median of qijI for the key bilaterals involving the United
States.28 We separate each of the four stores and mark their medians with each of four markers.
The thin black line plots eji , normalized to zero at the first date. As such, the relative levels
of the markers and the black line are not informative, but their time-series movements are. As
opposed to sharing none of the time-series properties of the black line, as would be predicted if
the average value of qijI were constant over time, the markers often appear to move along with
the black line.
       For example, the upward movement of the red circles representing Apple products early in the
sample for Germany and the United States mimics the upward movement of the log NER. This
  26
     In some countries and for some sectors, statistical agencies may try to account for the impact of new goods
on price indices by linking old and new goods using hedonics and other methods. Outside of technology sectors
and other than the most developed economies, such proper treatment is the exception and not the rule.
  27
     This possibility is a cousin of the explanation in Nakamura and Steinsson (2012) that the exclusion of substi-
tution prices from BLS import and export price indices is behind the low levels of exchange rate passthrough in
their aggregate indices.
  28
     As above, we weight at each date such that the contribution from each store and bilateral pair combination is
                                                                  I
equalized. We drop the limited number of observations where |qij    | > 0.75 or |qij | > 0.75.


                                                        23
means that as the euro appreciated relative to the dollar in 2009, prices at the time of introduction
grew higher in Germany relative to the United States when translated into a common currency.
Similarly, there is a downward movement for all of the retailers in the Japan-U.S. sample during
the large yen depreciation starting in late 2012, represented by the downward movement of the
log NER. (The gaps, particularly in the red circles during 2010 and early 2011, are the results
of periods without scraping.) It is difficult, however, to make conclusions from these rich scatter
plots, so we now turn to non-linear fits of these raw data.
   First we scale the qijI values for each store by a constant so they have the same mean in early
2012. We do this because we wish to capture the within-store time-series variation in median
good-level RERs at introduction as opposed to capturing compositional changes due to stores
with different mean LOP deviations entering or exiting our sample. We then use the lowess
nonlinear smoother on these data and plot the resulting fitted values as the dashed red line in
Figure 10, scaled up or down such that the average value equals that of the log NER. In this sense,
there is no information in the levels of either line in the diagram, but the time-series movements
are informative. Periods in between observed introductions are interpolated, and therefore long
periods lacking introductions appear as straight dashed red lines, such as the interpolations in
the middle of the China, France, Germany, and Japan plots.
   The co-movement at high and low frequency between the red-dashed line and black solid line
in Figure 10 is striking. The fitted average values of the RERs at introduction move with the
NER. Major secular trends in Canada, China, and Japan are at least partly captured, and higher
frequency movements in the NER with euro zone countries, Sweden, and the U.K. are all mirrored
by comparable high frequency movements in the log RER at the time of good introductions.
Companies appear to price with local currency reference points, even at the time that a new good
is introduced and despite large movements in the NER.
   To formally quantify this relationship, we estimate the following regressions:

                               qijI (z, i∗ij ) = γij + βeji (i∗ij ) + ij (z, i∗ij ),            (5)

where good z only appears in the one period when t = i∗ij , where we demean the left-hand side
variable for each store and country pair (equivalent to adding store-country-pair dummies), and
where we exclude any good with |qijI | > 0.75 or |qij | > 0.75. An estimated value β = 0 would imply
that goods are introduced at RER levels unrelated to the NER, consistent with the possibility
that the PPP puzzle owes to measurement errors reflecting the omission of product introduction
prices. An estimated value β = 1 would imply the opposite, that the RER at the time of good


                                                        24
introductions perfectly tracks the NER.
   Panel A of Table 7 reports the coefficients on this regression when we weight using the inverse
of the number of observations for each store and country pair combination. We consider in rows
(i) and (ii) “All Bilaterals” in our data and restrict to bilaterals involving the United States in
rows (iii) and (iv). Finally, the second column indicates whether we simply include all goods
(that are introduced within 15 weeks in both countries), or a more restricted set of goods that
eliminates goods first observed on the first date of scraping for the store-country combination
and goods first observed on a date with an unusually large increase in the number of new good
observations. This restricted set is labeled “Filtered Intros” and is designed to control for possible
misspecification of product introductions due to scraping gaps and errors. We cluster the standard
errors by retailer-weeks and note that these coefficients are estimated with high precision.
   Consistent with Figures 9 and 10, all four specifications in Panel A show that the good-level
RER closely tracks the NER even at the time of product introductions. For example, looking at
row (i), we see that across all stores and intros, the good-level RER at introduction (qijI ) moves
about 0.7 log point for every full log point movement in the NER. If we restrict to U.S. bilaterals
and the stricter definition of introductions, as in row (iv), the coefficient rises to about 0.8 log
point. In other words, if the bilateral NER appreciates by 10 percent over the course of the year,
one would expect new products to be introduced with relative prices 7 to 8 percent higher than
the previous year (i.e. relative local currency prices move between 2 and 3 percent).
   For U.S. bilaterals for IKEA, H&M, and Zara, good-level RERs at introduction roughly track
the NER one-for-one. This phenomenon holds for Apple products, but less so than it does for
the other stores. Regression (5) is very similar to that estimated using data on IKEA products
that are “new in both countries” in Table 5 of Baxter and Landry (2012). Their estimate would
correspond to a value of 0.64, which is only moderately below our results in rows (i) and (ii) for
IKEA and consistent with our qualitative conclusions. We consider these weighted results to be
our baseline estimates, but report unweighted results in Panel B. The store-by-store results are
similar, but due to the reduced weight on Apple products, the “All Stores” values all increase to




                                                 25
levels above 0.8.29
       In sum, we explain why product entry and exit may cause the measured aggregate real ex-
change rate to deviate from the more economically meaningful concept it aims to capture. Given
the importance of introduction prices for good-level RERs, documented in Section 4.2, this mis-
measurement surely matters in some episodes for some bilateral pairs. The results in Table 7,
however, suggest that this problem does not apply as systematically as would be required to
resolve the PPP puzzle. The relative prices for these goods move in a way at the time of intro-
duction that largely resembles how they would move if they were existing goods which simply
had sticky prices.


6        Implications for Theories of Price Setting
We showed above that there is tremendous variation in good-level RERs for country pairs that
do not share a common currency. In a typical bilateral pair, each country simultaneously has
much higher prices for some goods and much lower prices for others. This is consistent with, and
perhaps even more surprising than, the findings of a large earlier literature on LOP deviations
because our results include a large number of exactly-matched goods that sell for the same price
within each country. Further, we demonstrated that good-level RERs track the NER even at the
time of product introduction, when price adjustment costs for new goods are unlikely to matter.
Finally, we documented that the LOP is far more likely to hold between countries that use the
same currency, even relative to countries with exchange rates that are strongly pegged to each
other.
       What features might help generate these empirical patterns in macro models of price setting?
First, richer specifications of distribution cost functions that are specific to particular goods
may help account for the large dispersion in good-level RERs for pegged and floating country
pairs. Second, demand structures that generate variable markups even in the absence of nominal
rigidities are essential to generate the pricing behavior we observe for newly introduced goods.
Third, explaining the critical role of a common currency for price dispersion likely requires a focus
  29
     While the relationship of the RER with the bilateral NER is of course related to passthrough (as can be easily
seen in the “Changes in Demand” term of (2)), we cannot explicitly measure exchange rate passthrough in these
data because we do not know the identity of the exporting country for any given good. To see why, imagine a
good is produced in Japan and exported to both Spain and the United States with constant passthrough rates
of 0.75 and 0.25 respectively. If prices change only due to exchange rate shocks, a 10 percent depreciation of the
euro relative to the yen with no change in the dollar-yen will produce a 7.5 percent appreciation of the good-level
RER between Spain and the United States. Alternatively, a 10 percent appreciation of the dollar relative to the
yen with no change in the euro-yen will produce a 2.5 percent appreciation of the same good-level RER. These
two scenarios both imply a 10 percent nominal depreciation of the euro but generate different movements in the
good-level RER.


                                                        26
on consumer psychology or firm organizational structure.


6.1       Models of Distribution Costs
Richer models of distribution and marketing costs are needed to generate the tremendous variation
in good-level log RERs outside of currency unions seen, for example, in Figure 2. Although simple
models with perfect competition that rely on different costs of production or country-level iceberg
shipping costs can generate LOP deviations, they are still insufficient to fit the facts. Such models
imply that products are sourced from multiple countries and that the distribution of good-level
log RERs has support either mostly above or mostly below zero.30 These implications are at odds
with our empirical results.
       Far richer non-linear specifications for the marginal cost of marketing and distribution, how-
ever, have the promise of explaining a share of the observed pattern of good-level RERs outside
of currency unions. Perhaps fixed order costs or stockout avoidance motives interact with the
ability to hold inventories as in the setups in Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan (2010, 2012),
resulting in different marginal cost structures for seemingly similar goods for which storage is
differentially costly. Perhaps within-country logistics systems and processes are very specific to
the type of good. Perhaps there are steeply increasing or decreasing returns in the distribution
cost technology that apply at the product level. Models of the distribution and marketing tech-
nologies which generate significant heterogeneity in the marginal cost across similar goods within
a given country may explain some of the LOP variation in our data.


6.2       Models of Variable Markups
Our results are supportive of models generating pricing to market even after prices adjust and
where markup variation across goods, countries, and time plays a critical role. For example,
consider a simple sticky price model with persistent NER shocks, constant producer currency
marginal costs, and constant elasticities of demand in each country, where differences across
goods in these costs or elasticities are unrelated to the exchange rate. This model may produce
LOP deviations, but the distribution of these deviations at the date of introduction qijI would be
unrelated to eij , in stark contrast to our finding in Section 5.31
  30
     Prominent papers in international trade such as Eaton and Kortum (2002) generate price differences from cost
differences that emerge due to differences in the sourcing of the same goods and differential international shipping
costs. Others including Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003) focus on the importance of the distribution channel
in the total cost of reaching consumers.
  31
     The finding in Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010) that passthrough is incomplete even at the time of a
price change similarly argues against these models.



                                                        27
       Variable markups, even in the absence of price adjustment costs, feature prominently in real
exchange rate determination in Krugman (1987) and Dornbusch (1987) and the large subsequent
literature which includes Knetter (1993) and Atkeson and Burstein (2008) among many others.
Recent contributions in this direction, for example, generate a relationship between markups and
the nominal exchange rate by associating a good’s demand with its price relative to a slow-moving
local-currency reference point such as the wage. For example, Alessandria and Kaboski (2011)
and Kaplan and Menzio (2013) generate such a relationship by requiring customers to use their
time to shop or search before consuming.


6.3       Customer and Firm Psychology and the Role of the Internet
The fact that LOP holds well within currency unions but less so among credible and strong pegs
points to behavioral theories of price setting in which customer psychology, firm organizational
structure, and market norms play important roles. Canonical macro models that lack these
features would have a difficult time explaining why a nominal variable like the exchange rate has
any relevance for real price setting when it never fluctuates, as in the pegged economies. Canonical
models in regional or international economics that lack these features would have a difficult time
explaining why a German consumer (or arbitrageur) would find it dramatically harder to cross
the border and buy a product in Denmark compared to instead doing the same in the Netherlands
or Belgium.32
       For example, it is possible that firms’ pricing decisions are designed to avoid potential consumer
anger, which might result from the knowledge that other countries face lower prices. Put more
formally, firms may believe that the elasticity of demand for good z in country i is not only a
function of the local price but is also a function of the local currency value of foreign prices.
How might this account for differences between common currencies and pegs? If countries share a
common currency, then it is trivial to translate foreign into domestic prices. After all, the exchange
rate between euro zone countries equals one while the exchange rate between Denmark and euro
zone countries equals 7.46.33 In fact, the act of joining a currency union or the observation that
prices are quoted in the same currency may themselves shift the customer’s attention to the fact
that there is a relevant international comparison to be made.
       It is interesting to speculate on the role of the Internet in driving firms to equalize prices
  32
     The transaction cost charged by a currency exchange or a German credit card in order to make a purchase in
Danish kroner is far too small to account quantitatively for the differences found in Tables 2 and 3.
  33
     However, this reason alone cannot explain why price differences are often large between the United States and
Panama, where the currency is pegged at 1 with the dollar, or between the United States and Canada, where the
exchange rate has not deviated from 1 by more than a few percentage points in recent years.



                                                       28
both within individual countries and in currency unions. All our identification regarding the
role of currency unions comes from cross-sectional variation as we do not in our sample observe
any countries entering or exiting the euro zone. Similarly, all our conclusions are conditional on
the existence of the Internet. A comparison of price dispersion in euro zone countries today to
price dispersion in these same countries two decades ago, however, reflects changes in both the
currency and technology regimes. These two shocks may have an interesting interaction. Perhaps
technology has facilitated international price comparisons, particularly for goods priced in the
same currencies, and has therefore changed the implications of joining a currency union relative
to the pre-Internet era. If true, one might expect in the future to observe an increase in within-
and across-country price convergence for traded goods, even without reductions in trade frictions.
       Another reason to suspect that consumer psychology may play a role is that in currency
unions, we find that listed prices are equalized, despite the fact that market norms vary in terms
of whether prices are listed inclusive or exclusive of taxes. For example, the histograms in Figure
4 show that prices are often equalized across euro zone countries, despite the fact that European
prices are required to include VAT tax rates that differ across countries. Figure 6 shows that
prices which include VAT taxes in dollarized countries are often exactly equal to prices in the
United States that by norm exclude sales taxes. Firms appear to tolerate markup variation in
order to preserve equality in list prices. We view our results as supportive of approaches such as
those in Rotemberg (2005), Nakamura and Steinsson (2011), and Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer
(2013a,b). These papers model pricing strategies that take into account elements of consumer
psychology such as anger, habit formation, and a disproportionate focus on particular product
attributes.
       Moving from the customer to the firm side, another interpretation of our results is that the
organizational structure of firms is critical to understanding pricing strategies. It is possible that
each of these multinational companies has pricing departments that are segmented by currency. If
changing such structures is very costly, firms may set up separate departments for pegged regimes
simply due to the greater likelihood that they become a floating currency in the future. Standard
calibrated price-setting models would have a very difficult time delivering the optimality of such
a policy, however, and few papers connect firm organizational structure to pricing dynamics at
the macro level.34
  34
    See Zbaracki, Ritson, Levy, Dutta, and Bergen (2004) for a detailed analysis of the price setting process in
a large manufacturing firm. Neiman (2010, 2011), Hellerstein and Villas-Boas (2010), and Hong and Li (2013)
analyze the implications of vertical organizational structure for price rigidity and the response to exchange rate
shocks.




                                                       29
7     Conclusion
Using a novel dataset of more than one hundred thousand traded goods sold by four global
retailers in dozens of countries, we demonstrate that prices are generally equalized in currency
unions and diverge outside of them. The choice of currency regime for these products is the critical
determinant of market segmentation, far more important than transport costs or tax or taste
differences. Further, we demonstrate that the relative price at the time of product introductions
is the most important component of good-level RERs in our data, and this component moves at
high frequency with the NER.
    These findings have important implications for such critical topics as optimal currency regimes,
the dynamics of external adjustment, the international transmission of shocks, and RER mea-
surement. They suggest the repercussions of joining a currency union are far broader than the
simple elimination of nominal volatility. Our findings about the RER at introduction imply
that the root of pricing rigidities is not well captured by models that omit variable flexible price
markups or pricing complementarities, including many of those with monopolistic competition,
constant demand elasticities, and menu costs. Most broadly, the patterns we document point to
the importance of customer psychology, firm organizational structure, and the Internet for price
setting behavior, elements which do not yet feature prominently in most standard macroeconomic
models.
    We estimate that the sectors covered in our data account for more than 20 percent of U.S.
consumption on goods, but, clearly, the pricing behavior documented for these four global retailers
need not be representative of all retail sectors. Future work should focus on understanding what
determines when prices behave like those documented here and when they do not.




                                                 30
References
Alessandria, G., and J. Kaboski (2011): “Pricing-to-Market and the Failure of Absolute
 PPP,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(1), 91–127.

Alessandria, G., J. Kaboski, and V. Midrigan (2010): “Inventories, Lumpy Trade, and
 Large Devaluations,” American Economic Review, 100(5), 2304–2339.

        (2012): “Trade Wedges, Inventories, and International Business Cycles,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Atkeson, A., and A. Burstein (2008): “Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and International
 Relative Prices,” American Economic Review, 98(5), 1998–2031.

Bailey, D., and R. Whish (2012): Competition Law. Oxford University Press.

Balassa, B. (1964): “The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,” Journal of Po-
 litical Economy, 72(6), 584–596.

Baxter, M., and A. Landry (2012): “IKEA: Product, Pricing, and Pass-Through,” Working
 Paper.

Berka, M., and M. Devereux (2013): “Trends in European real exchange rates,” Economic
 Policy, 28(74), 199–242.

Berka, M., M. Devereux, and C. Engel (2012): “Real Exchange Rate Adjustment in and
 out of the Eurozone,” The American Economic Review, 102(3), 179–185.

Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2013a): “Competition for Attention,” Work-
 ing Paper.

        (2013b): “Salience and Consumer Choice,” Working Paper.

Borraz, F., A. Cavallo, R. Rigobon, and L. Zipitria (2012): “Distance and Political
 Boundaries: Estimating Border Effects under Inequality Constraints,” Working Paper.

Broda, C., and D. Weinstein (2008): “Understanding International Price Differences Using
 Barcode Data,” Working Paper.

Burstein, A., and N. Jaimovich (2009): “Understanding Movements in Aggregate and
 Product-Level Real Exchange Rates,” unpublished paper, UCLA and Stanford University.

Burstein, A., J. Neves, and S. Rebelo (2003): “Distribution Costs and Real Exchange
 Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
 50(6), 1189–1214.


                                           31
Cassel, G. (1918): “Abnormal Deviations in International Exchanges,” The Economic Journal,
 28(112), 413–415.

Cavallo, A. (2012): “Scraped Data and Sticky Prices,” Working Paper.

Cavallo, A., and R. Rigobon (2012): “The Distribution of the Size of Price Changes,”
 Working Paper.

Cosar, K., P. Grieco, and F. Tintelnot (2012): “Borders, Geography, and Oligopoly:
 Evidence from the Wind Turbine Industry,” Working Paper.

Crucini, M., and M. Shintani (2008): “Persistence in law of one price deviations: Evidence
 from micro-data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(3), 629–644.

Crucini, M., M. Shintani, and T. Tsuruga (2010): “Accounting for persistence and volatil-
 ity of good-level real exchange rates: The role of sticky information,” Journal of International
 Economics, 81, 46–60.

Crucini, M., C. Telmer, and M. Zachariadis (2005): “Understanding European real ex-
 change rates,” The American Economic Review, 95(3), 724–738.

Deloitte (2013): “Global Powers of Retailing 2013,” Report.

Devereux, M., and C. Engel (2007): “Expenditure switching versus real exchange rate
 stabilization: Competing objectives for exchange rate policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
 54, 2346–2374.

Devereux, M., C. Engel, and P. Storgaard (2004): “Endogenous Exchange Rate Pass-
 Through when Nominal Prices are Set in Advance,” Journal of International Economics, 63,
 263–291.

Dornbusch, R. (1987): “Exchange Rates and Prices,” American Economic Review, 77(1), 93–
 106.

Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70(5),
 1741–1779.

Engel, C. (1999): “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 107(3), 507–538.

Engel, C., and J. Rogers (1996): “How wide is the border?,” American Economic Review,
 86, 1112–1125.

         (2004): “European product market integration after the euro,” Economic Policy.

Gagnon, E., B. Mandel, and R. Vigfusson (2012): “Missing Import Price Changes and
 Low Exchange Rate Pass-Through,” Working Paper.

                                               32
Goldberg, P., and F. Verboven (2005): “Market Integration and Convergence to the Law
 of One Price: Evidence from the European Car Market,” Journal of International Economics,
 65, 49–73.

Gopinath, G., P.-O. Gourinchas, C.-T. Hsieh, and N. Li (2011): “International Prices,
 Costs, and Markup Differences,” American Economic Review, 101(6), 2450–2486.

Gopinath, G., O. Itskhoki, and R. Rigobon (2010): “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate
 Pass-through,” American Economic Review, 100, 304–336.

Gorodnichenko, Y., and L. Tesar (2009): “Border effect or country effect? Seattle may
 not be so far from Vancouver after all,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, (1),
 219–241.

Hellerstein, R., and S. B. Villas-Boas (2010): “Outsourcing and Pass-through,” Journal
 of International Economics, 81(2), 170–183.

Hong, G. H., and N. Li (2013): “Market Structure and Cost Pass-Through in Retail,” Working
 Paper.

Ilzetzki, E., C. Reinhart, and K. Rogoff (2008): “Exchange Rate Arrangements into the
  21st Century: Will the Anchor Currency Hold?,” Unpublished Data.

Imbs, J., H. Mumtaz, M. Ravn, and H. Rey (2005): “PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation and
  the Real Exchange Rate,” Quarterly Journal of Econoimcs, 120(1), 1–43.

Kaplan, G., and G. Menzio (2013): “Shopping Externalities and Self-Fulfilling Unemployment
 Fluctuations,” Working Paper.

Knetter, M. (1993): “International Comparisons of Price-to-Market Behavior,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 83(3), 473–486.

Krugman, P. (1987): “Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes,” in Real Financial
 Linkages Among Open Economics, ed. by S. Arndt, and J. Richardson, pp. 1355–1389. MIT
 Press, London.

Mussa, M. (1986): “Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real Exchange Rates:
 Evidence and Implications,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 25, 117–
 214.

Nakamura, A., E. Nakamura, and L. Nakamura (2011): “Price dynamics, retail chains
 and inflation measurement,” Journal of Econometrics, 161(1), 47–55.

Nakamura, E., and J. Steinsson (2011): “Price Setting in Forward-Looking Customer Mar-
 kets,” Journal of Monetary Economics.


                                            33
       (2012): “Lost in Transit: Product Replacement Bias and Pricing to Market,” American
  Economic Review.

Neiman, B. (2010): “Stickiness, Synchronization, and Passthrough in Intrafirm Trade Prices,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(3), 295–308.

         (2011): “A State-Dependent Model of Intermediate Goods Pricing,” Journal of Inter-
  national Economics, 85(1), 1–13.

Parsley, D., and S.-J. Wei (2001): “Explaining the border effect: the role of exchange rate
  variability, shipping costs and geography,” Journal of International Economics, 55, 87–105.

         (2008): “In Search of a Euro Effect: Big Lessons from a Big Mac Meal?,” Journal of
  International Money and Finance, 27(2), 260.

Rogers, J., and M. Jenkins (1995): “Haircuts or hysteresis? Sources of movements in real
 exchange rates,” Journal of International Economics, 38, 339–360.

Rogoff, K. (1996): “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Literature,
 34(2), 647–668.

Rotemberg, J. (2005): “Customer Anger at Price Increases, Changes in the Frequency of Price
 Adjustment and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(4), 829–852.

Samuelson, P. (1964): “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 46(2), 145–154.

Simonovska, I. (2011): “Income Differences and Prices of Tradables,” Working Paper.

Zbaracki, M., M. Ritson, D. Levy, S. Dutta, and M. Bergen (2004): “Managerial
  and customer costs of price adjustment: direct evidence from industrial markets,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 86(2), 514–533.




                                             34
                                                      All Stores          Apple             IKEA            H&M             Zara


             (i)      # Products, World                 117,046           11,235            69,631          14,117          22,063

             (ii)     # Products, United States          49,088           5,764             19,047           8,195          16,082

             (iii)    # Countries                          85               39                31              49              79

             (iv)     Time Period                       2008:Q4          2009:Q2           2008:Q4         2011:Q3         2011:Q3
                                                           to               to                to              to              to
35




                                                        2013:Q2          2013:Q2           2013:Q2         2013:Q2         2013:Q2

             (v)      Headquarters                                    United States        Sweden           Sweden          Spain

             (vi)     Industry                                          Consumer         Home/Office       Apparel         Apparel
                                                                        Electronics       Furniture

             (vii)    Global Industry Rank (2011)                       3rd largest       1st largest     4th largest     3rd largest

             (viii)   Retail Revs ($Bil. in 2011)        ≈ 100             ≈ 40              ≈ 25            ≈ 15            ≈ 15


                                            Table 1: Product, Time, and Country Coverage in the Data

     Notes: Retail Revenues are calculated using market shares and total industry sales data found in reports by Euromonitor International
     for 2011. These revenues are smaller than the total revenues listed, for example, in Apple’s annual report (which equaled $108 Billion),
     likely because Euromonitor only considers a subset of each company’s sales to be within their specific market definition.
                                                                        All Stores       Apple       IKEA        H&M        Zara

                    Panel A: Average Absolute Values of Log Good-level RERs

                    (i)      Full Sample         Currency Unions           0.076          0.023       0.129      0.020      0.102

                    (ii)     Full Sample         NER Pegs                  0.116          0.085       0.145      0.119      0.115

                    (iii)    Full Sample         Floats                    0.187          0.143       0.216      0.145      0.207

                    (iv)     (pi + pj ) > $100   Currency Unions           0.065          0.023      0.096       0.005      0.086

                    (v)      (pi + pj ) > $100   NER Pegs                  0.109          0.081      0.107       0.113      0.111

                    (vi)     (pi + pj ) > $100   Floats                    0.189          0.144      0.178       0.152      0.205
36




                    (vii)    (pi + pj ) > $400   Currency Unions           0.043          0.022      0.086       0.013      0.097

                    (viii)   (pi + pj ) > $400   NER Pegs                  0.096          0.078      0.094       0.125      0.118

                    (ix)     (pi + pj ) > $400   Floats                    0.171          0.151      0.170       0.141      0.270

                    Panel B: Share of Absolute Value of Log Good-level RERs Less Than 1 Percent

                    (x)      Full Sample         Currency Unions           0.610          0.681      0.307       0.911      0.548

                    (xi)     Full Sample         NER Pegs                  0.069          0.140       0.081      0.069      0.064

                    (xii)    Full Sample         Floats                    0.045          0.049      0.033       0.062      0.040


                 Table 2: Unconditional Moments of Log Good-level RERs by Store, Currency Regime, and Average Price Level

     Notes: Panel A of the Table reports unconditional means of the average (across weeks in the data) of the absolute value of each good’s
     log RER, separated by the currency regime. We exclude the small number of observations where |qij | > 0.75. Currency regime definitions
     closely follow Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2008) and are described in the text. The unconditional mean is reported from our full data
     set in (i) to (iii), excluding goods with an average price less than $50 in (iv) to (vi), and excluding goods with an average price less than
     $200 in (vii) to (ix). Panel B of the Table reports the share of the goods where LOP violations are less than 0.01 log point. Both panels
     use the same weights which equalize the contribution from each country-pair and store combination.
                                All Stores              Apple               IKEA                H&M                 Zara                     All Stores
                                                                                                                                  Flexible    Pegged    Currency
                                                                                                                                   NER         NER       Unions



      (i)     Outside of       0.123     0.109     0.054     0.120     0.034     0.087     0.091     0.126     0.162     0.105
              Cur. Unions     (0.006)   (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.006)   (0.004)   (0.006)   (0.004)   (0.009)   (0.009)

      (ii)    Pegged NER       -0.037    -0.073    -0.040    -0.058    -0.018    -0.071    0.003     -0.026    -0.053    -0.092
                              (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.011)   (0.013)   (0.007)   (0.010)   (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.005)   (0.005)

      (iii)   Log NER          -0.034              -0.017              -0.029              0.001               -0.027              -0.031
              Volatility      (0.006)             (0.007)             (0.008)             (0.008)             (0.012)             (0.006)

      (iv)    Log Bilateral    0.013               0.012               0.015               0.007               0.016               0.014       0.007       0.008
37




              Distance        (0.002)             (0.002)             (0.003)             (0.003)             (0.002)             (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.007)

      (v)     Abs. Relative 0.002                  -0.001              0.023               0.003               0.000               0.002       -0.008      -0.034
              Income        (0.002)               (0.006)             (0.007)             (0.005)             (0.002)             (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.022)

      (vi)    Abs. Relative 0.074                  0.477               0.072               0.049               0.015               0.102       0.288       0.433
              Taxes         (0.024)               (0.024)             (0.036)             (0.034)             (0.030)             (0.030)     (0.060)     (0.267)

              Cty. Dumies:      Y         N         Y           N       Y          N        Y         N         Y          N        Y           Y           Y


                                          Table 3: Regressions of Absolute Value of Log Good-level RERs

     Notes: Table reports regressions of the average (across weeks in the data) of the absolute value of each good’s log RER on a variety
     of covariates. The column labeled “All Stores” includes store dummies and are clustered by bilateral country pair-store. The columns
     labeled with store names are clustered by country pairs. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. We exclude the small number of
     observations where |qij | > 0.75. Currency regime definitions closely follow Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2008) and are described in the
     text. All regressions are weighted to equalize the contribution from each country-pair and store combination.
                                                       All Additional Stores     Adidas      Dell     Mango     Nike

                           Panel A: Average Absolute Values of Log Good-Level RERs

                           (i)       Currency Unions            0.086              0.087     0.054     0.112    0.053

                           (ii)      NER Pegs                   0.154              0.172     0.130     0.158    0.103

                           (iii)     Floats                     0.201              0.207     0.139     0.203    0.210

                           Panel B: Share of Absolute Value of Log Good-level RERs Less Than 1 Percent

                           (iv)      Currency Unions            0.377              0.353     0.380     0.332    0.442

                           (v)       NER Pegs                   0.054              0.027     0.041     0.053    0.092
38




                           (vi)      Floats                     0.049              0.045     0.052     0.041    0.138

                           Panel C: Regression Results

                           (vii)     Outside of                  0.116             0.120     0.086     0.091     0.158
                                     Cur. Unions                (0.005)           (0.010)   (0.018)   (0.011)   (0.020)

                           (viii)    Pegged NER                  -0.048            -0.035    -0.009    -0.045    -0.107
                                                                (0.008)           (0.016)   (0.014)   (0.009)   (0.021)

                           (ix)      Countries                    55                17        18        49        18


                                 Table 4: Results on Absolute Value of Good-Level Log RER for Additional Retailers

     Notes: Panel A of the Table reports unconditional means of the average (across weeks in the data) of the absolute value of each good’s
     log RER, separated by the currency regime. We exclude the small number of observations where |qij | > 0.75. Currency regime definitions
     closely follow Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2008) and are described in the text. The “NER pegs” category for Adidas, Dell, and Nike,
     however, only includes pairs involving Denmark and euro zone countries. Panel B of the Table reports the share of the goods where
     LOP violations are less than 0.01 log point. Panel C of the Table reports regressions of the average of the absolute value of each good’s
     RER on currency regime dummies. All panels use the same weights which equalize the contribution from each country-pair and store
     combination.
                                   Audio                     Electrical     Metal
                                 Equipment      Clothing    Equipment      Products     Shoes    Furniture    Software


                        Euro         0.067        0.091         0.069         0.067     0.114      0.095        0.112

                        Pegs         0.103        0.167         0.082         0.115     0.172      0.365        0.109

                        Floats       0.123        0.195         0.091         0.101     0.197      0.285        0.133


                       Table 5: Unconiditional Means of Log Category-level RERs in Eurostat Data by Currency Regime
39




     Notes: Table reports unconditional means of the absolute value of each Eurostat product category’s log RER, separated by the currency
     regime. The underlying data are annual and include the years 2003-2012. We only include European countries in this analysis and
     exclude the small number of observations where |qij | > 0.75. Pairs involving a euro zone country and Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
     Denmark, Latvia, and Lithuania, or pairs among these latter countries, are considered to be pegged.
                                                                All Stores      Apple       IKEA       H&M         Zara

                        Panel A: Product Duration (weeks)

                        (i)     World           Mean                 24            36         54           12        11
                                                Median               13            26         41           10        12

                        (ii)    United States   Mean                 37            46         78           12        11
                                                Median               15            31         52           10        11

                        Panel B: Percent of Products with Any Price Changes

                        (iii)   World           All Products         15            27         25           12         7
40




                                                ≥ 12 months          59            53         62           75         -
                                                ≥ 24 months          64            69         68            -         -

                        (iv)    United States   All Products         23            32         38           21         3
                                                ≥ 12 months          57            50         59           99         -
                                                ≥ 24 months          62            48         67            -         -


                                        Table 6: Statistics on the Duration of Products and Their Prices

     Notes: Panel A reports the mean and median number of weeks in which products appear in our dataset for all countries in the world
     as well as just in the United States. Due to left and right censoring, these estimates are likely downward biased. Panel B reports the
     share of goods worldwide and for the United States which experience at least one price change. We report this statistic in the overall
     data and also in subsamples restricted to goods with at least one and two years of data. Both panels weight to equalize the contribution
     from each store and country combination.
                                                                     All Stores       Apple       IKEA        H&M           Zara

                     Panel A: Weighted to Equalize Contributions of Store and Country Pair Combinations

                     (i)     All Bilaterals        All Intros           0.686          0.414       0.819       0.985        0.798
                                                                       (0.007)        (0.010)     (0.031)     (0.004)      (0.011)

                     (ii)    All Bilaterals        Filtered Intros      0.703          0.325       0.720       0.973        0.778
                                                                       (0.006)        (0.010)     (0.022)     (0.003)      (0.012)

                     (iii)   All U.S. Bilaterals   All Intros           0.680          0.493       0.848       1.021        0.971
                                                                       (0.029)        (0.035)     (0.047)     (0.017)      (0.026)

                     (iv)    All U.S. Bilaterals   Filtered Intros      0.788          0.414       0.913       1.030        1.068
                                                                       (0.022)        (0.035)     (0.042)     (0.018)      (0.034)
41




                     Panel B: Unweighted

                     (i)     All Bilaterals        All Intros           0.826          0.446       0.820       0.991        0.831
                                                                       (0.006)        (0.011)     (0.029)     (0.004)      (0.007)

                     (ii)    All Bilaterals        Filtered Intros      0.828          0.302       0.730       0.978        0.821
                                                                       (0.006)        (0.009)     (0.016)     (0.003)      (0.009)

                     (iii)   All U.S. Bilaterals   All Intros           0.868          0.518       0.948       1.025        0.951
                                                                       (0.022)        (0.034)     (0.049)     (0.018)      (0.024)

                     (iv)    All U.S. Bilaterals   Filtered Intros      0.951          0.395       0.934       1.032        1.053
                                                                       (0.016)        (0.032)     (0.037)     (0.019)      (0.025)


                                              Table 7: Regressions of Log RER at Introduction on Log NER

     Notes: Table reports coefficient of regressions of the log RER at introduction on the log NER. Each good is only included in the
     regression on a single introduction date. Standard errors are clustered by store and week combination. We exclude the limited number
     of observations where |qijI | > 0.75 or |qij | > 0.75. Panel A weights the observations to equalize the contribution of each store and country
     pair combination, while Panel B does not use any weights.
42




                                           (a) IKEA Online                                                (b) IKEA in Store

                                          Figure 1: Example of Online and Offline Prices for IKEA

     Notes: “IKEA Online” image is a screen shot taken of a product found on IKEA’s U.S. website. During that same week, the “IKEA in
     Store” picture was taken of the price of the identical product at the physical IKEA store located in Stoughton, Massachusetts. With
     few exceptions, all prices for all four retailers are identical online and offline in all countries, and this is just one example.
                              Austria                                   Canada                                     China                                    Spain




                                                         10
               6




                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                   8




                                                                                                                                            4
                                                         8




                                                                                                   6
               4




                                                                                                                                            3
                                                         6




                                                                                                   4




                                                                                                                                            2
                                                         4
               2




                                                                                                   2




                                                                                                                                            1
                                                         2
               0




                                                         0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                            0
                   -.75 -.5 -.25   0    .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75       -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75       -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75


                            Germany                                      Finland                                  France                                        Italy
               8




                                                         6




                                                                                                   8




                                                                                                                                            8
               6




                                                                                                   6




                                                                                                                                            6
                                                         4
               4




                                                                                                   4




                                                                                                                                            4
43




                                                         2
               2




                                                                                                   2




                                                                                                                                            2
               0




                                                         0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                            0
                   -.75 -.5 -.25   0    .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75       -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75       -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75


                              Japan                                      Mexico                                  Sweden                              United Kingdom
               5




                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                   4
                                                         6
               4




                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                   3
                                                         4
               3




                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                   2
               2




                                                         2




                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                   1
               1
               0




                                                         0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                            0
                   -.75 -.5 -.25   0    .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75       -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75       -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75




                                       Figure 2: Good-level RERs qij for Various Countries (i) with the United States (j)

     Notes: Figure includes all goods z and all weeks t for which qij is defined, with United States as country j and the other countries
     as country i. Histograms include frequency weights such that the contribution from each store is equalized for each country pair. We
     exclude the small number of observations where |qij | > 0.75. Dashed red vertical lines indicate the weighted average RER. Y-axes plot
     percents.
                                   Austria                                  Canada                                      China                                     Spain                                        Austria                                   Canada                                      China                                      Spain




                                                             15




                                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                       10




                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                   10




                                                                                                                                                 8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                             10




                                                                                                                                                 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                       5
                   5




                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                             5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                 2
                   0




                                                             0




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75


                                  Germany                                    Finland                                   France                                         Italy                                   Germany                                     Finland                                   France                                          Italy
                   15




                                                             10




                                                                                                       15




                                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                             8




                                                                                                                                                                                               8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                 15
                   10




                                                                                                       10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                             6




                                                                                                                                                                                               6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                             4




                                                                                                                                                                                               4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                   5




                                                                                                       5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                   0




                                                             0




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75


                                    Japan                                    Mexico                                   Sweden                               United Kingdom                                       Japan                                                                              Sweden                                United Kingdom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                   8




                                                                                                       6




                                                                                                                                                 6




                                                                                                                                                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                             8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                   6




                                                             6




                                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .5
                   4




                                                             4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .25
                   2




                                                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                   0




                                                             0




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75




                                                                                      (a) Apple                                                                                                                                                                    (b) IKEA
44




                                   Austria                                  Canada                                      China                                     Spain                                        Austria                                   Canada                                      China                                      Spain
                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                             15
                   10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                 8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                       15




                                                                                                                                                                                               8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                       10
                   5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                               4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                             5




                                                                                                       5




                                                                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                   0




                                                             0




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75


                                  Germany                                    Finland                                   France                                         Italy                                   Germany                                     Finland                                   France                                          Italy
                   15




                                                                                                       10




                                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8
                                                             10




                                                                                                       8




                                                                                                                                                 8




                                                                                                                                                                                               8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                   10




                                                                                                       6




                                                                                                                                                 6




                                                                                                                                                                                               6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                             5




                                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                                                               4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                   5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                   0




                                                             0




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75


                                    Japan                                    Mexico                                   Sweden                               United Kingdom                                       Japan                                     Mexico                                   Sweden                                United Kingdom
                   10




                                                             15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                       10




                                                                                                                                                                                               8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                 8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                   8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8
                                                                                                       8




                                                                                                                                                                                               6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                             10
                   6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                       6




                                                                                                                                                                                               4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                       4
                                                             5




                                                                                                                                                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                 2
                   2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                       2
                   0




                                                             0




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75




                                                                                       (c) H&M                                                                                                                                                                       (d) Zara

                                        Figure 3: Good-level RERs qij for Various Countries (i) with the United States (j), by Store

     Notes: Figure includes all goods z and all weeks t for which qij is defined, with United States as country j and the other countries as
     country i. All goods in each histogram are equally weighted. We exclude the small number of observations where |qij | > 0.75. Dashed
     red vertical lines indicate the weighted average RER. Y-axes plot percents.
                               Austria                                  Denmark                                   Germany                                        Finland




                                                         15




                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                                   50
               50




                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                   40
               40




                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                   30
               30




                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                   20
               20




                                                         5




                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                   10
               10
               0




                                                         0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                    -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75


                               France                                    Ireland                                        Italy                                 Netherlands

                                                         40




                                                                                                   50




                                                                                                                                                 60
               50




                                                                                                   40
               40




                                                         30




                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                   30
               30




                                                         20




                                                                                                   20
               20




                                                                                                                                                 20
45




                                                         10




                                                                                                   10
               10
               0




                                                         0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                    -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75


                               Norway                                   Portugal                                  Sweden                                              USA
               10




                                                                                                   15




                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                         80
               8




                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                         60




                                                                                                   10
               6




                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                         40
               4




                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                   5
                                                         20
               2




                                                                                                                                                 1
               0




                                                         0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                    -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75




                                               Figure 4: Good-level RERs qij for Various Countries (i) with Spain (j)

     Notes: Figure includes all goods z and all weeks t for which qij is defined, with Spain as country j and the other countries as country
     i. Histograms include frequency weights such that the contribution from each store is equalized for each country pair. We exclude the
     small number of observations where |qij | > 0.75. Dashed red vertical lines indicate the weighted average RER. Y-axes plot percents.
                                     Austria                                   Denmark                                    Germany                                         Finland                                                  Austria                                                Denmark                                                               Germany                                                   Finland




                    80




                                                               25




                                                                                                                                                         80




                                                                                                                                                                                                      40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25
                                                                                                          80
                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                    60




                                                                                                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                               15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                    40




                                                                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                          40
                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                    20




                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                          20
                                                               5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75             -.75 -.5 -.25            0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25       0    .25        .5     .75               -.75 -.5 -.25              0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25     0       .25        .5     .75


                                     France                                     Ireland                                         Italy                                  Netherlands                                                 France                                                   Ireland                                                                 Italy                                              Netherlands
                    80




                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                      30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                         80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                    60




                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                          40
                    40




                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                          20
                    20




                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75             -.75 -.5 -.25            0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25   0        .25        .5     .75               -.75 -.5 -.25              0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25     0       .25        .5     .75


                                     Norway                                    Portugal                                   Sweden                                               USA                                                Norway                                                   Portugal                                                              Sweden                                                        USA
                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                                      5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                          8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                    8




                                                                                                                                                         8




                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                          6
                    6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                         6




                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                          4
                    4




                                                                                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                          2
                    2




                                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75              -.75 -.5 -.25           0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25   0        .25        .5     .75                -.75 -.5 -.25             0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25        0    .25        .5     .75




                                                                                         (a) Apple                                                                                                                                                                                                        (b) IKEA
46




                                     Austria                                   Denmark                                    Germany                                         Finland                                                                  vs. Spain                                                                                                                  vs. Germany
                    100




                                                                                                          100




                                                                                                                                                         100
                                                               25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Austria                                              Denmark                                                                 Denmark                                                  France
                    80




                                                               20




                                                                                                          80




                                                                                                                                                         80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20 40 60 80 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                           10 15 20 25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                    60




                                                               15




                                                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                    40




                                                               10




                                                                                                          40




                                                                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                    20




                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                               5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25   0       .25    .5        .75                            -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25    0       .25    .5        .75
                                     France                                     Ireland                                         Italy                                  Netherlands
                    100




                                                                                                          100




                                                                                                                                                         100
                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Germany                                                 Portugal                                                                 Ireland                                                     Italy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20 40 60 80 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                           10 15 20 25
                    80




                                                                                                          80




                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                               40
                    60




                                                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                                         60
                    40




                                                                                                          40




                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                               20
                    20




                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25   0       .25    .5        .75                            -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25    0       .25    .5        .75


                                     Norway                                    Portugal                                   Sweden                                               USA                                                 Sweden                                                   USA                                                                Netherlands                                                 USA
                                                               100
                    40




                                                                                                          40




                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20 40 60 80 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                           15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                         8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
                    30




                                                                                                          30




                                                                                                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                         6
                    20




                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                                                           5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                    10




                                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25   0       .25    .5        .75                            -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75                     -.75 -.5 -.25    0       .25    .5        .75
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75




                                                                                          (c) H&M                                                                                                                                                                                                             (d) Zara

                                                               Figure 5: Good-level RERs qij for Various Countries (i) with Spain (j), by Store

     Notes: Figure includes all goods z and all weeks t for which qij is defined, with Spain as country j and the other countries as country i.
     All goods in each histogram are equally weighted. We exclude the small number of observations where |qij | > 0.75. Dashed red vertical
     lines indicate the weighted average RER. Y-axes plot percents.
                                      Bahrain                                   Ecuador                                  Hong Kong                                   Jordan
                                  Pegged to Dollar                              Dollarized                             Pegged to Dollar                          Pegged to Dollar




                      50




                                                                50




                                                                                                           50




                                                                                                                                                     50
                      40




                                                                40




                                                                                                           40




                                                                                                                                                     40
                      30




                                                                30




                                                                                                           30




                                                                                                                                                     30
                      20




                                                                20




                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                     20
                      10




                                                                10




                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                     10
                      0




                                                                0




                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                     0
                           -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75


                                   Kazakhstan                                  Lebanon                                      Oman                                    Panama
                                  Pegged to Dollar                          Pegged to Dollar                           Pegged to Dollar                      Dollarized (Weaker Form)
                      50




                                                                50




                                                                                                           50




                                                                                                                                                     50
                      40




                                                                40




                                                                                                           40




                                                                                                                                                     40
                      30




                                                                30




                                                                                                           30




                                                                                                                                                     30
                      20




                                                                20




                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                     20
                      10




                                                                10




                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                     10
47




                      0




                                                                0




                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                     0
                           -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75


                                       Qatar                                 El Salvador                                Saudi Arabia                        United Arab Emirates
                                  Pegged to Dollar                              Dollarized                             Pegged to Dollar                          Pegged to Dollar
                      50




                                                                50




                                                                                                           50




                                                                                                                                                     50
                      40




                                                                40




                                                                                                           40




                                                                                                                                                     40
                      30




                                                                30




                                                                                                           30




                                                                                                                                                     30
                      20




                                                                20




                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                     20
                      10




                                                                10




                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                     10
                      0




                                                                0




                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                     0
                           -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5    .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75




                                     Figure 6: Good-level RERs qij for Various Countries (i) with the United States (j)

     Notes: Figure includes all goods z and all weeks t for which qij is defined, with United States as country j and the other countries as
     country i. We include 9 countries with exchange rate pegs with the dollar as well as three countries that use the U.S. dollar as their
     currency. Ecuador and El Salvador only have the dollar as legal tender, and prices in our data are quoted in dollars for these countries.
     We label Panama as “Dollarized (Weaker Form)” since dollars and balboa coins are both accepted as legal tender, and prices in our
     data are quoted in balboas for Panama. We exclude the small number of observations where |qij | > 0.75. Y-axes plot percents.
                                    Austria                                   Canada                                       China                                     Spain                                        Austria                                   Canada                                     China                                     Spain




                                                                                                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                              10
                   6




                                                                                                         8




                                                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                                                                  8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8
                                                              8




                                                                                                         6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                   4




                                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                                  6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                              6




                                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                                  4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                              4
                   2




                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                              2
                   0




                                                              0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75


                                   Germany                                     Finland                                    France                                         Italy                                   Germany                                    Finland                                   France                                         Italy




                                                                                                                                                    10
                   8




                                                              6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                  8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                         8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                    8
                   6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                  6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                         6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                              4




                                                                                                                                                    6
                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                              2
                   2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                    2
                   0




                                                              0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75


                                     Japan                                     Mexico                                    Sweden                               United Kingdom                                       Japan                                    Mexico                                   Sweden                               United Kingdom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                   5




                                                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                              6




                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                         4
                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                         3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                              4
                   3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                         2
                   2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                              2




                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                         1
                   1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                   0




                                                              0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                    (a) Good-level RER (qij )                                                                                                                                                    (b) At Introduction qij
48




                                    Austria                                   Canada                                       China                                     Spain                                        Austria                                   Canada                                     China                                     Spain
                                                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                                                                                  30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                              80




                                                                                                                                                    80
                   80




                                                                                                         80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                    60
                   60




                                                                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                    40
                   40




                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                   20




                                                                                                         20
                   0




                                                              0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75


                                   Germany                                     Finland                                    France                                         Italy                                   Germany                                    Finland                                   France                                         Italy
                   100




                                                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                              80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                  30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                    80
                   80




                                                                                                         80
                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                   60




                                                                                                         60
                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                    40
                   40




                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                   20




                                                                                                         20
                   0




                                                              0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75


                                     Japan                                     Mexico                                    Sweden                               United Kingdom                                       Japan                                    Mexico                                   Sweden                               United Kingdom
                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25
                                                                                                         80
                   80




                                                              80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                         60
                   60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                         40
                   40




                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                         20
                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                   0




                                                              0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75




                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                              (c) Changes in Demand qij                                                                                                                                                                  (d) Stickiness qij

               Figure 7: Good-level RER Decomposition qij = qijI + qijD + qijS for Various Countries (i) with the United States (j)

     Notes: Figure includes all goods z and all weeks t for which qij is defined, with the United States as country j and the other countries
     as country i. Histograms include frequency weights such that the contribution from each store is equalized within each country pair.
     We exclude the small number of observations where |qij | > 0.75. Y-axes plot percents.
                                     Austria                                   Denmark                                    Germany                                        Finland                                      Austria                                   Denmark                                    Germany                                         Finland




                    60




                                                               15




                                                                                                                                                         50




                                                                                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                          50




                                                                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                          40
                    40




                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                                         30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                          30




                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                          20
                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                               5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                          10
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75


                                     France                                     Ireland                                         Italy                                 Netherlands                                     France                                     Ireland                                         Italy                                  Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                               40




                                                                                                          50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
                    50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                          40
                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                                                               30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                          30
                    30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           30
                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                          20
                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                          10
                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75


                                     Norway                                    Portugal                                   Sweden                                              USA                                     Norway                                    Portugal                                   Sweden                                               USA
                    10




                                                                                                          15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                         5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                     10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                80
                    8




                                                                                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                     8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60
                                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                    6




                                                                                                                                                         3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
                    4




                                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                          5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                    2




                                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                     (a) Good-level RER (qij )                                                                                                                                                        (b) At Introduction qij
49




                                     Austria                                   Denmark                                    Germany                                        Finland                                      Austria                                   Denmark                                    Germany                                         Finland
                                                                                                          100




                                                                                                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                               80
                    80




                                                                                                          80




                                                                                                                                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                               60
                    60




                                                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                               40
                    40




                                                                                                          40




                                                                                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                               20
                    20




                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75


                                     France                                     Ireland                                         Italy                                 Netherlands                                     France                                     Ireland                                         Italy                                  Netherlands
                    100




                                                               100




                                                                                                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                                          80




                                                                                                                                                         80
                    80




                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                                         60
                    60




                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                          40




                                                                                                                                                         40
                    40




                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                         20
                    20




                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75


                                     Norway                                    Portugal                                   Sweden                                              USA                                     Norway                                    Portugal                                   Sweden                                               USA
                                                               100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          25
                    80




                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                          80




                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           30
                    60




                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                    40




                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                          40
                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                     10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                    20




                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                          20
                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                    0




                                                               0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                          -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25     0     .25   .5   .75        -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25   0   .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0      .25   .5   .75         -.75 -.5 -.25    0    .25   .5   .75




                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                               (c) Changes in Demand qij                                                                                                                                                                      (d) Stickiness qij

                            Figure 8: Good-level RER Decomposition qij = qijI + qijD + qijS for Various Countries (i) with Spain (j)

     Notes: Figure includes all goods z and all weeks t for which qij is defined, with Spain as country j and the other countries as country i.
     Histograms include frequency weights such that the contribution from each store is equalized within each country pair. We exclude the
     small number of observations where |qij | > 0.75. Y-axes plot percents.
                                 Austria and USA                          Canada and USA                          China and USA                        Spain and USA




                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                        .5
                   .4




                                                                                                 .6
                                                                                                 .4
                                                        .4
                   .2




                                                                                                 .2
                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                        0
                   0




                                                                                                 0
                   -.2




                                                        0




                                                                                                 -.4 -.2
                                                        -.2
                   -.4




                                                                                                                                        -.5
                             2009 2010 2011 2012 2013                 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013               2009 2010 2011 2012 2013             2009 2010 2011 2012 2013


                                Germany and USA                           Finland and USA                        France and USA                         Italy and USA
                   .4




                                                                                                                                        .6
                                                        .4




                                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                        .4
                                                        .2
                   .2




                                                                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                        0
                   0




                                                                                                 0
                                                        -.6 -.4 -.2




                                                                                                                                        0
                   -.2




                                                                                                 -.2




                                                                                                                                        -.4 -.2
                   -.4




                                                                                                 -.4
                             2009 2010 2011 2012 2013                 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013               2009 2010 2011 2012 2013             2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
50




                                  Japan and USA                           Mexico and USA                         Sweden and USA                   United Kingdom and USA
                   .6




                                                                                                                                        .5
                                                        .5




                                                                                                 .6
                   .4




                                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                        0
                   .2




                                                                                                 .2
                                                        0
                   0




                                                                                                 -.4 -.2 0




                                                                                                                                        -.5
                   -.4 -.2




                                                        -.5




                                                                                                                                        -1
                             2009 2010 2011 2012 2013                 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013               2009 2010 2011 2012 2013             2009 2010 2011 2012 2013



                                                                       Apple           Ikea                   H&M              Zara


                                      Figure 9: Evolution of Good-Level RERs at Introduction (qijI ) and the NER, Raw Data

     Notes: Figure plots median log good-level RER at the time of introduction for each week and store combination for each bilateral
     relationship shown, weighted such that the contribution from each store is equalized for each bilateral pair. The black line plots the log
     NER, normalized to equal zero in the beginning of the sample. The figure is therefore informative about the time-series co-movement
     between the RER and the NER, but not about the level. Any given good contributes (at most) to only one point in the figure. We drop
     the very limited number of observations where |qijI | > 0.75 or |qij | > 0.75.
                            Austria and USA                                   Canada and USA                    China and USA                    Spain and USA




                                                                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                      .2
                                                    .3
                  .2




                                                                                                     .1
                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                      .1
                  .1




                                                                                                     0
                                                    .1




                                                                                                                                      0
                  0




                                                                                                     -.1
                                                    0




                                                                                                                                      -.1
                  -.1




                                                    -.1




                                                                                                     -.2
                        2009 2010 2011 2012 2013                          2009 2010 2011 2012 2013         2009 2010 2011 2012 2013         2009 2010 2011 2012 2013


                           Germany and USA                                    Finland and USA                  France and USA                     Italy and USA
                  .3




                                                    .3




                                                                                                     .3




                                                                                                                                      .2
                  .2




                                                                                                     .2
                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                      .1
                  .1




                                                                                                     .1
                                                    .1
                  0




                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                     0
                                                    0
                  -.1




                                                                                                     -.1
                                                    -.1




                                                                                                                                      -.1
                        2009 2010 2011 2012 2013                          2009 2010 2011 2012 2013         2009 2010 2011 2012 2013         2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
51




                             Japan and USA                                    Mexico and USA                   Sweden and USA               United Kingdom and USA
                                                    0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
                  .3




                                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                      .2
                                                                                                     .3
                  .2




                                                                                                                                      .1
                                                                                                     .2
                  .1




                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                      -.1
                  0




                                                                                                     0
                  -.1




                                                                                                                                      -.2
                        2009 2010 2011 2012 2013                          2009 2010 2011 2012 2013         2009 2010 2011 2012 2013         2009 2010 2011 2012 2013



                                                   RER at Introduction                                                 Log Exchange Rate


                                  Figure 10: Evolution of Good-Level RERs at Introduction (qijI ) and the NER, Lowess

     Notes: Figure plots with a dashed red line the non-linear fit (using Stata’s “lowess” command with a bandwidth of 0.1) of the weighted
     median log good-level RER at the time of introduction for each week and store combination for each bilateral relationship, as shown in
     Figure 9. The black line plots the log NER, normalized to equal zero in the beginning of the sample.
