                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ARBITRAGE ASYMMETRY AND THE IDIOSYNCRATIC VOLATILITY PUZZLE

                                        Robert F. Stambaugh
                                           Jianfeng Yu
                                             Yu Yuan

                                        Working Paper 18560
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18560


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




We are grateful for helpful comments from Lubos Pastor and seminar participants at the University
of Minnesota, University of Oxford, University of Toronto, and the Shanghai Advanced Institute of
Finance. We also thank Edmund Lee and Jianan Liu for excellent research assistance. The views
expressedherein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of EconomicResearch.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Robert F. Stambaugh, Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Arbitrage Asymmetry and the Idiosyncratic Volatility Puzzle
Robert F. Stambaugh, Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan
NBER Working Paper No. 18560
November 2012
JEL No. G02,G12,G14

                                             ABSTRACT

Short selling, as compared to purchasing, faces greater risks and other potential impediments. This
arbitrage asymmetry explains the negative relation between idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) and average
return. The IVOL effect is negative among overpriced stocks but positive among underpriced stocks,with
mispricing determined by combining 11 return anomalies. The negative effect is stronger, consistentwith
asymmetry in risks and other impediments inhibiting arbitrageurs in exploiting overpricing. Aggregating
across all stocks therefore yields a negative relation, explaining the IVOL puzzle. Further supportingour
explanation is a negative relation over time between the IVOL effect and investor sentiment, especially
among overpriced stocks.


Robert F. Stambaugh                                 Yu Yuan
Finance Department                                  Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance
The Wharton School                                  Shanghai Jiao Tong University
University of Pennsylvania                          Datong Plaza, 211 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367                         P.R.China, 200030
and NBER                                            yuanyu@wharton.upenn.edu
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu

Jianfeng Yu
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South, Suite 3-122
Minneapolis MN 55455
jianfeng@umn.edu
1.        Introduction

Does a stock’s expected return depend on “idiosyncratic” volatility that does not arise from
systematic risk factors? This question has been investigated empirically since virtually the
inception of classical asset pricing theory. Earlier empirical investigations often find no
relation, consistent with classical theory, or they find a positive relation between expected
return and idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL). Much of the recent empirical literature on this
topic, beginning notably with Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006), instead finds a negative
relation between expected return and IVOL.1 While a positive relation is accommodated
by various theoretical departures from the classical paradigm, the negative relation has
presented more of a puzzle.2

   This study presents an explanation for the observed negative relation between IVOL and
expected return. We start with the proposition that IVOL creates arbitrage risk that deters
market participants from exploiting mispricing and thereby correcting prices.3 We then
combine this familiar concept with what we term arbitrage asymmetry—the observation
that potential short sellers wishing to exploit overpricing face impediments to arbitrage
more than do potential purchasers wishing to exploit underpricing.4

       Combining the effects of arbitrage risk and arbitrage asymmetry implies the observed
negative relation between IVOL and expected return. To see this, first note that stocks with
greater IVOL, and thus greater arbitrage risk, are more susceptible to mispricing. Among
overpriced stocks, the IVOL effect in expected return is therefore negative—those with the
highest IVOL are the most overpriced. Similarly, among underpriced stocks, the IVOL effect
   1
     Recent studies finding a negative relation include Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006, 2009), Jiang,
Xu, and Yao (2009), Guo and Savickas (2010), and Chen, Jiang, Xu, and Yao (2012). The classic study
finding no relation between expected return and IVOL is Fama and MacBeth (1973), who acknowledge the
methodological issues raised by Miller and Scholes (1972) in their reexamination of Douglas (1968). A more
recent study finding no relation is Bali and Cakici (2008). Studies finding a positive relation include Lintner
(1965), Tinic and West (1986), Lehmann (1990), Malkiel and Xu (2002), and Fu (2009).
   2
     Explanations for a positive relation include Merton (1987), Barberis and Huang (2001), Malkiel and Xu
(2002), and Jones and Rhodes-Kropf (2003).
   3
     Studies addressing the role of arbitrage risk in mispricing include DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and
Waldmann (1990), Pontiff (1996), Shleifer and Vishny (1997), Mendenhall (2002), Mitchell, Pulvino, and
Stafford (2002), Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002), Ali, Hwang, and Trombley (2003), Mashruwala, Rajgopal,
and Shevlin (2006), Pontiff (2006), Zhang (2006), Cao and Han (2010), Duan, Hu, and McLean (2010),
McLean (2010), Lam and Wei (2011), and Jin (2012).
   4
     Studies addressing the role of short-sale constraints and costs in the equity market include Miller (1977),
Figlewski (1981), Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002), Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002), Duffie, Garleanu
and Pedersen (2002), Jones and Lamont (2002), D’Avolio (2002), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), Lamont
(2004), Lamont and Stein (2004), Ofek, Richardson, and Whitelaw (2004), Nagel (2005), Avramov, Chordia,
Jostova, and Philipov (2012), and Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012a).


                                                       1
is positive, as the highest IVOL stocks are then the most underpriced. With arbitrage asym-
metry, however, more of the potential underpricing has been eliminated, thereby reducing
the differences in the degree of underpricing associated with different levels of IVOL. As a
result, the negative IVOL effect among overpriced stocks is stronger than the positive IVOL
effect among underpriced stocks. When aggregating across all stocks, the negative IVOL
effect therefore dominates and creates the observed IVOL puzzle.

       We argue that a principal source of arbitrage asymmetry is risk. Short sellers are exposed
to short-run price fluctuations requiring additional capital contributions more than are pur-
chasers of stock. This observation (novel, to our knowledge) applies in particular to what
is often termed “noise-trader” risk (e.g., Shleifer and Vishny, 1997)—the risk that adverse
price moves necessitate closing a position before the eventual correction of mispricing would
yield a profit. Also, the inherent skewness in compounded returns contributes to greater
tail risk for short sellers over holding periods likely to be relevant to professional investment
managers.

       Adding to the risk-related sources of arbitrage asymmetry are other impediments to
short selling that have been previously discussed in the literature. The sizes of institutions
engaged in shorting, such as hedge funds, are rather small in aggregate compared to the
sizes of mutual funds and other institutions that do not short. Hong and Sraer (2012) place
primary emphasis on this disparity in arguing that short sale impediments are important.5
D’Avolio (2002) finds that shorting costs, while generally low, increase in the dispersion of
opinion about a stock, consistent with a setting in which shorting becomes more expensive
precisely when less optimistic investors would wish to short a stock whose price is driven up
by the more optimistic investors.6

    Our explanation of the IVOL puzzle is supported by the data. A key element of our em-
pirical work is constructing a proxy for mispricing. For this purpose, we average each stock’s
rankings associated with 11 return anomalies that survive adjustment for the three factors of
Fama and French (1993). Sorting stocks based on this composite anomaly ranking allows us
to investigate the IVOL effect within various degrees of relative mispricing. As predicted by
arbitrage risk combined with arbitrage asymmetry, the IVOL effect is significantly negative
(positive) among the most overpriced (underpriced) stocks, and the negative effect among
   5
     In making this point, the authors cite the low use of actual shorting by mutual funds, often due to
investment policy restrictions, as documented by Almazan, Brown, Carlson, and Chapman (2004), as well
as mutual funds’ low use of derivatives, as documented by Koski and Pontiff (1999).
   6
     Lamont (2004) discusses various impediments to short selling, and he also argues that impediments can
become more severe precisely when a stock becomes more overpriced, sometimes due to action by a firm to
deter shorting of its stock.


                                                    2
the overpriced stocks is significantly stronger.

   Additional implications of our explanation emerge when considering variation through
time in the likely market-wide direction of mispricing. Periods when overpricing is its
strongest are also those when we should observe the strongest negative IVOL effect among
stocks classified as relatively overpriced by the cross-sectional anomaly ranking. Similarly,
periods when underpricing is its strongest are those when we should observe the strongest
positive IVOL effect among stocks classified as relatively underpriced. With arbitrage asym-
metry, this variation in IVOL effects through time should be stronger for the stocks that are
relatively overpriced. Compared with low sentiment periods, during high sentiment periods
the negative IVOL effect among overpriced stocks is stronger, whereas the positive IVOL
effect among the underpriced stocks is weaker. Thus, when aggregating across all stocks, the
average negative relation between IVOL and expected return observed by previous studies
should be stronger in periods when there is a market-wide tendency for overpricing.

       To identify periods when a given mispricing direction is more likely, we use the index
of market-wide investor sentiment constructed by Baker and Wurgler (2006).7 Consistent
with the above predictions, the negative IVOL effect among overpriced stocks is significantly
stronger following months when investor sentiment is high, and the positive IVOL effect
among underpriced stocks is significantly stronger following months when investor senti-
ment is low. These inferences are further supported by finding that a time series regression
of an IVOL return spread (high minus low) on investor sentiment produces a significantly
negative coefficient for both the overpriced and underpriced stocks. Arbitrage asymmetry
implies that this variation over time in IVOL effects should be stronger among the over-
priced stocks. Consistent with this prediction, the time-series regression reveals significantly
stronger sentiment-related variation in the IVOL effect among the overpriced stocks. When
aggregating across stocks, the overall negative IVOL effect on expected return should be
stronger following high sentiment, and this prediction is also confirmed in our results.

    We focus here on explaining the relation between IVOL and expected return, but there
are additional empirical implications of our setting. In particular, among high-IVOL stocks,
mispricing, especially overpricing, should be stronger than among low-IVOL stocks. These
implications are in fact supported by Jin (2012), who finds that long-short spreads based
   7
    Related studies that investigate the role of investor sentiment in cross-sectional returns include Baker
and Wurgler (2006, 2007), Lemmon and Portniaguina (2006), Bergman and Roychowdhury (2008), Kaniel,
Saar, and Titman (2008), Frazzini and Lamont (2008), Livnat and Petrovic (2008), Antoniou, Doukas, and
Subrahmanyam (2012), Baker, Wurgler, and Yuan (2012), Chung, Hung, and Yeh (2012), Shen and Yu
(2012), and Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012a, 2012b).



                                                     3
on a wide range of anomalies are more profitable among high-IVOL stocks, and this effect
is especially strong for the short-leg profits. Li and Sullivan (2011) examine two of those
anomalies and similarly find that high-IVOL stocks provide greater long-short return spreads.
In another related study, Cao and Han (2010) explore the role of IVOL-related arbitrage risk
in mispricing. Those authors also sort stocks based on a composite of anomaly rankings, and
they also find a significantly negative (positive) IVOL effect among the relatively overpriced
(underpriced) stocks. Their results do not display a substantial asymmetry in the strength of
those IVOL effects, nor do they discuss asymmetry or the IVOL puzzle.8 Our hypothesized
role of arbitrage asymmetry in the IVOL effect is consistent with the event-study results of
Doran, Jiang, and Peterson (2012), who conclude that high-IVOL stocks experience negative
returns after short-sale constraints are relaxed.

       Alternative explanations of the IVOL puzzle appear in a number of studies. Jiang, Xu,
and Yao (2009) argue that high IVOL is associated with firms that disclose less and that the
market does not correctly assess the negative valuation implication associated with selec-
tive low disclosure. Boehme, Danielson, Kumar, and Sorescu (2009) find that the negative
IVOL effect flips to positive when firms with high institutional ownership and high shorting
activity are eliminated. Boyer, Mitton, and Vorkink (2010) conclude that a negative rela-
tion between expected return and idiosyncratic skewness is at least a partial explanation for
the IVOL puzzle. Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011) argue that the IVOL puzzle reflects a
preference for lottery-like payoffs, captured better by maximum past return than by IVOL.
Huang, Liu, Rhee, and Zhang (2010) conclude that IVOL proxies for a return-reversal effect.
Barinov (2011) and Chen and Petkova (2012) conclude that IVOL proxies for sensitivity to a
priced volatility factor. While these alternative explanations may all be at work, they seem
challenged to reconcile the joint set of empirical results we present here: (i) the sign of the
IVOL effect depends on whether stocks are identified as overpriced or underpriced, (ii) the
negative (positive) IVOL effect among overpriced (underpriced) stocks is stronger following
high (low) investor sentiment, and (iii) both of the previous results are stronger among the
overpriced stocks.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our measure of
relative cross-sectional mispricing, based on a composite ranking that combines 11 return
anomalies. Section 3 discusses arbitrage asymmetry, focusing in particular on asymmetry
in various risks faced by arbitrageurs. Section 4 presents our basic results showing that
   8
    A potential reason that asymmetry does not emerge as a feature of their study is that their anomaly
ranking measure could contain less information about mispricing, in that it combines only four anomalies,
instead of our eleven, and two of those four are size and book-to-market, for which a mispricing interpretation
must contend with a significant literature arguing that those variables instead proxy for risk.


                                                      4
the IVOL effect is positive among underpriced stocks but more strongly negative among
overpriced stocks. Section 5 explores the time-series implications of our setting, using investor
sentiment as a proxy for the likely direction of market-wide tendencies toward overpricing
or underpricing. Section 6 reviews the study’s main conclusions.



2.      Identifying Mispricing

In our setting, mispricing is essentially the difference between the observed price and the price
that would otherwise prevail in the absence of arbitrage risk and other arbitrage impediments.
Of course, mispricing is not directly observable, and the best we can do is to construct an
imperfect proxy for it. An obvious resource for this purpose is the evidence on return
anomalies, which are differences in average returns that challenge risk-based models. We
first describe our approach to constructing a mispricing measure based on anomalies, and
we then detail our 11 return anomalies taken from the literature.


2.1.     Mispricing Measure

We combine the anomalies to produce a univariate monthly measure that correlates with
the degree of relative mispricing in the cross section of stocks. While each anomaly is itself
a mispricing measure, our objective in combining them is to produce a single measure that
diversifies away some noise in each individual anomaly and thereby increases precision when
exploring the empirical implications of our setting.

     Our method for combining the anomalies is simple. For each anomaly, we assign a rank
to each stock that reflects the sorting on that given anomaly variable, where the highest
rank is assigned to the value of the anomaly variable associated with the lowest average
abnormal return, as reported in the literature. For example, one documented anomaly is
that high asset growth in the previous year is followed by low return (Cooper, Gulen, and
Schill, 2008). We therefore rank firms each month by asset growth, and those with the
highest growth receive the highest rank. The higher the rank, the greater the relative degree
of overpricing according to the given anomaly variable. A stock’s composite rank is then the
arithmetic average of its ranks for each of the 11 anomalies. Thus, we refer to the stocks
with the highest composite ranking as the most “overpriced” and to those with the lowest
ranking as the most “underpriced.” The mispricing measure is purely cross-sectional, so
it is important to note that these designations at best denote only relative mispricing. At

                                               5
any given time, for example, a stock identified as the most underpriced might actually be
overpriced. The intent of the measure is simply that such stocks would then be the least
overpriced within the cross section. We return to this point later, when investigating the
role of investor sentiment over time.

   Evidence that our mispricing measure is effective in diversifying some of the noise in
anomaly rankings can be found in the range of average returns produced by sorting on
our measure. For example, if each month we assign stocks to ten categories based on our
measure and then form a value-weighted portfolio for each decile, the following month’s
spread in benchmark-adjusted returns between the two extreme deciles averages 1.48% over
our sample period, 8/1965–1/2011. (The returns are adjusted for exposures to the three
equity benchmarks constructed by Fama and French, 1993: MKT, SMB, and HML.) In
comparison, if value-weighted decile portfolios are first formed for each individual anomaly
ranking, and then the returns on those portfolios are combined with equal weights across
the 11 anomalies, the corresponding spread between the extreme deciles is 0.86%. In other
words, averaging the anomaly rankings produces an extra 62 basis points per month as
compared to averaging the anomaly returns. (The t-statistic of the difference is 5.22.)

   We also find in the above comparison that ranking on our mispricing measure creates
additional abnormal return primarily among the stocks classified as overpriced. For exam-
ple, of the 62-basis-point improvement in the long-short return spread reported above, 58
basis points come from the most overpriced portfolio—the short leg of the corresponding
arbitrage strategy—and only 4 basis points come from the most underpriced—the long leg.
This asymmetry in improvement in arbitrage profits is consistent with arbitrage asymmetry:
With the latter asymmetry, one expects overpricing to be greater than underpricing, so a
better identification of mispricing should yield greater improvement in arbitrage profits for
overpriced stocks than for underpriced stocks.


2.2.    Anomalies

To our knowledge, these anomalies constitute a fairly comprehensive list of those that survive
adjustment for the three factors of Fama and French (1993). The same anomalies are used
by Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012a).

   1 and 2: Financial Distress

   Financial distress is often invoked to explain otherwise anomalous patterns in the cross-


                                              6
section of stock returns. However, Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) find that firms
with high failure probability have lower rather than higher subsequent returns (anomaly 1).
Campbell et al. suggest that their finding is a challenge to standard models of rational asset
pricing. The failure probability is estimated by a dynamic logit model with both accounting
and equity market variables as explanatory variables. Using Ohlson’s (1980) O-score as the
distress measure yields similar results (anomaly 2). Ohlson’s (1980) O-score is calculated
as the probability of bankruptcy in a static model using accounting variables, such as net
income divided by assets, working capital divided by market assets, current liability divided
by current assets, and etc. The failure probability is different with the O-score in that it is
estimated by a dynamic, rather than a static model, and that the model uses several equity
market variables, such as stock prices, book-to-market, stock volatility, relative size to the
S&P 500, and cumulative excess return relative to S&P 500.

   3 and 4: Net Stock Issues and Composite Equity Issues

   The stock issuing market has been long viewed as producing an anomaly arising from
sentiment-driven mispricing: smart managers issue shares when sentiment-driven traders
push prices to overvalued levels. Ritter (1991) and Loughran and Ritter (1995) show that,
in post-issue years, equity issuers underperform matching nonissuers with similar character-
istics (anomaly 3). We measure net stock issues as the growth rate of the split-adjusted
shares outstanding in the previous fiscal year. Daniel and Titman (2006) study an alterna-
tive measure, composite equity issuance, defined as the amount of equity a firm issues (or
retires) in exchange for cash or services. Under this measure, seasoned issues and share-based
acquisitions increase the issuance measure, while repurchases, dividends and other actions
that take cash out of the firm reduce this issuance measure. They also find that issuers
underperform nonissuers (anomaly 4).

   5: Total Accruals

   Sloan (1996) shows that firms with high accruals earn abnormal lower returns on average
than firms with low accruals, and suggests that investors overestimate the persistence of
the accrual component of earnings when forming earnings expectations. Here, total accruals
are calculated as changes in non-cash working capital minus depreciation expense scaled by
average total assets for previous two fiscal years.

   6: Net Operating Assets

   Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004) find that net operating assets, defined as the


                                               7
difference on the balance sheet between all operating assets and all operating liabilities scaled
by total assets, is a strong negative predictor of long-run stock returns. They suggest that
investors with limited attention tend to focus on accounting profitability, neglecting infor-
mation about cash profitability, in which case net operating assets, equivalently measured
as the cumulative difference between operating income and free cash flow, captures such a
bias.

   7: Momentum

   The momentum effect, discovered by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), is one of the most
robust anomalies in asset pricing. It refers to the phenomenon that high past recent recent
returns forecast high future returns. The momentum portfolios we use are ranked based on
cumulative returns from month -7 to month -2, and the holding period for these portfolios
is 6-month. That is, it is a 6/1/6 momentum strategy.

   8: Gross Profitability Premium

   Novy-Marx (2012a) discovers that sorting on gross-profit-to-assets creates abnormal benchmark-
adjusted returns, with more profitable firms having higher returns than less profitable ones.
Novy-Marx (2012a) argues that gross profits (item GP) scaled by assets (item AT) are the
cleanest accounting measure of true economic profitability. The farther down the income
statement one goes, the more polluted profitability measures become, and the less related
they are to true economic profitability.

   9: Asset Growth

   Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008) find companies that grow their total asset more earn
lower subsequent returns. They suggest that this phenomenon is due to investors’ initial
overreaction to changes in future business prospects implied by asset expansions. Asset
growth is measured as the growth rate of the total assets (item AT) in the previous fiscal
year.

   10: Return on Assets

    Fama and French (2006) find that more profitable firms have higher expected returns than
less profitable firms. Chen, Novy-Marx, and Zhang (2010) show that firms with higher past
return-on-assets earn abnormally higher subsequent returns. Return-on-assets measured as
the ratio of the quarterly earnings (item IBQ) and last quarter’s assets (item ATQ). Wang
and Yu (2010) find that the anomaly exists primarily among firms with high arbitrage costs


                                               8
and high information uncertainty, suggesting that mispricing is a culprit.

     11: Investment-to-Assets

     Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004) and Xing (2008) show that higher past investment predicts
abnormally lower future returns. Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004) attribute this anomaly to
investors’ initial underreactions to the overinvestment caused by managers’ empire-building
behavior. Here, investment-to-assets are measured as the annual change in gross property,
plant, and equipment plus the annual change in inventories scaled by the lagged book value
of assets.



3.      Arbitrage Risk and Asymmetry

Arbitrageurs face various risks. One source of risk, often termed “noise-trader” risk (e.g.,
Shleifer and Vishny, 1997), is that adverse price moves can require additional capital in
order to maintain positions that involve shorting or leverage. As a result, capital constraints
can necessitate closing positions before realizing profits that would ultimately result from
corrections of mispricing. Another source of risk is simply new information. An arbitrageur
can purchase a stock today that he correctly identifies as underpriced based on available
information, but negative information about the stock’s fundamental value can later be
revealed and cause a loss. Investment managers often care about performance over relatively
short periods such as a year. Sufficiently bad performance over such periods, whether from
noise traders or new information, could cost a manager his job, or at least reduce the capital
that investors allow him to manage.

     Our setting combines two simple concepts. First, greater arbitrage risk allows greater
mispricing, as such risk deters arbitrageurs from exploiting mispricing and thereby correct-
ing it. Second, arbitrage impediments are asymmetric, inhibiting short selling of overpriced
stocks more than they inhibit purchasing of underpriced stocks. Combining these two con-
cepts yields the implication that a given difference in arbitrage risk is associated with a
greater average degree of overpricing as compared to underpricing.

     The above implication follows generally, whatever the source of asymmetry in arbitrage
impediments. As discussed earlier, previously noted potential sources of asymmetric imped-
iments include restrictions against short selling faced by many institutions, such as mutual
funds, as well as occasionally high shorting costs. A key source of asymmetric impediments,
although perhaps one less recognized, is arbitrage risk itself. In the first subsection below,

                                              9
we discuss why short sellers face greater arbitrage risk than purchasers.

   If arbitrageurs can neutralize their exposure to benchmark risks, a seemingly reasonable
assumption, then idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL), as opposed to total volatility, is more
closely related to arbitrage risk. Moreover, arbitrageurs can hold positions in multiple stocks
at a given time, thereby enjoying diversification benefits. Therefore, the IVOL of the return
on a portfolio of stocks that are overpriced more directly translates to arbitrage risk for a
short seller, as compared to the IVOL’s of the individual stocks. Similarly, the IVOL of a
portfolio of underpriced stocks translates more directly to arbitrage risk for a purchaser.9 In
the second subsection below, we examine the idiosyncratic volatilities of returns on portfolios
formed within various levels of our mispricing measure.


3.1.       Asymmetric Arbitrage Risk

The risks faced by arbitrageurs are likely to be greater for short sellers than for purchasers.
Consider first the risk that additional capital will be required to maintain a position. As
noted above, this is a feature of noise-trader risk. In general, shorting requires that a margin
deposit be maintained at some percentage of position size. If the price of the shorted stock
rises, increasing the position size, additional margin capital can be required. A purchaser
who does not employ leverage does not face margin calls, so in that case the greater risk
facing the short seller is obvious.

       A short seller still faces greater risk of a margin call even compared to a purchaser who
buys on margin. To see this, note first that a position’s margin ratio, which must typically
be maintained above a specified maintenance level, is computed as
                                                   equity
                                          m=                  .                                        (1)
                                                position size
Now consider a short seller and a purchaser, identical in terms of both equity and position
sizes, who subsequently experience identical adverse rates of return on their underlying
securities. Given the identical absolute return magnitudes, the short seller and purchaser
lose identical amounts of equity, so they still have identical values for the numerator in
(1). The new denominators differ from each other, however. The position size decreases
for the purchaser but increases for the short seller, so the short seller’s m declines by a
   9
    One might note that the underlying issue is essentially the manner and extent to which correlations
among benchmark-adjusted returns enter portfolio volatilities. If the benchmark-adjusted returns are id-
iosyncratic in the strongest sense—uncorrelated with each other across all stocks—the individual-stock IVOL
remains the relevant quantity. See Pontiff (2006) for a discussion of this point.


                                                    10
greater amount. This asymmetry leaves short sellers more exposed to margin calls. For
example, if both the long and short positions are established with m = 50%, and they both
have maintenance requirements of m = 25%, the purchaser receives a margin call if the
security price drops by 33%, whereas the short seller receives a call if the price increases
by 20%. In practice, this asymmetry is magnified by stricter maintenance requirements for
short positions. For example, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), which
regulates U.S. brokerage firms, specifies m = 25% for long positions but m = 30% for short
positions.10 With the latter requirement, the above short seller receives a margin call if the
price increases by only 15.4%, less than half the percentage move triggering a call on the
long position.

   The risk of a large loss over an evaluation period such as a year can also be greater for
the short seller simply because of the skewness inherent to compounded returns. Suppose a
short seller and purchaser initially start with equal position sizes. If each of them experiences
the same adverse percentage change in value of their underlying securities in the first month,
their dollar losses are the same in that month. If that month is followed by another month of
identical adverse percentage changes in security values, the short seller’s total two-month loss
then exceeds that of the purchaser. The reason is that, after the first month, the purchaser’s
position size decreases while the short seller’s position increases. In essence, the compounding
effect positively skews multiperiod returns, and the positive skewness translates to greater
tail risk for a short seller. To better see the potential effect of such tail risk, suppose a short
seller and a purchaser take equal sized positions in underlying portfolios each having monthly
returns that are lognormal with a standard deviation of 4%. The short seller’s underlying
portfolio has an expected monthly return, after trading costs, equal to -0.50%, whereas
the purchaser’s portfolio has an expected return of 0.50%. Now consider the 1% Value-at-
Risk (VaR) over 12 months—the amount of 12-month dollar loss for which the probability
of a greater loss is equal to 1% (assuming both positions remain open). Straightforward
calculations reveal that the short seller’s VaR is 22% greater than the purchaser’s VaR.

   Another source of asymmetry in arbitrage risk is that short positions can occasionally
be squeezed. As with the noise-trader risk mentioned earlier, this risk can necessitate the
premature closing of an eventually profitable position. Specifically, a lender can recall a
stock loan, at which point the short seller can find it difficult to locate a new lender.11 There
is no corresponding risk for long positions.
  10
    See FINRA Rule 4210.
  11
    This risk is discussed, for example, by Dechow, Hutton, Meulbroek, and Sloan (2001), who cite circum-
stances surrounding the stock of Amazon.com in June 1998 as as a notable instance of a short squeeze.



                                                   11
3.2.     Idiosyncratic Volatilities of Portfolios

This study provides an explanation of the previously reported negative relation between
average return and IVOL, where IVOL is computed at the individual-stock level (Ang,
Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang, 2006). As noted earlier, arbitrage risk, which is central to our
explanation, is more appropriately related to the idiosyncratic volatility of a portfolio than
to a single stock. Thus, an important step in our empirical investigation is to confirm that
differences among individual-stock IVOL’s translate to corresponding differences in portfolio
IVOL’s.

   Table 1 reports idiosyncratic volatilities of portfolio returns sorted by mispricing and
individual-stock IVOL. We compute individual-stock IVOL following Ang, Hodrick, Xing,
and Zhang (2006), using the most recent month’s daily benchmark-adjusted returns.12 The
latter returns are computed as the residuals in a regression of each stock’s daily return on
the three factors defined by Fama and French (1993): MKT, SMB, and HML. Each month,
portfolios are formed by sorting first on the mispricing measure, forming five categories, and
then by sorting within each of those categories by individual-stock IVOL, again forming five
categories. At both stages, equal numbers of stocks are allocated to each category. The stocks
within each of the resulting 25 portfolios are value weighted to form the portfolio returns.
The portfolio IVOL’s reported in Table 1 are computed using the monthly portfolio returns,
adjusted by the Fama-French factors, over the sample period covering 8/1965–1/2011.

   The results in Table 1 confirm that within each level of mispricing, portfolio IVOL obeys
the same ordering as the underlying individual-stock IVOL used in the sorting. For exam-
ple, within the category of the most overpriced securities, the highest-IVOL portfolio has a
monthly IVOL of 4.43%, and then IVOL’s decline monotonically to 2.55% for the lowest-
IVOL portfolio. Within the category of the most underpriced, we see portfolio IVOL’s decline
monotonically from 3.42% for the highest-IVOL portfolio to 1.83% for the lowest-IVOL port-
folio. Similar patterns occur in the other three mispricing categories. We can thus conclude
that diversification does not eliminate the differences in arbitrage risk that trace to different
levels of individual-stock IVOL.

   Another result evident in Table 1 is that IVOL is higher among overpriced stocks than
among underpriced stocks. This asymmetry in IVOL’s is in fact consistent with our hypoth-
  12
    This method is common in recent studies, but there are alternative approaches, such as the EGARCH
model in Fu (2009). Guo, Kassa, and Ferguson (2012), and Fink, Fink, and He (2012) argue that the
positive relation between expected return and IVOL found by Fu (2009) owes to the use of contemporaneous
information in the conditional variance model and does not survive after controlling for such information.


                                                   12
esized setting. If arbitrage risk is an important determinant of the degree of mispricing, then
the more mispriced securities will tend to have higher risk. With asymmetric impediments
to arbitrage, however, overpricing is more likely than underpricing. Sorting on a relative mis-
pricing measure is therefore likely to be more effective at the overpriced end in identifying
high-risk stocks. If the impediments to arbitrage were instead symmetric, one should expect
a U-shaped pattern in going from the top to the bottom of Table 1. With the asymmetry,
the U-shape gets weakened among the underpriced stocks in the bottom rows. As a result,
we see at best only the hint of a U-shape.



4.      Mispricing and IVOL Effects

Table 2 presents the first set of our main results. The table reports average benchmark-
adjusted monthly returns for each of the same 25 double sorted portfolios in Table 1. We
see results consistent with the role of IVOL-driven arbitrage risk in mispricing. Among the
securities most likely to be mispriced, as identified by our mispricing measure, we expect
to see the magnitude of mispricing increase with IVOL. The patterns in average returns
are consistent with that prediction. For the most overpriced securities, the average re-
turns are negative and monotonically decreasing in IVOL, with the difference between the
highest- and lowest-IVOL portfolios equal to -1.77% per month (t-statistic: -7.87). For the
most underpriced securities, the average returns are positive and monotonically increasing in
IVOL, with the difference between the highest- and lowest-IVOL portfolios equal to 0.52%
per month (t-statistic: 2.93). For the stocks in the middle of the mispricing scale, there
is no apparent IVOL effect: there is no monotonicity, and the highest-versus-lowest differ-
ence is only -0.18% per month (t-statistic: -0.97). The role of mispricing in determining
the strength and direction of IVOL effects is readily apparent in Figure 1, which plots the
average benchmark-adjusted returns reported in Table 2.

     Also evident in Table 2 and Figure 1 is the asymmetry in IVOL effects predicted by asym-
metry in arbitrage impediments. The negative IVOL effect among the overpriced stocks is
stronger than the positive IVOL effect among the underpriced stocks. The negative highest-
versus-lowest difference among the most overpriced stocks is 3.4 times the magnitude of the
corresponding positive difference among the most underpriced stocks. This asymmetry ex-
plains the negative IVOL effect obtained when aggregating across all stocks, as shown in the
last row of Table 2. Among all stocks, consistent with the IVOL puzzle, average return is
monotonically decreasing in IVOL, with the highest-versus-lowest difference equal to -1.30%


                                              13
per month (t-statistic: -6.92).

    An additional implication of our setting is that the degree of mispricing, especially over-
pricing, should be greater among high-IVOL stocks than among low-IVOL stocks. We see
this implication supported as well. The difference in average portfolio returns between the
most overpriced stocks and the most underpriced stocks is negative and decreasing in IVOL,
as shown in the next to last row in Table 2. The difference between that short-long differ-
ence for the highest-IVOL portfolios versus the lowest-IVOL portfolios is -2.28% per month
(t-statistic: -8.48). These results are consistent with those of Jin (2012), who finds that
that long-short spreads on each of ten anomalies are more profitable among high-IVOL
stocks than among low-IVOL stocks, and that this difference in profitability is attributable
primarily to the short legs of each strategy.

    Recall that Table 2 is constructed by first sorting stocks into five categories based on the
mispricing measure and then, within each mispricing quintile, sorting stocks into five cate-
gories based on IVOL. This dependent two-way sort allows us to focus on how IVOL effects
depend on the direction and degree of mispricing. At the same time, however, the dependent
sort potentially sacrifices some clarity in understanding how these IVOL effects aggregate
across stocks to deliver the overall negative IVOL relation, since the breakpoints for IVOL
differ across mispricing quintiles. As a robustness check, we also do an independent two-way
sort, so that each of the mispricing-IVOL combinations simply contains the intersection of
separate one-way sorts on mispricing and IVOL. The same 5 × 5 array reported in Table 2 is
reported in Table 3, but with the independent sort replacing the dependent sort. As before,
we see a significantly positive monthly return difference between high-IVOL and low-IVOL
stocks among the most underpriced stocks (0.45 percent, t-statistic: 2.38), and we see a
stronger negative IVOL effect among the most overpriced stocks (-1.39 percent, t-statistic:
-6.58). Since the IVOL breakpoints are the same across the mispricing quintiles in Table 3,
it is easier to see how the IVOL effects within those quintiles aggregate to deliver the overall
negative IVOL effect reported in the last row of Table 2.13
  13
     As an additional robustness check, we also recompute Table 2 using equally weighted portfolios rather
than value-weighted portfolios, and the results are very similar: (i) a positive IVOL effect among the most
underpriced (0.40 percent, t-statistic: 3.45), (ii) a stronger negative IVOL effect among the most overpriced
(-1.48 percent, t-statistic: -9.02), and (iii) a negative overall IVOL effect (-0.73 percent, t-statistic: -6.37).




                                                       14
5.     Time-Varying IVOL Effects

In our setting, the IVOL effects in expected return hinge on mispricing. If the degree
and direction of mispricing vary over time, so should the IVOL effects. To investigate
such time-varying IVOL effects, we need to identify variation over time in the tendency for
general overpricing or underpricing in the stock market. For this purpose, we rely on the
index of market-wide investor sentiment constructed by Baker and Wurgler (2006). The
Baker-Wurgler (BW) index is constructed as the first principal component of six underlying
measures of investor sentiment: the average closed-end fund discount, the number and the
first-day returns of IPO’s, NYSE turnover, the equity share of total new issues, and the
dividend premium (log difference of average market/book of dividend payers vs. nonpayers).

   The first subsection below investigates whether IVOL effects vary over time with investor
sentiment in a manner predicted by our explanation. The results indicate that they do. For
this initial investigation of sentiment effects, we use the “raw” version of the BW index
from which macroeconomic effects are not removed. The reason for doing so is that investor
sentiment could be related to macroeconomic factors. For example, when the economy is
doing well, investors could also be more optimistic, and thus more likely to push prices above
fundamental values. While such macro-related sentiment effects are perfectly consistent
with our setting, many readers might ask whether they play a role in our results. In the
second subsection below, we investigate this question by using Baker and Wurgler’s (2006)
alternative sentiment measure, which removes the effects of six macro variables. We further
include six additional macro variables that previous empirical studies relate to expected
stock returns. Our results point to little or no role for macro factors in the sentiment-related
variation in the IVOL effects that we observe.


5.1.    Investor Sentiment and IVOL Effects

Recall that our mispricing measure at best identifies only relative mispricing. Periods of
high investor sentiment, when overpricing in the stock market is more likely in general, are
also those times when our relatively overpriced stocks are more likely to be overpriced in
absolute terms. At such times, the negative IVOL effect among our “overpriced” stocks
should be stronger than at other times. That is, the IVOL effect (highest minus lowest)
should be negatively related to the level of investor sentiment among the overpriced stocks.
Similarly, in periods of low investor sentiment, our relatively underpriced stocks are more
likely to be underpriced in absolute terms. At those times, the positive IVOL effect among

                                              15
our “underpriced” stocks should be stronger than otherwise. In other words, among the
underpriced stocks as well, the IVOL effect (highest minus lowest) should be negatively
related to the level of investor sentiment. Therefore, among both overpriced and underpriced
stocks, the IVOL effect should be negatively related to investor sentiment. As a result, the
overall negative IVOL effect observed when aggregating across stocks should be stronger
following high sentiment.

   To explore the above implications, Table 4 repeats the analysis in Table 2 separately for
high-sentiment and low-sentiment months. The three intermediate categories of IVOL are
omitted to save space in Table 4. Figure 2 displays the averages for all five IVOL categories
in low-sentiment and high-sentiment months. A high-sentiment month is one in which the
value of the BW sentiment index at the end of the previous month is above the median
value for the 1965:8–2011:1 sample period, while the low-sentiment months are those with
below-median index values in the previous month.

   The results in Table 4 and Figure 2 support the implications of our setting. First ob-
serve that among all stocks (bottom row), the negative IVOL effect is significantly stronger
following high sentiment, as predicted. The spread between the highest-IVOL and lowest-
IVOL average returns is -2.02% following high sentiment compared to -0.58% following low
sentiment—a difference of -1.44% (t-statistic: -3.74). Also as predicted, the relatively over-
priced stocks exhibit this same pattern. Among the most overpriced stocks, the spread
between the highest-IVOL and lowest-IVOL average returns is -2.28% following high senti-
ment compared to -1.25% following low sentiment—a difference of -1.03% (t-statistic: -2.37).
For the most underpriced stocks, the positive IVOL effect is stronger following low sentiment
than following high sentiment: Among those stocks, the spread between the highest-IVOL
and lowest-IVOL average returns is 0.16% following high sentiment compared to 0.87% fol-
lowing low sentiment—a difference of -0.71% (t-statistic: -1.96). These results go in the
direction of supporting arbitrage asymmetry as well, in that the sentiment-related difference
in IVOL effects is somewhat larger for the most overpriced stocks, although the t-statistic
for the difference is modest (-0.63). When interpreting this last result, one should probably
consider that a binary split between high- and low-sentiment periods, while useful in its
simplicity, does not necessarily yield the most powerful test. We next turn to time-series
regression as an alternative approach.

   Table 5 reports the results of regressing excess returns or return spreads in month t
on the variable St−1 , the level of the BW index at the end of the previous month. Also
included as independent variables are the contemporaneous realizations of the Fama-French


                                             16
factors (MKT, SMB, and HML), so the slope on St−1 reflects sentiment-related variation in
the benchmark-adjusted returns. The dependent variable in the regressions is either (i) the
(excess) return on the highest-IVOL portfolio, (ii) the return on the lowest-IVOL portfolio, or
(iii) the difference between those returns. These three regressions are run separately within
each mispricing category and within the overall stock universe.

   The results in Table 5 are again supportive of our setting’s implications. Consistent with
Table 4, the IVOL effect (highest minus lowest IVOL) is negatively related to investor sen-
timent. Within the overall stock universe, the slope on St−1 is equal to -0.79 (t-statistic:
-3.86), meaning that a one-standard-deviation swing in St−1 is associated with a 79-basis-
point difference in the IVOL effect. In addition, that negative slope is largest in magnitude
among the most overpriced stocks, and the difference between the slopes for the most over-
priced versus the most underpriced stocks is equal to -0.59 (t-statistic: -2.58).

   Our use of the BW index as an independent variable in time-series regressions follows, for
example, Baker and Wurgler (2006) and Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012a). One potential
concern in any time-series regression is that a seemingly significant relation is spurious.
This concern looms larger, the weaker is the prior motivation for the independent variable.
Investor sentiment has long been entertained as exerting a significant influence on stock prices
(e.g., Keynes, 1936), but spurious-regressor concerns can nevertheless arise. Indeed such a
concern with regard to investor sentiment is raised by Novy-Marx (2012b). Simulations
reported by Stambaugh, Yu and Yuan (2012b) reveal that the spurious regressor concern
is greatly diminished when considering the ability of such a regressor to generate predicted
results across a number of regressions.


5.2.    Exploring macroeconomic effects

As mentioned earlier, investor sentiment could be related to macroeconomic factors. It is
quite possible, for example, that when macroeconomic conditions are especially good, some
investors also become too optimistic and push equity prices above levels justified by funda-
mental values. Similarly, during recessions, some investors could become too pessimistic and
undervalue stocks as a result. As long as high (low) sentiment makes overpricing (under-
pricing) more likely, the extent to which sentiment relates to the macroeconomy does not
affect the implications explored above. Nevertheless, the extent to which macroeconomic
conditions play a role in our results are of potential interest.

   Baker and Wurgler (2006) construct an alternative sentiment index that removes macro-

                                               17
related variation by regressing their raw sentiment measures on six macro variables: the
growth in industrial production, the growth in durable, nondurable, and services consump-
tion, the growth in employment, and a flag for NBER recessions. Panel A of Table 6 repeats
the regressions in Table 5 using this alternative sentiment index. The results are very similar
to those in Table 5, indicating no important role for the six Baker-Wurgler macro variables
in the former results. In Panel B of Table 5, we repeat the regression in Panel A but add six
additional macro-related independent variables: the default premium, the term premium,
the real interest rate, the inflation rate, the consumption surplus ratio, and CAY. These
variables are often identified as being related to expected stock returns, so they seem espe-
cially relevant for exploring the role of macroeconomic conditions in our results. The default
premium is defined as the yield spread between BAA and AAA bonds, and the term pre-
mium is defined as the spread between 20-year and 1-year Treasuries. The real interest rate
is defined as the most recent monthly difference between the 30-day T-bill return and the
CPI inflation rate. The consumption surplus ratio defined in Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
Cay is the consumption-wealth variable defined in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001).14 The con-
clusions summarized previously based on Table 5 are again unchanged if instead based Panel
B of Table 6. Overall, the results in Table 6 indicate that the sentiment-related variation in
IVOL effects admit little or no role for the macro variables included in our investigation.

    We do not include macro variables directly related to the stock market, such as dividend
yield. In this sense, our choice of macro variables differs from that of Sibley, Xing, and Zhang
(2012). Those authors investigate whether it is macro-related sentiment or non-macro-related
sentiment that displays the ability to predict anomaly returns, as documented in Stambaugh,
Yu, and Yuan (2012a). Sibley, Xing, and Zhang conclude that it is largely macro-related
sentiment that exhibits the predictive ability. Such a result is consistent with sentiment-
driven mispricing in any event, but the distinction between macro and non-macro effects
seems less interesting when the macro variables include stock-market variables. Sentiment
that affects stock prices is likely to affect dividend yield, lowering yield when sentiment is
high, and vice versa. One would expect a sentiment measure purged of those stock-price
effects to be less effective in identifying sentiment-driven stock mispricing and, therefore, to
be less effective in predicting anomaly returns that reflect such mispricing.15
  14
     The bond yields are obtained from the St. Louis Federal Reserve, the T-bill return and inflation are
obtained from CRSP, and Cay is obtained from Sydney Ludvigson’s website. Following Wachter (2006), the
surplus ratio is calculated as a smoothed average of past consumption growth.
  15
     Additional stock-market variables included by Sibley, Xing, and Zhang (2012) are volatility and a liq-
uidity measure. Liquidity in particular could contain sentiment effects. In fact, Baker and Wurgler (2006)
include turnover as one of the variables constituting their sentiment index.




                                                    18
6.      Conclusions

We provide an explanation for the negative empirical relation between expected return and
idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) observed in the overall cross section of equities. Our expla-
nation combines two simple concepts. The first is that higher IVOL, which translates to
higher arbitrage risk, allows greater mispricing. As a result, expected return is negatively
(positively) related to IVOL among overpriced (underpriced) securities. The second con-
cept is that arbitrage is asymmetric, in that short sellers face greater impediments than
purchasers. Combining these two concepts yields the implication that a given difference in
IVOL is associated with a greater average degree of overpricing as compared to underpricing.
That is, the negative IVOL effect among overpriced securities is stronger than the positive
effect among underpriced, and thus a negative IVOL effect emerges within the overall cross
section.

     Our empirical evidence supports our explanation. First, using a composite measure based
on 11 return anomalies to gauge relative mispricing, we find a significant positive IVOL
effect among the most underpriced stocks but a stronger negative effect among the most
overpriced ones, consistent with arbitrage asymmetry. We also empirically confirm time-
series implications of our explanation. Using investor sentiment as a proxy for the likely
direction of market-wide mispricing, we find that the negative (positive) IVOL effect among
overpriced (underpriced) stocks is stronger when market-wide overpricing (underpricing) is
more likely. This negative relation over time between investor sentiment and the return
difference between high- and low-volatility portfolios is stronger among overpriced stocks,
consistent with the presence of arbitrage asymmetry.

     We argue that risk is a key source of arbitrage asymmetry. One source of risk that
is greater for short sellers is having to close prematurely an eventually profitable position
due to adverse price moves—often termed noise-trader risk. The risk of a short squeeze
necessitating a premature closure also has no long-side counterpart. Short sellers also face
tail risk to a greater degree, due to the positive skewness in returns over periods likely to be
relevant for professional investment managers.




                                              19
                                              Table 1
                       Idiosyncratic Volatility for Double Sorted Portfolios


The table reports monthly idiosyncratic volatility of the 25 double sorted portfolios. The 25 portfolios are
formed by sorting stocks on the idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) of their returns. The sort on IVOL is performed
for stocks within a given range of over/under-pricing, as determined by an average of the rankings produced
by 11 anomaly variables. The idiosyncratic volatility is calculated as the volatility of the residuals i,t in the
regression,
                                Ri,t = a + bM KTt + cSM Bt + dHM Lt + i,t ,
where Ri,t is the excess percent return in month t on either the high-IVOL portfolio or the low-IVOL portfolio.
The sample period is from 1965m8 to 2011m1.


                                              Highest     Next    Next    Next     Lowest
                                               IVOL       20%     20%     20%      IVOL
                       Most overpriced          4.43      3.55    3.25    3.11      2.55
                       Next 20%                 3.66      2.97    2.44     2.11     2.17
                       Next 20%                 3.35      2.70    2.25     2.12     2.05
                       Next 20%                 3.76      2.56    2.12     1.82     1.81
                       Most underpriced         3.42      2.69    2.27     1.94     1.83




                                                        20
                                            Table 2
         Idiosyncratic Volatility Effects in Underpriced versus Overpriced Stocks


The table reports average benchmark-adjusted returns for portfolios formed by sorting stocks on the idiosyn-
cratic volatility (IVOL) of their returns. The sort on IVOL is performed for stocks within a given range of
over/under-pricing, as determined by an average of the rankings produced by 11 anomaly variables. Also
reported are results based on sorting by IVOL within the entire stock universe. Benchmark-adjusted returns
are calculated as a in the regression,

                               Ri,t = a + bM KTt + cSM Bt + dHM Lt + i,t ,

where Ri,t is the excess percent return in month t on either the high-IVOL portfolio, the low-IVOL portfolio,
or the difference. The sample period is from 1965m8 to 2011m1. All t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on
the heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors of White (1980).



                              Highest      Next      Next      Next     Lowest    Highest       All
                               IVOL        20%       20%       20%       IVOL     −Lowest     Stocks
       Most overpriced          -2.19      -1.27     -0.88     -0.81     -0.42      -1.77      -0.83
       (top 20%)              (-11.23)    (-8.29)   (-6.26)   (-5.40)   (-3.60)    (-7.87)    (-8.07)
       Next 20%                 -0.91      -0.44     -0.24     -0.22     -0.10      -0.81      -0.24
                               (-5.82)    (-3.18)   (-2.32)   (-2.28)   (-0.98)    (-4.17)    (-3.83)
       Next 20%                 -0.11      0.05      0.05      -0.22     0.07       -0.18      -0.06
                               (-0.72)    (0.42)    (0.52)    (-2.29)   (0.79)     (-0.97)    (-1.30)
       Next 20%                 -0.09      0.07      0.29      0.22      0.15       -0.25      0.18
                               (-0.54)    (0.67)    (3.19)    (2.73)    (1.91)     (-1.19)    (4.32)
       Most underpriced         0.63       0.66      0.38      0.29      0.12       0.52       0.28
       (bottom 20%)            (4.30)     (5.55)    (3.88)    (3.50)    (1.55)     (2.93)     (5.51)

       Most overpriced −        -2.82      -1.93     -1.27     -1.10     -0.54      -2.28      -1.10
       most underpriced       (-11.66)    (-9.48)   (-6.69)   (-5.98)   (-3.56)    (-8.48)    (-7.97)

       All stocks               -1.23      -0.40     0.03      0.03      0.07       -1.30
                               (-7.44)    (-3.90)   (0.54)    (0.64)    (1.72)     (-6.92)




                                                     21
                                           Table 3
        Idiosyncratic Volatility Effects in Underpriced versus Overpriced Stocks:
                        Independently Double-Sorted Portfolios


The table reports average benchmark-adjusted returns for portfolios formed by sorting stocks independently
on the idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) and the mispricing score. The mispricing score is determined by an
average of the rankings produced by 11 anomaly variables. Also reported are results based on sorting by IVOL
within the entire stock universe. Benchmark-adjusted returns are calculated as a in the regression,

                               Ri,t = a + bM KTt + cSM Bt + dHM Lt + i,t ,

where Ri,t is the excess percent return in month t on either the high-IVOL portfolio, the low-IVOL portfolio,
or the difference. The sample period is from 1965m8 to 2011m1. All t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on
the heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors of White (1980).



                                   Highest      Next       Next      Next     Lowest    Highest
                                    IVOL        20%        20%       20%       IVOL     −Lowest
            Most overpriced          -1.85      -0.95      -0.72     -0.39      -0.46     -1.39
            (top 20%)              (-11.62)    (-7.28)    (-4.77)   (-2.88)   (-3.28)    (-6.58)
            Next 20%                 -0.89      -0.42      -0.29     -0.20     -0.06     -0.84
                                    (-5.99)    (-3.40)    (-2.78)   (-1.88)   (-0.55)   (-4.37)
            Next 20%                 -0.07      0.03       -0.04     -0.13     0.03      -0.10
                                    (-0.42)    (0.23)     (-0.40)   (-1.35)   (0.35)    (-0.51)
            Next 20%                 -0.18      0.09       0.17      0.19      0.23      -0.41
                                    (-0.91)    (0.74)     (1.87)    (2.46)    (3.20)    (-1.89)
            Most underpriced         0.59       0.61       0.48      0.33      0.14       0.45
            (bottom 20%)            (3.54)     (4.49)     (4.65)    (4.00)    (2.04)     (2.38)

            Most overpriced −        -2.44      -1.57      -1.19     -0.72     -0.60     -1.84
            most underpriced       (-11.05)    (-8.32)    (-6.13)   (-4.42)   (-3.61)   (-6.92)




                                                     22
                                                   Table 4
             Idiosyncratic Volatility Effects in High-Sentiment versus Low-Sentiment Periods


        The table reports average benchmark-adjusted returns for portfolios containing stocks with either the highest
        (top 20%) or lowest (bottom 20%) idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL). The sort on IVOL is performed for stocks
        within a given range of over/under-pricing, as determined by an average of the rankings produced by 11
        anomaly variables. Also reported are results based on sorting by IVOL within the entire stock universe. The
        benchmark-adjusted returns in high- and low-sentiment periods are estimates of aH and aL in the regression,

                                Ri,t = aH dH,t + aL dL,t + bM KTt + cSM Bt + dHM Lt + i,t ,

        where dH,t and dL,t are dummy variables indicating high- and low-sentiment periods, and Ri,t is the excess
        percent return in month t on either the high-IVOL portfolio, the low-IVOL portfolio, or the difference. The
        sample period is from 1965m8 to 2011m1. All t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on the heteroskedasticity-
        consistent standard errors of White (1980).

                                                                                                High-Sentiment Periods −
                       High-Sentiment Periods               Low-Sentiment Periods                 Low-Sentiment Periods
                     Highest Lowest Highest               Highest Lowest Highest               Highest Lowest Highest
                      IVOL     IVOL −Lowest                IVOL    IVOL −Lowest                 IVOL     IVOL −Lowest
Most overpriced       -2.77    -0.48    -2.28              -1.61    -0.36    -1.25               -1.16   -0.13     -1.03
(top 20%)            (-9.31) (-2.67)   (-6.71)            (-6.49) (-2.57)   (-4.41)            (-3.01) (-0.56)    (-2.37)
Next 20%               -1.19     -0.01       -1.18         -0.63      -0.19       -0.44         -0.56      0.18       -0.74
                      (-5.12)   (-0.06)     (-4.06)       (-3.00)    (-1.52)     (-1.71)       (-1.77)    (0.96)     (-1.91)
Next 20%               -0.11      0.31       -0.42         -0.10      -0.17       0.07          -0.01      0.48       -0.49
                      (-0.48)    (2.33)     (-1.53)       (-0.57)    (-1.46)     (0.29)        (-0.04)    (2.78)     (-1.37)
Next 20%               -0.12      0.22       -0.33         -0.07       0.09       -0.15         -0.05      0.13       -0.18
                      (-0.40)    (1.61)     (-0.96)       (-0.37)     (0.96)     (-0.71)       (-0.14)    (0.80)     (-0.44)
Most underpriced       0.51       0.35       0.16           0.76      -0.11       0.87          -0.25      0.46       -0.71
(bottom 20%)          (2.30)     (2.89)     (0.59)         (3.73)    (-1.13)     (3.80)        (-0.83)    (2.90)     (-1.96)

Most overpriced −      -3.27     -0.83       -2.44         -2.37      -0.25       -2.12         -0.90      -0.58      -0.32
most underpriced      (-8.99)   (-3.67)     (-6.20)       (-7.41)    (-1.30)     (-6.13)       (-1.86)    (-2.01)    (-0.63)

All stocks             -1.78      0.24       -2.02         -0.67      -0.10       -0.58         -1.10      0.33       -1.44
                      (-6.86)    (3.65)     (-6.85)       (-3.19)    (-1.98)     (-2.41)       (-3.26)    (4.12)     (-3.74)




                                                             23
                                        Table 5
  Idiosyncratic-Volatility Effects and Investor Sentiment: Predictive Regressions


  The table reports estimates of b in the regression,

                       Ri,t   = a + bSt−1 + cM KTt + dSM Bt + eHM Lt + ut ,

  where Ri,t is the excess percent return in month t on either the highest-IVOL portfolio (top 20%), the
  lowest-IVOL portfolio (bottom 20%), or the difference, and St is the level of the investor-sentiment
  index of Baker and Wurgler (2006). The sort on IVOL is performed for stocks within a given range of
  over/under-pricing, as determined by an average of the rankings produced by 11 anomaly variables.
  Also reported are results based on sorting by IVOL within the entire stock universe. The sample
  period is from 1965m8 to 2011m1. All t-statistics are based on the heteroskedasticity-consistent
  standard errors of White (1980).

                                            Highest IVOL          Lowest IVOL          Highest − Lowest
                                              b̂        t-stat.     b̂    t-stat.        b̂      t-stat.
Most overpriced (top 20%)                   -0.81        -3.94    0.05     0.49        -0.86      -3.82
Next 20%                                    -0.36        -2.27    0.09     0.94        -0.45      -2.25
Next 20%                                    -0.12        -0.81    0.30     3.25        -0.42      -2.20
Next 20%                                    -0.10        -0.61    0.07     0.83        -0.17      -0.85
Most underpriced (bottom 20%)               -0.12        -0.90    0.15     1.62        -0.26      -1.66
Most overpriced −                           -0.69       -2.93     -0.09    -0.62       -0.59      -2.58
most underpriced
All stocks                                  -0.63       -3.61     0.16     3.60        -0.79      -3.86




                                                    24
                                         Table 6
          Idiosyncratic-Volatility Effects and Investor Sentiment: Predictive
                     Regressions with Macroeconomic Controls


  The table reports estimates of b in the regressions,

         Ri,t   =    a + bS̃t−1 + cM KTt + dSM Bt + eHM Lt + ut (Panel A)
                                                                 X
                                                                 6
         Ri,t   =    a + bS̃t−1 + cM KTt + dSM Bt + eHM Lt +           mj Xj,t−1 + ut (Panel B),
                                                                 j=1

  where Ri,t is the excess percent return in month t on either the highest-IVOL portfolio (top 20%),
  the lowest-IVOL portfolio (bottom 20%), or the difference, S̃t is the level of the investor-sentiment
  index of Baker and Wurgler (2006) that is orthogonalized with respect to six macro variables, and
  X1,t , · · ·, X6,t are the term premium, the default premium, the interest rate, the inflation rate,
  the surplus ratio, and the wealth consumption ratio. The sort on IVOL is performed for stocks
  within a given range of over/under-pricing, as determined by an average of the rankings produced
  by 11 anomaly variables. Also reported are results based on sorting by IVOL within the entire
  stock universe. The sample period is from 1965m8 to 2011m1. All t-statistics are based on the
  heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors of White (1980).

                                             Highest IVOL        Lowest IVOL           Highest − Lowest
                                               b̂     t-stat.      b̂       t-stat.      b̂        t-stat.

                    Panel A. Ri,t = a + bS̃t−1 + cM KTt + dSM Bt + eHM Lt + ut
Most overpriced (top 20%)                    -0.76       -3.74    0.07       0.63      -0.83          -3.71
Next 20%                                     -0.42       -2.67    0.08       0.92      -0.50          -2.56
Next 20%                                     -0.18       -1.22    0.29       3.18      -0.47          -2.47
Next 20%                                     -0.15       -0.93    0.06       0.69      -0.21          -1.05
Most underpriced (bottom 20%)                -0.19       -1.47    0.13       1.44      -0.32          -2.04
Most overpriced −                            -0.57       -2.45   -0.06      -0.40      -0.51          -2.26
most underpriced
All stocks                                   -0.65       -3.71    0.15       3.21      -0.79          -3.87
                                                                             P6
        Panel B. Ri,t = a + bS̃t−1 + cM KTt + dSM Bt + eHM Lt +                j=1 mj Xj,t−1   + ut
Most overpriced (top 20%)                    -0.69       -2.96   -0.04      -0.31      -0.65          -2.49
Next 20%                                     -0.42       -2.37   0.05        0.50      -0.47          -2.13
Next 20%                                     -0.14       -0.90   0.25        2.62      -0.39          -1.91
Next 20%                                     -0.08       -0.46   0.11        1.20      -0.19          -0.88
Most underpriced (bottom 20%)                -0.19       -1.27   0.04        0.45      -0.23          -1.32
Most overpriced −                            -0.50       -1.95   -0.08      -0.49      -0.42          -1.65
most underpriced
All stocks                                   -0.51       -2.44    0.13       2.58      -0.63          -2.64




                                                     25
                                                 1




                                                0.5




                                                 0
        Monthly Abnormal Return (Percentage)




                                               −0.5




                                                −1

                                                                                                          Lowest IVOL
                                                                                                          Next 20%
                                               −1.5
                                                                                                          Next 20%
                                                                                                          Next 20%
                                                                                                          Highest IVOL
                                                −2




                                               −2.5
                                                      Most Overpriced   Next 20%      Next 20%        Next 20%   Most Underpriced
                                                                                   Mispricing Level




Figure 1. Monthly Abnormal Returns of Portfolios Ranked by Mispricing Level and
IVOL. The figure plots the average monthly abnormal return on portfolios formed in a 5 × 5
sort that ranks first by mispricing level and then by IVOL. Abnormal returns are calculated by
adjusting for exposures to the three Fama-French factors. The average ranking of 11 anomalies is
used to measure the relative level of mispricing. The sample period covers 8/1965–1/2011.




                                                                                       26
                                                  1



                                                 0.5



                                                  0
         Monthly Abnormal Return (Percentage)




                                                −0.5



                                                 −1



                                                −1.5



                                                       Entire Period (Overpriced Stocks)
                                                 −2
                                                       High−Sent Months (Overpriced Stocks)
                                                       Low−Sent Months (Overpriced Stocks)
                                                       Entire Period (Underpriced Stocks)
                                                −2.5   High−Sent Months (Underpriced Stocks)
                                                       Low−Sent Months (Underpriced Stocks)


                                           −3
                                         Lowest IVOL    Next 20%              Next 20%         Next 20%   Highest IVOL
                                                                             IVOL Level




Figure 2. IVOL Effects and Investor Sentiment. The figure plots the average monthly
abnormal return on portfolios formed in a 5 × 5 sort that ranks first by mispricing level and then
by IVOL. Results are displayed for the five portfolios in the most underpriced quintile and the
five portfolios in the most overpriced quintile. Abnormal returns are calculated by adjusting for
exposures to the three Fama-French factors. The average ranking of 11 anomalies is used to measure
the relative level of mispricing. Averages are reported for the overall 8/1965–1/2011 sample period
as well as for high-sentiment and low-sentiment months classified using the Baker-Wurgler index.




                                                                               27
                                     References

Ali, A., Hwang, L., and Trombley, M.A., 2003, Arbitrage risk and the book-to-market
    anomaly, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 355–373.

Almazan, Andres, Keith C. Brown, Murray Carlson, and David A. Chapman, 2004, Why
   constrain your mutual fund manager?, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 289–321.

Ang, A., R. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of volatility and
  expected returns, Journal of Finance 51, 259–299.

Ang, A., R. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2009, High idiosyncratic volatility and low
  returns: International and further U.S. evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 91,
  1–23.

Antoniou, Constantinos, John A. Doukas, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2012, Sentiment
   and momentum, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Avramov, Doron, Tarun Chordia, Gergana Jostova, and Alexander Philipov, 2012, Anoma-
   lies and financial distress, working paper, Hebrew University.

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2006, Investor Sentiment and the Cross-section of
   Stock Returns, Journal of Finance, 61, 1645–1680.

Baker, Malcolm, Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2007, Investor Sentiment in the Stock Market, Journal
   of Economic Perspectives 21, 129-152.

Baker, Malcolm, Jeffrey Wurgler, and Yu Yuan, 2012, Global, Local, and Contagious Investor
   Sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 272–287.

Bali, T., and N. Cakici ,2008, Idiosyncratic Volatility and the Cross-Section of Expected
   Returns,Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 29–58.

Bali, T., N. Cakici, and R. Whitelaw, 2011, Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and the cross-
   section of expected returns, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 427–446.

Barberis, Nicholas and Ming Huang, 2001, Mental accounting, loss aversion, and individual
   stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 1247–1292.

Barinov, Alexander, 2011, Idiosyncratic Volatility, Growth Options, and the Cross-Section
   of Returns, working paper, University of Georgia.

Bergman, N. and S. Roychowdhury, 2008, Investor Sentiment and Corporate Disclosure,
   Journal of Accounting Research 46, 1057–1083.

Boehme, Rodney, Bartley Danielsen, Praveen Kumar, and Sorin Sorescu, 2009, Idiosyncratic
   risk and the cross-section of stock returns: Merton (1987) meets Miller (1977), Journal
   of Financial Markets 12, 438–468.


                                           28
Boyer, B., T. Mitton, and K. Vorkink, 2010, Expected idiosyncratic skewness, Review of
   Financial Studies 23, 169–202.

Campbell, John, and John Cochrane 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based expla-
  nation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-251.

Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi, 2008, In search of distress risk, Journal
  of Finance 63, 2899–2939.

Carhart, Mark, 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
   57-82.

Cao, Jie, and Bing Han, 2010, Idiosyncratic Risk, Costly Arbitrage, and Cross-section of
   Stock Returns, Working paper, The University of Texas at Austin.

Chen, Long, Robert Novy-Marx, and Lu Zhang, 2010, An alternative three-factor model,
   working paper, CKGSB, University of Rochester, and Ohio State University.

Chen, J., Hong, H., Stein, J.C., 2002. Breadth of ownership and stock returns. Journal of
   Financial Economics 66, 171–205.

Chen, Linda, George J. Jiang, Danielle Xu, and Tong Yao, 2012, Dissecting the Idiosyncratic
   Volatility Anomaly, working paper, Washington State University.

Chen, Zhanhui, and Ralitsa Petkova, 2012, Does Idiosyncratic Volatility Proxy for Risk
   Exposure? Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.

Chung, San-Lin, Chi-Hsiou Hung, and Chung-Ying Yeh, 2012, When does investor sentiment
   predict stock returns?, Journal of Empirical Finance 19, 217–240.

Cooper, Michael J., Huseyin Gulen, and Michael J. Schill, 2008, Asset growth and the cross-
   section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 63, 1609–1652.

Daniel, Kent D., and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Market reactions to tangible and intangible
   information, Journal of Finance 61, 1605–1643.

Dechow, Patricia M., Amy P. Hutton, Lisa Meulbroek, and Richard G. Sloan, 2001, Short-
   sellers, fundamental analysis, and stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 61,
   77-106.

DeLong, Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert Waldmann, 1990,
   Noise trader risk in financial market. Journal of Political Economy, 90, 703–738.

Diether, K.B., Malloy, K.B., Scherbina, A., 2002. Differences of opinion and the cross-section
   of stock returns. Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.

Doran, J., D. Jiang, and D. Peterson, 2012, Gambling in the New Year? The January
   idiosyncratic volatility puzzle, Review of Finance, Forthcoming.



                                             29
Douglas, George W., 1968, Risk in the Equity Markets: An Empirical Appraisal of Market
   Efficiency, University Microfilms Inc., Ann Arbor.

Duan, Y., Hu, G., and McLean, R.D., 2010 Costly arbitrage and idiosyncratic risk: evidence
  from short sellers, Journal of Financial Intermediation 19, 564–579.

Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2002, Securities lending shorting
   and pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 307–339.

D’Avolio, G., 2002, The market for borrowing stock, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
   271-306.

Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
   bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, 2006, Profitability, investment, and average returns.
   Journal of Financial Economics 82, 491–518.

Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical
   Tests. The Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.

Figlewski, S., 1981, The informational effects of restrictions on short sales: some empirical
   evidence. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 16, 463–476.

Fink, J.; K. Fink; and H. He, 2012, Expected Idiosyncratic Volatility Measures and Expected
   Returns, Financial Management, forthcoming.

Frazzini, Andrea and Owen Lamont, 2008, Dumb money: Mutual fund flows and the cross
   section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics, 88, 299-322.

Fu, Fangjian, 2009, Idiosyncratic Risk and the Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns,
   Journal of Financial Economics 91, 24–37.

Hirshleifer, David, Kewei Hou, Siew Hong Teoh, and Yinglei Zhang, 2004, Do investors
   overvalue firms with bloated balance sheets, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 38,
   297–331.

Hong, Harrison and David Sraer, 2012, Speculative betas, working paper, Princeton Univer-
   sity.

Huang, Wei, Qianqiu Liu, S. Ghon Rhee, and Liang Zhang, 2010, Return reversals, idiosyn-
  cratic risk, and expected returns, Review of Financial Studies 23, 147–168.

Guo, H. and R. Savickas, 2010, Relation between time-series and cross-sectional effects of
  idiosyncratic variance on stock returns, Journal of Banking & Finance 34, 1637–1649.

Guo Hui, Haimanot Kassa, and Michael Ferguson, 2012, On the Relation between EGARCH
  Idiosyncratic Volatility and Expected Stock Returns, working paper, University of Cincin-
  nati.


                                             30
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling
   losers: Implications for market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.

Jiang, George J., Danielle Xu, and Tong Yao, 2009, The information content of idiosyncratic
   volatility, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44, 1–28.

Jin, Lucy, 2012, Idiosyncratic volatility and anomaly returns, working paper, University of
    Pennsylvania.

Jones, C.M., Lamont, O., 2002, Short-sale constraints and stock returns. Journal of Finan-
   cial Economics 66, 207-239.

Jones, Charles M. and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2003, The price of diversifiable risk in venture
   capital and private equity, working paper, Columbia University.

Kaniel, Ron, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman, 2008, Individual investor trading and stock
  returns, Journal of Finance 63 , 273–310.

Keynes, John M., 1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Macmillan,
   London.

Koski, Jennifer Lynch and Jeffrey Pontiff, 1999, How are derivatives used? Evidence from
   the mutual fund industry, Journal of Finance 54, 791–816.

Lam, Eric, and John Wei, 2011, Limits-to-arbitrage, investment frictions, and the asset
   growth anomaly, Journal of Financial Economics 102, 127–149.

Lamont, Owen, 2004, Going down fighting: short sellers vs. firms, working paper, Yale.

Lamont, Owen, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2004, Aggregate short interest and market valuation,
   American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94, 29-32.

Lehmann, Bruce N., 1990, Fads, martingales, and market efficiency, Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 105, 1–28.

Lemmon M., and E., Portniaquina, 2006, Consumer confidence and asset prices: Some
   empirical evidence, Review of Financial Studies, 19, 4, 1499– 1529.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected
   stock returns, Journal of Finance, 56, 3, 815– 849.

Li, Xi and Rodney N. Sullivan, 2011, The limits to arbitrage revisited: The accrual and asset
    growth anomalies, Financial Analysts Journal 67(4), 50–66.

Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in
   stock portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics, 47, 13–37.

Livnat, Joshua and Christine Petrovits, 2008, Investor sentiment, post-earnings announce-
   ment drift, and accruals, working paper, New York University.


                                             31
Loughran, T., and J. R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23–51.

Mashruwala, C., Rajgopal, S., and Shevlin, T., 2006, Why is the accrual anomaly not arbi-
  traged away? The role of idiosyncratic risk and transaction costs, Journal of Accounting
  and Economics 42,3–33.

Malkiel, Burton G. and Yexiao Xu, 2002, Idiosyncratic Risk and Security Returns, working
  paper, University of Texas at Dallas.

McLean, R.D., 2010, Idiosyncratic risk, long-term reversal, and momentum, Journal of Fi-
  nancial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 883–906.

Mendenhall, Richard R., 2004, Risk and post-earnings-announcement drift, Journal of Busi-
  ness 77, 875-894.

Merton, Robert C., 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
  information, Journal of Finance 42, 483–510.

Miller, Edward M., 1977, Risk, Uncertainty and divergence of opinion, Journal of Finance
   32, 1151–1168.

Miller, Merton H. and Myron Scholes, 1972, Rates of return in relation to risk: A Re-
   examination of Some Recent Findings, in Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets, ed.
   Michael C. Jenson, Praeger, New York.

Mitchell, Mark, Todd Pulvino, and Erik Stafford, 2002, Limited Arbitrage in Equity Markets,
   Journal of Finance 57, 551–584.

Nagel, Stefan, 2005, Short sales, institutional investors and the cross-section of stock returns,
   Journal of Financial Economics 78, 277–309.

Novy-Marx, Robert, 2012a, The other side of value: Good growth and the gross profitability
   premium, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Novy-Marx, Robert, 2012b, Pseudo-predictability in conditional asset pricing tests: Explain-
   ing anomaly performance with politics, the weather, global warming, sunspots, and the
   stars, working paper, University of Rochester.

Ofek, E., Richardson, M., Whitelaw, R.F., 2004, Limited arbitrage and short sales restric-
   tions: evidence from the options markets, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 305–342.

Ohlson, James A., 1980, Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy,
   Journal of Accounting Research 18, 109–131.

Pontiff, Jeffrey, 1996, Costly arbitrage: Evidence from closed-end funds, Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 111, 1135–1152.

Pontiff, Jeffrey, 2006, Costly arbitrage and the myth of idiosyncratic risk, Journal of Ac-
   counting and Economics 42, 35–52.


                                               32
Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The long-run performance of initial public offerings. Journal of Finance
   46, 3–27.

Scheinkman, Jose, and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles, Journal
   of Political Economy 111, 1183–1219.

Shen, Junyan and Jianfeng Yu, 2012, Investor Sentiment and Economic Forces, working
   paper, University of Minnesota.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance, 52,
   35–55.

Sibley, Steve E., Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2012, Is “sentiment” sentimental?,
    working paper, Purdue University and Rice University.

Sloan, R.G., 1996, Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about
   future earnings? Accounting Review 71, 289–315.

Stambaugh, Robert F., Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2012a, The Short of It: Investor Senti-
   ment and Anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 288–302.

Stambaugh, Robert F., Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2012b, The Long of It: Odds That
   Investor Sentiment Spuriously Predicts Anomaly Returns, working paper, University of
   Pennsylvania.

Tinic, Seha M. and Richard R. West, 1986, Risk, return, and equilibrium: a revisit, Journal
   of Political Economy 94, 126–147.

Titman, S., Wei, K.C.J., Xie, F., 2004. Capital investments and stock returns. Journal of
   Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677–700.

Wachter, Jessica, 2006, A consumption-based model of the term structure of interest rates,
  Journal of Financial Economics 79, 365-399.

Wang, Huijun and Jianfeng Yu, 2010, Dissecting the Profitability Premium, working paper,
  University of Minnesota.

White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a
  direct test for heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817–838.

Wurgler, J., and Zhuravskaya, E., 2002, Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for stocks?
  Journal of Business 75, 583–608.

Xing, Yuhang, 2008, Interpreting the value effect through the Q-theory: An empirical inves-
   tigation, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1767–1795.

Zhang, Frank, 2006, Information uncertainty and stock returns, Journal of Finance 61, 105–
   136.



                                             33
