                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      USING STUDENT TEST SCORES TO MEASURE PRINCIPAL PERFORMANCE

                                           Jason A. Grissom
                                          Demetra Kalogrides
                                             Susanna Loeb

                                         Working Paper 18568
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18568


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




This research was supported by a grant from the Institute of Education Sciences (R305A100286).
We would like to thank the leadership of the Miami-Dade County Public Schools for the help they
have given us with both data collection and the interpretation of our findings. We are especially thankful
to Gisela Field, who makes this work possible. We are also grateful to Mari Muraki for excellent data
management. All errors are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jason A. Grissom, Demetra Kalogrides, and Susanna Loeb. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Student Test Scores to Measure Principal Performance
Jason A. Grissom, Demetra Kalogrides, and Susanna Loeb
NBER Working Paper No. 18568
November 2012
JEL No. I21

                                               ABSTRACT

Expansion of the use of student test score data to measure teacher performance has fueled recent policy
interest in using those data to measure the effects of school administrators as well. However, little
research has considered the capacity of student performance data to uncover principal effects. Filling
this gap, this article identifies multiple conceptual approaches for capturing the contributions of principals
to student test score growth, develops empirical models to reflect these approaches, examines the properties
of these models, and compares the results of the models empirically using data from a large urban
school district. The paper then assesses the degree to which the estimates from each model are consistent
with measures of principal performance that come from sources other than student test scores, such
as school district evaluations. The results show that choice of model is substantively important for
assessment. While some models identify principal effects as large as 0.15 standard deviations in math
and 0.11 in reading, others find effects as low as 0.02 in both subjects for the same principals. We
also find that the most conceptually unappealing models, which over-attribute school effects to principals,
align more closely with non-test measures than do approaches that more convincingly separate the
effect of the principal from the effects of other school inputs.


Jason A. Grissom                                      Susanna Loeb
PMB #414                                              524 CERAS, 520 Galvez Mall
230 Appleton Place                                    Stanford University
Nashville, TN 37203-5721                              Stanford, CA 94305
jason.grissom@vanderbilt.edu                          and NBER
                                                      sloeb@stanford.edu
Demetra Kalogrides
Stanford University
520 Galvez Mall Drive
Stanford CA, 94305
dkalo@stanford.edu
                   Using Student Test Scores to Measure Principal Performance

                                          Jason A. Grissom *
                                         Demetra Kalogrides †
                                           Susanna Loeb ‡

                                                  ***

Abstract
Expansion of the use of student test score data to measure teacher performance has fueled
recent policy interest in using those data to measure the effects of school administrators as well.
However, little research has considered the capacity of student performance data to uncover
principal effects. Filling this gap, this article identifies multiple conceptual approaches for
capturing the contributions of principals to student test score growth, develops empirical
models to reflect these approaches, examines the properties of these models, and compares the
results of the models empirically using data from a large urban school district. The paper then
assesses the degree to which the estimates from each model are consistent with measures of
principal performance that come from sources other than student test scores, such as school
district evaluations. The results show that choice of model is substantively important for
assessment. While some models identify principal effects as large as 0.15 standard deviations in
math and 0.11 in reading, others find effects as low as 0.02 in both subjects for the same
principals. We also find that the most conceptually unappealing models, which over-attribute
school effects to principals, align more closely with non-test measures than do approaches that
more convincingly separate the effect of the principal from the effects of other school inputs.

                                                  ***

        Recently, policymakers have shown increased interest in evaluating school

administrators based in part on student test score performance in their schools. As an example,

in 2011 Florida enacted Senate Bill 736, also known as the “Student Success Act,” which

stipulates that at least 50 percent of every school administrators’ evaluation must be based on

student learning growth as measured by state assessments (Florida Senate, 2011). The bill also

orders districts to factor these evaluations into compensation decisions for principals. A year

earlier, in Louisiana, Governor Bobby Jindal signed House Bill 1033, which similarly requires

school districts to base a portion of principals’ evaluations on student growth by the 2012-2013

school year (Louisiana State Legislature, 2010). Florida and Louisiana’s enactments follow

Tennessee’s statewide principal evaluation policy, which requires that “[f]ifty percent of the

evaluation criteria shall be comprised of student achievement data, including thirty-five percent

* Peabody College, Vanderbilt University. Email: jason.grissom@vanderbilt.edu.
† Center for Education Policy Analysis, Stanford University. Email: dkalo@stanford.edu.
‡ Center for Education Policy Analysis, Stanford University. Email: sloeb@stanford.edu.


                                                                                                   1
based on student growth data…”; these evaluations are used to “inform human capital decisions,

including… hiring, assignment and promotion, tenure and dismissal, and compensation”

(Tennessee State Board of Education, 2011). Elsewhere, school districts are experimenting with

the use of student test scores to determine administrator pay. For instance, since 2007,

principals in Dallas Independent School District have been eligible for an opt-in performance

pay plan through which they can earn up to $2,000 on the basis of a measure of their

performance from student test score gains (Center for Educator Compensation Reform, n.d.).

       A potentially disconcerting facet of the burgeoning movement to utilize student test

score data to measure the performance of school administrators is that it is proceeding with

little guidance into how this measurement might best be accomplished. That is, while

researchers have devoted significant energy to investigating the use of student test scores to

evaluate teacher performance (e.g., Aaronson, Barrow and Sander, 2007; Rivkin, Hanushek and

Kain, 2005; Rockoff, 2004; McCaffrey, Sass and Lockwood, 2009; Koretz, 2002; McCaffrey

et.al. 2004; Sanders and Rivers, 1996), far less work has considered this usage in the context of

principals (Lipscomb et al., 2010; Branch, Hanushek, & Rivkin, 2012; Chiang, Lipscomb, & Gill,

2012; Coelli & Green, 2012; Dhuey & Smith, 2012). This paper is one of the first to examine

measures of principal effectiveness based on student test scores both conceptually and

empirically and the first that we know of to see how these measures compare to alternative

(non-test-based) evaluation metrics, such as district holistic evaluations.

       Though research on the measurement of teacher value-added certainly is relevant to the

measurement of principal effects, the latter raises a number of issues that are unique to the

principal context. For example, disentangling the impact of the educator from the long-run

impact of the school presents particular difficulties for principals in comparison to teachers

because there is only one principal at a time in each school. Even in theory, it is difficult to

choose how much of the school’s performance should be attributed to the principal instead of

the factors outside of the principal’s control. Should, for example, principals be responsible for

                                                                                                     2
the effectiveness of teachers that they did not hire? From the point of view of the school

administrator whose compensation level or likelihood of remaining in his or her job may depend

on the measurement model chosen, thoughtful attention to these details is of paramount

importance. From the point of view of researchers seeking to identify correlates of principal

effectiveness, the question of how best to isolate principal contributions to the school

environment from panel data is of central importance as well.

       In contributing to the nascent literature on the use of student test score data to measure

principal performance, this paper has four goals. First, it identifies a range of possible value-

added-style models for capturing principal effects using student achievement data. Second, it

describes what each of these models measures conceptually, highlighting potential strengths,

weaknesses, and tradeoffs. Third, it uses longitudinal student test score and personnel data from

a large urban district to compare the estimates of principal performance generated by each

model, both to establish how well they correlate with one another and to assess the degree to

which model specification would lead to different conclusions about the relative performance of

principals within each district. Finally, the paper compares the results from the different models

of principal value-added effectiveness to subjective personnel evaluations conducted by the

district central office and survey assessments of principal performance from their assistant

principals and teachers. This approach is in keeping with recent work assessing the relationship

between teachers’ value-added measures of effectiveness and other assessments such as

principal evaluations, structured observational protocols, and student surveys (e.g., Jacob &

Lefgren, 2008; Kane & Staiger, 2012; Grossman et. al., forthcoming).

       The study identifies three key issues in using test scores to measure principal

effectiveness: theoretical ambiguity, potential bias, and reliability. By theoretical ambiguity we

mean lack of clarity about what construct is actually being captured. By potential bias we mean

that some methods may misattribute other factors (positively or negatively) to principal

performance. By reliability, or lack thereof, we mean that some approaches create noisy

                                                                                                    3
measures of performance, an issue that stands out as particularly salient for district-level

evaluation where the number of schools is relatively small.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section reviews the existing

literature on the measurement of educator effects on students, detailing prior research for

principals and highlighting issues from research on teachers that are relevant to the

measurement of principal performance. The third section describes possible models for

identifying principal performance from student test score data, which is followed by a

description of the data used for the empirical section of the paper. The next section presents

results from estimating and comparing the models. The subsequent section compares these

results to other, non-test measures. The last section discusses the implications of this study,

summarize our conclusions, and offer directions for future research.



             Using Student Test Scores to Measure Educator Performance

       A large number of studies in educational administration have used student test score

data to examine the impact of school leadership on schools (for reviews, see Hallinger & Heck,

1998; Witziers, Bosker, & Krüger, 2003). Often, however, these studies have relied on cross-

sectional data or school-level average scores, which have prevented researchers from estimating

leadership effects on student growth (rather than levels) or controlling appropriately for student

background and other covariates, though there are exceptions. For example, Eberts and Stone

(1988) draw on national data on elementary school students to estimate positive impacts of

principals’ instructional leadership behaviors on student test scores. Brewer (1993) similarly

used the nationally representative, longitudinal High School and Beyond data to model student

achievement as a function of principal characteristics, finding some evidence that principals’

goal setting and teacher selection were associated with student performance gains. In more

recent work, Clark, Martorell, and Rockoff (2009), using data from New York City, estimate the

relationship between principal characteristics and principal effectiveness as measured by

                                                                                                  4
student test score gains. The study finds principals improve with experience, especially during

their first few years on the job. Similarly, Grissom and Loeb (2011) compare principal

characteristics—in this case, principals’ and assistant principals’ assessments of the principals’

strengths—to student achievement growth. They find that principals with stronger organization

management skills (e.g., personnel, budgeting) lead schools with greater student achievement

gains.

         Although these past studies have demonstrated linkages between principal

characteristics or behaviors and student performance, only four studies that we know of—all but

one of which are work in progress—use student achievement data to model the value-added of

school principals directly. Coelli and Green (2012), the only published paper in this group,

estimates the effects of principals on high school graduation and 12th grade final exam scores in

British Columbia, Canada. A benefit of this study is that it examines an education system that

rotates principals through schools, allowing them to compare outcomes for the same school with

different principals, though they cannot follow students over time and are limited to high school

outcomes. The authors distinguish a model of principal effects on students that are constant

over the period that the principal is in the school from one that allows for a cumulative effect of

the principal that builds over time. They find little to no effect of principals using the first model

but a substantial effect after multiple years using the second approach (e.g., a 2.6 percentage

point increase in graduation associated with a one standard deviation change in principal

effectiveness).

         Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin (2012) use student-level data from Texas from 1995 to

2001 to create two alternative measures of principal effectiveness. The first measure estimates

principal-by-school effects via a regression that models student achievement as a function of

prior achievement as well as student and school characteristics. Their second approach, similar

to Coelli and Green (2012) but using longitudinal test score data, includes both these controls

and school fixed effects. The paper focuses on the variance of principal effectiveness using these

                                                                                                      5
measures and a direct measure of variance gained by comparing year-to-year covariance in years

that schools switched principals and years that they did not. The paper provides evidence of

meaningful variation across principals—by their most conservative estimates, a school with a

principal whose effectiveness is one standard deviation above the mean will have student

learning gains at 0.05 standard deviations greater than average—but does not directly compare

relationships among measures.

       Dhuey and Smith (2012) use data on elementary and middle school students, again in

British Columbia, and estimate the effect of the principal on test performance using a school and

principal fixed effect model that compares the learning in a school under one principal to that

under another principal, similar to Branch et. al.'s (2012) school fixed effect approach. They also

include a specification check without school fixed effects. The study finds large variation across

principals using either approach (0.16 standard deviations of student achievement score in math

and 0.10 in reading for the fixed effects model).

       Finally, Chiang, Lipscomb, and Gill (2012) use data on elementary and middle school

students in Pennsylvania to answer the question of how much of the “school effect” on student

performance can be attributed to the principal. They estimate principal effects within grades and

schools for schools that undergo leadership transitions over a three year period, then use those

effects to predict school effectiveness in a fourth year in a different grade. They find that, while

principals do impact student outcomes, principals only explain a small portion (approximately

15%) of the overall school effect and conclude that school value-added on its own is not useful

for evaluating the contributions of principals.

       Each of these papers quantifies variance in principals' effects and underscores the

importance of separating the school effect from the principal effect. However, none of these

studies focus on the ambiguity of what aspects of schools should be separated from principals,

nor do they discuss how to account for average differences across schools in principal




                                                                                                       6
effectiveness. Moreover, none of these studies compare the principal value-added measure to

non-test-based measures.



Is Principal Value-Added Like Teacher Value-Added?

       Unlike the sparse literature linking principals to student achievement, the parallel

research on teachers is rich and rapidly developing. Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005)

demonstrated important variation in value-added across teachers in Texas, building on earlier

work in Tennessee (e.g., Sanders & Rivers, 1996). The signal-to-noise ratio of single-year

measures of teachers’ contributions to student learning is often low, though the persistent

component still appears to be practically meaningful (McCaffrey, Sass & Lockwood, 2009;

McCaffrey, Lockwood, Koretz, & Hamilton, 2004). One of the biggest concerns with teacher

value-added measures comes from the importance of the test used in the measure. Different

tests give different rank orderings for teachers (Lockwood et. al., 2007). Multiple researchers

have raised concern about bias in the estimates of teachers value-added (Rothstein, 2009),

though recent research using experimental data provides evidence of meaningful variation in

effectiveness across teachers that have long-run consequences for students (Chetty et. al., 2011).

These long-run effects persist, even though the direct effect of teachers on student achievement

fades out substantially over the first few years (Jacob, Lefgren, & Sims, 2010).

       Measuring principal performance using student test scores no doubt faces many of the

same difficulties as measuring teacher performance using student test scores. The test metric

itself is likely to matter (Measures of Effective Teaching Project, 2010). Measurement error in

the test, compounded by using changes over time, will bring error into the value-added measure

(Boyd, Lankford, Loeb & Wyckoff, 2012). The systematic sorting of students across schools and

classrooms can introduce bias if not properly accounted for.

       At first blush, then, we may be tempted to conclude that the measurement issues

surrounding principals are similar to those for teachers, except perhaps that the typically much

                                                                                                   7
large number of students available to estimate principal effects will increase precision. Closer

examination, however, suggests that measuring principal effects introduces a set of concerns

teacher estimates may not face to the same extent. As an example, consider the criticism leveled

at teacher effects measurement that teachers often do not have control over the educational

environment in their classrooms and thus should not be held accountable for their students’

learning. For instance, if they are required to follow a scripted curriculum, then they may not be

able to distinguish themselves as effective instructors. This concern is even greater for

principals, who, by virtue of being a step removed from the classroom, have even less direct

control over the learning environment and who often come into a school that already has a

complete (or near complete) teaching workforce that they did not help choose.

       Moreover, in comparison to teachers, the number of principals in any school district is

quite small. These low numbers mean that a good comparison between principals working in

similar situations—which we often make via a school fixed effect in teacher value-added

models—may be difficult to identify, and thus, it is more difficult to create fair measures of

effectiveness. A final potentially important conceptual issue arises from the fact that—unlike the

typical teacher—principals who work in the same school over time will have repeated effects on

the same students over multiple academic years as those students move through different grades

in the principal’s school. The following section explores these issues in more detail and their

implications for measuring principals’ value added to student achievement.



                                  Modeling Principal Effects

       The question of how to model principal effects on student learning depends crucially on

the structure of the relationship between a principal’s performance and student performance. To

make this discussion explicit, consider the following equation:

                                      𝐴𝑖𝑗𝑠 = 𝑓(𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑠 , 𝑆�𝑃𝑗𝑠 , 𝑂𝑠 �)




                                                                                                   8
This equation simply describes a student i's achievement as some function f of their own

characteristics X and the effectiveness of the school S. School effectiveness, in turn, is a function

of the performance P of the student’s principal (j) and other aspects O of the school (s) that are

outside of the control of the principal. In other words, both the level of a principal’s performance

and other aspects of the school affect student outcomes. The important question is what we

believe about the properties of function S, which describes how the principal affects the school’s

performance.

       Two issues are particularly germane. The first is the time frame over which we expect the

effects to be realized. Are the full effects of principal performance on school effectiveness, and

thus student outcomes, immediate; that is, is the function S such that high performance P by the

principal in a given school year is reflected in higher school effectiveness and higher student

outcomes in that same year? Alternatively, is S cumulative such that only with several

consecutive years of high P will A increase? To illustrate the difference and why it is important,

consider a principal who is hired to lead a low-performing school. Suppose the principal does an

excellent job from the very beginning (i.e., P is high). How quickly would you expect that

excellent performance to be reflected in student outcomes? The answer depends on the nature of

principal effects. If effects come through channels such as assigning teachers to classrooms

where they can be more effective or providing teachers or students incentives or other

encouragement to exert more effort, they might be reflected in student performance

immediately. If, on the other hand, effects come through changes to the school environment that

take longer to show results—such as doing a better job recruiting or hiring good teachers—even

excellent principal performance may take multiple years to be reflected in student outcomes.

       The second issue is distinguishing the principal effect from other characteristics of the

school outside of the principal influence; that is, distinguishing P from O. One possibility is that

the O is not very important. It may be that the vast majority of school effects are attributable to

the principal’s performance, with the possible exception of peer effects, which could be captured

                                                                                                      9
by observable characteristics of students such as the poverty rate and the average academic

achievement of students before entering the school. In this case, identifying the overall school

effect is sufficient for identifying the principal performance effect. A second possibility is that

these other school characteristics, O, that are outside of the principal's control are important for

school effectiveness. For example, some schools may have a core group of teachers that inspire

other teachers to be particularly effective, or they may have supportive community leaders who

bring resources into the school to support learning. In this case, if the goal is to identify

principal effectiveness it will be important to net out the underlying school effects.

       With this simple conceptual model in mind, we describe three alternative approaches to

using data on A to differentiate performance P. The appropriateness of each approach again

depends on the underlying nature of principals’ effects, which are unknown.



Approach 1: School Effectiveness

       Consider first the case in which principals have immediate effects on student learning

that does not vary systematically over time. For this first approach, also assume that the

principals have substantial control over the factors that affect students. If these assumptions

hold, an appropriate approach to measuring the contribution of that principal would be to

measure the learning of students in the school while the principal is working there, adjusting for

the background characteristics of students. This common approach is essentially the same as

the one used to measure teacher effects (Lipscomb et. al., 2010); we assume that teachers have

immediate effects on students during the year that they are in the teacher’s classroom, so we

take students’ growth during that year—adjusted for a variety of controls, perhaps including

lagged achievement and student fixed effects—as a measure of the teacher’s effect. For

principals, any growth in student learning that is different than what would be predicted for a

similar student in a similar context is attributed to the principal, just as the same growth within

a teacher’s classroom is attributed to the teacher.

                                                                                                      10
       For teachers, such an approach has face validity. Teachers have direct and individual

influences on the students in their classrooms, so—assuming the inclusion of the appropriate set

of covariates—it makes sense to take the adjusted average learning gains of a teacher’s students

during a year as a measure of the teacher’s effect. The face validity of this kind of approach,

however, is not as strong for principals. While some of the effectiveness of a school may be due

to the current principal, much of it may be due to factors that were in place prior to the principal

assuming the leadership role and are outside of the control of the principal. As an example,

often many of the teachers who teach under the leadership of a given principal were hired before

the principal took over. Particularly in the short run, it would not make sense to attribute all of

the contributions of those teachers to that principal. Under this conceptual approach, an

excellent new principal who inherits a school filled with low-quality teachers—or, conversely, an

inadequate principal hired into a school with high-quality teachers—might incorrectly be

debited or credited with school results disconnected from his or her own job performance.



Approach 2: Relative Within-School Effectiveness

       As described above, there may be school characteristics aside from the student body

composition that affects school effectiveness and are outside the control of the principal. A

community leader providing unusual support to the school or a teacher or set of teachers who

are particularly beneficial to school culture during the tenure of multiple principals are possible

examples. One way to account for the elements of school effectiveness that are outside of

principals’ control is to compare the effectiveness of the school during the principal’s tenure to

the effectiveness of the school at other times. The measure of a principal’s effectiveness would

then be how effective the school is at increasing student learning while the principal is in charge

in comparison to how effective the school is (or was) at other times when another person holds

the principal position. Conceptually, this approach is appealing if we believe the quality of the




                                                                                                    11
school that a principal inherits affects the quality of that school during the principal's tenure, as

it most likely does.

        There are, however, practical reasons for concern with within-school comparisons,

namely that the comparison sets that can be tiny and, as a result, idiosyncratic. This approach

holds more appeal when data are available over a long enough period of time for the school to

experience many principals. However, if there is little principal turnover or the data stream is

short, this approach may not be feasible or advisable. Schools with only one principal during the

period of observation will have no variation with which to differentiate the principal effect from

the school effect, regardless of how well or poorly the principal performs. Schools with two or

three principals for each school over the duration of the data will allow a principal effect to be

differentiated, but we may worry about the accuracy of the resulting principal effects estimates

as measures of principal performance. Because each principal’s estimate is in relation to the

other principals who have served in that school in the data, how well the others performed at the

principal job can impact a given principal’s estimated effect on the school. Consider the simplest

case where only two principals are observed, and assume principal A is exactly in the middle of

the distribution of actual principal performance. If principal B is a poor performer, under the

relative school effectiveness approach, principal A will look good by comparison. If B is an

excellent performer, A will look poor, even though her actual performance was the same as in

the first case.

        The sorting of principals across schools acerbates the potential problem with this

approach. Extant research provides evidence that principals, like teachers, are not sorted

randomly across schools. Schools serving many low-income, non-white, and low-achieving

students have principals who have less experience and less education and who attended less

selective colleges (Loeb, Kalogrides, & Horng, 2010). If principals are distributed systematically

across schools such that more effective principals are consistently in some schools but not in

others, then the comparison of a given principal to other principals who lead the same school is

                                                                                                     12
not a fair comparison. This dilemma is similar to the one faced in estimating teacher effects. If

teachers are distributed evenly across schools, then comparing a teacher to other teachers in

their school is a fair comparison and eliminates the potential additional effect of school factors

outside of the classroom. However, if teachers are not distributed evenly across schools, then

this within-school comparison disadvantages teachers in schools with better colleagues.

Similarly, the estimated effect of the second-best principal in the district might be negative

under this approach if she simply had the bad luck of being hired into the spot formerly held by

the first-best principal, even if she would have had (potentially large) positive estimated effects

in nearly every other school.



Approach 3: School Improvement

       So far we have considered models built on the assumption that principal performance is

reflected immediately in student outcomes and that this reflection is constant over time.

Perhaps more realistic, however, is an expectation that new principals take time to affect their

schools and their effect builds over time. Much of what a good principal may do is improve the

school through building a productive work environment (e.g., through hiring, professional

development, and building relationships), which may take several years to achieve. If so, we may

wish to employ a principal effects model that accounts for this time dimension.

       One such alternative measure of principal effectiveness would capture the improvement

in school effectiveness during the principal’s tenure. That is, the school may have been relatively

ineffective in the year prior to the principal starting, but if the school improves over the duration

of the principal’s tenure, then that improvement would be a measure of his or her effectiveness.

Similarly, if the school’s performance declines as the principal’s tenure in the school extends, the

measure would capture that as well.

       The appeal of such an approach is its clear face validity. However, it has disadvantages.

In particular, the data requirements are substantial. There is measurement error in any measure

                                                                                                   13
of student learning gains, and differencing these imperfectly measured variables to create a

principal effectiveness measure increases the error (Kane & Staiger, 2002; Boyd, Lankford,

Loeb, & Wyckoff, 2012). There simply may not be enough signal in average student

achievement gains at the school level to get acceptably reliable measures of improvement. That

is, this measure of principal effectiveness may be so imprecise as to provide little evidence of

actual effectiveness. In addition, this approach faces the same challenges of the second

approach in that if the school was already improving because of work done by prior

administrators, we may overestimate the performance of principals who simply maintain this

improvement. Similarly, if the school was doing well but had a bad year just before the

transition to the new principal then by measuring improvement relative to this low starting

point, the approach might not accurately capture the principal's effectiveness.

       These three approaches—school effectiveness, relative school effectiveness, and school

improvement—provide conceptually different measures of principal effectiveness. They each

are based on a conceptually different model of principals’ effects and the implementation of each

model will lead to different concerns about bias (validity) and precision (reliability). The goal of

the analyses below is to create measures based on each of these conceptual approaches, compare

them to one another, and compare them to other, non-test-based measures of principal

performance.



                                               Data

       The data used in this study come from administrative files on all staff, students, and

schools in the Miami-Dade County Public Schools (M-DCPS) district from the 2003-04 through

the 2010-11 school years. M-DCPS is the largest public school district in Florida and the fourth

largest in the United States, trailing only the school districts in New York City, Los Angeles, and

Chicago. In 2010, M-DCPS enrolled 347,000 students, more than 225,000 of whom were




                                                                                                   14
Hispanic. Nearly 90 percent of students in the district are either black or Hispanic, and 60

percent qualify for free or reduced priced lunches.

       We use measures of principal effectiveness based on the achievement gains in math and

reading of students at a school. The test score data include math and reading scores from the

Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT). The FCAT is given in math and reading to

students in grades 3–10. It is also given in writing and science to a subset of grades, though we

use only math and reading scores for this study. The FCAT includes criterion referenced tests

measuring selected benchmarks from the Sunshine State Standards (SSS). We standardize

students’ test scores to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one within each grade

and school-year.

       We combine the test score data with demographic information, including student race,

gender, free/reduced price lunch eligibility, and whether students are limited English proficient.

We can link students to their schools and thus to their principals in each year. We obtain M-

DCPS staff information from a database that includes demographic measures, prior experience

in the district, highest degree earned, and current position and school for all staff members.

       In addition to creating measures of principals’ value-added and contrasting these

measures, we also compare the value-added measures to non-test-based measures of

performance that we obtained from a variety of sources. First, we compare the measures to the

school accountability grades and to the district evaluations of the principals. Florida grades

each school on a 5-point scale (A, B, C, D, F) that is meant to succinctly capture performance.

Grades are based on a scoring system that assigns points to schools for their percentages of

students achieving the highest levels in reading, math, science, and writing on Florida’s

standardized tests in grades 3 through 10, or who make achievement gains. Grades also factor in

the percentage of eligible students who are tested and the test gains of the lowest-performing

students.




                                                                                                  15
        M-DCPS leadership also evaluates principals each year, and we obtained these

evaluation outcomes from the district for the 2001 through 2010 school years. In each year,

there are four distinct evaluation ratings, though the labels attached to these ratings vary across

years. The highest rating is either distinguished or substantially exceeds standards; the second

highest rating is exceeds standards or commendable; the third highest rating is competent,

meets standards or acceptable; while the lowest rating is below expectations. Over the ten-year

observation period, about 47 percent of principal by year observations received the highest

ratings, 45 percent received the second-to-highest rating, while fewer than 10 percent received

one of the lower two ratings. We code the ratings on an ordinal scale from 1 to 4 and take their

average for all years that a principal is employed at a given school.

        Second, we compare the value-added measures to student, parent and school staff

assessment of the school climate from the district-administered climate survey. These surveys

ask a sample of students, teachers, and parents from each school in the district to agree or

disagree with following three statements: 1) students are safe at this school; 2) students are

getting a good education at this school; and 3) the overall climate at this school is positive and

helps students learn at this school. A fourth item asks respondents to assign a letter grade (A–F)

to their school that captures its overall performance. The district provided these data to us from

the 2004 through the 2009 school years. They had collapsed the data to the school-year level so

that our measures capture the proportion of parents, teachers or students that agree with a

given statement as well as the average of the grades respondents would assign to their school.

We create three scales based on student, teacher and parent responses that combine these four

questions. We take the first principal component of the four measures in each year and then

standardize the resulting factor scores for students, teachers, and parents. 1




1In all cases the weights on the four elements of each factor are approximately equal and the eigenvalues
are all 3.4.

                                                                                                        16
       Third, we compare the measure to principals’ and assistant principals’ assessments of

the principals that we obtained from an online survey we administered in regular M-DCPS

public schools in spring 2008. Nearly 90% of surveyed administrators responded. As described

in Grissom and Loeb (2011), both principals and assistant principals were asked about principal

performance on a list of 42 areas of job tasks common to most principal positions (e.g.,

maintaining a safe school environment, observing classroom instruction). We use factor scores

of these items to create self-ratings and AP ratings of aggregate principal performance over the

full range of tasks, as well as two more targeted measures that capture the principal’s

effectiveness at instruction and at organizational management tasks, such as budgeting and

hiring. We chose these specific task sets because of evidence from prior work that they are

predictive of school effectiveness (Grissom & Loeb, 2011; Horng, Klasik, & Loeb, 2010).

       Our final comparisons are between the principal value-added measures and two indirect

measures of school health: the teacher retention rate and the student chronic absence rate. The

retention rate is calculated as the proportion of teachers in the school in year t who returned to

that same school in year t+1. The student chronic absence rate is the is the proportion of

students absent more than 20 days in a school in a given year, which is the definition of chronic

absence used in Florida’s annual school indicators reports. Table 1 describes the variables that

we use in our analyses. Overall we have 523 principals with 719 principal-by-school

observations. Sixty seven percent of the principal-by-school observations are for female

principals, while 23 percent, 35 percent and 41 percent are for white, black and Hispanic

principals respectively. The student body is less white, only 8 percent, and substantially more

Hispanic. The accountability grades for schools range from 0 to 4, with an average of 2.81.

Principal ratings are skewed with an average of 3.54 on a four point scale. Approximately 82

percent of teachers return to their school the following year. On average approximately 10

percent of students are absent for more than 20 days.




                                                                                                   17
                                                 Model Estimation

       In keeping with the discussion above, we estimate three types of value-added measures

based on different conceptions about how principals affect student performance: school

effectiveness during a principal’s tenure, relative within-school effectiveness, and school

improvement. This section describes the operationalization of each approach.



Approach 1: School Effectiveness

       We estimate two measures of school effectiveness during a principal’s tenure. Equation

1a describes the simplest of the models where the achievement, A, of student i in school s with

principal p in time t is a function of that student’s prior achievement, student characteristics, X,

school characteristics, S, class characteristics, C, year and grade fixed effects and a principal-by-

school fixed effect, δ, the estimate of which becomes our first value-added measure.

          Aispt = Ais ( t −1) β 1 + X ispt β 2 + S spt β 3 + C spt β 4 + τ y + γ g + δ sp + ε ispt   (1a)

This model attributes to the principal the additional test performance that a student has relative

to what we would predict he or she would have given the prior year test score and the

background characteristics of the student and his or her peers. In other words, this model

defines principal effectiveness to be the average covariate-adjusted test score growth for all

students in that principal’s school over the time the principal works there. This approach is

similar to models typically used to measure teacher value-added, which measure teacher

effectiveness as the average growth of the teachers’ students in the years they pass through his

or her classroom. One drawback of using this approach for principals is that the principal might

have affected both prior years’ performance and the current performance if the principal was in

the same school the year before, a limitation that teacher models are assumed not to face (since

fourth grade teachers cannot directly affect third graders’ learning, for example). However, this

approach does still capture whether the learning gain during the year is greater than would be

predicted given other factors in the model.

                                                                                                            18
       The second model capturing the school’s effectiveness during a principal’s time is

summarized by Equation 1b. It is similar to the approach above except that, instead of

comparing students to observationally similar students, it compares the learning of a given

student to his or her own learning when in a school headed by a different principal. Here the

change in student achievement from t-1 to t is modeled as a function of the student’s time-

varying characteristics, the school characteristics, class characteristics, a student fixed effect

(πi), and student-level random error. The principal-by-school fixed effect, δ, is again the

effectiveness measure.

                Aispt − Aisp ( t −1) = X ispt β 2 + S spt β 3 + C spt β 4 + π i + τ y + γ g + δ sp + ε ispt (1b)

       The second model differs from the first primarily by including a student fixed effect,

which adjusts for unobservable characteristics of students. However, student fixed effects

models have the disadvantage of relying only on students who switch schools or have multiple

principals to identify the effects. Although we employ a data stream long enough to observe

both many students switching across school levels (i.e., structural moves) and many students

switching schools within grade levels, this requirement may reduce both the generalizability of

the results and reliability of the estimates. In fact, experimental research by Kane and Staiger

(2008) suggests that student fixed effects estimates may be more problematic than similar

models using a limited number of student covariates.

       The test scores used to generate the value-added estimates in the models described

above are the scaled scores from the FCAT, standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard

deviation of one for each grade in each year. Subscripts for subjects are omitted for simplicity,

but we estimate each equation separately for student achievement in math and reading.

Because we use a lagged test score to construct our dependent variables or as a control variable

on the right hand side in some specifications, the youngest tested grade (grade 3) and the first

year of data we have (2003) are omitted from the analyses, though their information is used to

compute a learning gain in grade 4 and in 2004. The time-varying student characteristics used

                                                                                                                   19
in our analyses are whether the student qualifies for free or reduced priced lunch, whether they

are currently classified as limited English proficient, whether they are repeating the grade in

which they are currently enrolled, and the number of days they missed school in a given year

due to absence or suspension (lagged). Student race and gender are absorbed by the student

fixed effect in 1b but are included in models that exclude the student fixed effect (1a). The class

and school-level controls used in the models include all of the student-level variables aggregated

to the classroom and school-levels.

       The value-added measures described above are principal-by-school fixed effects derived

from Equations 1a and 1b. After estimating the fixed effects models, we save the principal-by-

school fixed effect coefficients and their corresponding standard errors. The estimated

coefficients for these fixed effects include both real differences in achievement gains associated

with teachers or schools and measurement error. We therefore shrink the estimates using the

empirical Bayes method to bring imprecise estimates closer to the mean (see appendix 1),

though shrinking the school fixed effects tends not to change the estimates much given large

samples in each school.



Approach 2: Relative Within-School Effectiveness

       As with approach 1, we create two measures of relative principal effectiveness comparing

a principal to other principals in the same school. Equation 2a describes our first value-added

measure for this approach.

                Aispt = Ais ( t −1) β 1 + X ispt β 2 + S spt β 3 + C spt β 4 + τ y + γ g + φ s + δ p + ε ispt   (2a)

Like equation 1a, equation 2a models a student’s test score as a function of last year’s score,

student characteristics (X), (time-varying) school characteristics (S), and classroom

characteristics (C). Model 2a also includes a principal fixed effect (δ) and a school fixed effect

(φ), which nets out the average of students in the school during the full time period. The



                                                                                                                       20
principal value-added measures in this case are based on the principal fixed effects and shrunk

to adjust for measurement error as described above.

        The model described in equation 2a implicitly compares each principal to other

principals serving in the same school. This specification reduces the amount of school

effectiveness that we attribute to the principal. Approach 1 above attributes all of the school’s

growth during a principal’s tenure to that principal, while equation 2a only attributes the

difference between the learning of students during the principal’s tenure and the learning of

students in the same school at other times.

        There are drawbacks to this approach. We can only estimate models based on this

approach for principals who work at schools that have more than one principal during the time

span of the data, which limits the analytic sample. In addition, we might be concerned that a

comparison to just one or two other principals who served at the school might not be justified.

Another potential downside of the principal effects from Equation 2a is that estimating a

separate fixed effect for each school and each principal places substantial demands on the data

because it is completely non-parametric. That is, instead of controlling linearly for a measure of

school effectiveness, it estimates a separate value for each school’s effect.

        As an alternative, we run a series of models that do not include the school fixed effect but

include controls for the average value-added of the school during the years that the principal

was not leading the school. Equation 2b describes this approach.

                 Aispt = Ais ( t −1) β 1 + X ispt β 2 + S spt β 3 + C spt β 4 + β 5 E s + τ y + γ g + δ p + ε ispt   (2b)

E is the effectiveness of school s in the years prior to the principal’s tenure. E is estimated using

a model similar to equation 1a, substituting a school-by-year fixed effect for a principal-by-year

fixed effect, then averaging the value of the (shrunken) school effect for school s in the years

prior to the start of principal i's tenure.

        Note that, by shrinking our estimate of E, we are adjusting for sampling error to reduce

potential measurement error bias in the estimation of Equation 2b. However, to the extent that

                                                                                                                            21
E includes error beyond this sampling error—for example, a “shock” that affected the whole

school—this estimation will also be prone to measurement error bias. For this reason, equation

2a is preferable in terms of bias, though equation 2b might reduce the error of measurement. 2



Approach 3: School Improvement

        Our third approach defines principal effectiveness as school improvement during a

principal’s tenure. Equation 3 describes our first value-added measure capturing this

improvement.

                 Aispt = Ais ( t −1) β 1 + X ispt β 2 + S spt β 3 + C spt β 4 + τ y + γ g + δ sp + α sp Tspt + ε ispt   (3)

The model is similar to the one described in Equation 1a except that it includes a measure of the

time that the principal has been the principal of the school (entered as a linear time trend T) and

a principal-specific coefficient on that time trend, as well as a principal-by-school fixed effect, δ.

This approach allows a separate starting point or intercept for each principal and then allows the

school to improve under the principal’s leadership. In this case, our measure of principal value-

added is the time-trend coefficient, α; we shrink this estimate as described above.

        Importantly, we restrict these models to principals working in a school at least three

years so that estimating a time trend in performance is meaningful. Because the administrative

files do not contain a measure of school-specific experience, we must further restrict these

models to principals that we observe in their first year at a school, which reduces the sample

substantially. This approach is cleaner than using all principal-school combinations because the

effects of a principal on school improvement may be very different in their first couple of years

than it is after they have been at the school for a longer period of time.




2 We also ran an alternative specification of Equation 2b which includes a student fixed effect and models

the gains in achievement but includes the same independent variables as in Equation 1b. The results are
similar to those without the student fixed effect, though attenuated. In the interest of brevity, we do not
report the results, but they are available from the authors upon request.

                                                                                                                              22
The Distribution of Principal Effects

       In total, we run five main models that capture five distinct measures of principal

effectiveness. Figure 1 plots the distributions of each of the measures for math and reading

value-added. The distributions are approximately normal for all the measures. Shrinking the

estimates narrows each distribution relatively little, as we would expect given the large number

of student observations used to derive each estimate. Still, there are patterns. Shrinkage affects

the estimates of Model 1b, which includes student fixed effects, more than model 1a. This

observation is not surprising given that student fixed effects models use substantially more

degrees of freedom. For Approach 2, the principal effects are narrowed more by shrinkage in

the estimates that include school fixed effects (Equation 2a) than in the model that include

controls for school effectiveness in other years. These differences are again not surprising

considering Model 2a includes school fixed effects while Model 2b does not. Approach 3, which

defines principal effectiveness by school improvement, begins with a narrow distribution and

narrows further by shrinkage. This narrowing is expected given that measuring improvement

(changes) exacerbates measurement error.

       Table 2 provides the standard deviations of the estimates of principal effects from our

models as well as the values of our estimates at various percentiles. These standard deviations

are a measure of how much principals vary in their effect on student achievement. We report

the standard deviation of the coefficients from the models from which we get the estimates and

the standard deviation of the shrunken coefficients, which we use as our effectiveness measures.

The shrunken estimates are the best approximation of each principal’s effect, but the variance of

these shrunk estimates is an underestimation of the variance in the true principal effect. This

difference between the best estimates for the individual principals and the best estimate of the

variance of principal effects arises because each principal effect has more error—requiring

greater shrinkage—than do groups of principals, which is the basis of the variance calculations.

Because of this difference, we also report a third variance, which is simply the variance of the

                                                                                                   23
fixed effects minus the mean of the squared standard errors. We label this term the “true”

standard deviation.

       Looking across these effectiveness estimates, we first observe that they are generally in

the range of estimates obtained in other studies using different data and specifications. Dhuey

and Smith (2012), for example, estimate standard deviations of 0.09 to 0.16 in units of standard

deviations of student performance, while Branch et. al. (2012) estimates these at approximately

0.11, and Chiang et. al. (2012) estimates these at 0.05 to 0.09. Yet we also see that the variance

in the effect differs substantially by estimation approach. The measures based on the school

effectiveness models show the largest effect estimates. Model 1a has a standard deviation of 0.16

for math and 0.12 for reading, compared to 0.19 and 0.14 for the student fixed effects model

using the final standard error estimate. While shrinking narrows these distributions, the change

is relatively small. The standard deviations of the shrunk estimates are 0.15, 0.11, 0.13 and 0.09

respectively.

       Our second approach conceptualizes principal effectiveness as value-added relative to

the value-added of the school when other principals are in charge. Here the standard deviations

are, not surprisingly, far smaller because we are removing the variation in value-added across

schools. The two models produce similar estimates of the standard deviation of the empirical-

Bayes shrunk estimates, 0.07 and 0.06 for math and o.03 and 0.04 for reading. The standard

errors of the coefficients are much larger for the approach that includes school fixed effects in

the model. This inclusion increases the noise/error in the estimates, and the resulting standard

deviations are approximately twice as high for the unshrunk coefficients in the model with

school fixed effects as in the model with controls for the schools estimated value-added.

       The final approach estimates principal effectiveness as the increase in school

effectiveness during the principal’s tenure and is labeled as Model 3. The standard deviation of

the shrunk estimates are the smaller in these models than in the models based on the other two

approaches, with standard deviations of 0.03 for math and 0.02 for reading. These estimates

                                                                                                    24
are lower than the ones reported in other studies, as one might expect given that improvement

in student learning is conceptually different from the level of student learning, which has been

the basis of prior estimates of principal value-added.

       These analyses have the value-added measures scaled in the units of student

achievement. We see that the standard deviation of the estimates vary across the different

approaches: the value-added measures that attribute all school effects to the principal have the

greatest variance and the models that estimate gains in school effectiveness have the smallest

variance. For the remainder of the paper, we standardize each of the measures to have a mean

of 0.0 and a standard deviation of 1.0. We make this conversion so that we can compare among

principals using a standard metric, i.e., a standard deviation in the value-added estimate.

       In addition to having different distributions (i.e., different variance), the different value-

added measures have different coverage. We can measure value-added under the first approach

for more principals. Models 1a and b have sample sizes of 725 principal by school observations.

Approach 2 includes controls for the school during the time that other principals were in charge

and thus it is limited to schools with at least two principals. Model 2a includes school fixed

effects and thus other principals have to be in the school for at least one year during the sample

period. Model 2b includes a control for student learning from one year to the next and thus

eliminates a few more schools for which there was only one year of data under another principal.

Approach 3 (school improvement) requires the most years of data and thus reduces the sample

substantially to approximately 218 principal by school observations. The sample sizes make

clear that the data requirements differ across models and affect the feasibility of estimating the

different approaches in practice.



                             Comparing Results across Models

       The value-added models are conceptually different, but are they also empirically

different? Table 3 provides the correlations among the shrunk, standardized measures. The first

                                                                                                   25
relationship to note is that Model 1a and Model 2b are quite highly correlated. The difference

between the two specifications is that 2b includes a control for the value-added of school during

other principals’ leadership. This inclusion changes the estimates, but they are still correlated

0.45 for math and 0.53 for reading. These correlations are somewhat higher than the within-

approach correlations for Approach 1 of 0.29 (math) and 0.44 (reading) and for Approach 2,

o.32 (math) and 0.48 (reading). The high correlation between Models 1a and 2a could be due to

substantial measurement error in the control for prior principal effectiveness as described

above. The correlations between the third approach and the first two are smaller. Model 3,

which measures improvement, is not nearly as highly correlated with the other models.

       In Table 3 we also show the correlation between the main effect from Model 3 and the

principal specific time trends. Not surprisingly, we find a negative correlation between the main

effect and the principal specific time trends, which suggests that principals that take over in

schools that are higher performing also see less rapid improvement in their students’ test score

gains during their tenure at a school. This correlation highlights a potential drawback of using

school improvement as a measure of principal effectiveness.

       An alternative to assessing correlations among the models’ predictions is to check the

consistency of the prediction for a given principal when his or her effect estimate is calculated

using one model versus another. For each model, we sort the predictions into quartiles, then, for

any two modeling Approaches A and B, we check how often the highest performers under model

A (i.e., the highest quartile) would be reassigned to the lowest quartile if Approach B was used

instead. Results of this exercise are shown in Table 4. For simplicity, only math comparisons are

shown (reading results are similar). The table illustrates that reclassification rates between the

two extreme quartiles tell a similar story to the correlation table. Model 1a and Model 2b, which

differ by the inclusion of controls for school value-added, have relatively low reclassification.

However, Model 2a, which includes school fixed effects, has a high reclassification rate with all

the other models. These reclassification rates show that choice of model matters substantially

                                                                                                    26
for how principal performance would be rated under different estimation systems; for example,

28% to 29% of the highest performers under the simplest model (Approach 1) would be

reclassified as among the lowest performers under the school improvement model (Approach 3).

       We can also compare estimates within the models by comparing results for math and

reading and, for a subset of principals, comparing their value-added in one school to their value-

added when serving in a different school. Table 5 gives these results. The correlations between

math and reading value-added are statistically significant, ranging from 0.51 for the school

improvement model (3) to 0.80 for Model 1a. Generally the correlations are highest for

Approach 1 and lowest for Approach 3. Note that Approach 1 is perhaps most subject to inflation

from sorting of principals among schools of similar performance levels, while Approach 3 is

perhaps most subject to measurement error due to its use of differences in student achievement

growth.

       The correlations between math and reading show some consistency, but the results

comparing the same principal serving in different schools are more sobering. Using the same

approaches we compare the value-added of each principal when they lead one school to his or

her value-added when they lead another school. We only report these estimates for the first and

third approaches because the second approach does not distinguish when principals are at

different schools. The across-schools correlations are positive and significant for the first

approach, ranging from 0.3 to 0.4, but they are not statistically significant (or even always

positively signed) for the third approach. The higher correlation for Approach 1 could result

from the approach better capturing true principal effectiveness that is portable across sites.

However, it also could come from the sorting of principals where some principals work in

schools that have a baseline of greater effectiveness and the correlation simply captures this

sorting and not the principal effect. There is no evidence that the improvement that Approach 3

measures is at all portable across schools.




                                                                                                 27
       In summary, the three different approaches produce substantively different estimates of

the principals’ value-added to student achievement. Even within the same conceptual

approaches, the specification matters. The third approach that conceptualizes principal effects

as school improvement during a principal’s tenure is particularly unrelated to the other

measures and also produces estimates that are uncorrelated across jobs for a given principal. It

is possible that these measures are largely noise. Comparing the first two approaches, the

differences within approaches become clearer. The first approach conceptualizes value-added

as school effectiveness during a principal’s tenure while the second approach conceptualizes

value- added as school effectiveness during a principal’s tenure relative to the effectiveness of

the school under other principals. One specification of the second approach simply takes the

first approach and includes an estimate, albeit measured with error and shrunk, of the school

effect when the principal is not in charge. The two estimates—those with and without the school

effect control—give estimates that are more highly correlated than the within-approach

specifications for Approach 1 and Approach 2. This correlation may results from Model 2b not

being a true within-school estimate of principal effects because of potentially substantial

measurement error in the control for school effectiveness in prior years.



                           Correlations with External Measures

       Given the differences across the value-added measures of principal effectiveness, the

next set of analyses compares these measures to non-test-based measures of principal and

school effectiveness. The goal of this analysis is to better understand which type of value-added

these alternative assessments are capturing, if any. We cannot tell from this analysis which

approach is correct, per se; “correctness” is in large part a question of how principals actually

affect schools, as we discuss above. However, we can learn what measures of value-added these

other measures most closely reflect.




                                                                                                    28
        While the test-based measures adjust for differences across principals in the

characteristics of the schools in which they work, the other measures do not. Because of this

lack of adjustment, we estimate the relationships between the value-added estimates and the

alternative measures using a regression approach in which we adjust for the average school test

scores in the first tested grade, percent white students, percent black students, percent of

students suspended, and percent of students chronically absent. All of these variables are

measured during the first year in which we observe a principal at a school. We also adjust for

principal race and gender. 3 For most of the non-test-based measures of principal effectiveness,

we do not know the reliability. As a result, measurement error concerns dictate that we model

the alternative measures as a function of the test-based-measures (which we can adjust for

measurement error due to sampling error) and the controls.

        The first comparison is between the value-added measures and both the average state

accountability grade given to the school during the principal’s tenure and the district’s

evaluation of the principal. Table 6a gives these results. 4 The first clear result is the lack of

positive relationship between either outcome and the value-added estimates based on the third

approach. If these Approach 3 estimates are, in fact, picking up school improvement (and not

just noise), there is no evidence that either the school accountability grade or the principal

evaluation score is measuring school improvement. All of the other estimates, those for

Approach 1 and Approach 2, are positively correlated with the outcomes. The strongest

relationship is clearly with the simplest model from the first approach. Both the accountability

grade and the district evaluation of the principal are more closely linked with average school



3 This adjustment is more important for measures that clearly do not take these differences into account,
such as student assessments and attendance. They are less important for measures such as district
assessments which likely adjust for these differences already.
4 For all of these analyses we ran an alternative specification in which that forced the sample sizes to be

the same across value-added measures. While for most studies we would present those findings instead,
in this case the sample differences are an inherent part of the approach. In practice, restricting the
sample changed the results very little and the alternative tables are available from the authors upon
request.

                                                                                                          29
effectiveness during the principal’s tenure than to the effectiveness of the principal relative to

other principals that have served at the school or, certainly, to school improvement.

       Students, staff and parents evaluate the school through yearly school climate surveys.

Table 6b compares the value-added measures to student, parent and staff reports of the school

climate. The story here is very similar to the one for accountability grades and district principal

evaluations. The outcome measures are most strongly related to the school effectiveness

estimates of principal value-added as captured by Approach 1. The two specifications within the

first approach do an about equal job of explaining the variation in the climate measures. The

two measures in Approach 2 have positive point estimates in the regression but are only

significant in a couple of models. Again, there is no evidence at all that Approach 3 is related to

the student, staff or parent assessments of the climate.

       Our third set of comparisons is between the value-added measures and assistant

principals’ and principals’ assessment of principals’ task effectiveness. Table 6c presents the

results for assistant principal evaluations and Table 6d presents the results for principals’ self-

evaluations. Note that these models are only estimated for principals in 2008, the year of our

survey. In both cases, the simplest model in Approach 1 is most closely associated with assistant

principal and principal evaluations. In this case the second estimation of Approach 2, which

includes the control for school effectiveness instead of the school fixed effect, is also positive but

only about half as large as the simplest approach. The estimates from Approach 3 are, again,

unrelated to the outcome measures. The estimates from Approach 2 that control for a school

fixed effect similarly explain none of the variation in the evaluations. Again, the evaluation

measures appear to be picking up school effectiveness as measured by how much students learn

in comparison to observationally similar students in other schools.

       Finally, we compare the value-added measures to process measures in the school. Table

6e describes the results for teacher retention and student chronic absenteeism. Again, here the

relationships are strongest for the simplest value-added measures. The second model in the first

                                                                                                      30
approach is somewhat more highly correlated than the first. Principals who lead schools in

which students learn more than they do when they are in other schools are also in schools with

lower chronic absenteeism and somewhat higher teacher retention. There is only a weak

relationship with value-added relative to other leaders of the same school (Approach 2) and the

relationship between these school outcomes and value-added as school improvement (Approach

3) is actually negative in some of the analyses.

       In summary, the comparisons with other ratings indicate that the simplest models, those

measuring school effectiveness during the principal’s tenure, are most strongly related to the

non-test based measures. The within-school comparison approach is sometimes positively

related to other measures but these results are not at all consistent. The final approach, that

measuring improvement, shows no positive relationship with any of the other measures and

some negative relationships, particularly with accountability grade and principals’ assessment of

their own effectiveness.



                                 Discussion and Conclusions

       Both the rhetoric and the laws addressing the evaluation of school principals often

advocate for the use of student test scores to judge principal effectiveness. This position has a

clear logic: principals should be assessed in accordance with how they affect the outcomes that

we care about. Yet little research has explored the properties of potential test-based measures of

principals’ effects and how they behave relative to non-test-based measures of effectiveness. The

goal of this paper is to present different theoretical and empirical approaches to measuring

principal effectiveness, to compare them to each other, and then to compare them with non-test

based measures.

       We present three different approaches to measuring principals’ influence on student

performance. The first simply measures the effectiveness of the school during a principal’s

tenure. This approach attributes all the school effects to the principal, even though he or she is

                                                                                                    31
unlikely to hire all the teachers in the school and, similarly, may not be in control of other

elements of the school. At least in the district from which we drew the data for these analyses,

only 23 percent of teachers and 33 percent of assistant principals come in new to a school with a

new principal, and even here, we do not know how much influence the principal had on even

these new hires, though probably not much, given the timing of principal hires and moves. The

second approach compares the effectiveness of the school under one principal to the

effectiveness of the school under other principals. This approach has the clear advantage of not

attributing all of the school effect to the principal, but it has stringent data requirements, which

are difficult for single districts—even the largest districts—to meet. These first two approaches

are measuring the average school effectiveness. The third approach measures the improvement

in school effectiveness during a principal’s tenure. Again, the data requirements for this

approach are high, given the measurement error inherent in measuring gains. However, it does

have the theoretical appeal of capturing improvement.

       If these measures were highly correlated with each other, then the choice of measures

would not be important. However, they are not strongly correlated. This issue is especially

stark for the school improvement approach, which is rarely correlated with the other approaches

at all, but it is apparent for the other approaches as well. Even within the same conceptual

approach, the choice of model matters; comparing a simple school effectiveness model with and

without a student fixed effect (i.e., Approaches 1a and 1b) produces a correlation of only 0.29 for

math and 0.44 for reading. This pattern of low correlations is driven in part by problems

internal to each of the measures. Although the principals who have higher value-added by one

measure in math often have higher value-added on that same measure in reading, the estimate

of a principal’s effectiveness while leading one school is not strongly predictive of how effective

he or she will be in another school even employing the same calculation.

       To better understand these measures, we compared them to the school accountability

grade; to the district’s rating of their effectiveness; to students’, parents’ and staff assessment of

                                                                                                    32
the school climate; and to principals’ and assistant principals’ assessment of the principal’s

effectiveness at tasks associated with the job of the principals. These comparisons show that the

first approach—measuring the effectiveness of the school during the principal’s tenure—is more

predictive of the non-test-based measures than the other two approaches. In fact, the third

approach that measures improvement is sometimes negatively correlated with these other

measures, such as the principal’s assessment of his leadership skills.

       The implications of these results may not be as clear as they first seem. The non-test-

based measures appear to validate the value-added measure of principal effectiveness that is

based on the school effectiveness, a measure that has unappealing conceptual properties (see

also Chiang, Lipscomb, & Gill, 2012). An alternative interpretation, however, is that these

positive relationships represent a shortcoming in the non-test measures. In rating the

performance of the principal, district officials, for example, likely take into account the

effectiveness of the school itself. Asked to assess principals’ leadership skills, assistant principals

and the principals themselves may be partially basing their ratings on how well the school is

performing instead of purely on the principal’s effectiveness itself. In other words,

differentiating the performance of the principal from that of other school factors may be a

difficulty confronted by both test-based and subjective estimates.

       The second two approaches—comparing principals to other principals in the same school

and measuring principal effectiveness by school improvement—are more compelling than the

simple school effectiveness approach, at least in theory. The school fixed effect version of the

second approach takes out the part of the school effectiveness that the principal inherited, but

the data demands are intensive when using school and principal fixed effects in the same model.

Models that include linear controls for school measures of effectiveness are closer to those from

Approach 1, perhaps because of the highly parameterized nature of the control and the

measurement error in the school effectiveness variable, even when shrunk to adjust for sampling

error. There are also theoretical reasons to worry about these measures. For example, if highly

                                                                                                    33
effective principals systematically sort to certain schools, then the within-school comparison will

lose important variation. The within-school comparison also compares principals with schools

over time and schools are not stagnant in the difficulties and opportunities they present to

principals. The third approach that measures school improvement should capture the principal’s

contribution to improving the school, but the signal-to-noise ratio appears to be low because

estimating changes increases measurement error. The improvement measure also has difficulty

in that it is impossible to use during the principal’s first year in a school.

        In sum, there are important tradeoffs among the different modeling approaches. The

simplest approach seemingly over-attributes aspects of the school’s performance to the

principal, but it produces estimates that correlate relatively highly across math and reading,

across different schools in which the principal works, and with other measures of non-test

outcomes we care about. On the other hand, the relative within-school effectiveness and school

improvement approaches come closer to modeling a reasonable relationship between principal

performance and student outcomes conceptually, but, perhaps because the data requirements

are stringent, empirically the results inspire less confidence.

        The inconsistencies and drawbacks of the measures lead to consideration of whether

they should be used at all. Theoretically, if student test performance is an outcome school

systems value, then scores should be used in some way for assessing schools and holding

personnel accountable. The warning that comes from these analyses is that it is important to

think carefully about what the measures are revealing about the specific contribution of the

principal and to use the measures for what they are, which is not as a clear indicator of

principals’ specific contributions to student test score growth.




                                                                                                 34
                                          References

Aaronson, D., Barrow, L., & Sander, W. (2007). Teachers and Student Achievement in the
      Chicago Public High Schools. Journal of Labor Economics, 25, 95–135.

Boyd, D., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2012). Measuring Test Measurement Error: A
       General Approach (NBER Working Paper 18010).

Branch, G. F., Hanushek, E. A., & Rivkin S. G. (2012). Estimating the Effect of Leaders on
      Public Sector Productivity: The Case of School Principals (NBER Working Paper
      17803).

Brewer, D. J. (1993). Principals and student outcomes: Evidence from U.S. high schools.
      Economics of Education Review, 12(4), 281-292.

Center for Educator Compensation Reform (n.d.). Dallas Principal and Teacher Incentive Pay
       Program. Retrieved from http://cecr.ed.gov/pdfs/profiles/Dallas.pdf.

Chiang, H., Lipscomb, S., & Gill, B. (2012). Assessing the Feasibility of Using Value-Added
       Models for Principal Evaluations (Working Paper).

Clark, D., Martorell, P., & Rockoff, J. (2009). School Principals and School Performance
        (CALDER Working Paper 38).

Chetty, R., Friedman, J., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D., & Yagan, D. (2011). How Does
       Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4), 1593-1660.

Coelli, M., & Green, D. A. (2012). Leadership effects: School principals and student outcomes.
        Economics of Education Review, 31(1), 92–109.

Dhuey, E., & Smith, J. (2012). How important are school principals in the production of
      student achievement? (University of Toronto Working Paper).

Eberts, R. W., & Stone, J. A. (1988). Student achievement in public schools: Do principals make
       a difference? Economics of Education Review, 7(3), 291-299.

Florida Senate. (2011). Text of Senate Bill 736. Recieved from
       http://www.flsenate.gov/Session/Bill/2011/0736/BillText/er/PDF.

Grissom, J., & Loeb, S. (2011). Triangulating Principal Effectiveness: How Perspectives of
      Parents, Teachers, and Assistant Principals Identify the Central Importance of
      Managerial Skills. American Educational Research Journal, 48(5), 1091-1123.

Grossman, P. L., Loeb, S., Cohen, J., Hammerness, K. M., Wyckoff, J., Boyd, D. J., & Lankford,
      H. (forthcoming). Measure for Measure: The relationship between measures of
      instructional practice in middle school English Language Arts and teachers’ value-added
      scores. American Journal of Education.

Hallinger, P., & Heck, R. (1998). Exploring the Principal’s Contribution to School Effectiveness:
       1980-1995. School Effectiveness & School Improvement, 9(2), 157.

                                                                                                 35
Horng, E., Klasik, D., & Loeb, S. (2010). Principal’s Time Use and School Effectiveness.
       American Journal of Education, 116(4), 491-523.

Jacob, B. A., & Lefgren, L. (2008). Can principals identify effective teachers? Evidence on
       subjective performance evaluation in education. Journal of Labor Economics, 26(1), 101-
       136.

Jacob, B. A., Lefgren, L., & Sims D. (2010). The Persistence of Teacher-Induced Learning Gains.
       Journal of Human Resources, 45(4), 915-943.

Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2002). The Promise and Pitfalls of Using Imprecise School
       Accountability Measures. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16 (4), 91–114.

Kane, T, J., & Staiger, D. O. (2008). Are Teacher-Level Value-Added Estimates Biased? An
       Experimental Validation of Non-Experimental Estimates (Working Paper). Retrieved
       from http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic245006.files/Kane_Staiger_3-17-08.pdf

Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2012). Gathering Feedback for Teaching, Measures of Effective
       Teaching Project. Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

Koretz, D. (2002). Limitations in the Use of Achievement Tests as Measures of Educators’
       Productivity. In E. Hanushek, J. Heckman, & D. Neal (Eds.), Designing Incentives to
       Promote Human Capital. Special issue of The Journal of Human Resources (pp. 752–
       777).

Lipscomb, S., Teh, B., Gill, B., Chiang, H., & Owens, A. (2010). Teacher and principal value-
      added: Research findings and implementation practices. Cambridge, MA: Mathematica
      Policy Research.

Lockwood, J. R., McCaffrey, D. F., Hamilton, L. S., Stecher, B., Le, V., & Martinez, J. F. (2007).
      The Sensitivity of Value-Added Teacher Effect Estimates to Different Mathematics
      Achievement Measures. Journal of Educational Measurement, (44)1, 47–67.

Loeb, S., Kalogrides, D., & Horng, E. (2010) Principal Preferences and the Uneven Distribution
       of Principals across Schools. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 32(2), 205–
       229.

Louisiana State Legislature. (2010). Text of House Bill No. 1033. Retrieved from
       http://www.legis.state.la.us/billdata/streamdocument.asp?did=689716.

McCaffrey, D. F., Sass, T. R., & Lockwood, J. R. (2009). The Intertemporal Stability of Teacher
      Effect Estimates (Working Paper).

McCaffrey, D. F., Lockwood, J. R., Koretz, D., Louis, T. A., & Hamilton, L. S. (2004). Models for
      value-added modeling of teacher effects. Journal of Education and Behavioral
      Statistics, 29(1), 67-101.

Measures of Effective Teaching Project (2010). Learning About Teaching: Initial Findings from
      the Measures of Effective Teaching Project. The Gates Foundation.




                                                                                                 36
Rivkin, S. G., Hanushek, E. A., & Kain, J. F. (2005). Teachers, Schools, and Academic
       Achievement. Econometrica, 73(2), 417–458.

Rockoff, J. E. (2004). The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence
       from Panel Data. American Economic Review, 94(2), 247-52.

Rothstein, J. (2009). Student Sorting and Bias in Value-Added Estimation: Selection on
       Observables and Unobservables. Education Finance and Policy, 4(4), 537-571.

Sanders, W., & Rivers, K. (1996). Cumulative and Residual Effects of Teachers on Future
      Academic Achievement (Technical Report). University of Tennessee Value-Added
      Research and Assessment Center.

Tennessee State Board of Education. (2011). Teacher and Principal Evaluation Policy. Retrieved
      from http://www.tn.gov/sbe/Policies/5.201%20Teacher%20and%20Principal%20Eval
      uation%20Policy%20-%20Update%202011.pdf.

Witziers, B., Bosker, R.J., & Krüger, M.L. (2003). Educational leadership and student
       achievement: The elusive search for an association. Educational Administration
       Quarterly, 39(3), 398-425.




                                                                                            37
Figure 1: The distribution of Value-Added Principal Effectiveness Measures

   MATH
                       Model 1A                              Model 1B                                   Model 2A




                                                                                          15
                                            6
          6




                                                                                          10
                                            4
          4




                                                                                          5
                                            2
          2




                                                                                          0
                                            0
          0




              -.5   -.25   0   .25   .5          -.5    -.25        0        .25   .5          -.5   -.25   0   .25   .5


                       Model 2B                                Model 3
                                            20
          6
          4




                                            10
          2




                                            0
          0




              -.5   -.25   0   .25   .5          -1    -.5      0       .5     1   1.5


                                          Estimated Effect                               EB Effect

      READING
                       Model 1A                              Model 1B                                   Model 2A
                                                                                          20
          6




                                            6




                                                                                          15
          4




                                            4




                                                                                          10
          2




                                            2




                                                                                          5
          0




                                            0




                                                                                          0




              -.5   -.25   0   .25   .5          -.5    -.25        0        .25   .5          -.5   -.25   0   .25   .5


                       Model 2B                                Model 3
                                            20
          6
          4




                                            10
          2
          0




                                            0




              -.5   -.25   0   .25   .5          -1    -.5      0       .5     1   1.5


                                          Estimated Effect                               EB Effect




                                                                                                                           38
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
                                                                          Mean       SD        N             Year Measured
Number of Principal-School Combinations                                                       719
Number of Principals                                                                          523
Gender: Female                                                             0.67               719               Constant
Gender: Male                                                               0.33               719               Constant
Race/Ethnicity: White                                                      0.23               717               Constant
Race/Ethnicity: Black                                                      0.35               717               Constant
Race/Ethnicity: Hispanic                                                   0.41               717               Constant
Race/Ethnicity: Other                                                      0.01               717               Constant
Average Standardized Math Score, First Tested Grade                       -0.06     0.39      687         First Year at School
Average Standardized Reading Score, First Tested Grade                    -0.06     0.40      683         First Year at School
Proportion White                                                           0.08     0.10      719         First Year at School
Proportion Black                                                           0.36     0.34      719         First Year at School
Proportion Hispanic                                                        0.54     0.31      719         First Year at School
Proportion Absent 21 or More Days                                          0.10     0.10      719         First Year at School
Proportion Suspended                                                       0.08     0.11      719         First Year at School
AP Rating of Principal (Overall)                                          -0.04     0.91      167            2008 Survey
AP Rating of Principal (Management)                                       -0.03     0.97      216            2008 Survey
AP Rating of Principal (Operations)                                       -0.01     0.91      211            2008 Survey
AP Rating of Principal (Instruction)                                      -0.02     0.90      189            2008 Survey
AP Rating of Principal (Internal Relations)                               -0.04     0.92      228            2008 Survey
AP Rating of Principal (External Relations)                               -0.05     0.97      220            2008 Survey
Principal Rating of Own Effectiveness (Overall)                            0.00     0.99      203            2008 Survey
Principal Rating of Own Effectiveness (Management)                         0.00     0.99      236            2008 Survey
Principal Rating of Own Effectiveness (Operations)                         0.01     1.00      232            2008 Survey
Principal Rating of Own Effectiveness (Instruction)                       -0.02     1.01      221            2008 Survey
Principal Rating of Own Effectiveness (Internal Relations)                -0.02     1.01      233            2008 Survey
Principal Rating of Own Effectiveness (External Relations)                -0.02     1.00      237            2008 Survey
Teacher Retention Rate (in School)                                         0.82     0.08      678       Average While at School
Student Chronic Absence Rate                                               0.10     0.10      719       Average While at School
School Climate Scale-Student Report                                       -0.14     1.00      703       Average While at School
School Climate Scale- Staff Report                                        -0.16     1.05      712       Average While at School
School Climate Scale- Parent Report                                       -0.19     1.05      706       Average While at School
School Accountability Grade, 0-4 Point Scale                               2.81     1.20      690       Average While at School
Average of Ratings Received From District (1-4)                            3.54     0.51      658       Average While at School
Proportion of Years Received Highest Rating From District                  0.59     0.41      658       Average While at School
Notes: The data include one observation for each principal-school combination except in cases where 2008 survey items are used-- these
just use principal-school combinations in 2008.




                                                                                                                                   39
Table 2. Distribution of Principal Value-Added Estimates
                                                                                                  Standard Deviations                Percentiles of Estimates before EB Shrinkage
                                                                                                FE        EB       TRUE             10th      25th       50th       95th      90th                     N
Math
          Approach 1: School Effectiveness
            Model 1A (No Student FE)                                                           0.16        0.15         0.16        -0.18       -0.11        -0.03       0.11         0.22         725
            Model 1B (With Student FE)                                                         0.19        0.13         0.17        -0.19       -0.10        -0.01       0.10         0.24         725
          Approach 2: Relative Within-School Effectiveness
            Model 2A (Principal & School FE)                                                   0.06        0.04         0.05        -0.05       -0.02        0.00        0.03         0.06         555
            Model 2B (Principal FE, Control for Prior School Effectiveness)                    0.10        0.08         0.10        -0.09       -0.05        0.01        0.07         0.13         284
          Approach 3: School Improvement
            Model 3 (Principal by School Time Trend)                                           0.08        0.03         0.08        -0.04       -0.01        0.01        0.04         0.08         218
Reading
          Approach 1: School Effectiveness
            Model 1A (No Student FE)                                                           0.12        0.11         0.12        -0.14       -0.09        -0.02       0.09         0.17         725
            Model 1B (With Student FE)                                                         0.14        0.09         0.12        -0.16       -0.09        -0.01       0.08         0.15         725
          Approach 2: Relative Within-School Effectiveness
            Model 2A (Principal & School FE)                                                   0.04        0.02         0.04        -0.04       -0.02        0.00        0.02         0.04         558
            Model 2B (Principal FE, Control for Prior School Effectiveness)                    0.07        0.06         0.07        -0.10       -0.05        0.00        0.03         0.09         284
          Approach 3: School Improvement
            Model 3 (Principal by School Time Trend)                                           0.06        0.02         0.05        -0.04       -0.01        0.01        0.03         0.06         218
          Note: FE refers to the original fixed effects estimates while EB refers to the Empirical Bayes shrunken estimates. True calculates the standard deviation by taking the square root of the
          variance of the fixed effects minus the mean of the standard errors squared.




                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
Table 3: Pairwise Correlations Among Alternative Principal Effect Estimates
                                                                                                         3-
                                                                        1A     1B     2A      2B     Intercept   3 - Slope
MATH
Model 1B: School Effectiveness (With Student FE)                        0.29   1.00
Model 2A: Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal & School
FE)                                                                     0.28   0.24   1.00
Model 2B: Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal FE, Control
for Prior School Effectiveness)                                         0.46   0.23   0.44   1.00
Model 3: Intercept from Model with Principal by School Time Trend       0.75   0.33   0.04   0.11       1.00
Model 3: Principal by School Time Trend                                 0.07   0.17   0.25   0.18      -0.39       1.00
READING
Model 1B: School Effectiveness (With Student FE)                        0.44   1.00
Model 2A: Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal & School
FE)                                                                     0.30   0.25   1.00
Model 2B: Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal FE, Control
for Prior School Effectiveness)                                         0.47   0.29   0.36   1.00
Model 3: Intercept from Model with Principal by School Time Trend       0.80   0.41   0.03   0.12       1.00
Model 3: Principal by School Time Trend                                 0.02   0.05   0.07   -0.05     -0.32       1.00
Note: Bolded correlations are significant at p<=.05.




                                                                                                                             41
Table 4 Reclassification Rates (Math, Selected Models):
Percent Appearing in Quartile 4 of Row Approach that Appear in Quartile 1 for Column Approach

                                                                                  Model 1A Model 1B Model 2A Model 2B Model 3
Model 1A: School Effectiveness (No Student FE)                                       -
Model 1B: School Effectiveness (With Student FE)                                    10.1      -
Model 2A: Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal & School FE)              13.2     19.1      -
Model 2B: Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal FE, Control for Prior
School Effectiveness)                                                               5.9      20.6    17.2       -
Model 3: Principal by School Time Trend                                             29        28      21       27        -




                                                                                                                                42
Table 5: Correlation between Math and Reading Principal Value-Added Estimates

                                                                                    Between              Across Schools
                                                                                    Math and
                                                                                    Reading           Math        Reading
Model 1A: School Effectiveness (No Student FE)                                        0.80            0.35         0.29
Model 1B: School Effectiveness (With Student FE)                                      0.69            0.31         0.39
Model 2A: Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal & School FE)                0.63             NA           NA
Model 2B: Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal FE, Control
for Prior School Effectiveness)                                                        0.59            NA            NA
Model 3: Principal by School Time Trend                                                0.51           -0.41         0.22


Note: The first column reports the correlation between value-added in math and reading for each principal-school combination.
The second and third columns report the correlations between a given value-added estimate for a given principal in the first
and second schools that they serve. Bolded correlations are significant at p < .05.




                                                                                                                                43
Table 6a: Comparing Value Added Measures to Accountability Grade and District Evaluation

                                             School Acct'y Grade           Average of Eval Ratings


                                             Math          Reading           Math          Reading


Model 1A:                                  0.446    ***    0.363    ***    0.126    ***    0.159    ***
School Effectiveness (No Student FE)      (0.041)         (0.038)         (0.037)         (0.034)
N                                           666             667             626             627
Model 1B:                                  0.239    ***    0.258    ***    0.070    **     0.106    ***
School Effectiveness (With Student FE)    (0.031)         (0.031)         (0.023)         (0.023)
N                                           666             667             626             627
Model 2A:                                  0.071     *     0.080     **    0.033           0.053     *
Relative Within School Effectiveness      (0.029)         (0.025)         (0.025)         (0.022)
(Principal & School FE)
N                                           512             514             475             479
Model 2B:                                  0.253    ***    0.235    ***    0.097     *     0.119     **
Relative Within School Effectiveness      (0.050)         (0.046)         (0.042)         (0.040)
(Principal FE, Control for Prior School
Effectiveness)
N                                           254             254             222             222
Model 3:                                   0.062           0.064     +    -0.006          -0.021
Principal By School Time Trend            (0.040)         (0.036)         (0.037)         (0.034)
N                                           206             206             204             204




                                                                                                          44
Table 6b: Comparing Value Added Measures to Student, Parent and School Staff Assessment
                                                           Student Report                       Staff Report                  Parent Report


                                                         Math          Reading           Math            Reading           Math          Reading
Model 1A:                                              0.189    ***    0.132    ***    0.184      ***    0.132    **     0.130    **     0.052
School Effectiveness (No Student FE)                  (0.041)         (0.038)         (0.046)           (0.043)         (0.044)         (0.047)
N                                                       676             681             680               684             676             680
Model 1B:                                              0.234    ***    0.225    ***    0.174      ***    0.160    ***    0.166    ***    0.153    ***
School Effectiveness (With Student FE)                (0.032)         (0.034)         (0.033)           (0.032)         (0.034)         (0.043)
N                                                       676             681             680               684             676             680
Model 2A:                                              0.019           0.020           0.052      +      0.046           0.000           0.013
Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal &     (0.031)         (0.028)         (0.031)           (0.031)         (0.033)         (0.037)
School FE)
N                                                       518             524             522               528             518             523
Model 2B:                                              0.097     *     0.071     +     0.116       *     0.072           0.054           0.064
Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal FE,   (0.043)         (0.042)         (0.055)           (0.052)         (0.044)         (0.045)
Control for Prior School Effectiveness)
N                                                       262             263             265               266             262             263
Model 3:                                               0.039           0.099     *    -0.002             0.049           0.039           0.078     *
Principal By School Time Trend                        (0.036)         (0.041)         (0.045)           (0.043)         (0.036)         (0.039)
N                                                       206             206             207               207             206             206




                                                                                                                                                  45
Table 6c: Comparing to Assistant Principal Assessments of Principals’ Task Effectiveness
                                                                Overall Rating             Management Scale              Instruction Scale


                                                             Math        Reading         Math         Reading           Math         Reading
Model 1A:                                                   0.436    *    0.314    *    0.331    *    0.379     **    0.377    *     0.268     *
School Effectiveness (No Student FE)                       (0.169)       (0.126)       (0.152)       (0.133)         (0.163)        (0.114)
N                                                            160           160           205           205             179            179
Model 1B:                                                   0.217    +    0.115         0.171         0.096           0.153          0.116
School Effectiveness (With Student FE)                     (0.118)       (0.100)       (0.104)       (0.075)         (0.117)        (0.087)
N                                                            160           160           205           205             179            179
Model 2A:                                                   0.127         -0.049        0.092         -0.000          0.073          -0.071
Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal & School   (0.104)       (0.088)       (0.083)       (0.069)         (0.100)        (0.085)
FE)
N                                                            104           107           138           140             118            121
Model 2B:                                                   0.390    *    0.252    *    0.210    +    0.198     *     0.445    **    0.247     *
Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal FE,        (0.151)       (0.105)       (0.115)       (0.078)         (0.158)        (0.097)
Control for Prior School Effectiveness)
N                                                             53            53            67            67              56             56
Model 3:                                                    0.061         0.025         0.049         0.058           0.018          0.073
Principal By School Time Trend                             (0.104)       (0.114)       (0.083)       (0.095)         (0.097)        (0.113)
N                                                             79            79           103           103              87             87




                                                                                                                                              46
Table 6d: Comparing to Principal Assessments of Principals’ Task Effectiveness
                                                                   Overall Rating             Management Scale              Instruction Scale


                                                                 Math        Reading         Math         Reading          Math         Reading
Model 1A:                                                      0.303    *    0.204          0.267    +    0.257     *     0.347    *    0.268     *
School Effectiveness (No Student FE)                          (0.150)       (0.146)        (0.148)       (0.129)         (0.137)       (0.130)
N                                                               193           193            224           224             209           209
Model 1B:                                                      0.044         0.089          0.077         0.154     +     0.099         0.162     +
School Effectiveness (With Student FE)                        (0.105)       (0.097)        (0.109)       (0.093)         (0.092)       (0.095)
N                                                               193           193            224           224             209           209
Model 2A:                                                      0.003         0.097          0.048         0.150     +     0.164    +    0.149
Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal & School      (0.095)       (0.082)        (0.090)       (0.077)         (0.085)       (0.092)
FE)
N                                                               120           123            143           146             133           136
Model 2B:                                                      0.219         0.260     +    0.237         0.333     **    0.320    *    0.279     *
Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal FE, Control   (0.179)       (0.136)        (0.156)       (0.105)         (0.144)       (0.122)
for Prior School Effectiveness)
N                                                                62            62             74            74              70            70
Model 3:                                                      -0.151        -0.228     *   -0.053        -0.178     +    -0.154        -0.202     *
Principal By School Time Trend                                (0.112)       (0.099)        (0.122)       (0.098)         (0.112)       (0.101)
N                                                                93            93            111           111             102           102




                                                                                                                                                 47
Table 6e: Comparing to Teacher Turnover and Student Absenteeism
                                                                Teacher Retention Rate (in
                                                                         School)                 Chronic Absence Rate (21+Days)


                                                                 Math           Reading             Math           Reading
Model 1A:                                                       0.001            0.001           -0.006           -0.026    ***
School Effectiveness (No Student FE)                           (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.006)         (0.005)
N                                                                644              645              714              714
Model 1B:                                                       0.009    **      0.004           -0.013    **     -0.020    ***
School Effectiveness (With Student FE)                         (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.004)         (0.004)
N                                                                644              645              714              714
Model 2A:                                                       0.000           -0.001            -0.000          -0.003
Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal & School FE)   (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.003)         (0.003)
N                                                                490              493              546              549
Model 2B:                                                       0.010    +      -0.002            0.004           -0.005
Relative Within School Effectiveness (Principal FE, Control    (0.006)         (0.005)           (0.004)         (0.004)
for Prior School Effectiveness)
N                                                                236              236              274              274
Model 3:                                                       -0.007     *     -0.006       +    0.009     *      0.002
Principal By School Time Trend                                 (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.004)         (0.007)
N                                                                207              207              217              217




                                                                                                                                  48
Appendix 1: Bayesian Shrinkage

                                                 ^
         Our estimated principal effect ( δ sp ) is the sum of a “true” principal effect ( δ sp ) plus

some measurement error 8:

          ^
         δ sp = δ sp + ε sp                                                           (1)

The empirical Bayes estimate of a principal’s effect is a weighted average of their estimated fixed

effect and the average fixed effect in the population where the weight, λsp, is a function of the

precision of each principal’s fixed effect and therefore varies by s and p. The less precise the

estimate, the more we weight the mean. The more precise the estimate, the more we weight the

estimate and the less we weight the mean. Similarly, the more variable the true score (holding

the precision of the estimate constant) the less we weight the mean, and the less variable the

true score, the more we weight the mean assuming the true score is probably close to the mean.

The weight, λsp, should give the proportion of the variance in what we observe that is due to the

variance in the true score relative to the variance due to both the variance in the true score and

precision of the estimate. This more efficient estimator of teacher quality is generated by:

          ^                   −            ^
E (δ sp | δ ) = (1 − λsp )(δ ) + (λsp ) * δ sp                                                 (2)

                     (σ δ ) 2
where λsp =                                                                                    (3)
                (σ εj ) 2 +(σ δ ) 2

Thus, the term λsp can be interpreted as the proportion of total variation in the teacher effects

that is attributable to true differences between teachers. The terms in (3) are unknown so are

estimated with sample analogs.

    ^             ^
(σ εsp ) 2 = var(δ εsp )                                                                       (4)




8Here we make the classical errors in variables (CEV) assumption, assuming that measurement error is
not associated with an unobserved explanatory variable.

                                                                                                       49
which is the square of the standard error of the teacher fixed effects. The variance of the true

fixed effect is determined by:

                                   ^                ^
                       (σ δ ) 2 = (σ δ ) 2 − mean(σ ε ) 2                                   (5)

         ^
where (σ δ ) 2 is the variance of the estimated teacher fixed effects (Gordon, Kane, and Staiger

2006; Jacob and Lefgren 2005). We shrink the school value-added estimates in the same

manner described above.




                                                                                                   50
