                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     NONLINEAR POLICY RULES AND THE IDENTIFICATION AND ESTIMATION
       OF CAUSAL EFFECTS IN A GENERALIZED REGRESSION KINK DESIGN

                                           David Card
                                           David Lee
                                           Zhuan Pei
                                          Andrea Weber

                                       Working Paper 18564
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18564


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2012




We thank Diane Alexander, Mingyu Chen, Martina Fink, Andrew Langan, Steve Mello, and Pauline
Leung for excellent research assistance. We have benefited from the comments and suggestions of
Andrew Chesher, Nathan Grawe, Bo Honoré, Guido Imbens, Pat Kline and seminar participants at
Brookings, Cornell, Georgetown, IZA, LSE, NBER, Princeton, Rutgers, Upjohn, UC Berkeley, UCL,
Uppsala, Wharton and Zürich. Andrea Weber gratefully acknowledges research funding from the Austrian
Science Fund (NRN Labor Economics and the Welfare State). The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by David Card, David Lee, Zhuan Pei, and Andrea Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Nonlinear Policy Rules and the Identification and Estimation of Causal Effects in a Generalized
Regression Kink Design
David Card, David Lee, Zhuan Pei, and Andrea Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 18564
November 2012
JEL No. C13,C14,C31

                                               ABSTRACT

We consider nonparametric identification and estimation in a nonseparable model where a continuous
regressor of interest is a known, deterministic, but kinked function of an observed assignment variable.
This design arises in many institutional settings where a policy variable (such as weekly unemployment
benefits) is determined by an observed but potentially endogenous assignment variable (like previous
earnings). We provide new results on identification and estimation for these settings, and apply our
results to obtain estimates of the elasticity of joblessness with respect to UI benefit rates. We characterize
a broad class of models in which a “Regression Kink Design” (RKD, or RK Design) provides valid
inferences for the treatment-on-the-treated parameter (Florens et al. (2008)) that would be identified
in an ideal randomized experiment. We show that the smooth density condition that is sufficient for
identification rules out extreme sorting around the kink, but is compatible with less severe forms of
endogeneity. It also places testable restrictions on the distribution of predetermined covariates around
the kink point. We introduce a generalization of the RKD – the “fuzzy regression kink design” – that
allows for omitted variables in the assignment rule, as well as certain types of measurement errors
in the observed values of the assignment variable and the policy variable. We also show how standard
local polynomial regression techniques can be adapted to obtain nonparametric estimates for the sharp
and fuzzy RKD. We then use a fuzzy RKD approach to study the effect of unemployment insurance
benefits on the duration of joblessness in Austria, where the benefit schedule has kinks at the minimum
and maximum benefit level. Our estimates suggest that the elasticity of joblessness with respect to
the benefit rate is on the order of 1.5.


David Card                                            Zhuan Pei
Department of Economics                               W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research
549 Evans Hall, #3880                                 300 South Westnedge Avenue
University of California, Berkeley                    Kalamazoo, MI 49007-4686
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                               U.S.A.
and NBER                                              peizhuan@gmail.com
card@econ.berkeley.edu
                                                      Andrea Weber
David Lee                                             University of Mannheim
Industrial Relations Section                          Economics Department
Princeton University                                  L7, 3-4
Firestone Library A-16-J                              68131 Mannheim
Princeton, NJ 08544                                   Germany
and NBER                                              a.weber@uni-mannheim.de
davidlee@princeton.edu
1     Introduction

There is now an extensive literature that generalizes the additive/linear structure of first-generation econo-

metric models to accommodate nonseparable models (including duration models, censored regression mod-

els, and discrete choice models) within semiparametric (e.g., Han (1987); Sherman (1993); Cavanagh and

Sherman (1998); Khan and Tamer (2007)) and nonparametric frameworks (e.g., Roehrig (1988); Matzkin

(1991); Matzkin (1992); Matzkin (2003)).1 In particular, a growing body of research considers identifica-

tion and estimation in a nonseparable model when the continuous regressors of interest are endogenous (e.g.,

Lewbel (1998); Lewbel (2000); Blundell and Powell (2003); Chesher (2003); Altonji and Matzkin (2005);

Florens et al. (2008); Imbens and Newey (2009)). So far, existing approaches rely on the existence of one or

more instrumental variables that are assumed to be independent of the errors in the model. Unfortunately,

in many applied contexts it is difficult to find candidate instruments that satisfy the necessary independence

assumptions. The problem is particularly acute when the regressor of interest is a policy variable that is

mechanically determined by an endogenous assignment variable. The level of unemployment benefits, for

example, is typically set by a formula that depends on previous earnings. In this situation any instrument

that is correlated with benefits is likely to be correlated with the unobserved determinants of previous earn-

ings, and hence also correlated with unobserved determinants of unemployment duration – a violation of

independence.

     Nevertheless, a common feature of many policy rules is the presence of a kink, or multiple kinks, in the

formula that relates the assignment variable to the policy variable. As has been noted by Guryan (2001),

Dahlberg et al. (2008), Nielsen et al. (2010) and Simonsen et al. (2011), a kinked assignment rule holds out

the possibility for identification of the policy variable effect, even in the absence of traditional instruments.

The basic idea is to look for an induced kink in the mapping between the assignment variable and the

outcome variable that coincides with the kink in the policy rule, and compare the relative magnitudes of

the two kinks. An obvious concern with this “regression kink design” (RKD) is the endogeneity of the

assignment variable. Saez (2010), for example, notes that a kink in the tax schedule will typically cause

taxpayers to “bunch” at the kink. Such behavior could lead to a non-smooth distribution of unobserved

heterogeneity around the kink point, confounding inferences based on a regression kink design.2

     This paper establishes conditions under which the behavioral response to a formulaic policy variable
    1 See  Blundell and Powell (2003) and Matzkin (2007) for literature surveys.
    2A   similar concern is often raised in regression discontinuity designs – see Urquiola and Verhoogen (2009), for example.


                                                                  1
like unemployment benefits can be identified within a general class of nonparametric and nonseparable

regression models. Specifically, we establish conditions for the RKD to identify the same “local average

response” (Altonji and Matzkin (2005)) or “treatment-on-the-treated” parameter (Florens et al. (2008)) that

would be identified in a randomized experiment. The key assumption is that conditional on the unobservable

determinants of the outcome variable, the density of the assignment variable is smooth (i.e., continuously

differentiable) at the kink point in the policy rule. We show that this smooth density condition rules out

deterministic sorting, while allowing for other less extreme forms of endogeneity – including, for example,

situations where agents endogenously sort but make small optimization errors (e.g., Chetty (2012)). We also

show that the smooth density condition generates strong predictions for the distribution of predetermined

covariates among the population of agents located near the kink point. Thus, as in a regression discontinuity

(RD) design (Lee and Lemieux (2010); DiNardo and Lee (2011)), the validity of the regression kink design

is testable.

    In many realistic settings, the policy rule of interest depends on unobserved individual characteristics,

or is implemented with error. In addition, both the assignment variable and the policy variable may be

observed with error. We thus present a generalization of the RKD – which we call a “fuzzy regression kink

design” – that allows for these features. The fuzzy RKD estimand replaces the known change in slope of

the assignment rule at the kink with an estimate based on the observed data. Under a series of additional

assumptions, including a monotonicity condition analogous to the one introduced by Imbens and Angrist

(1994) (and implicit in latent index models (Vytlacil, 2002)), we show that the fuzzy RKD identifies a

weighted average of marginal effects, where the weights are proportional to the magnitude of the individual-

specific kinks.3

    We then discuss nonparametric estimation of the RKD and fuzzy RKD, using local polynomial estima-

tion (Fan and Gijbels (1992)). Specifically, under a set of regularity conditions we establish consistency and

asymptotic normality of local linear and local quadratic estimators for the sharp and fuzzy kink designs, and

provide conditions under which nonparametric inference can be conducted using estimates and sampling

errors from standard regression routines.

    Finally, we use a fuzzy RKD approach to analyze the effect of unemployment insurance (UI) benefits

on the duration of benefit claims and joblessness in Austria. As in the U.S., the Austrian UI system specifies
   3 The “marginal effect” to which we refer in this paper – the derivative of the outcome with respect to the continuous endogenous

regressor – should not be confused with the marginal treatment effect (MTE) of Heckman and Vytlacil (2005), where the treatment
is binary.


                                                                 2
a benefit level that is proportional to earnings in a “base period” prior to job loss, subject to a minimum

and maximum. We study the effects of the kinks at the minimum and maximum benefit levels, using data

on a large sample of unemployment spells from the Austrian Social Security Database (see Zweimüller et

al. (2009)). An important advantage of these data is that we can measure both the duration of UI benefit

claims and the duration of joblessness (i.e., the length of time from the end of the old job and the start of the

new job).4 Simple plots of the data show strong visual evidence of kinks in the relationship between base

period earnings and the durations of benefit claims and joblessness at both kink points. We also examine the

relationship between base period earnings and various predetermined covariates (such as gender, occupation,

age, and industry) around the kink points. The conditional distributions of the covariates evolve smoothly

around the “bottom kink” (at the earnings threshold for minimum benefits) but are less smooth around the

“top kink” (at the threshold for maximum benefits).

      Our fuzzy RKD estimates of the elasticity of the duration of claims and the duration of joblessness are

relatively large and reasonably precise, particularly around the bottom kink, where the density of observa-

tions is higher. In particular, the estimated elasticity of joblessness using a local linear regression is 1.73

(standard error = 0.44), while the estimated elasticity of the duration of benefit claims is 1.25 (standard error

= 0.41). Both estimates are robust to wide variation in the bandwidth choice. The estimated elasticities

around the top kink are more sensitive to alternative bandwidth choices, but generally comparable in magni-

tude. Overall, we conclude that increases in UI benefits in Austria appear to exert a relatively large effect on

both low-wage and high-wage individuals, with behavioral elasticities that are somewhat larger than have

been found in recent U.S. studies using difference-in-difference designs (e.g., Chetty (2010)).




2      Nonparametric Regression and the Regression Kink Design

2.1     Background

Consider the generalized nonseparable model


                                                        Y = y (B,V,U)                                                           (1)
    4 Cardet al. (2007) point out that it may be important to distinguish between the impacts of UI policy variables on the duration
of the UI claim versus impacts on the duration of joblessness.




                                                                 3
where Y is an outcome, B is a continuous regressor of interest, V is another observed covariate, and U is

an error term that potentially enters the model in a non-additive way. This is a particular case of the model

considered by Imbens and Newey (2009); there are two observable covariates and interest centers on the

effect of B on Y . As is understood in the literature, this formulation allows for completely unrestricted

heterogeneity in the responsiveness of Y to B. In the case where B is binary, the model is equivalent to

a potential outcomes framework where the “treatment effect” of B for a particular individual is given by

Y1 − Y0 = y (1,V,U) − y (0,V,U). Note that in contexts with discrete outcomes, Y could be defined as an

individual-specific probability of a particular outcome (as in a binary response model) or an individual-

specific expected value (e.g. an expected duration) that depends on B, V , and U, where the structural

function of interest is the relation between B and the probability or expected value.5

    One natural benchmark object of interest in this setting is the “average structural function” (ASF), as

discussed in Blundell and Powell (2003):

                                                             Z
                                             ASF (b, v) =        y (b, v, u) dFU (u)


where FU (·) is the c.d.f. of U. This gives the average value of Y that would occur if the entire population

(as represented by the unconditional distribution of U) were assigned to a particular value of the pair (b, v).

Florens et al. (2008) call the derivative of the ASF with respect to the continuous treatment of interest the

“average treatment effect” (ATE), which is a natural extension of the average treatment effect familiar in the

binary treatment context.

    A closely related construct is the “treatment on the treated” (TT) parameter of Florens et al. (2008):

                                                            ∂ y (b, v, u)
                                                        Z
                                      T Tb|v (b, v) =                     dFU|B=b,V =v (u)
                                                                 ∂b

where FU|B=b,V =v (u) is the c.d.f. of U conditional on B,V equal to b, v. As noted by Florens et al. (2008),

this is equivalent to the “local average response” (LAR) parameter of Altonji and Matzkin (2005). The TT

(or equivalently the LAR) gives the average effect of a marginal increase in b at some specific value of the

pair (b, v), holding fixed the distribution of the unobservables, FU|B=b,V =v (·).
   5 In these cases, one would use the observed outcome Y ∗ (0 or 1 outcome, or an observed duration), and use the fact that the

expectation of Y ∗ and Y would be equivalent given the same conditioning statement, in applying all of the identification results
below.




                                                                 4
    Recent studies, including Florens et al. (2008) and Imbens and Newey (2009), have proposed methods

that use an instrumental variable Z to identify causal parameters such as TT or LAR. An appropriate instru-

ment Z is assumed to influence B, but is, at the same time, independent of the non-additive errors in the

model. Chesher (2003) observes that such independence assumptions may be “strong and unpalatable”, and

hence proposes the use of local independence of Z to identify local effects.

    As mentioned in the introduction, there are some important contexts – particularly when the regressor of

interest is a deterministic function of another behaviorally endogenous variable – where no instruments can

plausibly satisfy the independence assumption, either globally or locally. For example, consider the case

where Y represents the duration of unemployment for a job-loser, B represents the level of unemployment

benefits, and V represents pre-job-loss earnings. Assume (as in many institutional settings) that unemploy-

ment benefits is a linear function of pre-job-loss earnings up to some maximum: B = b(V )=ρ min(V, T ).

Conditional on V there is no variation in the benefit level, so model (1) is not nonparametrically identified.

One could try to get around this fundamental non-identification by treating V as an error component corre-

lated with B. But in this case, any variable that is independent of V will, by construction, be independent of

the regressor of interest B, so it will not be possible to find instruments for B, holding constant the policy

regime.

    Despite this conclusion, it may be possible to exploit the kink in the benefit rule to identify the causal

effect of B on Y , in a similar spirit to the regression discontinuity design of Thistlethwaite and Campbell

(1960). The idea is that if B exerts a causal effect on Y , and there is a kink in the deterministic relation

between B and V at v = T then we should expect to see an induced kink in the relationship between Y and

V at v = T .6 This identification strategy has been employed in a few empirical studies. Guryan (2001), for

example, uses kinks in state education aid formulas as part of an instrumental variables strategy to study the

effect of public school spending.7 Dahlberg et al. (2008) use the same approach to estimate the impact of

intergovernmental grants on local spending and taxes. More recently, Simonsen et al. (2011) use a kinked

relationship between total expenditure on prescription drugs and their marginal price to study the price

sensitivity of demand for prescription drugs. Nielsen et al. (2010), who introduce the term “Regression
   6 Without  loss of generality, we normalize the kink threshold T to 0 in the remainder of the paper.
   7 Guryan   (2001) describes the identification strategy as follows: “In the case of the Overburden Aid formula, the regression
includes controls for the valuation ratio, 1989 per-capita income, and the difference between the gross standard and 1993 education
expenditures (the standard of effort gap). Because these are the only variables on which Overburden Aid is based, the exclusion
restriction only requires that the functional form of the direct relationship between test scores and any of these variables is not the
same as the functional form in the Overburden Aid formula.”



                                                                  5
Kink Design” for this approach, use a kinked student aid scheme to identify the effect of direct costs on

college enrollment.

    Nielsen et al. (2010) make precise the assumptions needed to identify the causal effects in the constant-

effect, additive model

                                                      Y = τB + g (V ) + ε,                                                       (2)

where B = b(V ) is assumed to be a deterministic (and continuous) function of V with a kink at V = 0. They

show that if g (·) and E [ε|V = v] have derivatives that are continuous in v at v = 0, then

                                                   dE[Y |V =v]
                                           lim          dv            − lim− dE[Ydv|V =v]
                                          v0 →0+                 v=v0  v0 →0              v=v0
                                    τ=                         0             0
                                                                                               .
                                                      lim+ b (v0 ) − lim− b (v0 )
                                                     v0 →0             v0 →0


The expression on the right hand side of this equation – the RKD estimand – is simply the change in slope

of the conditional expectation function E [Y |V = v] at the kink point (v = 0), divided by the change in the

slope of the deterministic assignment function b(·) at 0.8

    Below we provide the following new identification results. First, we establish conditions for identifi-

cation of causal effects using the RKD for the most general regression model possible – namely, the non-

separable model in (1). By allowing the error term to enter nonseparably, we are allowing for unrestricted

heterogeneity in the structural relation between the endogenous regressor and the outcome. As an example

of the relevance of this generalization, consider the case of modeling the impact of UI benefits on unemploy-

ment durations with a proportional hazards model. Even if benefits enter the hazard function with a constant

coefficient, the shape of the baseline hazard will in general cause the true model for expected durations to

be incompatible with the constant-effects, additive specification in (2). The addition of multiplicative un-

observable heterogeneity (see Meyer (1990)) in the baseline hazard poses an even greater challenge to the

justification of parametric specifications such as (2). The nonseparable model (1), however, contains the

implied model for durations in Meyer (1990) as a special case, and goes further by allowing (among other

things) the unobserved heterogeneity to be correlated with V and B. Having introduced unobserved hetero-

geneity in the structural relation, we show that the RKD estimand τ identifies an effect that can be viewed as

the TT (or LAR) parameter that has been discussed in the nonseparable regression literature. Given that the

identified effect is an average of marginal effects across a heterogeneous population, we also make precise
   8 In an earlier working paper version, Nielsen et al. (2010) provide similar conditions for identification for a less restrictive,
additive model, Y = g (B,V ) + ε.


                                                                  6
how the RKD estimand implicitly weights these heterogeneous marginal effects. The weights are intuitive,

and correspond to the weights that would be obtained using data generated by a randomized experiment.

      Second, we generalize the RK design to allow for the presence of unobserved determinants of B and

measurement errors in B and V . That is, while maintaining the model in (1), we allow for the possibility

that the observed value for B deviates from the amount predicted by the formula using V , either because of

unobserved inputs in the formula, or measurement errors in V or B. This “fuzzy RKD” generalization may

have broader applicability than the “Sharp RKD”.9

      Finally, we provide testable implications for the RK design. As we discuss below, a key condition for

identification in the RKD is that the distribution of V for each individual is sufficiently smooth. This smooth

density condition rules out the case where an individual can precisely manipulate V , but allows individuals

to exert some influence over V .10 We provide two tests that can be useful in assessing whether this key

identifying assumption holds in practice.


2.2      Identification of Regression Kink Designs

2.2.1      Sharp RKD

We begin by stating the identifying assumptions for the RKD and making precise the interpretation of the

resulting causal effect. In particular, we provide conditions under which the RKD identifies the same T Tb|v

parameter that is identified by a randomized experiment.

      Sharp RK Design: Let (V,U) be a pair of random variables (with V observable, U unobservable). To

emphasize that the distribution of U can be arbitrary and need not be continuous or smooth in any way,

and also to ease exposition in the proofs, let U be discrete with an arbitrary number of points of support.11

Denote the c.d.f. and p.d.f. of V conditional on U = u by FV |U=u (v) and fV |U=u (v). Let B ≡ b(V ), let
                                                  ∂ y(b,v,u)                        ∂ y(b,v,u)
Y ≡ y(B,V,U). Also, define y1 (b, v, u) ≡             ∂b       and y2 (b, v, u) ≡       ∂v     .

      Assumption 1. (Regularity) y(·, ·, ·) is a continuous function with y1 (b, v, u) continuous in b for all b, v

and u.

      Assumption 2. (Smooth effect of V ) y2 (b, v, u) is continuous in v for all b, v and u.

      Assumption 3. (First stage) b(·) is a known function, everywhere continuous and continuously differ-
   9 The sharp/fuzzy distinction in the RKD is analogous to that for the RD Design (see Hahn et al. (2001)).
  10 Lee (2008) shows that a similar condition is necessary in a regression discontinuity design.
  11 That is, similar results could be derived for continuously distributed U.




                                                                   7
entiable on (−∞, 0) and (0, ∞), but lim+ b0 (v) 6= lim− b0 (v). In addition, fV |U=u (0) is strictly positive for all
                                                     v→0               v→0
u ∈ A, where ∑u∈A Pr(U = u) > 0.

       Assumption 4. (Smooth density) FV |U=u (v) is twice continuously differentiable in v for all v, u. That is,
                                                                                                  ∂ fV |U=u (v)
the derivative of the conditional probability density function fV |U=u (v),                             ∂v      ,   is continuous in v for all

u.

       Assumption 1 states that the marginal effect of B must be a continuous function of the observables

and the unobserved error U. Assumption 2 is considerably weaker than an exclusion restriction that would

dictate that V not enter as an argument, because here V is allowed to affect Y , as long as its marginal effect

is continuous. Assumption 3 states that the researcher knows the function b(v), and that there is a kink in

the relationship between B and V at the threshold V = 0. It is additionally necessary to assume a positive

density of V around the threshold for a non-trivial subpopulation.

       Assumption 4 is the key identifying assumption for a valid RK design. As in Lee (2008), this condi-

tion rules out precise manipulation of the assignment variable. But whereas continuity of fV |U=u (v) in v is

sufficient for identification, it is insufficient in the RK design. Instead, the sufficient condition is the conti-

nuity of the partial derivative of fV |U=u (v) with respect to v. In Subsection 4.1 below we discuss a simple

equilibrium search model where Assumption 4 may or may not hold. The importance of this assumption

underscores the need to be able to empirically test its implications.

Proposition 1. In a valid Sharp RKD, that is, when Assumptions 1-4 hold:

       (a) Pr(U 6 u|V = v) is continuously differentiable in v at v = 0 ∀u.
                     dE[Y |V =v]
               lim       dv          − lim dE[Ydv|V =v]
             v0 →0+              v=v0 v →0−             v=v0                                                    fV |U=u (0)
                                       0
       (b)                 db(v)            db(v)
                                                               = E[y1 (b0 , 0,U)|V = 0] = ∑u y1 (b0 , 0, u)        fV (0)     Pr(U = u) = T Tb0 |0
                   lim dv            − lim
                 v0 →0+          v=v0 v →0− dv v=v0
                                       0
where b0 = b(0).

       The proof is in the Supplemental Appendix.

       Part (a) states that the rate of change in the probability distribution of individual types with respect to

the assignment variable V is continuous at V = 0.12 This leads directly to part (b): as a consequence of the

smoothness in the underlying distribution of types around the kink, the discontinuous change in the slope

of E [Y |V = v] at v = 0 divided by the discontinuous change in slope in b (V ) at the kink point identifies

T Tb0 |0 .13
     12 Note
          also that (a) implies Proposition 2(a) in Lee (2008), i.e., the continuity of Pr(U 6 u|V = v) at v = 0 for all u. This is a
consequence of the stronger smoothness assumption we have imposed on the conditional distribution of V on U.
  13 Technically, the T T and LAR parameters do not condition on a second variable V . But in the case where there is a one-to-one



                                                                             8
Remark 1. It is tempting to interpret T Tb0 |0 as the “average marginal effect of B for individuals with V = 0”,

which may seem very restrictive because the smooth density condition implies that V = 0 is a measure-zero

event. However, part (b) implies that T Tb0 |0 is a weighted average of marginal effects across the entire

population, where the weight assigned to an individual of type U reflects the relative likelihood that he or

she has V = 0. In settings where U is highly correlated with V , T Tb0 |0 is only representative of the treatment

effect for agents with realizations of U that are associated with values of V close to 0. In settings where

V and U are independent the weights for different individuals are equal, and RKD identifies the average

marginal effect evaluated at B = b0 and V = 0.

Remark 2. The weights in Proposition 1 are the same ones that would be obtained from using a randomized

experiment to identify the average marginal effect of B, evaluated at B = b0 , V = 0. That is, suppose that

B was assigned randomly so that fB|V,U (b) = f (b). In such an experiment, the identification of an average

marginal effect of b at V = 0 would involve taking the derivative of the experimental response surface

E [Y |B = b,V = v] with respect to b for units with V = 0. This would yield

              ∂ E [Y |B = b,V = 0]                     ∂ (∑u y (b, 0, u) Pr(U = u|V = 0, B = b))
                                                 =
                        ∂b               b=b0                                 ∂b                           b=b0
                                                                                                               
                                                                          fB|V =0,U=u (b) fV |U=u (0)
                                                       ∂ ∑u y (b, 0, u) f          (b)       fV (0)   Pr(U = u)
                                                                               B|V =0
                                                 =
                                                                                    ∂b
                                                                                                                    b=b0
                                                                                                  
                                                                            fV |U=u (0)
                                                       ∂ ∑u y (b, 0, u)        fV (0)     Pr(U = u)
                                                 =
                                                                            ∂b
                                                                                                       b=b0
                                                                    fV |U=u (0)
                                                 = ∑ y1 (b0 , 0, u)             Pr(U = u).
                                                   u                   fV (0)

Even though B is randomized in this hypothetical experiment, V is not. Intuitively, even if randomization

allows one to identify marginal effects of B, it cannot do anything about the fact that units with V = 0 will

in general have a particular distribution of U. Of course, the advantage of this hypothetical randomized
relationship between B and V , the trivial integration over the (degenerate) distribution of V conditional on B = b0 will imply that
T Tb0 |0 = T Tb0 ≡ E [y1 (b0 ,V,U) |B = b0 ], which is literally the T T parameter discussed in Florens et al. (2008) and LAR in Altonji
and Matzkin (2005). In our application to unemployment benefits, B and V are not one-to-one, since beyond V = 0, B is at the
maximum benefit level. In this case, T Tb will in general be discontinuous with respect to b at b0 :
                                                        (
                                                          TT                          b < b0
                                                T Tb = R b|v
                                                            T Tb0 |v fV |B (v|b0 ) dv b = b0 ,

and the RKD estimand identifies limb↑b0 T Tb .



                                                                   9
experiment is that one could potentially identify the average marginal effect of B at all values of B and V ,

and not just at B = b0 and V = 0.


2.2.2      Fuzzy Regression Kink Design

Although many important policy variables are set according to a deterministic formula, in practice there

is often some slippage between the theoretical value of the variable as computed by the stated rule and its

observed value. This can arise because the formula – while deterministic – depends on other (unknown)

variables in addition to the primary assignment variable, or alternatively because of measurement errors in

the available data set. This motivates the extension of fuzzy RKD.14

    Specifically, assume now that B = b (V,U), where the presence of U in the formula for B allows for

unobserved determinants that are potentially correlated with the outcome variable. In addition, assume that

the observed values of B and V , B∗ and V ∗ respectively, differ from their true values as follows:


                                                 B∗ ≡ B +UB ;           V ∗ ≡ V +UV

                                                                        UV ≡ G ·UV 0 ,


where UB and UV 0 are continuously distributed, and that their joint density conditional on U is continuous

and supported on an arbitrarily large compact rectangle in R2 ; G is an indicator variable that is equal to zero

with probability π (V,U,UB ,UV 0 ). Note that the error in the observed value of V is assumed to be a mixture

of a conventional (continuously-distributed) measurement error and a point mass at 0, so with probability

π > 0 we observe the true value of V , and with probability 1 − π we observe V +UV 0 . The random variables

(V,U,UB ,UV 0 , G) determine (B, B∗ ,V ∗ ,Y ) and we observe (B∗ ,V ∗ ,Y ).

    Assumption 3a. (First stage) For each u, b(·, u) is a function that is everywhere continuous and con-

tinuously differentiable on (−∞, 0) and (0, ∞) with respect to the first argument. b+
                                                                                    1 (u) ≡ lim+ b1 (v, u) 6=
                                                                                                                                v→0
b−
 1 (u)     ≡ lim− b1 (v, u) for all u in some subset A of the population, ∑u∈A Pr(U = u) > 0.
             v→0
    Assumption 4a. (Smooth density) Let V,UB ,UV 0 have a well-defined joint probability density function
                                                                      ∂ fV,UB ,U          (v,uB ,uV 0 )
                                                                               V 0 |U=u
conditional on each u, fV,UB ,UV 0 |U=u (v, uB , uV 0 ), and let                   ∂v                     be continuous for all v, uB , uV 0 , u.
                                                                           ∂ π(v,u,uB ,uV 0 )
    Assumption 5. (Smooth probability of no error in V )                         ∂v              is continuous for all v, uB , uV 0 , u.
                                                  −                            −
    Assumption 6. (Monotonicity) Either b+                            +
                                         1 (u) ≥ b1 (u) for all u or b1 (u) ≤ b1 (u) for all u.
  14 See   Hahn et al. (2001) for a definition of the fuzzy regression discontinuity design.


                                                                   10
                                                                                                                          −
     Assumption 7. (Non-negligible population at the kink) ∑u∈A Pr [UV = 0|V = 0,U = u]                         b+
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                 1 (u) − b1 (u) fV |U=u (0) Pr(U =


u) > 0.

     Assumption 3a modifies Assumption 3: b (·, u) is known to have a kink for a non-neglible subset of

the population, but there is heterogeneity in the magnitude of the kinks, which are unobservable at the

individual level. Assumption 4a modifies Assumption 4: for each u, there is a joint density of V and the

measurement error components that is continuously differentiable in v. Note that this allows a relatively

general measurement error structure in the sense that V,UB ,UV 0 can be arbitrarily correlated. It is critical

that there is a mass point in the distribution of the measurement error UV at 0. In the absence of such a mass

point, further assumptions must be made about the measurement error to achieve identification (as in the

case with the RD design). Assumption 5 states that the mass point probability, while potentially dependent

on all other variables, is smooth with respect to V .

     Assumption 6 states that the direction of the kink is either non-negative or non-positive for the entire

population. This is analogous to the monotonicity condition of Imbens and Angrist (1994), but is potentially

easier to justify, since it is not a behavioral assumption about compliance behavior, but rather a restriction

on the nature of the policy formula. In particular, Assumption 6 rules out situations where some individuals

experience a positive kink at V = 0, but others experience a negative kink at V = 0. We anticipate that in

many contexts, specific knowledge of the policy rule will imply that this condition is met.15

     Assumption 7 states that we must have a non-negligible subset of individuals who simultaneously have

a non-trivial first stage, have UV = 0, and have positive probability that V is in a neighborhood of 0.

Proposition 2. In a valid Fuzzy RK Design, that is, when Assumptions 1, 2, 3a, 4a, 5, 6, and 7 hold:

     (a) Pr(U 6 u|V ∗ = v∗ ) is continuously differentiable in v∗ at v∗ = 0 ∀u.
                         |V ∗ =v∗ ]                  |V ∗ =v∗ ]
               lim dE[Y dv  ∗             − lim dE[Y dv ∗
            v0 →0+                  v∗ =v0 v →0−                 v∗ =v0
                                            0
     (b)               ∗    ∗
                   dE[B |V =v ] ∗                dE[B |V ∗ =v∗ ]
                                                     ∗                     = ∑u y1 (b (0, u) , 0, u) ϕ (u) Pr(U = u)
             lim        dv∗               − lim       dv∗
           v0 →0+                   v∗ =v0 v →0−                  v∗ =v0
                                            0
                                                                                   fV |U=u (0)
                                                                 −
                                      Pr[UV =0|V =0,U=u](b+
                                                          1 (u)−b1 (u))                fV (0)
     where ϕ (u) =                                                             fV |U=ω (0)            .
                                                          −
                            ∑ω Pr[UV =0|V =0,U=ω](b+
                                                   1 (ω)−b1 (ω))                  fV (0)    Pr(U=ω)

     The proof is in the Supplemental Appendix.

Remark 3. The fuzzy RKD continues to estimate a weighted average of marginal effects of B on Y , but the

weight is now given by ϕ (u).
                                                                                 −
  15 For   example, in our application below we have a situation where b+
                                                                        1 (u) > b1 (u) for some subset of the population, and
          −
b+
 1 (u) = b1 (u)  for the remainder.



                                                                                11
                                                                                  fV |U=u (0)
Remark 4. The weight ϕ (u) has three components. The first component,                fV (0) ,   is the same weight
                                                      −
as in the sharp RKD. The second component, (b+
                                             1 (u) − b0 (u)), reflects the size of the kink in the benefit

schedule at V = 0 for an individual of type u. Analogous to the LATE interpretation, the fuzzy RKD estimand

upweights types with a larger kink at the threshold V = 0. Individuals whose benefit schedule is not kinked

at V = 0 do not contribute to the estimand. Finally, the third component Pr [UV = 0|V = 0,U = u] represents

the probability that the assignment variable is correctly measured at V = 0. Again, this has the intuitive

implication that observations with a mismeasured value of the assignment variable do not contribute to the

fuzzy RKD estimand. Note that if π is constant across individuals then this component of the weight is just

a constant.


2.3     Testable Implications of the RKD

In this section we formalize the testable implications of a valid RK design. Specifically, we show that the

key smoothness conditions given by Assumptions 4 and 4a lead to two strong testable predictions. The first

prediction is given by the following corollary of Propositions 1 and 2:

Corollary 1. In a valid Sharp RKD, fV (v) is continuously differentiable in v. In a valid Fuzzy RKD, fV ∗ (v∗ )

is continuously differentiable in v∗ .

      The key identifying assumption of the RKD is that the density of V or V ∗ is sufficiently smooth for

every individual, ruling out situations where an individual precisely manipulates V (and hence V ∗ ). This

smoothness condition cannot be true if we observe a kink in the density of either V or V ∗ . That is, evidence

that there is “deterministic sorting” in V (or V ∗ ) at the kink point implies a violation of the key identifying

RKD assumption. This is analogous to the test of manipulation of the assignment variable for RD designs,

discussed in McCrary (2008).

      The second prediction presumes the existence of data on “baseline characteristics” – analogous to char-

acteristics measured prior to random assignment in an idealized randomized controlled trial – that are deter-

mined prior to V .

      Assumption 8. There exists an observable random vector X = x(U) determined prior to V . x (·) does

not include V or B, since it is determined prior to those variables.

In conjunction with our basic identifying assumptions, this leads to the following prediction:



                                                       12
                                                                       d Pr[X≤x|V =v]
Corollary 2. In a valid Sharp RKD, if Assumption 8 holds, then               dv         is continuous in v at v = 0 for
                                                           d Pr[X≤x|V ∗ =v∗ ]
all x. In a valid Fuzzy RKD, if Assumption 8 holds, then         dv∗            is continuous in v∗ at v∗ = 0 for all x.

    The smoothness conditions required for a valid RKD imply that the conditional distribution function of

any predetermined covariates X (given V or V ∗ ) cannot exhibit a kink at V = 0 or V ∗ = 0. This test of design

is analogous to the simple “test for random assignment” that is often conducted in a randomized trial, based

on comparisons of the baseline covariates in the treatment and control groups. It also parallels the test for

continuity of Pr[X ≤ x|V = v] emphasized by Lee (2008) for a regression discontinuity design. Importantly,

however, the assumptions for a valid RKD imply that the derivatives of the conditional expectation functions

(or the conditional quantiles) of X with respect to V (or V ∗ ) are continuous at the kink point – a stronger

implication than the continuity implied by the necessary conditions for a valid RDD.



3    Nonparameteric Estimation and Inference in a Regression Kink Design

In this section, we provide the theory for estimation and inference in the RKD. In Subsection 3.1.1, following

the RD literature, we define our proposed Sharp RKD (SRKD) estimator as the difference in the estimated

derivative of the conditional expectation of the outcome scaled by the known magnitude of the kink in

the endogenous regressor. The difference in derivatives is estimated by the difference in slopes of local

polynomial regressions fit to data on either side of the kink point and evaluated at the kink point. For

the Fuzzy RKD (FRKD), the magnitude of the “first stage” kink is also estimated by local regressions.

In Subsection 3.1.2, we provide the regularity conditions under which the estimators are consistent and

asymptotically normal, and derive their asymptotic variance. We show that, even though a local quadratic

regression is expected to have smaller bias than a local linear regression under the same bandwidth sequence

(see for example, Hahn et al. (2001)), the asymptotic variance for the quadratic is 16 times that for the linear

specification. We further show that an alternative estimator that uses a symmetric kernel around the kink

point and restricts the regression function to be continuous leads to no reduction in asymptotic variance, even

when the restriction is true. Finally, in Subsection 3.2 we provide the conditions under which inference can

be conducted using robust standard errors (White (1980)) reported in common statistical software packages.




                                                      13
3.1     Definitions and Asymptotic Properties of RKD Estimators

3.1.1    Definition of the Sharp and Fuzzy RKD Estimators

In our exposition, we follow the notation in Fan and Gijbels (1996) and Hahn et al. (2001) and define


                                                 m(v) = E[Yi |Vi = v]

                                                     r(v) = E[Bi |Vi = v]


to be the expectation of the outcome and endogenous regressor, respectively, conditional on a given value

v of the assignment variable Vi . For both the sharp and fuzzy cases, the RKD estimand is the ratio of

limv→0+ m0 (v) − limv→0− m0 (v) to limv→0+ r0 (v) − limv→0− r0 (v).

      We employ a local polynomial regression framework to estimate these function limits and hence the

causal effects of interest. Specifically, we split the data into two subsamples – observations to the left and

right of the kink point – and estimate separate local polynomial regressions for each subsample. For the

sharp RK design, r(v) = b(v) is a known function and we only need to solve the following least squares

problems
                                             n−             p
                                                                                 Vi−
                                      min ∑ {Yi− − ∑ β̃ j− (Vi− ) j }2 K(            )                          (3)
                                      {β̃ j− } i=1         j=0                    h

                                             n+             p
                                                                                 Vi+
                                      min ∑ {Yi+ − ∑ β̃ j+ (Vi+ ) j }2 K(            )                          (4)
                                      {β̃ j+ } i=1         j=0                    h

where the − and + superscripts denote quantities in the regression on the left and right side of the kink

point respectively, p is the order the polynomial, K the kernel, and h the bandwidth. Denote the solutions

to the minimization problems of (3) and (4) by {β̂ j− } and {β̂ j+ } respectively, and note that j!β̂ j− and j!β̂ j+

are estimators of limv→0− m( j) (v) and limv→0+ m( j) (v), the left and right limits of the j-th derivative of the

function m(v) at 0. Since κ1+ = limv→0+ r0 (v) and κ1− = limv→0− r0 (v) are known quantities in a sharp design,

the sharp RKD estimator is defined as
                                                                 β̂1+ − β̂1−
                                                      τ̂SRKD =               .
                                                                 κ1+ − κ1−

      In a fuzzy RKD, the first stage relationship is no longer deterministic, and r(·) is an unknown function.




                                                                14
So we estimate κ1+ and κ1− by solving

                                             n−             p
                                                                                    Vi−
                                        min
                                         − ∑
                                                   {B−
                                                     i −   ∑ κ̃ −j (Vi− ) j }2 K(       )                                    (5)
                                         κ̃ j i=1          j=0                       h
                                            n+             p
                                                                                Vi+
                                       min
                                        + ∑
                                            {B+        +    + j 2
                                              i − ∑ κ̃ j (Vi ) } K(                 ).                                       (6)
                                        κ̃ j i=1        j=0                      h

The fuzzy RKD estimator τ̂FRKD can then be defined as


                                                                  β̂1+ − β̂1−
                                                     τ̂FRKD =
                                                                  κ̂1+ − κ̂1−

where κ̂1+ and κ̂1− are estimators of κ1+ and κ1− obtained from (5) and (6).


3.1.2      Asymptotic Distributions of the RKD Estimators

In this subsection, we adapt results from Fan and Gijbels (1996), Hahn et al. (1999) and Hahn et al. (2001)

to derive the asymptotic properties of the local polynomial estimators. When implementing the RKD esti-

mators in practice, one must make choices for the polynomial order p, kernel K and bandwidth h. In the

RD context where the quantities of interest are the intercept terms on two sides of the threshold, Hahn et

al. (2001) propose local linear regression (p = 1) due to the large bias of a local constant fit at the bound-

ary; this has since become the standard of the literature. Analogously, in estimating a derivative, a local

quadratic (p = 2) approach can be expected to lead to an asymptotically smaller bias compared to a local

linear (p = 1) fit. But as we demonstrate below, the asymptotic variance of a local quadratic regression is

significantly larger than its local linear counterpart, by a factor of 16. For this reason, we provide results for

both local linear and local quadratic specifications. Following Imbens and Lemieux (2008) and the common

practice in the RD literature, we adopt a uniform kernel (Assumption 13 below), and establish the necessary

rate of bandwidth shrinkage for valid inference. We defer the discussion of our bandwidth choice in practice

to Subsection 4.5.1, and leave a full theoretical treatment of optimal bandwidth determination for future

research.16

    We make the following assumptions, which are similar to those invoked in Hahn et al. (2001) and Imbens

and Lemieux (2008).17 In the remainder of this section, we denote the left and right limit of any function
  16 See Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) for a full theoretical analysis of an optimal bandwidth for the case of the regression
discontinuity design.
  17 Assumption 9 is implicit in Hahn et al. (1999). Assumptions 10L, 11L, 12, 14 and 15 explicitly mirror Assumptions 1, 2, 3, 5




                                                                 15
g(·) at 0 by g(0− ) and g(0+ ), respectively, and we use the notation g (0± ) in a statement to mean that the

statement holds true for both g (0+ ) and g (0− ). We use g( j) (·) to denote the j-th derivative of the function

g (·).

    Assumption 9. The triplets (Yi , Bi , Vi ), i = 1, ..., n, are i.i.d.

    Assumption 10L. m(v) and r(v) are twice continuously differentiable except possibly at v = 0. There

exists an M > 0 such that |m( j) (v)| and |r( j) (v)| are bounded on [−M, 0) and (0, M] for j = 0, 1, 2.

    Assumption 10Q. m(v) and r(v) are three times continuously differentiable except possibly at v = 0.

There exists an M > 0 such that |m( j) (v)| and |r( j) (v)| are bounded on [−M, 0) and (0, M] for j = 0, 1, 2, 3.

    Assumption 11L. The limits m( j) (0± ) and r( j) (0± ) exist for j = 0, 1, 2.

    Assumption 11Q. The limits m( j) (0± ) and r( j) (0± ) exist for j = 0, 1, 2, 3.

    Assumption 12. The density of Vi , f (v), is continuous and bounded near 0 with f (v) > 0.

    Assumption 13. The kernel is uniform: K(u) = 21 1{|u|<1} .

    Assumption 14. σY2 (v) ≡ Var(Yi |Vi = v) and σB2 (v) ≡ Var(Bi |Vi = v) are bounded in a neighborhood

around v = 0. Furthermore, the limits σY2 (0± ), σB2 (0± ) and σBY (0± ) ≡ lime→0+ Cov(Yi , Bi |Vi = ±e) exist.

    Assumption 15. ψY (v) = E[|Yi − m(Vi )|3 |Vi = v] and ψB (Vi ) = E[|Bi − r(Vi )|3 |Vi = v] are bounded in a

neighborhood around 0 and the limits ψY (0± ) and ψB (0± ) are well-defined.

    Assumption 16L. The bandwidth sequence satisfies h ∝ n−ρ where ρ ∈ ( 51 , 13 ).

    Assumption 16Q. The bandwidth sequence satisfies h ∝ n−ρ where ρ ∈ ( 17 , 31 ).

Proposition 3. (a) Local Linear (p = 1): Under Assumptions 9, 10L, 11L, 12-15 and 16L, the asymptotic

distribution of the local linear slope estimator is given by

                                    √                                   12σY2 (0± )
                                     nh3 {m̂0L (0± ) − m0 (0± )} ⇒ N(0,             ).                                     (7)
                                                                          f (0)

(b) Local Quadratic (p = 2): Under Assumptions 9, 10Q, 11Q, 12-15 and 16Q, the asymptotic distribution

of the local quadratic slope estimator is given by

                                   √                                   192σY2 (0± )
                                    nh3 {m̂0Q (0± ) − m0 (0± )} ⇒ N(0,              ).                                     (8)
                                                                          f (0)
and 6 in Hahn et al. (1999), while Assumption 13 is a specific case of their Assumption 4. We follow Imbens and Lemieux (2008)
and choose the bandwidths in Assumptions 16L and 16Q to eliminate the asymptotic bias, which is different from the approach
taken by Hahn et al. (2001). We maintain the identification assumptions from Section 2 in the remainder of this section without
explicitly mentioning them.



                                                              16
     The proof is in the Supplemental Appendix.

Remark 5. In a fuzzy RKD, Proposition 3 can also be applied to derive the asymptotic distribution of the

first stage kink, by replacing m with r and Y with B.

Remark 6. Fan and Gijbels (1996) argue that given the same bandwidth sequence, the variance of m̂(ν) does

not increase when moving from using a polynomial of order p = ν + 2q to that of order p = v + 2q + 1

(for nonnegative integers q); they suggest that it is thus “costless” to choose p such that p − ν is odd. In

our case, the variance in (8) is 16 times that in (7), which is due to estimating m̂0 at a boundary. Thus,

in the RKD design there is a substantial “cost” in variance from using local quadratic polynomials versus

local linear polynomials.18 For the same bandwidth sequence, an improvement in mean squared error from
                                                       √
using a quadratic would require the bias to be at least 15 times as large as the standard error in the linear

specification.19

     Noting that observations to the left and right of the kink point are independent, we can derive the asymp-

totic distribution of the sharp RKD estimator from Proposition 3.

Proposition 4. (a) Local Linear (p = 1): Under Assumptions 9, 10L, 11L, 12-15 and 16L, the asymptotic

distribution of the local linear sharp RKD estimator is given by

                                              √
                                                      L
                                               nh3 (τ̂SRKD − τSRKD ) ⇒ N(0, 12 · ΩSRKD )


                          1         σY2 (0+ )+σY2 (0− )
where ΩSRKD =        (κ1+ −κ1− )2           f (0)       .

     (b) Local Quadratic (p = 2): Under Assumptions 9, 10Q, 11Q, 12-15 and 16Q, the asymptotic distribu-

tion of the local quadratic sharp RKD estimator is given by

                                             √       Q
                                              nh3 (τ̂SRKD − τSRKD ) ⇒ N(0, 192 · ΩSRKD ).


     The proof is in the Supplemental Appendix.
  18 To see the intuition behind the variance difference between an interior and boundary point, suppose the true regression function

was linear, given by Y = α0 + α1V + ε with ε homoskedastic. The asymptotic variance of the OLS coefficient on the linear term is
 Var(ε)                             Var(ε)
Var(V )
         in a linear regression and          in a quadratic regression, where Ṽ is the residual from a linear projection of V on V 2 . If V
                                    Var(Ṽ )
is symmetrically distributed around 0, then in this “interior” case, there is zero covariance between V and V 2 , so Var (V ) = Var Ṽ .
                                                                                                                                           

In a boundary case (e.g. V ≥ 0) there will be a nonzero covariance between V and V 2 and hence Var Ṽ < Var (V ).
                                                                                                               
   19 In the most favorable case for the quadratic, there is zero bias in the quadratic specification. If the square of the bias is less

than 15 times the variance in the linear specification, then the linear specification will have a smaller mean squared error. If the
quadratic specification has nonzero bias, then an improvement would require the linear specification to be even more biased.


                                                                    17
    For the fuzzy RKD estimator, we have

Proposition 5. (a) Local Linear (p = 1): Under Assumptions 9, 10L, 11L, 12-15 and 16L, the asymptotic

distribution of the local linear fuzzy RKD estimator is given by

                                         √
                                                 L
                                          nh3 (τ̂FRKD − τFRKD ) ⇒ N(0, 12 · ΩFRKD )


where

                           σY2 (0− ) + σY2 (0+ )    τY2 σB2 (0− ) + σB2 (0+ )
                                                                            
                     1                                                           2τY (σBY (0− ) + σBY (0+ ))
           ΩFRKD =       {                        +                            −                             }
                   f (0)            τB2                        τB4                          τB3

with τB = r0 (0+ ) − r0 (0− ) and τY = m0 (0+ ) − m0 (0− ).

    (b) Local Quadratic (p = 2): Under Assumptions 9, 10Q, 11Q, 12-15 and 16Q, the asymptotic distribu-

tion of the local quadratic fuzzy RKD estimator is given by

                                       √       Q
                                        nh3 (τ̂FRKD − τFRKD ) ⇒ N(0, 192 · ΩFRKD ).


    The proof is in the Supplemental Appendix.

    Given the identification assumptions above, one expects the conditional expectation of Y to be contin-

uous at the threshold. One natural question is the extent to which imposing continuity in estimation (as

opposed to estimating separate local polynomials on either side of the threshold) can reduce variance in the

estimator of the kink. The result below indicates that when the kernel is symmetric, a constrained RKD

estimator has the same asymptotic properties as the unconstrained estimators described above.
                       QR
    Let τ̂ LR
           SRKD and τ̂ SRKD be the sharp RKD estimator from the local linear and quadratic regressions with

the restriction mL (0− ) = mL (0+ ), respectively. They can be obtained by solving the “pooled” least squares

problem
                                                  n      p                        p
                                                                                                        Vi
                                     min        ∑ {Yi − ∑
                                   {γ̃ Sj ,δ̃ jS } i=1
                                                               γ̃ Sj (Vi ) j −   ∑ δ̃ jS Di (Vi ) j }2 K( h )                    (9)
                                                         j=0                     j=1

where Di = 1{Vi >0} and by excluding Di as a regressor we require that the left and right intercepts be the
                                                                                            pR                           δ̂1S
same. Denoting the solutions to (9) by γ̂ Sj and δ̂ jS ,20 the resulting RKD estimator is τ̂SRKD =                    κ1+ −κ1−
                                                                                                                                 for
                                        QR
p = L, Q. Similarly, let τ̂ LR
                            FRKD and τ̂ FRKD be the fuzzy RKD estimators from the local linear and quadratic
  20 For
       simplicity of notation, we do not include the superscript p in γ̂ Sj and δ̂ jS , but the dependence of the estimators on the
polynomial order is implied.


                                                                       18
regression with the restrictions that mL (0− ) = mL (0+ ) and rL (0− ) = rL (0+ ). This amounts to replacing the

denominator κ1+ − κ1− with an estimated kink in Bi and solving the same problem as in (9). If the same

bandwidth is used for the estimation of the kink in Bi and the outcome equation (as in Imbens and Lemieux

(2008) and Lee and Lemieux (2010)), this amounts to solving

                                                    n          p                         p
                                                                                                              Vi
                                     min            ∑ {Yi − ∑ γ̃ Fj (Vi ) j − δ̃1F B̂i − ∑ δ̃ jF Di (Vi ) j }2 K( )   (10)
                                  {γ̃ Fj ,δ̃ jF   }i=1        j=0                       j=2                      h


where B̂i is the predicted value of Bi from the local polynomial regression of B on V j ( j = 0, ..., p) and D ·V j
                                   pR
( j = 1, ...p).21 Specifically, τ̂ FRKD = δ̂1F for p = L, Q; this is analogous to the 2SLS estimator proposed by

Hahn et al. (2001).

Proposition 6. (a) Local Linear (p = 1): Under Assumptions 9, 10L, 11L, 12-15 and 16L,

                                              √
                                                       LR
                                                nh3 (τ̂SRKD − τSRKD ) ⇒ N(0, 12 · ΩSRKD ))
                                              √
                                                      LR
                                               nh3 (τ̂FRKD  − τFRKD ) ⇒ N(0, 12 · ΩFRKD )).


(b) Local Quadratic (p = 2): Under Assumptions 9, 10Q, 11Q, 12-15 and 16Q,

                                            √        QR
                                              nh3 (τ̂SRKD − τSRKD ) ⇒ N(0, 192 · ΩSRKD ))
                                            √       QR
                                             nh3 (τ̂FRKD  − τFRKD ) ⇒ N(0, 192 · ΩFRKD )).


    The proof is in the Supplemental Appendix.

Remark 7. The intuition behind this result can be seen in a simple example. Suppose the conditional expec-

tation can be modeled as a piecewise linear model


                                                               Y = c0 + c1V + d1 DV + ε


where D = 1 [V ≥ 0] and ε is homoskedastic, and V is symmetrically distributed around 0. The restricted

RKD estimator is the linear regression of Y on V and DV , while the unrestricted estimator (two separate

linear models) additionally (and unnecessarily) includes D as a control. The asymptotic variance for the
  21 The                      p
           last summation ∑ j=2 δ̃ jF Di (Vi ) j is omitted in the linear case.



                                                                             19
                                                            Var(ε)           Var(ε)                          ˜ is the residual
restricted and unrestricted estimators for d1 are               ˜ )
                                                           Var(DV
                                                                      and        ˇ ),
                                                                            Var(DV
                                                                                        respectively, where DV
                             ˇ is the residual from projecting DV on V and D. Due to symmetry, the
from projecting DV on V and DV
                                                              ˜ = DV
coefficient on D in the latter projection is zero, and hence DV    ˇ .22

Remark 8. Despite the asymptotic statement in Proposition 6, we focus on the restricted RKD estimators

below in our empirical analysis. We do this because in practice, the bandwidths we use are large enough

such that the distribution of V is not symmetric, which implies that if the true function is piecewise linear

(or quadratic) within the window, the restricted estimators will be more precise.


3.2     Variance Estimation and Inference in RKD

In this subsection, we discuss variance estimation and inference in an RK design. The restricted SRKD

estimator amounts to restricting the data to a symmetric window around the kink point, and regressing Y

on linear (or quadratic) terms in V and DV (where D is the indicator for V ≥ 0), but leaving out the “main

effect” D. The restricted FRKD estimator uses the same specification, except that it replaces DV with B and

uses DV as the excluded instrument. We show that the corresponding standard heteroskedasticity-robust

variance estimators – commonly built into statistical software – can be used for inference.23
                                                                                           R                                  S
      In a sharp RKD, the variance estimator for the (2p + 1) × 1 vector β̂ sharp = (γ̂0S , ..., γ̂ Sp , δ̂1S , ..., δ̂ p )T , the

solution to (9), is24
                                                 ˆ β̂ Rsharp ) = S−1
                                                Var(                          −1
                                                                  XX Ŝsharp SXX


where SXX = ∑ni=1 Xi XTi K( Vhi ) and Ŝsharp = ∑ni=1 (Xi XTi )ε̂i2 K 2 ( Vhi ) with Xi = (1, ...,Vi p , DiVi , ..., DiVi p )T and
                  R
ε̂i = Yi − XTi β̂ sharp .
                                                                                               R
      In a fuzzy RKD, the variance estimator for the (2p + 1) × 1 vector β̂ f uzzy = (γ̂0F , ..., γ̂ pF , δ̂1F ..., δ̂ pF )T =

( 1n ∑ni=1 Wi XTi K( Vhi ))−1 ( n1 ∑ni=1 WiYi K( Vhi )), the solution to (10), is


                                                ˆ β̂ Rfuzzy ) = S−1
                                               Var(                            −1
                                                                 XW Ŝ f uzzy SW X

                                                                                                   Cov(DV,V )
  22 Consider   using the Frisch-Waugh theorem to compute the coefficient on D. Under symmetry      Var(V )
                                                                                                                = 12 , and the DV − 12 V
is orthogonal to V by construction and also orthogonal to D due to the symmetry of the distribution of V . Hence DV − 21 V is
orthogonal to the residual from projecting D on V .
   23 An alternative, and asymptotically equivalent, approach for the FRKD would be (analogous to Imbens and Lemieux (2008)) a

plug-in variance estimator that separately estimates each component of the asymptotic variance.
   24 Since we are concerned with their consistency, the heteroskedasticity-robust variance estimators defined here abstract away

from the finite sample adjustments that may appear in statistical software packages.




                                                                20
                                                                                                                    R
where SXW = ∑ni=1 Xi WTi K( Vhi ), SW X = STXW and Ŝ f uzzy = ∑ni=1 (Xi XTi )û2i K 2 ( Vhi ) and ûi = Yi − WTi β̂ f uzzy with

Wi = (1, ...,Vi p , Bi , DiVi2 ..., DiVi p )T .25

    Since we are interested in the scalar RKD estimator δ̂1S in the sharp case and δ̂1F in the fuzzy case, we

define ek to be the unit vector of length (2p + 1) whose k-th entry is equal to 1, and let


                      LR                 1        T ˆ      LR                  LR            ˆ β̂ LR
                  ˆ τ̂SRKD
                 Var(      )=          +     − 2 e3 Var(β̂ sharp )e3 ;
                                                                           ˆ τ̂FRKD
                                                                          Var(      ) = eT3 Var(  f uzzy )e3
                                    (κ1 − κ1 )
                  ˆ τ̂ QR ) =            1           ˆ β̂ QR                   QR            ˆ β̂ QR
                 Var(                            eT Var(   sharp )e4 ;
                                                                           ˆ τ̂FRKD
                                                                          Var(      ) = eT4 Var(  f uzzy )e4
                      SRKD
                                    (κ1+ − κ1− )2 4

where the L and Q superscripts denote whether a given estimator is obtained from a linear or quadratic local

regression.

    In order for these variance estimators to be consistent, we require the additional regularity condition:

    Assumption 17. κY (v) = E[|Yi − m(Vi )|4 |Vi = v] and κB (Vi ) = E[|Bi − r(Vi )|4 |Vi = v] are bounded in a

neighborhood around 0 and the limits κY (0± ) and κB (0± ) are well-defined.

Proposition 7. Consistency of the variance estimators for the restricted RKD estimators.26

    (a) Local Linear (p = 1): Under Assumptions 9, 10L, 11L, 12-14, 16L, and 17,


                           nh3Var( LR
                               ˆ τ̂SRKD ) → 12 · ΩSRKD ;            nh3Var( LR
                                                                        ˆ τ̂FRKD ) → 12 · ΩSRKD .


    (b) Local Quadratic (p = 2): Under Assumptions 9, 10Q, 11Q, 12-14, 16Q, and 17,


                             ˆ τ̂ QR ) → 192 · ΩSRKD ;
                         nh3Var(                                    nh3Var( QR
                                                                        ˆ τ̂FRKD ) → 192 · ΩFRKD .
                                 SRKD



    The Proof is in the Supplemental Appendix.

    Combining Proposition 4, Proposition 5 and Proposition 7, we have

Corollary 3. For p=L,Q,

                1            pR                                         1            pR
            q             (τ̂SRKD − τSRKD ) ⇒ N(0, 1);              q             (τ̂FRKD − τFRKD ) ⇒ N(0, 1).
              ˆ    pR                                                 ˆ    pR
             Var(τ̂SRKD )                                            Var(τ̂FRKD )
  25 Note that in the linear case, Wi does not include any interaction terms.
  26 We can also prove that the heteroskedasticity-robust variance estimators for the unrestricted RKD estimators defined in the
previous subsection are consistent.



                                                               21
4      The Effect of UI Benefits on the Duration of Benefit Claims and Jobless-

       ness

In this section, we use a fuzzy RKD approach to estimate the effect of higher unemployment benefits on

the duration of unemployment among UI claimants in Austria. The precise magnitude of the disincentive

effect of UI benefits is of substantial policy interest. As shown by Baily (1978), for example, an optimal

unemployment insurance system trades off the moral hazard costs of reduced search effort against the risk-

sharing benefits of more generous payments to the unemployed.27 Obtaining credible estimates of this effect

is difficult, however, because UI benefits are determined by previous earnings, and are therefore correlated

with unobserved characteristics of workers that influence their expected duration of unemployment. Since

the UI benefit formula in Austria has both a minimum and maximum, a regression kink approach can provide

new evidence on the impact of higher UI benefits at two different points in the benefit schedule. Before

presenting our empirical analysis, we briefly discuss the underlying model of job search behavior that we

use to frame our analysis, focusing on the plausibility of the density smoothness condition that is sufficient

for a valid RKD. We then describe the benefit system in Austria, our data sources, and our main estimation

results.


4.1      Theoretical background

In a standard search model, higher UI benefits reduce the incentives for search and raise the reservation

wage, leading to an increase in the expected duration of joblessness.28 More subtly, higher benefits can

also exert a general equilibrium effect on steady state distribution of wages. Christensen et al. (2005), for

example, derive the equilibrium distribution of wages, given a fixed UI benefit and a latent distribution of

wage offers. In their model, a twice continuously differentiable wage offer distribution function ensures that

the cumulative distribution of wages – and the associated distribution of previous wages for newly laid-off

workers – is twice continuously differentiable.

      In the Supplemental Appendix we present an extension of this model with one new feature: a UI benefit
    27 The original analysis in Baily (1978) has been generalized to allow for liquidity constraints (Chetty (2010)) and variable takeup

(Kroft (2008)).
  28 In a standard model, workers receive wage offers from an offer distribution F(w), and the arrival rate of offers is λ s, where s is

the (endogenous) level of search intensity. Assuming an unemployed worker receives an indefinite benefit b, and that λ is the same
for employed and unemployed searchers, a currently unemployed worker accepts any offer with w ≥ b, and unemployment spells
are exponentially distributed with mean [λ s∗u (1 − F(b))]−1 , where s∗u is the optimal search intensity of unemployed workers. An
increase in b raises the reservation wage and leads to lower value of s, implying an increase in the average duration of search.


                                                                   22
that is proportional to the wage on the preceding job, up to some maximum benefit level (for simplicity

we ignore any minimum benefit provision, though such a feature could be easily incorporated). Relative to

the canonical model with a fixed UI benefit, a wage-dependent benefit introduces heterogeneity among the

unemployed. In particular, the value of unemployment is increasing in the level of the previous wage (w−1 ),

up to the threshold for the maximum benefit (T max ), and is then constant for all higher wages. Consequently,

the value function for an unemployed worker contains a kink at w−1 = T max . A wage-dependent benefit also

enhances the value of a higher-wage job, since it entitles the worker to higher benefits when the job ends.

This incremental benefit stops once the wage (w) hits the threshold for the maximum UI benefit, creating a

kink at w = T max in the value function for employed workers. This kink induces a kink in the mapping from

wages to optimal on-the-job search effort by currently employed workers, which in turn leads to a kink in

the density of wages at T max (see the Supplemental Appendix for details). Since the rate of job destruction

is assumed to be constant across jobs, the same kink appears in the density of previous wages for new job-

losers. Such a kink – at precisely the threshold for the maximum benefit rate – violates the smooth density

condition (i.e., Assumptions 4/4a) necessary for a valid regression kink design based on the change in the

slope of the benefit function at T max .29

    The prediction of a kink in the equilibrium density of wages depends on individuals being able to per-

fectly forecast the location of the kink in the UI benefit schedule. In our context – the Austrian labor market

during the period from 2001-2008 – we suspect that this is unrealistic, since the kink point is adjusted each

year depending on lagged rates of wage inflation (see below). In the Supplemental Appendix we show that

if a given worker chooses search intensity assuming the wage threshold is T max + ε, rather than T max , and

ε has a continuous distribution across workers, then the equilibrium density of wages (and the density of

previous wages among new job-losers) will be smooth at T max . On the other hand, search effort (the focus of

interest) among job-losers will still contain a kink at the actual threshold T max , so a regression kink design

based on the kink in the UI schedule will still identify the incentive effect of higher UI benefits, even in the

presence of small and continuously distributed errors.

    Given these theoretical possibilities, we consider it important to examine the actual distribution of pre-

displacement wages among job seekers and test for the presence of kinks around the minimum and maximum
  29 In the model as written all workers are identical: hence a kink in the density of wages at T max will not actually invalidate an
RK design. More realistically, however, workers differ in their cost of search (and in other dimensions) and the kink at T max will be
larger for some types than others, causing a discontinuity in the conditional distribution of unobserved heterogeneity at T max that
will lead to bias in an RKD.



                                                                 23
benefit thresholds, as well as for kinks in the conditional distributions of any predetermined covariates.

While we do not necessarily expect to find kinks in our setting (given the difficulty of precisely forecasting

the benefit thresholds), a kink may well exist in other settings – e.g., in the U.S., where maximum UI benefits

are often fixed for several years at the same nominal value.


4.2     The Unemployment Insurance System in Austria

Job-losers in Austria who have worked at least 52 weeks in the past 24 months are eligible for unemployment

insurance benefits, with a rate that depends on their average daily earnings in the “base calendar year” for

their benefit claim (the previous calendar year for claims filed in the second half of the year; the second

most recent calendar year for claims filed in the first half of the year).30 Average daily earnings in the base

year are adjusted to the current year by a nominal wage growth factor, and converted to net daily earnings,

using the Social Security and Income tax schedules for a single white-collar worker.31 The daily UI benefit

is calculated as 55% of net daily earnings, subject to a maximum benefit level that is adjusted each year.32

During our sample period the maximum increased from C36.05 (for claims in 2001) to C41.77 (for claims

in 2008).

      Unemployed individuals with dependent family members are also eligible for a family allowance that is

added to their basic UI benefit. During the years 2001 - 2008 the allowance was C0.97 per day per depen-

dent. Finally, individuals whose total benefit (base plus family allowance) is below a specified minimum

receive a supplement that tops-up their total benefit to the minimum.33 However, total UI benefit cannot

exceed 60% of net daily base year earnings for a single individual, or 80% for a claimant with dependents,

so the minimum benefit provision is not binding for individuals with very low earnings.

      These rules create a piecewise linear relationship between base calendar year earnings and UI benefits

that depends on the Social Security and income tax rates as well as the replacement rate and the minimum
   30 Specifically, for claims filed from January to June of year t the base calendar year is year t − 2, while for claims filed from

July to December of year t the base calendar year is year t − 1. The back-dating of the base year for claims filed early in the year
reflects the fact that earnings information is extracted from the Social Security database (the same system used to record earnings
information for state-run pensions) which is typically updated with a lag.
   31 This calculation assumes that the individual works the entire year at the average daily wage, and ignores the actual tax deduc-

tions for a given claimant.
   32 The maximum is linked to the maximum earnings level for Social Security contributions, which is adjusted each year based

on the past changes in average Social Security-taxable wages. Specifically, the earnings level at which the maximum UI benefit is
reached in year t is set by the Social Security contribution cap in year t − 3 multiplied by 12/14 (to reflect the fact that employees
in Austria receive 14 months of salary each year). Thus the lowest earnings level at which maximum UI benefits apply is about
20% below the contemporaneous contribution cap.
   33 The minimum benefit is linked to the minimum income amount for individuals receiving social insurance benefits such as

public pensions.


                                                                 24
and maximum benefit amounts. As an illustration, Figure 1a plots actual daily UI benefits against annual

base year earnings for a sample of UI claimants in 2004. The presence of a high fraction of observations

with benefits that lie precisely on the benefit schedule leads to a series of clearly discernible lines in the

figure, though there are also many observations scattered above and below the lines, which we discuss in

more detail below.

    In the middle of the graph there are 5 distinct upward-sloping linear segments, corresponding to indi-

viduals with 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 dependents. These schedules all reach an upper kink point at approximately

C38,700, the threshold for the maximum benefit in 2004 (which is shown in the graph by a solid vertical

line).34 At the lower end, the situation is more complicated: each of the upward-sloping segments reaches

the minimum daily benefit of C21.77/day at a different level of earnings, reflecting the fact that the basic

benefit includes family allowances, but the minimum does not. Thus, for example, a single claimant reaches

the minimum benefit with annual earnings of ∼ C19, 200, while a claimant with 2 dependents reaches the

minimum with earnings of ∼ C17, 100.

    Finally, among the lowest-paid claimants the benefit schedule becomes upward-sloping again. Low-

earning claimants with no dependents have a benefit that is 60% of their base earnings (net of taxes), while

those with dependents have a benefit that is 80% of their net base year earnings. These rules generate the

two lines at the bottom of the graph with benefits below the C21.77/day “minimum”.35

    In addition to the observations that lie on the piecewise linear segments in Figure 1a, there are many

other observations that lie off these segments. There are at least three explanations for these observations.

The first is that we have incorrectly calculated base year earnings from the available administrative earnings

data, due to error in the calculation of the claim start date, for example. The second is that the Social Security

earnings records are inaccurate, and were over-ridden by benefit administrators using updated information.36

A third explanation is that UI benefits are mis-reported. Our belief, based in part on experiences with other

administrative files, is that all three types of errors are possible, and routinely occur in many other settings

(see e.g., Kapteyn and Ypma (2007)).
  34 C38,700    is approximately C105.7 per day gross earnings, or about C67.8 per day in net earnings, after deducting the ∼ 18%
employee Social Security contribution, and income taxes. The 55% replacement rate then generates a daily benefit of C37.3, which
was the maximum benefit rate in 2004.
   35 The line for low-earning single claimants actually bends at earnings of around C15,000, reflecting the fact at this point a single

claimant begins paying income taxes, which are deducted from gross earnings in the calculation of UI benefits.
   36 Errors in the recording or calculation of base earnings will lead to points that lie to the left or right of the benefit schedule.

Such errors may account for the presence of substantial numbers of claimants who receive the minimum benefit but have relatively
high or relatively low recorded benefits.



                                                                  25
    Our RKD analysis exploits the kinks in the UI benefit schedule induced by the minimum and maximum

benefit levels. Unfortunately, as we discuss below, we do not have access to information on the number

of dependents reported by a UI claimant, so we adopt a fuzzy RKD approach in which the number of

dependents is treated as an unobserved determinant of benefits. This does not affect the location of the “top

kink” associated with the maximum benefit, since claimants with different numbers of dependents all have

the same threshold earnings level T max for reaching the maximum (though the level of maximum benefits

differs by family size). For the “bottom kink” associated with the minimum benefit, however, there is a

different threshold T min for each family size. Moreover, there is a only a limited range of earnings for which

T min actually applies: for single claimants, for example, this is the set of people with net daily base period

wages between 1/0.60 and 1/0.55 of the minimum benefit.37

    We deal with this complication by focusing on the location of the kink in the benefit schedule for single

claimants, and again relying upon the fuzzy RKD framework. Specifically, we define T min as the bottom

kink point for a single claimant: this is the level of annual earnings – approximately C19,200 – shown in

the figure by a solid vertical line. To the right of T min the benefit schedules for all claimant groups slope

upward. To the left, benefits for claimants with dependents continue to fall, but benefits for single claimants

are constant with respect to earnings: thus we expect to measure a kink in the average benefit function at

T min , with a magnitude that is (roughly) 0.55ps , where ps is the (local) fraction of single claimants. To avoid

the “subminimum” portion of the benefit schedule, we limit our analysis to claimants with daily net earnings

above 1/0.60 times the minimum daily benefit. For 2004 claims, this cutoff point is shown by the dashed

line in Figure 1 at approximately C17, 100. We also limit attention to claimants whose annual earnings

are below the Social Security contribution cap. This cutoff is shown by the dashed line at approximately

C48, 000 in Figure 1.

    Regular UI benefits in Austria have a relatively short duration. The basic entitlement is 20 weeks of

benefits, with an additional 10 weeks (30 weeks total) for claimants with more than 3 years of employment

in the last 5 years, and another 9 weeks (39 weeks total) for claimants over the age of 40 with at least 6 years

of employment in the last 10 years.38 When regular benefits are exhausted, however, claimants who satisfy

a family-income-based means test can receive Unemployment Assistance (UA) benefits, which are linked to
  37 Single claimants receive the minimum benefit if and only if it is between 55% and 60% of their net daily earnings.
                                                                                                                   That is, their
net daily earnings must exceed 1/0.60 of the minimum benefit, but fall below 1/0.55 of the minimum benefit in order to receive
the minimum.
  38 There are further extensions for claimants over 50, but we limit our sample to claimants under the age of 50.




                                                                26
UI. In particular, during the first 6 months of UA, the benefit amount (for those who satisfy the means test)

is 92% of a claimant’s “regular UI benefit” (i.e., the benefit that is calculated as 55% of net daily earnings)

if his/her regular benefit is above the minimum level, or 95% if regular benefits are below the minimum.39

After those first 6 months, the UA benefit falls to the minimum UI amount, with dependent allowances and

an additional premium for those with longer UI entitlement.

      Figure 1b shows weekly initial UA benefit amounts actually received by 2004 UI claimants who ex-

hausted their regular benefits, as a function of their base year earnings. As in Figure 1a, we display solid

lines at T min and T max , and dashed lines at the upper and lower earnings limits for our sample. Note that

UA benefits, like UI benefits, reach a plateau once base year wages exceed T max . In contrast, the two benefit

formulas display very different behavior around the lower kink point in the UI formula, T min . Approaching

T min from the left, UA benefits for a single filer are calculated as 0.95 × 0.55 × net daily wage, whereas

approaching from the right they are calculated as 0.92 × 0.55 × net daily wage. The change in the formula

generates a small “flat spot” which is (barely) visible in the graph (for people with gross annual earnings

between T min and 1.03 × T min ), and a small decrease in the slope of the relationship between base year

earnings and UA benefits (from 52.25% of net daily wages to 50.60%).40

      The relationship between UA and UI benefits impacts the interpretation of the marginal effects esti-

mated in our RKD analysis. Specifically, around the top kink, where UI and initial UA benefits both “top

out” at the same point, the estimated marginal effect of higher UI benefits from our analysis represents a

combined impact of higher UI benefits and higher UA benefits for the subset of claimants who are eligible

for UA. Around the bottom kink in the UI benefit schedule, however, UA benefits are (nearly) smooth, so the

estimated marginal effect of higher UI benefits in our analysis is (implicitly) holding constant UA benefits.


4.3      Data and Analysis Sample

Our data are drawn from the Austrian Social Security Database (ASSD), which records employment and

unemployment spells on a daily basis for all individuals employed in the Austrian private sector (see

Zweimüller et al. (2009)). In addition to starting and ending event dates, the ASSD contains information on

total earnings (up to the Social Security contribution cap) received by each individual from each employer

in a calendar year. We merge the ASSD with UI claims records that include the claim date, the daily UI
  39 A   claimant receives 95% of the minimum in the region where the second formula exceeds the first.
  40 Recall   that T min is the level of gross annual earnings that yields a net daily wage that is 1/0.55 of the minimum daily benefit.



                                                                   27
benefit actually received by each claimant, and the duration of the benefit spell. We use the UI claim dates

to assign the base calendar year for each claim, and then calculate base year earnings for each claim, which

is the observed assignment variable for our RKD analysis (i.e., V ∗ in the notation of Section 2).

    The ASSD allows us to construct a number of different outcomes associated with each new unemploy-

ment claim. We focus on two main ones: the duration of the initial spell of UI; and the time between the end

of the old job and the start of any new job (which we censor at 1 year, the maximum time we can observe

for spells in the final year of our claim sample). The duration of the initial UI spell is comparable to the

outcome variable that has been analyzed in many previous studies, which rely exclusively on claim records

from the UI system (e.g., Meyer (1990)).41 The duration of time between jobs is a broader measure of in-

activity that may better reflect the moral hazard costs of UI. This is particularly true in the Austrian context,

where people who have exhausted regular UI benefits can receive UA benefits that are closely linked to their

UI benefits. In addition to these two key outcomes, the ASSD provides data on such characteristics as age,

gender, education, and marital status, as well as detailed employment histories and the industry and location

of each job.

    Our analysis sample focuses on individuals who leave a job with minimum of one year of job tenure

(thus ensuring eligibility for UI) and initiate a UI claim within four weeks of the job ending date (eliminating

job-quitters, who face a four-week waiting period). Starting with a sample of 792,054 unemployment spells

that meet these two criteria, we make three additional restrictions to arrive at our analysis sample. First,

we drop 34,352 spells with either zero earnings in the base year, or with no valid UI claim.42 Second, we

eliminate individuals older than 50, reducing the sample by 115,576 spells. This exclusion is motivated by

the strong interaction between the UI system with early retirement regulations in Austria, which results in

an extremely low rate of re-entry into employment for job-losers who are over 50 years of age. Finally, we

restrict the sample to individuals with baseline earnings high enough to receive the minimum UI benefit but

less than the Social Security contribution cap (i.e., between the dashed lines in Figures 1a and 1b). The

resulting sample includes 369,566 unemployment spells initiated between 2001 and 2008.

    We pool observations from different years in the following way. First, we divide the claimants in each
   41 Some claimants end their initial UI spell then restart the claim after a period of time, without an intervening period of (covered)

employment. Thus, the duration of the initial spell is sometimes less than the total number of days of UI payments received. We use
this outcome variable because it corresponds to “time to first exit”, which is the main outcome in studies that use a hazard-modeling
framework.
   42 People without a valid claim could be receiving disability insurance payments, or could have some other reason for not being

eligible to receive UI.



                                                                  28
year into two (roughly) equal groups based on their gross base year earnings: those below the 50th per-

centile are assigned to the “bottom kink” sample, while those above this threshold are assigned to the “top

kink” sample. Since earnings have a right-skewed distribution, the cutoff threshold is closer to T min than

T max , implying a narrower support for our observed assignment variable V ∗ (observed annual base year

earnings) around the bottom kink than the top kink. Next we re-center base year earnings for observations

in the bottom kink subsample around T min , and re-center base year earnings for observation in the top kink

subsample around T max , so both kinks occur at V ∗ = 0. Finally, we pool the yearly re-centered subsamples.

    Table 1 reports basic summary statistics for the bottom and top kink samples. Mean base year earnings

for the bottom kink group are about C21,000, with a relatively narrow range of variation (standard deviation

= C2,300), while mean earnings in the top kink group are higher (mean = C31,000) and more disperse

(standard deviation = C5,700). Mean daily UI benefits are C24 for the bottom kink group (implying an

annualized benefit of C8,800, about 46% of T min ), while mean benefits for the top kink sample are C31.7

(implying an annualized benefit of C11,600, about 30% of T max ). Looking down the table, people in the

bottom kink sample are more likely to be female (38% versus 21% in the top kink sample), are a little

younger, less likely to be married, more likely to have had a blue-collar occupation, and are less likely to

have post-secondary education. Despite the differences in demographic characteristics and mean pay, the

means of our two main outcome variables are not too different in the bottom kink and top kink samples.

The average duration of the first UI spell is around 80 days, while the mean duration of joblessness is much

longer (150 days). Overall, job-losers receive UI payments for about 84% of the time between the previous

and next jobs. Only about 10 percent of claimants exhaust their regular UI benefits, and only 6-7 percent of

all claimants end up receiving UA. Conditional on exhaustion, however, the fraction of UI claimants who

initiate UA is around 60%.

    As we emphasized in Section 2, a critical concern for valid inference based on an RKD is that the density

of the observed assignment variable (in our case, base year earnings) is smooth at the kink point. Figures 2a

and 2b show the frequency distributions of base year earnings around the bottom and top kink points in our

two subsamples. For the bottom kink sample we use 100-Euro bins, reflecting the relatively narrow range for

V ∗ around T min , and the relatively high density of our sample in this range (about 2,500-2,800 observations

per 100-Euro bin). For the top kink we use a coarser 300-Euro bin, reflecting the wider range for V ∗ around

T max , and the lower density of our sample in this range (about 1,400 observations per 300-Euro bin in a

neighborhood of T max ).

                                                     29
      An examination of these figures suggests that the empirical frequency distributions are relatively smooth

around the two kink points, with no obvious discontinuities in the derivatives of the underlying density

functions. To test this more formally, we fit a series of simple models for the empirical histograms shown in

Figures 2a and 2b, using a minimum chi-squared approach.43 These models assume that the mean fraction

of the population in each bin around the kink point is a continuous polynomial function of the bin midpoint,

but allow the first and higher-order derivatives of the mean function to jump at the kink point. We test

for a smooth density by testing for a jump in the linear term of the polynomial at the kink. Supplemental

Appendix Table 1 summarizes the estimated kinks in the density for models with polynomials of order 2,

3, 4, or 5, as well as the goodness of fit of each model and the associated Akaike model selection statistic.

For the lower kink sample the third-order model has the lowest Akaike criterion, and the fitted values are

shown in Figure 2a. This model and the higher order models all show no evidence of a kink in the density of

observations around T min . For the upper kink sample the 4th and 5th order models have very similar Akaike

statistics and we plot the fitted values from the fourth order model. Again, there is no evidence of a kink

in the density around T mas . We provide additional evidence on validity of an RKD approach in the next

subsection, based on the conditional distribution functions of various predetermined covariates around the

two kink points.


4.4     Graphical Overview of the Effect of Kinks in the UI Benefit Schedule

As a starting point for our RKD analysis, Figures 3 and 4 show the relationships between base years earnings

and actual UI benefits around the bottom and top kinks. Note that in these (and subsequent) figures we have

narrowed our focus to a range of ±C2, 000 around the bottom kink (using 100-Euro bins, with 20 bins on

each side of the kink), and ±C6, 000 around the top kink (using 300-Euro bins, with 20 bins on each side of

the kink). Given the upper and lower earnings cutoffs for our sample, these are (approximately) the largest

symmetric ranges we can use around the two kink points.44

      As expected given the UI benefit formula, Figures 3 and 4 show very clear kinks in the empirical rela-

tionship between average benefits and base year earnings, with a sharp increase in slope as earnings pass

through the lower threshold T min , and a sharp decrease as they pass through the upper threshold T max . De-
  43 As shown in Lindsay and Qu (2003), the minimum chi-squared objective can be interpreted as a optimally weighted minimum

distance objective for the multinomial distribution of histogram frequencies.
  44 These ranges are approximately ±σ , where σ is the standard deviation of the observed assignment variable in the corresponding

lower or upper kink samples.



                                                               30
spite the fixity of the basic UI benefit schedule for single claimants to the left of T min and to the right of

T max , average benefits actually paid are increasing in both tails, albeit more slowly than in the intervening

interval. The explanation is family allowances. Moving left from T min the average number of dependent

allowances is falling, as claimants with successively higher numbers of dependents hit the minimum benefit

level (see Figure 1). Likewise, moving right from T max the average number of allowances is rising, reflecting

a positive correlation between earnings and family size. In addition, the rising slope in average benefits to

the right of T max reflects a shifts in the earnings distribution. In later years, when the maximum benefit level

is higher, there is a larger mass of observations farther to the right of T max .

    Figures 5-8 present a parallel set of figures for the log of time to next job and the log of the initial

UI spell duration, which we refer to for simplicity as “claim duration” (we use the logs of these duration

variables to facilitate the calculation of elasticities). Figures 5 and 6 show that there are well-defined kinks

in the relationship between base year earnings and the duration of time to next job at both the bottom and

top thresholds, though the data to the right of T max in Figure 6 are a little noisy. Figures 7 and 8 show similar

kinks for claim duration, though again the data to the right of the top threshold appear relatively dispersed.

    Given the relatively short duration of UI benefits in our sample (20 - 39 weeks), it is also interesting

to look at the probability a claimant exhausts benefits, and the probability of initiating a UA benefit spell.

Supplemental Appendix Figures 1a and 1b show these outcomes around the bottom kink. Both the prob-

ability of exhaustion and the probability of initiating a UA claim show evidence of a discrete increase in

the slope with respect to base year earnings, suggesting that higher UI benefits increase the probability of

exhaustion and increase the probability of starting a UA benefit spell. Figures 1c and 1d present parallel

graphs around the top kink. Both the probability of exhaustion and the probability of starting UA exhibit

kinks in the expected direction, though as with our main outcome variables, the probabilities are relatively

noisy in the range of earnings just above T max .

    Finally, we turn to the patterns of the predetermined covariates around T min and T max . Supplemental

Appendix Figures 2 and 3 show the conditional means of four main covariates around the two kink points:

age, fraction female, fraction blue-collar, and fraction who were recalled to the previous job.45 Most of these

graphs show little indication of a kink in the conditional mean function, though mean age appears to have a

slight kink at T min , while the fraction recalled to the previous job shows a mild kink at T max . To increase the
  45 Many  seasonal jobs in Austria lay off workers at the end of the season and re-hire them again at the start of the next season.
Having been recalled from unemployment to the recently lost job is a good indicator that the present spell may end with recall to
that job again – see Del Bono and Weber (2008).


                                                                31
power of this analysis we construct a pair of “covariate indices” – predicted outcomes using only baseline

covariates as regressors – from simple linear regression models relating our two outcome variables to a

vector of 59 covariates, including dummies for gender, blue collar occupation, and being recalled to the

previous job, decile of age (9 dummies), decile of previous job tenure (9 dummies), quintile of previous

daily wage (4 dummies), major industry (6 dummies), region (3 dummies), year of claim (7 dummies),

decile of previous firm size (9 dummies), and decile of previous firm’s recall rate (9 dummies).46 These

estimated covariate index functions can be interpreted as “best linear predictions” of mean log time to next

job and mean log claim duration, given the vector of predetermined variables.

      Figure 9 plots the conditional mean values of the estimated covariate indices around the upper and

lower kinks. The graphs in the left panel of the Figure show that the mean predicted outcomes evolve

smoothly through the bottom kink. In contrast, the graphs on the right suggest that the conditional means of

predicted time to next job and predicted claim duration both kink slightly at T max . As we show below, this

visual impression is confirmed by more formal comparisons of the estimated slopes of the conditional mean

functions for covariate indices to the right and left of T max .


4.5     RKD Estimation Results

4.5.1     Bandwidth Choice

The estimators proposed and discussed in Section 3 require a choice of bandwidth. In our empirical analysis,

we use a “rule-of-thumb” bandwidth based on Equation (3.20) of Fan and Gijbels (1996) and refer to our

bandwidth as the “FG bandwidth”:

                                                                σ̂ 2 (0)          1       1
                                         h = Cp · [                           ] 2p+3 n− 2p+3
                                                          {m̂(p+1)       2 ˆ
                                                                   (0)} f (0)

where the constants are computed to be C1 = 2.35 for the local linear and C2 = 3.93 for the local quadratic

case.47 The quantities σ̂ 2 (0) and m̂(p+1) (0) are estimated from a global polynomial regression of Y on the

assignment variable V allowing for a kink at the threshold, and the order of the polynomial is chosen by the
  46 We   fit a single prediction model for each outcome using the pooled bottom kink and top kink samples.
  47 Following                                                                   3eT S+−1 S∗+ S+−1 e2 2p+31
                 Fan and Gijbels (1996), the constant is computed by C p = ( 2p{e2 T S+−1 c+    1
                                                                                                     } 2)   as a result of minimizing the
                                                                                     2      p (p+1)!

asymptotic mean squared error of the derivative estimator. The quantities             +    ∗+           +
                                                                               e2 , S , S and c p are defined in the Supplemental
Appendix, and plugging in the “−” (minus) counterparts of these quantities results in the same bandwidth. The constant we
compute is appropriate for boundary estimation.




                                                                  32
Akaike Information Criterion (AIC).48 fˆ(0) is estimated from a global polynomial fit to the histogram of V

(the base year earnings variable). Following the convention in the RD literature, we use the same h on both

sides of the kink. We do not attempt to derive an optimal bandwidth based on the mean squared error of the

RKD estimators as Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) have done in the RDD context.49 We do, however,

explore the sensitivity of the estimates to a range of bandwidths.


4.5.2    Reduced Form Kinks in Assignment and Outcome Variables

Table 2 presents reduced form estimates of the kinks in our endogenous covariate of interest (log daily

benefits) and our two main outcome variables (log of time to next job and log of initial UI spell duration)

around T min and T max . For each variable we show the estimated symmetric bandwidths (columns 1 and 3)

and the associated kink estimates (columns 2 and 4) from local linear and local quadratic models.

    Looking first at log daily benefits, notice that the estimated kinks are relatively precisely estimated, and

quite similar using either the local linear or local quadratic models, though as expected given the results

in Section 3, the estimated standard errors from the local quadratic model are substantially larger. At the

bottom kink, the FG bandwidth choice for the local linear model is slightly larger than the maximum avail-

able symmetric bandwidth in the data ( C2,010), while the FG bandwidth for the local quadratic model is

substantially above the maximum. We therefore use the largest possible symmetric bandwidth for our point

estimate of the kink. At the top kink a similar situation arises: the FG bandwidths for the linear and quadratic

models are both somewhat larger than the maximum available symmetric bandwidth (C6,125), so again we

use the maximum available symmetric bandwidth.

    Turning to the outcome variables, the estimated kinks are somewhat less precisely estimated than the

kinks in log benefits, but all are significantly different from 0 at conventional levels and of the expected

sign. The point estimates are also somewhat sensitive to choice of a local linear versus local quadratic

approximation, with the latter models yielding 50 - 100% larger estimates of the kinks in both outcomes.

In terms of magnitudes, the estimates of the kink in log time to next job are 1.7 - 3.5 times larger than the

corresponding estimates of the kink in log benefits, suggesting that the elasticity of time out of work with
   48 σ̂ 2 (0) is taken to be the estimated error variance assuming homoskedasticity. When a polynomial of order lower than (p + 1)

is selected by the AIC, we choose the polynomial to be of order (p + 1).
   49 In Section 3, we did not discuss the behavior of the local polynomial estimator associated with a bandwidth growing at the
                1
rate of n− 2p+3 , which is n− 5 for the local linear and n− 7 for the local quadratic case. However, we could have chosen the rate of
                                1                             1

                                      1                     1
shrinkage to be slightly above n 5 for the linear and n 7 for the quadratic specifications, which correspond to the propositions in
Section 3 but make little difference empirically. Therefore, we present the FG bandwidth for simplicity.



                                                                33
respect to benefits is above 1. The estimates of the kink in log claim duration are a little smaller and imply

elasticities in the range of 1.2 - 2.8.

    A potential concern with the estimates in Table 2 is their sensitivity to the choice of bandwidth. To

address this concern, we estimated the kinks in log benefits, log time to next job, and log duration of the

initial UI spell at T min and T max using local linear models with a range of potential bandwidths, and then

plotted the estimated kink against the bandwidth choice for each variable. The results are summarized in

Supplemental Appendix Figures 4-9. Supplemental Appendix Figure 4, for example, shows the estimated

kink in log daily UI benefits at the lower kink point for bandwidth choices between C600 and C4,000. Since

the maximal bandwidth to the left of the T min is only C2,133, for wider bandwidth choices we use all the

available data to the left and expand the range of base year earnings to the right according to the bandwidth.

We also indicate the FG symmetric bandwidth reported in Table 2 by a vertical line in the graph (which in

this case is C2,133).

    Examination of Supplemental Appendix Figure 4 shows that the estimated kink in log daily benefits

at the lower threshold is quite stable at around 0.020 - 0.023 for all possible bandwidths. Supplemental

Appendix Figure 5 shows a similar figure for the estimated kink in log daily benefits at the upper threshold.

Here, the range of possible bandwidths is higher, although the maximal range of data to the right of the upper

kink is C6,125, so for higher bandwidths only the range to the left of the kink point is expanded. Again the

estimated kink is relatively stable at -0.015 to -0.016 in a range of bandwidths between C3,000 and C8,000.

    The effects of different bandwidth choices on the estimated kinks in log of time to next job at T min and

T max are shown in Supplemental Appendix Figures 6 and 7. At the bottom threshold the estimated kinks

are fairly stable at between 0.03 and 0.04 in a range of bandwidths between C1,200 and C3,500. At the top

threshold the estimated kinks are a little more sensitive to the choice of bandwidth, with a range from -0.05

(at a bandwidth of C3,000) to -0.025 (at a bandwidth of C7,000). The FG symmetric bandwidth ( C4,148)

is near the lower end of this range and yields an estimated kink that is somewhat larger in absolute value

than one would obtain from wider bandwidths. Supplemental Appendix Figures 8 and 9 show the estimated

kinks in log claim duration for different bandwidth choices. These appear to be relatively stable, once the

bandwidth is over C1,600 (for the bottom threshold) or C4,000 (for the top threshold).

    Overall, we conclude that the estimated reduced form kinks in the assignment variable and the outcome

variable are not particularly sensitive to even a relatively wide range of alternative choices for the bandwidth

used to calculate the slopes on each side of the kink points T min and T max .

                                                       34
4.5.3   Kinks in Conditional Means of Predetermined Covariates

While the reduced form estimates in Table 2 appear to be relatively robust, an important question is how

smoothly the characteristics of workers vary with their base period wages around the two kink points. As

noted in Subsection 2.3, the smooth density assumption that ensures a valid RK design despite unobserved

heterogeneity, or endogeneity in the covariate of interest has the following implication – the conditional

distribution of any predetermined covariate will evolve smoothly around the benefit thresholds. Table 3

presents tests of this smoothness prediction for the covariates indices introduced in Figure 9, as well as for

four main components of the indices. The format is the same as in Table 2: we show the estimated kinks

using local linear and local quadratic models with FG symmetric bandwidths for each covariate.

    The estimates in Panel A of Table 3 confirm the impression from Figure 9 that despite a small (but statis-

tically significant) kink in the conditional distribution of age around T min , there is no corresponding kink in

predicted time to next job or predicted claim duration. The estimates in Panel B are more problematic. The

fraction of blue collar workers and the fraction of workers who were recalled to their last job both exhibit

kinks at T max , as do the two covariate indices. The magnitudes of the kinks in the predicted durations of

joblessness and claim duration are also relatively large. For example, using a local linear specification, the

estimated kink in predicted log time to next job is -0.0138, 35% as big as the corresponding kink in actual

log time to next job (-0.0396). Similarly, the estimated kink in predicted log claim duration from a local

linear model (-0.0096) is 43% as big as the kink in actual log claim duration. These estimates suggest that

35-45% of the kinks in the two outcome variables at T max could be explained by kinks in the distribution of

observed characteristics of workers.

    Given the relatively smooth density of UI claims around T max shown in Figure 2b, and the institutional

fact that actual value of T max is hard to forecast, we think it is unlikely that the kinks in predicted jobless-

ness and predicted claim duration are due to deterministic sorting around T max . We think a more likely

explanation is the inherent heterogeneity in the upper tail of the earnings distribution, which is evident in

the noisiness of the conditional means of covariate indices to the right of T max in Figure 9. Regardless of

the explanation, however, the presence of these kinks means that RKD estimates from the top kink sample

must be interpreted cautiously.




                                                       35
4.5.4   Fuzzy RKD Estimates

As a final step in our empirical analysis we present fuzzy RKD estimates of the effect of higher UI benefits

on the duration of UI claims and joblessness. To obtain point estimates for the elasticities we first choose an

FG symmetric bandwidth for the outcome variable (either time to next job or claim duration) around either

the bottom or top kink. We then use this bandwidth to estimate the kinks in both the unemployment benefit

function and the outcome variable, and take the ratio of these estimates as our fuzzy RKD estimate. Except

for the fact that we choose a different bandwidth in estimating the kink in log UI benefits, the estimated

elasticities in Table 4 would be equivalent to dividing the reduced-form kinks in the outcome variables in

Table 2 by the corresponding kinks in log benefits. And since estimates of the kink in log benefits are

relatively stable across bandwidth choices (Supplemental Appendix Figures 3 and 4), the actual estimates

are not very different from an “indirect two-stage” approach based on the reduced-form kink estimates.

    Using local linear specifications, the estimated elasticities of log time to next job and log claim duration

around the bottom kink are 1.73 and 1.25, respectively, while the corresponding elasticities around the top

kink are 2.64 and 1.31, respectively. The elasticities from local quadratic models are typically about twice as

large (reflecting the larger reduced form kinks in the outcome variables from a local quadratic specification),

but substantially less precise. A potential problem for the quadratic models is that the FG bandwidths are

in all cases wider than our maximum available symmetric bandwidths (C2,010 around the bottom kink or

C6,125 around the top kink), so we are not able to utilize as much data as would be optimal, given the

apparent smoothness of the target functions we are trying to approximate. In view of this issue, and the

superior asymptotic performance of a local linear specification for the same bandwidth sequence, we focus

on the estimates from the local linear models.

    As with the reduced-form kink estimates, a concern with the structural estimates from the fuzzy RKD is

that the point estimates may be sensitive to the bandwidth choice. Figures 10-13 plot the structural elasticity

estimates for our two outcome variables around the bottom and top kinks associated with a range of potential

bandwidths. Figure 10 shows that the estimated elasticity of time to next job with respect to UI benefits

around the bottom kink is relatively stable at close to 1.75 for a very wide range of bandwidths. Figure 11

shows that the estimated elasticity around the top kink is a little more sensitive to bandwidth choice, with a

larger estimate (between 2 and 3) for lower bandwidths, but an elasticity of 2 or less for bandwidths above

C5,000. Figures 12 and 13 show that the elasticities of the duration of the initial UI spell with respect to UI



                                                      36
benefits for the bottom and top kink samples are both quite stable and in a relatively narrow range between

1.1 and 1.4.

    We also investigate the robustness of the point estimates by calculating the FG bandwidths using a

selection procedure that does not allow a change in slopes in the outcome of interest at the kink point. The

reduced-form kink estimates from this alternative procedure are presented in Supplemental Appendix Table

2, while the structural RKD estimates are presented in Supplemental Appendix Table 3. Comparisons of

these estimates to the corresponding estimates in Tables 2 and 4 suggest that the alternative procedure yields

bandwidth choices and point estimates that are relatively close to our baseline procedure. One notable

difference is in the bandwidth choice for the log of time to next job at the top kink. Here the alternative

procedure selects a substantially wider bandwidth than the baseline procedure, leading to a smaller estimate

of the reduced form kink, and a smaller elasticity estimate that is much closer in magnitude to the estimated

elasticity of time to next job in the bottom kink sample.

    In another robustness check, we investigate the effect of our decision to censor the time to next job at one

year in our main analysis.50 Supplemental Appendix Table 4 presents fuzzy RKD estimates of the benefit

elasticity of time to next job when the outcome variable is censored at 52 weeks, 39 weeks, 30 weeks, and

20 weeks. The choice of a lower censoring point leads to somewhat smaller elasticity estimates in both the

bottom kink and top kink samples. For example, lowering the censoring point to 39 weeks (which is the

longest duration of regular UI benefits for any job-losers in our sample) leads to a 10% smaller estimated

elasticity at the bottom kink, and a 30% smaller elasticity at the top kink. These results suggest that our

main results are qualitatively unaffected by alternative choices for the censoring point.

    Finally, we also investigate potential differences in benefit responsiveness between the duration of the

initial UI benefit spell and the total number of days of UI benefits received by a claimant. Supplemental

Appendix Table 5 shows RKD estimates of the structural benefit elasticities for both measures of UI uti-

lization. Using local linear models, the estimated elasticities for total days of UI are 10-20% larger than the

corresponding elasticities for the duration of the first spell. These estimates suggest that duration of second

spells of UI may be more sensitive to the benefit level than the duration of the initial spells, though it should

be noted that estimates from the local quadratic models suggest the opposite. Given the standard errors and
  50 A small fraction of job-losers (3-5%) never return to jobs in the private sector, even after a decade.
                                                                                                   These individuals may move
to self-employment or government jobs (which are not included in the ASSD), or they may find a job outside Austria, or withdraw
from the labor force. In principle an RKD approach can be applied in a Tobit or hazard model framework, though the estimation
methods presented in Section 3 cannot be directly used in such models.



                                                                   37
the conflicting relative magnitudes of the elasticities from local linear and local quadratic models, however,

we cannot draw definitive conclusions.

    Overall, the estimates from our main specifications and the various alternatives lead us to two main

conclusions. First, for job-losers from the lower part of the earnings distribution (around T min ), the elasticity

of the duration of the initial UI claim spell with respect to unemployment benefits is around 1.25, while the

elasticity of the time to next job with respect to UI benefits is probably a little larger, in the range of 1.5 to

2.0. Our confidence in these estimates is strengthened by their relative robustness to alternative bandwidth

choices, and by the fact that tests for the validity of an RK design around the lower kink show little evidence

that the design is compromised by sorting.

    A second, more tentative conclusion is that the corresponding elasticities for job-losers in the upper part

of the earnings distribution (around T max ) are of a roughly similar magnitude. Two factors lead us to a more

cautious assessment of the benefit responsiveness for higher-wage job-losers. Most importantly, tests for

the validity of an RKD approach show that the conditional distributions of observed worker characteristics

change slopes around T max . These changes are not associated with any discernible “bunching” at the kink

point in the benefit schedule, but they are large enough to cause a 30-40% upward bias in the estimated

elasticities of our two main outcomes. A second factor is that the point estimates of the reduced-form

kinks in the outcome variables and in the structural RKD coefficients are both somewhat more sensitive to

alternative bandwidth choices than the estimates for lower-wage workers.

    How do our estimated benefit elasticities compare to those in the existing literature? Supplemental Ap-

pendix Table 6 contains a brief summary of the existing literature, drawing on the survey by Krueger and

Meyer (2002) for the earlier U.S.-based literature, all of which use administrative records on unemployment

insurance claims and estimate the effect of UI benefits on the duration of the initial spell of insured unem-

ployment. These studies point to a benefit elasticity in the range of 0.3 to 0.8.51 A recent study by Landais

(2012) applies a regression kink design to some of the same data used in these earlier studies and obtains

estimates of the elasticity of the initial UI benefit spell that range from 0.40 to 0.70. Another recent study by

Chetty (2010) uses retrospective interview data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation and

obtains an average benefit elasticity of about 0.5. Taken together these U.S. studies suggest a benchmark
  51 Krueger and Meyer attribute an estimated elasticity of 1.0 to Solon (1985) who studies the effect of making UI benefits taxable
on the unemployment duration of high-earning claimants. He finds that the introduction of taxation caused a 22% reduction in the
average duration of initial UI claims by higher-earning claimants (with no effect on low-earners). Assuming an average tax rate of
30%, this implies an elasticity of 0.73, which is our preferred interpretation of Solon (1985)’s results.



                                                                38
of around 0.5 for the elasticity of initial UI claim duration on the UI benefit. Most of the European studies

included in Supplemental Appendix Table 6 estimate the effect of benefits on the time to first exit from the

UI system, and obtain benefit elasticities that are similar to the U.S. studies. An exception is Carling et al.

(2011), who study the effect of a reduction in the benefit replacement rate in Sweden in 1996 on the exit

rate from unemployment recipiency to employment. Their estimate of the elasticity of time to next job with

respect to the benefit level is 1.6, which is very similar to our point estimate of 1.73 for the bottom kink

sample.

    Our finding that the estimated benefit elasticity of the time to next job for the bottom kink sample is as

high or higher than the estimated elasticity of the initial UI claim duration is interesting in light of relatively

smooth UA benefit formula at T min . Specifically, since time to next job (N) is approximately equal to the

duration of the first UI spell (D1 ) plus “uncovered” time (D2 ) during which the job seeker is off UI:


                                 KinkT min E[N|v∗ ] ≈ KinkT min E[D1 |v∗ ] + KinkT min E[D2 |v∗ ]


where KinkT min g(v∗ ) denotes the kink in the function g(v∗ ) at v∗ = T min , i.e., the difference between the left

and right derivatives of g(v∗ ) at v∗ = T min . This says that the reduced form kink in time to next job at T min

is (approximately) the sum of the kink in the duration of the first claim and the kink in uncovered time. In

terms of the implied RKD benefit elasticity estimates,

                                            E[D1 |v∗ = T min ]        E[D2 |v∗ = T min ]
                                   εNB ≈                       εD B +                    εD B ,
                                            E[N|v∗ = T min ] 1        E[N|v∗ = T min ] 2

where εNB is the benefit elasticity of time to next job, εD1 B is the benefit elasticity of the duration of the

initial UI spell, and εD2 B is the benefit elasticity of uncovered time. Our estimates suggest εNB > εD1 B , which

implies that there must be a kink in the relationship between uncovered time and base year earnings at T min ,

despite the fact that UA benefits available to exhaustees with lower family income during the uncovered

period have (almost) no kink at T min .

    We checked this conclusion directly using data on the duration of uncovered time (i.e., time to next job

minus total time on UI) for people in the bottom kink sample. Local linear regression models confirm that

there is a significant positive kink at T min in the relation between uncovered time and base year earnings

(estimated kink = 0.69, standard error = 0.21).52 We conjecture that this kink may be due in part to lags
  52 There   is a larger negative kink in the relation between uncovered time and base year earnings at T max (estimated kink = -1.79,


                                                                  39
in the search process. People who search less while on UI because of more generous benefits will have a

smaller inventory of prior contacts at the expiration of benefits, causing lower job-starting rates even after

benefits expire. In any case, our findings underscore the potential value in being able to measure time to

next job in assessing the incentive effects of the UI system.



5     Conclusion

In many institutional settings a key policy variable (like unemployment benefits or public pensions) is set

by a deterministic formula that depends on an endogenous assignment variable (like previous earnings).

Conventional approaches to causal inference, which rely on the existence of an instrumental variable that is

correlated with the covariate of interest but independent of underlying errors in the outcome, will not work

in these settings. When the policy function is continuous but kinked (i.e., non-differentiable) at a known

threshold, a regression kink design provides a potential way forward (Guryan (2001); Nielsen et al. (2010);

Simonsen et al. (2011)). The sharp RKD estimand is simply the ratio of the estimated kink in the rela-

tionship between the assignment variable and the outcome of interest at the threshold point, divided by the

corresponding kink in the policy function. In settings where there is incomplete compliance with the policy

rule (or measurement error in the actual assignment variable), a “fuzzy RKD” replaces the denominator

of the RKD estimand with the estimated kink in the relationship between the assignment variable and the

policy variable.

    In this paper we provide sufficient conditions for a sharp and fuzzy RKD to identify causal effects in a

general nonseparable model (e.g., Blundell and Powell (2003)). The key assumption is that the conditional

density of the assignment variable, given the unobserved error in the outcome, is continuously differentiable

at the kink point. This smooth density condition rules out situations where the value of the assignment

variable can be precisely manipulated, while allowing the assignment variable to be correlated with the

latent errors in the outcome. Thus, extreme forms of “bunching” predicted by certain behavioral models

(e.g., Saez (2010)) violate the smooth density condition, whereas similar models with errors in optimization

(e.g., Chetty (2010)) are potentially consistent with an RKD approach. In addition to yielding a testable

smoothness prediction for the observed distribution of the assignment variable, we show that the smooth

density condition also implies that the conditional distributions of any predetermined covariates will be
standard error = 0.83). Given the kink in UA benefits, however, this is expected.



                                                                40
smooth functions of the assignment variable at the kink point. These two predictions are very similar in

spirit to the predictions for the density of the assignment variable and the distribution of predetermined

covariates in a regression discontinuity design (Lee (2008)).

    We also provide a precise characterization of the treatment effects identified by a sharp or fuzzy RKD.

The sharp RKD identifies a weighted average of marginal effects, where the weight for a given unit reflects

the relative probability of having a value of the assignment variable close to the kink point. Under an addi-

tional monotonicity assumption we show that the fuzzy RKD identifies a slightly more complex weighted

average of marginal effects, where the weight also incorporates the relative size of the kink induced in the

actual value of the policy variable for that unit.

    Our final methodological contribution is to show how standard local polynomial regression techniques

(Fan and Gijbels (1992)) can be adapted to obtain nonparametric estimators for the sharp and fuzzy RKD,

and to characterize their asymptotic behavior.

    We illustrate the use of a fuzzy RKD approach by studying the effect of unemployment benefits on

the duration of joblessness in Austria, where the benefit schedule has kinks at the minimum and maximum

benefit level. We present a variety of simple graphical evidence showing that these kinks induce kinks in

the duration of benefit receipt, and in the duration of total joblessness between the end of the previous job

and the start of the next job. We also present a variety of tests of the smooth density assumption around

the thresholds for the minimum and maximum benefit amounts. We then present local polynomial-based

estimates of the “reduced form” kinks in these outcome variables, and of the “structural” RKD estimates of

the elasticities of the duration of UI recipiency and duration of joblessness with respect to the UI benefit.

Our estimates point to elasticities that are in the range between 1 and 2 – somewhat higher than most of the

estimates from previous studies in the U.S. and Europe.




                                                     41
References
Altonji, Joseph G. and Rosa L. Matzkin, “Cross Section and Panel Data Estimators for Nonseparable
  Models with Endogenous Regressors,” Econometrica, 2005, 73 (4), 1053–1102.

Amemiya, Takeshi, Advanced Econometrics, Harvard University Press, 1985.

Arraz, Jose M., Fernando Munoz-Bullon, and Juan Muro, “Do Unemployment Benefit Legislative
  Changes Affect Job Finding?,” Working Paper, Universidad de Alcalä 2008.

Baily, Martin N., “Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance,” Journal of Public Economics,
  1978, 10 (3), 379–402.

Blundell, Richard and James L. Powell, “Endogeneity in Nonparametric and Semiparametric Regres-
  sion Models,” in Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter Hansen, and Stephen J. Turnovsky, eds., Advances in
  economics and econometrics theory and applications : Eighth World Congress., Vol. II of Econometric
  Society monographs no. 36, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003, pp. 312–357.

Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber, “Cash-on-Hand and Competing Models of Intertemporal
  Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (4), 1511–
  1560.

Carling, Kenneth, Bertil Holmlund, and Altin Vejsiu, “Do Benefit Cuts Boost Job Finding? Swedish
  Evidence from the 1990s,” Economic Journal, 2011, 111 (474), 766–790.

Cavanagh, Christopher L. and Robert P. Sherman, “Rank Estimators for Monotonic Index Models,”
  Journal of Econometrics, 1998, 84 (2), 351–381.

Chesher, Andrew, “Identification in Nonseparable Models,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (5), 1405–1441.

Chetty, Raj, “Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 2010, 116 (2), 173–234.

  , “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro and Macro Evidence on
  Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 2012, 80 (3), 969–1018.

Christensen, Bent Jesper, Rasmus Lenz, Dale T. Mortensen, George R. Neumann, and Axel Werwatz,
 “On the Job Search and the Wage Distribution,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2005, 23 (1), 181–221.

Classen, Kathleen P., “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search,” in S.A. Lippman and J.J. McCall, eds.,
  Studies in the Economics of Search, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1977, pp. 191–219.

Dahlberg, Matz, Eva Mork, Jorn Rattso, and Hanna Agren, “Using a Discontinuous Grant Rule to
  Identify the Effect of Grants on Local Taxes and Spending,” Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92 (12),
  2320–2335.

Del Bono, Emilia and Andrea Weber, “Do Wages Compensate for Anticipated Working Time Restric-
  tions? Evidence from Seasonal Employment in Austria,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2008, 26 (1),
  181–221.

DiNardo, John E. and David S. Lee, “Program Evaluation and Research Designs,” in Orley Ashenfelter
  and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4A, Elsevier, 2011.



                                                   42
Fan, Jianqing and Irene Gijbels, “Variable Bandwidth and Local Linear Regression Smoothers,” Annals
  of Statistics, 1992, 20 (4), 2008–2036.

   and    , Local Polynomial Modelling and Its Applications, Chapman and Hall, 1996.

Florens, J. P., J. J. Heckman, C. Meghir, and E. Vytlacil, “Identification of Treatment Effects Using Con-
  trol Functions in Models With Continuous, Endogenous Treatment and Heterogeneous Effects,” Econo-
  metrica, 2008, 76 (5), 1191–1206.

Guryan, Jonathan, “Does Money Matter? Regression-Discontinuity Estimates from Education Finance
 Reform in Massachusetts,” Working Paper 8269, National Bureau of Economic Research 2001.

Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw, “Evaluating the Effect of an Antidiscrimina-
 tion Law Using a Regression-Discontinuity Design,” Working Paper 7131, National Bureau of Economic
 Research May 1999.

  , , and , “Identification and Estimation of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity De-
  sign,” Econometrica, 2001, 69 (1), 201–209.

Han, Aaron K., “Non-Parametric Analysis of a Generalized Regression Model: The Maximum Rank Cor-
 relation Estimator,” Journal of Econometrics, 1987, 35, 303–316.

Heckman, James J. and Edward Vytlacil, “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects, and Econometric
 Policy Evaluation,” Econometrica, 2005, 73 (3), 669–738.

Imbens, Guido and Karthik Kalyanaraman, “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression Discontinu-
  ity Estimator.,” Review of Economic Studies, 2012, 79 (3), 933 – 959.

Imbens, Guido W. and Joshua D. Angrist, “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
  Effects,” Econometrica, 1994, 62 (2), 467–475.

   and Thomas Lemieux, “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to Practice,” Journal of Economet-
  rics, February 2008, 142 (2), 615–635.

  and Whitney K. Newey, “Identification and Estimation of Triangular Simultaneous Equations Models
  Without Additivity,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1481–1512.

Kapteyn, Arie and Jelmer Y. Ypma, “Measurement Error and Misclassification: A Comparison of Survey
 and Administrative Data,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2007, 25 (3), 513–551.

Katz, Lawrence H. and Bruce D. Meyer, “The Impact of the Potential Duration of Unemployment Benefits
 on the Duration of Unemployment,” Journal of Public Economics, 1990, 41 (1), 45–72.

Khan, Shakeeb and Elie Tamer, “Partial Rank Estimation of Duration Models with General Forms of
 Censoring,” Journal of Econometrics, 2007, 136 (1), 251 – 280.

Kroft, Kory, “Takeup, Social Multipliers and Optimal Social Insurance,” Journal of Public Economics,
  2008, 92 (3-4), 722–737.

Krueger, Alan B. and Bruce D. Meyer, “Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance,” in Alan J. Auerbach
 and Martin S Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier, 2002,
 pp. 2327–2392.



                                                   43
Lalive, Rafael, Jan C. Van Ours, and Josef Zweimüller, “How Changes in Financial Incentives Affect
  the Duration of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (4), 1009–1038.

Landais, Camille, “Assessing the Welfare Effects of Unemployment Benefits Using the Regression Kink
  Design,” Working Paper, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research 2012.

Lee, David S., “Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in U.S. House Elections,” Journal
  of Econometrics, February 2008, 142 (2), 675–697.

   and Thomas Lemieux, “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture, 2010, 48 (2), 281–355.

Lewbel, Arthur, “Semiparametric Latent Variable Model Estimation with Endogenous or Mismeasured
  Regressors,” Econometrica, 1998, 66 (1), 105–121.

  , “Semiparametric Qualitative Response Model Estimation with Unknown Heteroscedasticity or Instru-
  mental Variables,” Journal of Econometrics, 2000, 97, 145–177.

Lindsay, Bruce G. and Annie Qu, “Inference Functions and Quadratic Score Tests,” Statistical Science,
  2003, 18 (3), 394–410.

Matzkin, Rosa L., “A Nonparametric Maximum Rank Correlation Estimator,” in W.A. Barnett, J.L. Pow-
 ell, and G.E. Tauchen, eds., Nonparametric and Semiparametric Methods in Economics and Statistics,
 Cambridge University Press, 1991.

  , “Nonparametric and Distribution-Free Estimation of the Binary Threshold Crossing and The Binary
  Choice Models,” Econometrica, 1992, 60(2), 239–270.

  , “Nonparametric Estimation of Nonadditive Random Functions,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (5), 1339–
  1375.

  , “Chapter 73 Nonparametric identification,” in James J. Heckman and Edward E. Leamer, eds., James J.
  Heckman and Edward E. Leamer, eds., Vol. 6, Part B of Handbook of Econometrics, Elsevier, 2007,
  pp. 5307 – 5368.

McCrary, Justin, “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity Design: A Den-
 sity Test,” Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 698–714. The regression discontinuity design: Theory
 and applications.

Meyer, Bruce D., “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells,” Econometrica, 1990, 58 (4),
 757–782.

   and Wallace K. C. Mok, “Quasi-Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Unemployment Insurance
  from New York State,” NBER Working Paper No.12865 2007.

Moffitt, Robert, “Unemployment Insurance and the Distribution of Unemployment Spells,” Journal of
 Econometrics, 1985, 28 (1), 85–101.

Nielsen, Helena Skyt, Torben Sørensen, and Christopher R. Taber, “Estimating the Effect of Student
  Aid on College Enrollment: Evidence from a Government Grant Policy Reform,” American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 2010, 2 (2), 185–215.

Roed, Knut and Tao Zhang, “Does Unemployment Compensation Affect Unemployment Duration?,” Eco-
  nomic Journal, 2003, 113 (484), 190–206.

                                                   44
Roehrig, Charles S., “Conditions for Identification in Nonparametric and Parametric Models,” Economet-
  rica, 1988, 56 (2), 433–447.

Rudin, Walter, Principles of Mathematical Analysis International Series in Pure and Applied Mathematics,
 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, 1976.

Saez, Emmanuel, “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  2010, 2 (3), 180–212.

Sherman, Robert P., “The Limiting Distribution of the Maximum Rank Correlation Estimator,” Economet-
  rica, 1993, 61 (1), pp. 123–137.

Simonsen, Marianne, Lars Skipper, and Niels Skipper, “Price Sensitivity of Demand for Prescription
  Drugs: Exploiting a Regression Kink Design,” Working Paper 2010-3, University of Aarhus Department
  of Economics 2011.

Solon, Gary, “Work Incentive Effects of Taxing Unemployment Benefits,” Econometrica, 1985, 53 (2),
  295–306.

Thistlethwaite, Donald L. and Donald T. Campbell, “Regression-Discontinuity Analysis: An Alternative
  to the Ex-Post Facto Experiment,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 1960, 51 (6), 309–317.

Urquiola, Miguel and Eric Verhoogen, “Class-Size Caps, Sorting, and the Regression-Discontinuity De-
  sign,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (1), 179–215.

Vytlacil, Edward, “Independence, Monotonicity, and Latent Index Models: An Equivalence Result,”
  Econometrica, 2002, 70 (1), 331–341.

White, Halbert, “A Heteroskedasticty-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct Test for Het-
 eroskedasticity,” Econometrica, 1980, 48 (4), 817–838.

Zweimüller, Josef, Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, Rafael Lalive, Andreas Kuhn, Jean-Philippe Wuellrich,
 Oliver Ruf, and Simon Büchi, “Austrian Social Security Database, University of Zurich,” Working
 Paper iewwp410, Institute for Empirical Research in Economics 2009.




                                                  45
              50        40
 Daily UI Benefit in Euro
20         30 10                    Figure 1a: UI Benefits in 2004




                             0   10000     20000          30000       40000   50000
                                         Base Year Earnings in Euro



                                    Figure 1b: UA Benefits in 2004
              40
Daily UA Benefit in Euro
  20          10   30




                             0   10000     20000          30000       40000   50000
                                         Base Year Earnings in Euro
                                                Figure 2a: Density in Bottom Kink Sample

             0.0200



             0.0175



             0.0150
Frequency




             0.0125
                                                                        Note: restricted cubic polynomial fit shown.
                                                                        T‐statistic for continuous slope at kink‐point = ‐0.71
             0.0100



             0.0075



             0.0050
                   ‐2050   ‐1550   ‐1050     ‐550      ‐50      450      950      1450      1950     2450     2950      3450      3950    4450
                                                              Base Year Earnings Relative to T‐min




                                                    Figure 2b: Density in Top Kink Sample

             0.045


             0.040                         Note: restricted quartic polynomial fit shown.
                                           T‐statistic for continuous slope at kink‐point=1.22
             0.035


             0.030


             0.025
 Frequency




             0.020


             0.015


             0.010


             0.005


             0.000
                 ‐13950 ‐12450 ‐10950       ‐9450    ‐7950    ‐6450    ‐4950     ‐3450    ‐1950      ‐450    1050     2550       4050    5550
                                                              Base Year Earnings Relative to T‐max
                                         Figure 3: Daily UI Benefits
                                                Bottom Kink Sample
               24.5       24
   Average Daily UI Benefit
22.5     23    2223.5




                               -1800                      0                       1800
                                         Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min



                                         Figure 4: Daily UI Benefits
                                                  Top Kink Sample
               38      37
  Average Daily UI Benefit
34     35       36
               33




                                 -5000                    0                     5000
                                         Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max
                              Figure 5: Log Time to Next Job
                                       Bottom Kink Sample
         4.7
         4.65
    Log(duration)
4.55      4.6
         4.5




                    -1800                        0                       1800
                                Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min



                              Figure 6: Log Time to Next Job
                                         Top Kink Sample
         4.75
         4.7
Log(duration)
 4.6    4.65
         4.55
         4.5




                      -5000                     0                      5000
                               Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max
                              Figure 7: Log Claim Duration
                                      Bottom Kink Sample
         4.05   4
   Log(duration)
3.95     3.9




                    -1800                       0                       1800
                               Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min



                              Figure 8: Log Claim Duration
                                        Top Kink Sample
         4.15
         4.1
Log(duration)
    4.05 4
         3.95




                      -5000                    0                      5000
                              Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max
                                                            Figure 9: Covariate Indices
                             Predicted Log Time to Next Job                                               Predicted Log Time to Next Job
                                      Bottom Kink Sample                                                             Top Kink Sample
         4.65




                                                                                      4.7  4.65
               4.6
   Log(duration)




                                                                             Log(duration)
                                                                                 4.6
4.55




                                                                                      4.55
         4.5




                                                                                      4.5




                     -1800                     0                      1800                        -5000                      0                     5000
                               Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min                                         Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max


                             Predicted Log Claim Duration                                                 Predicted Log Claim Duration
                                      Bottom Kink Sample                                                             Top Kink Sample
         4




                                                                                      4.08
                                                                                      4.06
             3.98
 Log(duration)




                                                                              Log(duration)
                                                                             4.02    4.04
3.96




                                                                                      4
         3.94




                                                                                      3.98




                     -1800                     0                      1800                        -5000                      0                     5000
                               Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min                                         Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max
                Figure 10: Fuzzy RKD Estimation with Varying Bandwidth
                                   Log Time to Next Job, Bottom Kink Sample
      8
      6  4
Elasticity
2     0
      -2




                       1000                       2000                         3000           4000
                                                           Bandwidth
                 Notes: local linear estimation, vertical bar denotes FG bandwidth




                Figure 11: Fuzzy RKD Estimation with Varying Bandwidth
                                      Log Time to Next Job, Top Kink Sample
      10
      8     6
 Elasticity
2    40
      -2
      -4




                2000              4000               6000         8000                10000   12000
                                                         Bandwidth
                 Notes: local linear estimation, vertical bar denotes FG bandwidth
             Figure 12: Fuzzy RKD Estimation with Varying Bandwidth
                                  Log Claim Duration, Bottom Kink Sample
    4
    2
Elasticity
  0 -2
    -4




                    1000                       2000                         3000           4000
                                                        Bandwidth
              Notes: local linear estimation, vertical bar denotes FG bandwidth




             Figure 13: Fuzzy RKD Estimation with Varying Bandwidth
                                    Log Claim Duration, Top Kink Sample
    6
    4
Elasticity
    0
    -2
    -4 2




             2000              4000               6000         8000                10000   12000
                                                      Bandwidth
              Notes: local linear estimation, vertical bar denotes FG bandwidth
Table	  1:	  Summary	  Statistics	  for	  Bottom	  and	  Top	  Kink	  Samples	  of	  UI	  Claimants
                                                                                                 Bottom	  Kink	  Sample                                                                                             Top	  Kink	  Sample
                                                                                                 Mean              Std.	  Dev.                                                                                     Mean               Std.	  Dev.
                                                                                                  (1)                 (2)                                                                                            (3)                  (4)
Baseline	  earnings	  (euros)                                                   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  20,970	  
                                                                                                              	                                  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,324	     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  31,384	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  	                                 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  5,666	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         	  
Daily	  UI	  benefit	  (euros)                                                                               24.0                                                                2.5                                             31.7                                                               4.6
Time	  to	  next	  job	  (days)*                                                                       150.4                                                          129.1                                                149.3                                                         131.6
Duration	  of	  initial	  UI	  spell	  (days)**                                                            78.9                                                           67.0                                                 80.8                                                          70.0
Total	  days	  of	  UI	  received	                                                                    101.0                                                               75.9                                            101.0                                                              78.7
Fraction	  exhausted	  benefits***                                                                            0.10                                                           0.30                                                 0.09                                                          0.29
Fraction	  of	  days	  to	  next	  job	  covered	  by	  UI                                              0.83                                                           0.25                                                 0.84                                                          0.25
Fraction	  claiming	  UA	  after	  UI                                                                       0.07                                                           0.26                                                 0.07                                                          0.25
Fraction	  with	  time	  to	  next	  job	  censored                                                       0.19                                                           0.40                                                 0.21                                                          0.40
Fraction	  eligible	  for	  extended	  benefits                                                             0.78                                                           0.42                                                 0.90                                                          0.29
Max.	  weeks	  of	  UI	  eligibility                                                                   29.88                                                               6.30                                            31.92                                                              5.56
Fraction	  female                                                                                              0.38                                                           0.48                                                 0.21                                                          0.41
Mean	  Age                                                                                                     33.1                                                                8.4                                             35.9                                                               7.4
Fraction	  Austrian	  nationals                                                                               0.84                                                           0.36                                                 0.90                                                          0.30
Fraction	  married                                                                                             0.38                                                           0.48                                                 0.45                                                          0.50
Fraction	  bluecollar	  occupation                                                                            0.65                                                           0.48                                                 0.56                                                          0.50
Fraction	  with	  higher	  education                                                                         0.11                                                           0.32                                                 0.19                                                          0.39
Fraction	  in	  Vienna                                                                                        0.21                                                           0.41                                                 0.24                                                          0.43
Tenure	  in	  most	  recent	  job	  (Years)                                                    3.42                                                            3.35                                                4.25                                                          4.20
Recalled	  to	  last	  job                                                                       0.21                                                           0.41                                                0.26                                                          0.44
Industry:
	  	  Construction                                                                                0.14                                                            0.35                                                0.25                                                          0.44
	  	  Manufacturing                                                                               0.24                                                            0.42                                                0.25                                                          0.43
	  	  Trade                                                                                       0.21                                                            0.41                                                0.16                                                          0.37
	  	  Services                                                                                    0.27                                                            0.44                                                0.24                                                          0.43
Number	  observations                                                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  183,479                                         	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  186,087
Notes:	  sample	  contains	  UI	  claimants	  under	  the	  age	  of	  50	  with	  claims	  in	  2001-­‐2008,	  who	  had	  at	  least	  1	  year	  of	  tenure	  on	  
their	  previous	  job,	  began	  their	  claim	  within	  4	  weeks	  of	  losing	  their	  past	  job,	  and	  had	  a	  valid	  UI	  claim	  record	  and	  non-­‐
missing	  earnings	  in	  the	  base	  period	  prior	  to	  the	  claim.	  	  Observations	  in	  the	  bottom	  kink	  sample	  have	  base	  period	  
earnings	  in	  a	  range	  around	  the	  bottom	  kink	  in	  the	  UI	  benefit	  schedule;	  observations	  in	  the	  top	  kink	  sample	  have	  base	  
period	  earnings	  in	  a	  range	  around	  top	  kink.	  	  See	  text.

*	  Time	  to	  next	  job	  is	  censored	  at	  365	  days.
**	  Claim	  duration	  is	  censored	  at	  39	  weeks	  (maximum	  entitlement).
***	  Indicator	  equals	  1	  if	  claim	  duration	  =	  maximum	  entitlement.
Table	  2:	  Reduced	  Form	  Estimates	  of	  Kink	  Effects	  in	  Benefits	  and	  Durations

                                                                 Local	  Linear	  Models                                   Local	  Quadratic	  Models

                                             FG	  Bandwidth Estimated	  Kink                                   FG	  Bandwidth Estimated	  Kink
                                                     (1)          (2)                                                    (3)          (4)

A.	  	  Bottom	  Kink:
Log	  daily	  UI	  benefit                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,133	  
                                                                                         	           0.0222     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,564	  
                                                                                                                                                             	           0.0192
                                                                                                     (0.0010)                                                            (0.0025)

Log	  time	  to	  next	  job             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,615	  
                                                                                         	           0.0375     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,328	  
                                                                                                                                                             	           0.0598
                                                                                                     (0.0093)                                                            (0.0280)

Log	  claim	  duration                     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,651	  
                                                                                         	           0.0269     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,564	  
                                                                                                                                                             	           0.0541
                                                                                                     (0.0085)                                                            (0.0254)

B.	  	  Top	  Kink:

Log	  daily	  UI	  benefit                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  7,064	  
                                                                                         	          -­‐0.0154   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  6,577	  
                                                                                                                                                             	          -­‐0.0166
                                                                                                     (0.0006)                                                            (0.0027)

Log	  time	  to	  next	  job             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,148	  
                                                                                         	          -­‐0.0396   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  7,521	  
                                                                                                                                                             	          -­‐0.0577
                                                                                                     (0.0100)                                                            (0.0191)

Log	  claim	  duration                     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  9,067	  
                                                                                         	          -­‐0.0221   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  9,355	  
                                                                                                                                                             	          -­‐0.0363
                                                                                                     (0.0038)                                                            (0.0151)
Notes:	  standard	  errors	  in	  parentheses.	  	  See	  text	  for	  a	  description	  of	  the	  FG	  bandwidth	  
determination.	  
Table	  3:	  Estimates	  of	  Kink	  Effects	  in	  Distribution	  of	  Covariates


                                                                            Local	  Linear	  Models                                    Local	  Quadratic	  Models

                                                        FG	  Bandwidth Estimated	  Kink                                   FG	  Bandwidth Estimated	  Kink
                                                                (1)          (2)                                                    (3)          (4)
A.	  	  Bottom	  Kink:
Predicted	  log	  time	  to	  next	  job           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1,989	  
                                                                                                    	           0.0040     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,409	  
                                                                                                                                                                        	           0.0045
                                                                                                                (0.0037)                                                            (0.0129)

Predicted	  log	  claim	  duration                   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,764	  
                                                                                                    	           0.0021     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,736	  
                                                                                                                                                                        	           0.0012
                                                                                                                (0.0021)                                                            (0.0086)

Female                                                  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1,381	  
                                                                                                    	           0.0089     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,573	  
                                                                                                                                                                        	           0.0059
                                                                                                                (0.0088)                                                            (0.0170)
Age                                                                                                 	  
                                                        	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,363	      0.3103     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,652	  
                                                                                                                                                                        	           0.4373
                                                                                                                (0.0784)                                                            (0.2408)

Blue	  collar	  occupation                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,289	  
                                                                                                    	          -­‐0.0072   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,284	  
                                                                                                                                                                        	          -­‐0.0354
                                                                                                                (0.0036)                                                            (0.0143)
Recalled	  to	  last	  job                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1,846	  
                                                                                                    	          -­‐0.0055   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,322	  
                                                                                                                                                                        	          -­‐0.0046
                                                                                                                (0.0046)                                                            (0.0038)

B.	  	  Top	  Kink:
Predicted	  log	  time	  to	  next	  job           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,230	  
                                                                                                    	          -­‐0.0138   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  6,722	  
                                                                                                                                                                        	          -­‐0.0251
                                                                                                                (0.0033)                                                            (0.0069)
Predicted	  log	  claim	  duration                   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,083	  
                                                                                                    	          -­‐0.0096   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  7,060	  
                                                                                                                                                                        	          -­‐0.0176
                                                                                                                (0.0023)                                                            (0.0045)
Female                                                  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,129	  
                                                                                                    	          -­‐0.0222   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  5,884	  
                                                                                                                                                                        	          -­‐0.0129
                                                                                                                (0.0103)                                                            (0.0088)
Age                                                     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  5,737	  
                                                                                                    	          -­‐0.0393   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  10,128	  
                                                                                                                                                                	                  -­‐0.0936
                                                                                                                (0.0358)                                                            (0.0936)
Blue	  collar	  occupation                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,867	  
                                                                                                    	           0.0175     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  7,370	  
                                                                                                                                                                        	           0.0350
                                                                                                                (0.0047)                                                            (0.0080)
Recalled	  to	  last	  job                           	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  7,218	  
                                                                                                    	           0.0032     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  10,437	  
                                                                                                                                                                	                   0.0122
                                                                                                                (0.0017)                                                            (0.0053)
Notes:	  standard	  errors	  in	  parentheses.	  	  See	  text	  for	  a	  description	  of	  the	  FG	  bandwidth	  determination.	  
Predicted	  log	  time	  to	  next	  job	  and	  predicted	  log	  claim	  duration	  are	  estimated	  covariate	  indexes	  for	  
these	  two	  outcomes,	  fit	  on	  the	  pooled	  bottom	  and	  top	  kink	  samples.	  The	  vector	  of	  59	  covariates	  
includes	  dummies	  for	  gender,	  blue	  collar	  occupation,	  and	  being	  recalled	  to	  the	  previous	  job,	  decile	  of	  
age	  (9	  dummies),	  decile	  of	  previous	  job	  tenure	  (9	  dummies),	  quintile	  of	  previous	  daily	  wage	  (4	  
dummies),	  major	  industry	  (6	  dummies),	  region	  (3	  dummies),	  year	  of	  claim	  (7	  dummies),	  decile	  of	  
previous	  firm	  size	  (9	  dummies),	  and	  decile	  of	  previous	  firm's	  recall	  rate	  (9	  dummies).
Table	  4:	  Estimated	  Structural	  Coefficients	  from	  Fuzzy	  Regression	  Kink	  Design


                                                         Local	  Linear	  Models                                               Local	  Quadratic	  Models
                                                                            Estimated	                                                            Estimated	  
                                                 FG	  Bandwidth             Elasticity                                   FGl	  Bandwidth           Elasticity
                                                         (1)                    (2)                                                (3)                  (4)

A.	  	  Bottom	  Kink:
Log	  time	  to	  next	  job                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,615	  
                                                                                                    	           1.726    	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,328	  
                                                                                                                                                                              	           3.024
                                                                                                                (0.440)                                                                   (1.501)

Log	  claim	  duration                        	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2,651	  
                                                                                                    	           1.250    	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,564	  
                                                                                                                                                                              	           2.816
                                                                                                                (0.406)                                                                   (1.401)

B.	  	  Top	  Kink:
Log	  time	  to	  next	  job                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,148	  
                                                                                                    	           2.643    	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  7,521	  
                                                                                                                                                                              	           3.497
                                                                                                                (0.715)                                                                   (1.278)

Log	  claim	  duration                        	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  9,067	  
                                                                                                    	           1.312    	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  9,355	  
                                                                                                                                                                              	           2.500
                                                                                                                (0.228)                                                                   (1.103)
Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  in	  parentheses.	  	  FG	  bandwidth	  is	  based	  on	  determination	  for	  outcome	  variable.	  	  
Estimated	  elasticities	  in	  columns	  2	  and	  4	  are	  obtained	  from	  a	  2SLS	  procedure,	  instrumenting	  the	  treatment	  
variable	  B	  with	  the	  interaction	  term	  D×V,	  see	  text	  section	  3.2.
Supplemental Appendix–Identification

Proof of Proposition 1:For part (a), we take the derivative

                                                                     fV |U≤u (v)
                                                                                          
                          d                                 d
                             Pr(U 6 u|V = v) =                                   Pr [U ≤ u]
                          dv                                dv          fV (v)
                                                                                                     !
                                                            d                fV |U=u0 (v)
                                                       =             ∑                    Pr(U = u0 )
                                                            dv       u0 6u       fV (v)
                                                                  d fV |U=u0 (v)
                                                       =    ∑                    Pr(U = u0 )                               (11)
                                                            u0 6u dv    fV (v)

where the first line follows by Bayes’ Rule. Since fV |U=u (v) is continuously differentiable in v at 0 for all u
                                                                             d
by Assumption 4 and that (11) involves a finite summation,                   dv Pr(U   6 u|V = v) is continuous at 0.

    For part (b), in the numerator,

        dE[Y |V = v]                       d
 lim+                         =     lim+        y(b(v), v, u) Pr(U = u|V = v)
v0 →0       dv         v=v0        v0 →0   dv ∑
                                              u                                            v=v0
                                           d                  fV |U=u (v)
                              =     lim+     ∑  y(b(v), v, u)             Pr(U = u)
                                   v0 →0   dv u                  fV (v)                           v=v0
                                        ∂            fV |U=u (v)
                              = lim+ ∑ y(b(v), v, u)             Pr(U = u)
                                v0 →0 u ∂ v             fV (v)                                 v=v0
                                                                             fV |U=u (v0 )
                              =     lim+ b0 (v0 ) ∑ y1 (b(v0 ), v0 , u)                    Pr(U = u) +
                                   v0 →0           u                            fV (v0 )
                                                                     fV |U=u (v0 )                     ∂ fV |U=u (v0 )
                                    lim+ ∑{y2 (b(v0 ), v0 , u)                     + y(b(v0 ), v0 , u)                 } Pr(U = u).
                                   v0 →0   u                            fV (v0 )                       ∂ v fV (v0 )

Similarly,

        dE[Y |V = v]                                                         fV |U=u (v0 )
 lim−                         =     lim− b0 (v0 ) ∑ y1 (b(v0 ), v0 , u)                    Pr(U = u) +
v0 →0       dv         v=v0        v0 →0           u                             f (v0 )
                                                                     fV |U=u (v0 )                     ∂ fV |U=u (v0 )
                                    lim− {∑ y2 (b(v0 ), v0 , u)                    + y(b(v0 ), v0 , u)                 } Pr(U = u).
                                   v0 →0       u                         f (v0 )                       ∂ v f (v0 )

The continuity assumed in Assumptions 1-4 implies that terms can be eliminated and combined to obtain

                                  dE[Y |V = v]                       dE[Y |V = v]
                          lim+                            − lim−
                         v0 →0        dv           v=v0    v0 →0         dv             v=v0
                                                                                   fV |U=u (0)
                       =( lim+ b0 (v0 ) − lim− b0 (v0 )) ∑ y1 (b(0), 0, u)                     Pr(U = u).
                          v→0              v→0              u                         fV (0)
      Assumption 3 states that the denominator lim+ b0 (v0 ) − lim− b0 (v0 ) is nonzero, and hence we have
                                                                  v0 →0               v0 →0


          dE[Y |V =v]
    lim                      − lim− dE[Ydv|V =v]
v0 →0+         dv       v=v0  v0 →0              v=v0                                                                    fV |U=u (0)
                      0             0
                                                               = E[y1 (b(0), 0,U)|V = 0] = ∑ y1 (b(0), 0, u)                         Pr(U = u),
             lim b (v0 ) − lim− b (v0 )                                                                u                    fV (0)
            v0 →0+            v0 →0


which completes the proof.

      In order to prove Proposition 2, we first present and prove the following Lemma’s.

Lemma 1. Let S be a sub-vector of the random vector (U,UB ,UV 0 ) that at least includes U, and S∗ the

vector of the remaining random variables. Then fV |S=s (v) is continuously differentiable in v for all s.

      To see this, note that

                                                                                                          Pr(U = u)
                         fV |S=s,S∗ =s∗ (v) =           fV,UB ,UV 0 |U=u (v, uB , uV 0 )
                                                                                           ∑ω fUB ,UV 0 |U=ω (uB , uV 0 ) Pr(U = ω)
                                                           "                                                               #
                                                                                                 Pr(U  =   u)
Z                                                      Z
     fV |S=s,S∗ =s∗ (v) fS∗ |S=s (s∗ ) ds∗ =     fV,UB ,UV 0 |U=u (v, uB , uV 0 )                                            fS∗ |S=s (s∗ ) ds∗
                                                                                  ∑ω fUB ,UV 0 |U=ω (uB , uV 0 ) Pr(U = ω)
                                               "                                                                           #
                                                                                                 Pr(U = u)
                                             Z
                               fV |S=s (v) =     fV,UB ,UV 0 |U=u (v, uB , uV 0 )                                            fS∗ |S=s (s∗ ) ds∗ ,
                                                                                  ∑ω fUB ,UV 0 |U=ω (uB , uV 0 ) Pr(U = ω)

where the first line follows by Bayes’ rule, and we integrate both sides over fS∗ |S=s (s∗ ) in the second line.

Taking derivatives on both sides of the third line, interchanging differentiation and integration (permitted

by Assumption 4a and the continuity fUB ,UV 0 |U=u over a compact rectangle as per Theorem 9.42 of Rudin

(1976)) and using Assumption 4a again, we obtain the result. QED.
                 ∂ fV ∗ |S=s (v∗ )
Lemma 2.               ∂ v∗          is continuous for all v∗ and s.

      To see this, note that after applying Bayes’ Rule, and re-arranging, we obtain


fV ∗ |S=s,S∗ =s∗ (v∗ ) = Pr [UV = 0|S = s, S∗ = s∗ ] fV |S=s,S∗ =s∗ ,UV =0 (v∗ )

                                     + Pr [UV 6= 0|S = s, S∗ = s∗ ] fV ∗ |S=s,S∗ =s∗ ,UV 6=0 (v∗ )
                                                                                                           fV |S=s,S∗ =s∗ (v∗ )
                           = Pr [UV = 0|S = s, S∗ = s∗ ] Pr [UV = 0|V = v∗ , S = s, S∗ = s∗ ]
                                                                                                     Pr [UV = 0|S = s, S∗ = s∗ ]
                                                                                                                  fV |S=s,S∗ =s∗ (v∗ − uV 0 )
                                              6 0|S = s, S∗ = s∗ ] Pr [UV =
                                     + Pr [UV =                           6 0|V = v∗ − uV 0 , S = s, S∗ = s∗ ]
                                                                                                               Pr [UV 6= 0|S = s, S∗ = s∗ ]
                           = Pr [UV = 0|V = v∗ , S = s, S∗ = s∗ ] fV |S=s,S∗ =s∗ (v∗ )

                                     + Pr [UV 6= 0|V = v∗ − uV 0 , S = s, S∗ = s∗ ] fV |S=s,S∗ =s∗ (v∗ − uV 0 )
Multiplying both sides of the last line by fS∗ |S=s (s∗ ) and integrating over s∗ , taking the partial derivative

with respect to v∗ , and applying Assumptions 4a and 5 and the reasoning in Lemma 1, we have the desired

result. QED.

               ∂ Pr[UV =0|V ∗ =v∗ ,S=s]
Lemma 3.                ∂ v∗              is continuous for each v∗ and s.

     To see this,


       Pr [UV = 0|V ∗ = v∗ , S = s] = Pr [V = V ∗ |V ∗ = v∗ , S = s]
                                                                         Pr [V = V ∗ |S = s]
                                             =     fV ∗ |S=s,V =V ∗ (v∗ )
                                                                             fV ∗ |S=s (v∗ )
                                                                        Pr [V = V ∗ |S = s]
                                             =     fV |S=s,V =V ∗ (v∗ )
                                                                            fV ∗ |S=s (v∗ )
                                                                    Pr [V = V ∗ |S = s] fV |S=s (v∗ )
                                             =     fV |S=s,V =V ∗ (v∗ )
                                                                          fV |S=s (v∗ )         fV ∗ |S=s (v∗ )
                                                                                     fV |S=s (v∗ )
                                             = Pr [V = V ∗ |V = v∗ , S = s]
                                                                                    fV ∗ |S=s (v∗ )
                                               Z
                                                                                                        fV |S=s (v∗ )
                                             =    π (v∗ , u, uB , uV 0 ) fS∗ |V =v∗ ,S=s (s∗ ) ds∗
                                                                                                       fV ∗ |S=s (v∗ )
                                               Z
                                                                                                  fS∗ |S=s (s∗ ) ∗ fV |S=s (v∗ )
                                             =    π (v∗ , u, uB , uV 0 ) fV ∗ |S∗ =s∗ ,S=s (v∗ )                   ds                  .
                                                                                                  fV ∗ |S=s (v∗ )      fV ∗ |S=s (v∗ )

where the partial derivative of the right hand side in the last line is continuous for all v∗ and s by Assumption

5 and Lemmas 1 and 2. QED.

     Proof of Proposition 2

     For part (a), the proof is the same as for part (a) in Proposition 1, replacing V with V ∗ and using Lemma

2.

     For part (b), we can write


      E [Y |V ∗ = v∗ ] =       ∑ E [Y |V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u] Pr(U = u|V ∗ = v∗ )                                                                (12)
                                 u
                          =    ∑ (E [Y |UV = 0,V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u] Pr [UV = 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u] +
                                 u
                            E [Y |UV 6= 0,V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u] Pr [UV 6= 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u]) Pr(U = u|V ∗ = v∗ )
                                         Z                           
                          = ∑ z1 z2 z3 +      z4 z5 duV 0 · [1 − z2 z3 ] z6 .                                (13)
                                 u


where the second line follows from the law of iterated expectations, and to ease exposition below, we use
the notation:


                                      z1 ≡ y (b (v∗ , u) , v∗ , u)

                                      z2 ≡ Pr [V = V ∗ |V = v∗ ,U = u]
                                                      fV |U=u (v∗ )
                                      z3 ≡
                                                     fV ∗ |U=u (v∗ )
                                      z4 ≡ y (b (v∗ − uV 0 , u) , v∗ − uV 0 , u)

                                      z5 ≡         fUV 0 |UV 6=0,V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (uV 0 )

                                      z6 ≡ Pr(U = u|V ∗ = v∗ ).


Note that we have used the fact that Pr [UV = 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u] = z2 z3 because


                Pr [UV = 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u] = Pr [V = V ∗ |V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u]
                                                                              Pr [V = V ∗ |U = u]
                                                 =      fV ∗ |U=w,V =V ∗ (v∗ )
                                                                                  fV ∗ |U=u (v∗ )
                                                                             Pr [V = V ∗ |U = u]
                                                 =      fV |U=u,V =V ∗ (v∗ )
                                                                                 fV ∗ |U=u (v∗ )
                                                                     Pr [V = V ∗ |U = u] fV |U=u (v∗ )
                                                 =      fV |U=u,V =V ∗ (v∗ )
                                                                          fV |U=u (v∗ )      fV ∗ |U=u (v∗ )
                                                                                  fV |U=u (v∗ )
                                                 = Pr [V = V ∗ |V = v∗ ,U = u]
                                                                                 fV ∗ |U=u (v∗ )

where the second and fifth lines follow from Bayes’ rule.

    The derivative of E [Y |V ∗ = v∗ ] in equation (12) with respect to v∗ is

                             dE [Y |V ∗ = v∗ ]                                      ∂ (z2 z3 z6 )
                                   dv∗
                                                   =      ∑ z01 z2 z3 z6 + ∑ z1        ∂ v∗
                                                                                                                             (14)
                                                           u                  u
                                                                       R
                                                                   ∂ [( z4 z5 duV 0 ) [1 − z2 z3 ] z6 ]
                                                          +∑
                                                               u                ∂ v∗

where z0j denotes the partial derivative of z j with respect to v∗ .

    In a parallel fashion, we can write

                                          Z                             Z Z                                       
                    ∗   ∗   ∗
                E [B |V = v ] =      ∑           z7 z8 duB z2 z3 +                z9 z10 duV 0 duB       · [1 − z2 z3 ] z6
                                      u
with


                                            z7 ≡ b (v∗ , u) + uB

                                            z8 ≡           fUB |UV =0,V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (uB )

                                            z9 ≡ b (v∗ − uV 0 , u) + uB

                                            z10 ≡          fUB ,UV 0 |UV 6=0,V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (uB , uV 0 ) .


And the analogous derivative with respect to v∗ is

                     dE [B∗ |V ∗ = v∗ ]
                                                       Z                          
                                                                                                             ∂ (z8 z2 z3 z6 )
                                                                                                    Z
                                             =    ∑              z07 z8 duB       z2 z3 z6 + ∑          z7                    duB                           (15)
                           dv∗                     u                                            u                ∂ v∗
                                                                 RR
                                                            ∂ [(       z9 z10 duV 0 duB ) [1 − z2 z3 ] z6 ]
                                                  +∑                                                        .
                                                       u                         ∂ v∗

                                                                                                                          R
     The proof of part (b) follows from showing that the partial derivatives of z2 , z3 , z4 z5 duV 0 , z6 , z8 , as well

        z9 z10 duV 0 duB with respect of v∗ are continuous (or we say interchangeably that these functions are
  RR
as

“continuously differentiable in v∗ ”), and noting that that z1 and z7 are continuous by Assumptions 1, 2, and

3a. From this it follows that there is no discontinuity in the second and third terms of the right hand sides of

(14) and (15) at v∗ = 0. The RKD estimand can then be shown to be the ratio of the discontinuities in the

first terms of those two equations.

     As shown by Lemma 3, z2 is continuously differentiable in v∗ .

     The quantity z3 is continuously differentiable by Lemmas 1 and 2 and Assumption 7, and z5 is continu-

ously differentiable in v∗ because

                                            Pr [UV 6= 0|UV 0 = uV 0 ,V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u] fUV 0 |V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (uV 0 )
     fUV 0 |UV 6=0,V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (uV 0 ) =
                                                             Pr [UV 6= 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u]
                                                                                                                fV ∗ |U               (v∗ ) fU 0 |U=u (uV 0 )
                                                                                                                      V 0 =uV 0 ,U=u
                                            (1 − Pr [UV = 0|UV 0 = uV 0 ,V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u])                                     fV ∗ |U=u (v∗ )
                                                                                                                                              V

                                      =                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                          1 − z2 z3

and the derivative of the last line is continuous by Lemmas 2 and 3.
                          R
     The expression           z4 z5 duV 0 is continuously differentiable because, by a change of variables where q =

v∗ −uV 0 , it is equal to − y (q, b (q, u) , u) fUV 0 |UV 6=0,V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (v∗ − q) dq, which is continuously differentiable
                               R


in v∗ by the continuous differentiability of z5 .
                                                                                                                            Pr(U=u)
    We see that z6 is continuously differentiable in v∗ because Pr(U = u|V ∗ = v∗ ) = fV ∗ =v∗ |U=u (v∗ ) ∑                         ∗            ;
                                                                                                                      ω fV ∗ |U=ω (v ) Pr(U=ω)

z7 is continuously differentiable by Assumption 3a, and z8 is continuously differentiable in v∗ because

                                            Pr [UV = 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u,UB = uB ]
      fUB |UV =0,V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (uB ) =                                            fUB |V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (uB )
                                                 Pr [UV = 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u]
                                            Pr [UV = 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u,UB = uB ]                     ∗ fUB |U=u (uB )
                                     =                                           fV ∗ |U =u ,U=u (v )
                                                 Pr [UV = 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u]            B   B
                                                                                                         fV ∗ |U=u (v∗ )

where the derivative of the last line is continuous in v∗ by Lemmas 2 and 3.

    The quantity z10 is continuously differentiable in v∗ because

                                                                                        fUV 0 ,UB |V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (uV 0 , uB )
fUB ,UV 0 |UV 6=0,V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (uB , uV 0 ) = Pr [UV 6= 0|UV 0 = uV 0 ,UB = uB ,V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u]
                                                                                       Pr [UV 6= 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u]
                                                                          ∗   ∗
                                                                                        fV ∗ |UV 0 =uV 0 ,UB =uB ,U=u (v∗ )
                                         = Pr [UV 6= 0|UV = uV ,UB = uB ,V = v ,U = u]
                                                              0        0
                                                                                       Pr [UV 6= 0|V ∗ = v∗ ,U = u]
                                           fUV 0 ,UB |U=u (uV 0 , uB )
                                                                       ,
                                                  fV ∗ |U=u (v∗ )

and the derivative of the last line is continuous by Lemmas 2 and 3.
                      RR
    The expression         z9 z10 duV 0 duB is continuously differentiable because with a change of variables (q =

v∗ − uV 0 ), it is equal to −        (b (q, u) + uB ) fUB ,UV 0 |UV 6=0,V ∗ =v∗ ,U=u (uB , v∗ − q) dqduB , which is continuously
                                RR


differentiable in v∗ by Assumption 3a and the continuous differentiability of z10 .

    As a result of the smoothness of these above terms, we can write

                                            dE[Y |V ∗ = v∗ ]                        dE[Y |V ∗ = v∗ ]
                                     lim+                                 − lim−                                           (16)
                                 v0 →0           dv∗             v∗ =v0    v0 →0         dv∗           v∗ =v0
                            =        lim
                                 v0 →0+ u
                                            ∑ z01 z2 z3 z6 − v lim
                                                             0  →0−∑ z01 z2 z3 z6                                          (17)
                                                                      u
                                                                
                            =    ∑        lim z01 − lim− z01
                                                         z2 z3 z6 |v∗ =v0                                                  (18)
                                     u   v0 →0+    v0 →0
                                                                 −
                            = ∑ y1 (b (0, u) , 0, u) b+
                                                                        
                                                      1 (u) − b1 (u) z2 z3 z6 |v∗ =v0                                      (19)
                                     u


where the last line follows from Assumptions 1, 2, and 3a.
   Similarly, we can write

                                      dE [B∗ |V ∗ = v∗ ]                     dE [B∗ |V ∗ = v∗ ]
                                lim+                              −   lim                                                      (20)
                               v0 →0         dv∗           v∗ =v     v0 →0−         dv∗           v∗ =v0
                                        Z                0                     Z Z                   
                                                 0                                             0
                         =      lim ∑           z7 z8 duB z2 z3 z6 du − lim−                 z7 z8 duB z2 z3 z6                (21)
                               v0 →0+ u                                      v0 →0
                                         Z                          Z            
                                                 0                          0
                         =     ∑ v0lim          z7 z8 duB − lim−           z7 z8 duB    z2 z3 z6 |v∗ =v0                       (22)
                                u     →0+                      v0 →0
                                   Z                   
                                                                          −
                                                              b+
                                                                                 
                         =     ∑        z8 |v∗ =v0 duB         1 (u) − b1 (u) z2 z3 z6 |v∗ =v0                                 (23)
                                u

                               ∑ b+1 (u) − b−1 (u) z2 z3 z6 |v∗ =v0 .
                                                       
                         =                                                                                                     (24)
                                u


   Finally, consider the term z2 z3 z6 |v∗ =v0 , which, after applying Bayes’ rule and re-arranging, is equal to

                                                      fV |U=u (0)
    z2 z3 z6 |v∗ =v0     = Pr [V = V ∗ |V = 0,U = u]               Pr(U = u|V ∗ = 0)
                                                     fV ∗ |U=u (0)
                                                     fV |U=u (0)               fV (0) Pr(U = u|V ∗ = 0)
                         = Pr [V = V ∗ |V = 0,U = u]              Pr(U = u)
                                                        fV (0)              Pr(U = u)     fV ∗ |U=u (0)
                                                     fV |U=u (0)             fV (0) Pr(U = u|V ∗ = 0) fV ∗ (0)
                         = Pr [V = V ∗ |V = 0,U = u]              Pr(U = u)
                                                        fV (0)              fV ∗ (0) Pr(U = u) fV ∗ |U=u (0)
                                                     fV |U=u (0)             fV (0)
                         = Pr [V = V ∗ |V = 0,U = u]              Pr(U = u)          .
                                                        fV (0)              fV ∗ (0)

           fV (0)
Because   fV ∗ (0)   can be pulled out of the integral in both (19) and (24), we have the result

                        dE[Y |V ∗ =v∗ ]                   dE[Y |V ∗ =v∗ ]
              lim+          dv∗                  − lim−       dv∗
            v0 →0                       v∗ =v0    v0 →0                   v∗ =v0
                                                                                    = ∑ y1 (b (0, u) , 0, u) ϕ (u) Pr(U = u)
                       dE[B∗ |V ∗ =v∗ ]                   dE[B∗ |V ∗ =v∗ ]
             lim+          dv∗                   − lim−       dv∗
                                                                                          u
           v0 →0                        v∗ =v0    v0 →0                    v∗ =v0


                                                                     fV |U=u (0)
                                                        −
                             Pr[UV =0|V =0,U=u](b+
                                                 1 (u)−b1 (u))           fV (0)
where ϕ (u) =                                                    fV |U=ω (0)              . Note that Assumptions 6 and 7 guarantee
                                                   −
                     ∑u Pr[UV =0|V =0,U=ω](b+
                                            1 (ω)−b1 (ω))            fV (0)     Pr(U=u)
non-negative, finite weights. QED.
Supplemental Appendix–Estimation Theory

Asymptotic Distribution Theory of the RKD Estimators

    Notations: We follow Fan and Gijbels (1996) and Hahn et al. (1999) and define

                            −  R0 j                    ±                        ±         ±
    • µ+                                         ±                      ±
             R∞ j
       j ≡    0 u K(u)du, µ j ≡ −∞ u K(u)du and S ≡ (µ j+l )06 j,l6p ; c p ≡ (µ p+1,..., µ2p+1 );

                             −  R0 j 2              ∗± ≡ (ν ± )
    • ν+                                                                        ±     ∗± defined here are
             R∞ j 2
       j ≡    0 u K (u)du, ν j ≡ −∞ u K (u)du, and S        j+l 06 j,l6p ; the S and S

      not related to the S and S∗ in the proof of Proposition 2.

    • Let H be the (p + 1) × (p + 1) matrix Diag(1, h, ...h p ).

    • Define

                                                       p
                                                                    1
                                 ς (v) ≡ m(v) − ∑ βl vl −                 m(p+1) (0)v p+1
                                                      l=0        (p + 1)!
                                                       p
                                                                   1
                                ξ (v) ≡ r(v) − ∑ κl vl −                 r(p+1) (0)v p+1
                                                      l=0       (p + 1)!

      for a local polynomial regression of order p. Note that Taylor’s Theorem and Assumption 10 imply


                               sup |ς (v)| = o(h2 )          sup |ξ (v)| = o(h2 ) f orp = 1
                             0<v6Mh                         0<v6Mh
                                                  3
                               sup |ς (v)| = o(h )           sup |ξ (v)| = o(h3 ) f orp = 2.
                             0<v6Mh                         0<v6Mh



Proof of Proposition 3, 4 and 5: The proofs are analogous to those in Hahn et al. (1999) and are available

upon request.

    Proof of Proposition 6: We prove the proposition for the local linear case, and the L superscript in most

of the estimators is omitted. Proof for the local quadratic case is analogous.

    1) Asymptotic distribution of the restricted sharp RKD estimator.

    Extending the Hahn et al. (1999) framework, we let Y = (Y1− , ...,Yn−− ,Y1+ ...,Yn++ )T be the “stacked” n × 1

outcome variable vector where the first n− entries are observations to the left of the threshold and the last
                                                                                                     V−
n+ entries are those to the right of the threshold. Let            4 matrix whose ith row is (1, hi , 0, 0) for
                                                     Z be the n × 
                                                         −
                   V+                                 WK      0 
i 6 n− or (0, 0, 1, hi ) for i > n− . Also let WK =                with W± K being the diagonal matrices
                                                                +
                                                        0 WK
                          ±
          V1±          Vn±
Diag(K(    h ), ..., K( h )).     The restricted sharp RKD estimator can be obtained from solving the constrained

least squares problem

                                                                                 R                           R
                                                   min(Y − Zβ̃ )T WK (Y − Zβ̃ )
                                                            R
                                                       β̃
                                                                R
                                             s.t. Rβ̃ = 0                                                                                   (25)


where R = (1, 0, −1, 0).
                                                   R
    Denote the resulting estimator by β̂ = (β̂0R− , hβ̂1R− , β̂0R+ , hβ̂1R+ )T and define Y∗ = Y − Zβ . It is a
standard result (e.g. a generalization of (1.4.5) of Amemiya (1985)) that

                R
              (β̂ − β )       =   [(ZT WK Z)−1 − (ZT WK Z)−1 RT (R(ZT WK Z)−1 RT )−1 R(ZT WK Z)−1 ]ZT WK Y∗ .


                                                                                              β̂1R+ −β̂1R−
It is straightforward to show that β̂1R+ − β̂1R− = δ̂1S and hence                               κ1+ −κ1−
                                                                                                                 LR
                                                                                                             = τ̂SRKD is the restricted sharp RKD

estimator defined in the text.

    Under Assumptions 9, 10L, 11L, 12-15 and 16L, the same reasoning in Hahn et al. (1999) gives

                                                                            
                                          1
                                         √         ZT W             K   Y∗       ⇒ N(0, f (0)Σsharp )                                       (26)
                                          nh

with                                                                                                        
                                                                σY2 (0− )S∗−                    0
                                         Σsharp =                                                           .
                                                                                                            
                                                                         0               σY2 (0+ )S∗+

Next, we examine the asymptotic behavior of


                     (ZT WK Z)−1 − (ZT WK Z)−1 RT (R(ZT WK Z)−1 RT )−1 R(ZT WK Z)−1 .


Lemma 1 of Hahn et al. (1999) implies that
                                                                                                      
                                            1 T                                          S−       0 
                                               Z WK Z → f (0)                                      ,
                                                              
                                            nh                  0                                S+
and as a consequence,


                        nh{(ZT WK Z)−1 − (ZT WK Z)−1 RT (R(ZT WK Z)−1 RT )−1 R(ZT WK Z)−1 }
                          1 T             1                     1               1
               = (          Z WK Z)−1 − ( ZT WK Z)−1 RT (R( ZT WK Z)−1 RT )−1 R( ZT WK Z)−1
                         nh               nh                   nh               nh
                          1 −1
               =              Γ − Γ−1 RT (RΓ−1 RT )−1 RΓ−1 + o p (1)                                                        (27)
                        f (0)

                              
                   S−         0 
where Γ =                      .
          
                    0        S+
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                           1
                                                                           2      − 14                 1
                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                           4     − 81
    Putting together (26) and (27), and plugging in S− = 
                                                                                             +                ∗− 
                                                                                            , S =            , S =                  ,
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                          − 41         1
                                                                                       6
                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                           6              − 81     1
                                                                                                                                   12
                        
           1       1
           4       8
S∗+ =                    we have
                        
           1       1
           8       12



                                   nh3Var(β̂1R+ − β̂1R− ) = 12 f (0)(σY2 (0+ ) + σY2 (0− )),


                                                     LR                 β̂1R+ −β̂1R+
and it follows that the asymptotic distribution of τ̂SRKD =               κ1+ −κ1−
                                                                                       is

                                           √
                                                   LR
                                            nh3 (τ̂SRKD − τ) ⇒ N(0, 12 · ΩSRKD ).


    (2) Asymptotic distribution of the restricted fuzzy RKD estimator.
    Similar to the proof for the sharp case, let B = (B−         −     +       + T
                                                       1 , ..., Bn− , B1 ..., Bn+ ) be the “stacked” n × 1 vector
of the treatment/policy variables, and the minimization problem for the first stage equation is defined analo-
gously to (25). Denote the resulting estimator by κ̂ R = (κ̂0R− , hκ̂1R− , κ̂0R+ , hκ̂1R+ ) for the first stage and define
B∗ = B − Zκ. As argued in the sharp case above, κ̂1R+ − κ̂1R− can be equivalently obtained from regressing
                                            β̂1R+ −β̂1R−                                                LR
B on 1, V and DV . It follows that          κ̂1R+ −κ̂1R−
                                                           is equal to the (2SLS) fuzzy RKD estimator τ̂FRKD . Similar to
the sharp case, we have:

                   R
               (β̂ − β )      =    [(ZT WK Z)−1 − (ZT WK Z)−1 RT (R(ZT WK Z)−1 RT )−1 R(ZT WK Z)−1 ]ZT WK Y∗

               (κ̂ R − κ)     =    [(ZT WK Z)−1 − (ZT WK Z)−1 RT (R(ZT WK Z)−1 RT )−1 R(ZT WK Z)−1 ]ZT WK B∗ .


Under Assumptions 9, 10L, 11L, 12-15 and 16L, the same reasoning in Hahn et al. (1999) gives the joint
distribution                                                
                                      1      K  ZT W   Y∗
                                     √             ⇒ N(0, f (0)Σ f uzzy )                                           (28)
                                                   
                                      nh  ZT WK B∗

with                                                                                                     
                                  σY2 (0− )S∗−       0      σBY         (0− )S∗−              0
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
                                       0      σY2 (0+ )S∗+       0                    σBY   (0+ )S∗+     
                     Σ f uzzy =                                                                          .
                                                                                                         
                                 σBY (0− )S∗−       0      σB2 (0− )S∗−                      0
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                         
                                        0      σBY (0+ )S∗+       0                    σB2 (0+ )S∗+

Combining (27) and (27) and plugging in the values for S± and S∗± , we have


                                    nh3Var(β̂1R+ − β̂1R− ) = 12 f (0)(σY2 (0+ ) + σY2 (0− ))

                                    nh3Var(κ̂1R+ − κ̂1R− ) = 12 f (0)(σB2 (0+ ) + σB2 (0− ))

                       nh3Cov(β̂1R+ − β̂1R− , κ̂1R+ − κ̂1R− ) = 12 f (0)(σBY
                                                                          2
                                                                             (0+ ) + σBY
                                                                                      2
                                                                                         (0− )),


                                                                          LR                      β̂1R+ −β̂1R+
and applying the Delta Method gives that the asymptotic distribution of τ̂FRKD =                  κ̂1R+ −κ̂1R−
                                                                                                                 is

                                      √
                                              LR
                                       nh3 (τ̂FRKD − τ) ⇒ N(0, 12 · ΩFRKD ).



    Proof of Proposition 7: Again, we prove the proposition for the local linear case because the proof for

the local quadratic case is analogous, and we omit the L superscript in most of the estimators for simplicity

of exposition.

    1) Consistency of the sharp RKD variance estimator: First, Lemma 1 of Hahn et al. (1999) gives that
                                                                                  
                                                µ0− + µ0+      µ1− + µ1+   µ1+          
                                 H 0                                             H 0 
                                                                                  
               SXX   = nh f (0){         −    +  −    +   +                                + o p (1)}
                                        µ1 + µ1 µ2 + µ2 µ2
                                                                                 
                                                                                   
                                  0 h                                                0 h
                                           µ1+     µ2+   µ2+

For the other term in the variance estimator,
                                       n
                                                                                                R              Vi
                    Ŝsharp =         ∑ (Xi XTi )(Yi − XTi β Rsharp + XTi β Rsharp − XTi β̂ sharp )2 K 2 ( h )
                                      i=1
                                       n
                                                                               Vi
                             =        ∑ (Xi XTi )(Yi − XTi β Rsharp )2 K 2 ( h )
                                      i=1
                                      |                   {z                        }
                                                          (i)
                                           n
                                                                                            R           Vi
                                      + 2 ∑ (Xi XTi )(Yi − XTi β Rsharp )XTi (β Rsharp − β̂ sharp )K 2 ( )
                                          i=1                                                           h
                                        |                              {z                                  }
                                                                      (ii)
                                         n
                                                                       R              Vi
                                      + ∑ (Xi XTi ){XTi (β Rsharp − β̂ sharp )}2 K 2 ( ) .
                                        i=1                                            h
                                        |                      {z                        }
                                                              (iii)



where β Rsharp = (γ0S , γ1S , δ1S )T . We examine the three terms separately

                                                                        

                              n
                                           1                    Vi    0 
                                                                                  S    S     2 2 Vi
                                                                        
                       (i) = ∑ {(1 − Di ) 
                                           Vi                   Vi2      (Yi − γ0 − γ1 Vi ) K ( h ) +
                                                                       0 
                             i=1                                        
                                            0                    0     0
                                                               
                                 1 Vi Vi                       
                                                                 (Yi − γ0S − (γ1S + δ1S )Vi )2 K 2 ( Vi )}.
                                                               
                             Di         2   2
                                 Vi Vi Vi                                                           h
                                                               
                                  Vi Vi2 Vi2


We examine the matrix expression above entry by entry: let ϒl−             l       S    S     2 2 Vi
                                                            i ≡ (1 − Di )Vi (Yi − γ0 − γ1 Vi ) K ( h ) and

ϒl+      l       S     S    S      2 2 Vi
 i ≡ DiVi (Yi − γ0 − (γ1 + δ1 )Vi ) K ( h ). Note that


              n
                                        1 00 + 2                2 2 Vi
           E[ ∑ ϒl+             l
                 i ] = nE[DiV {εi + m (0 )Vi + ς (Vi )} K ( )]
             i=1                        2                            h
                                            v                      1                          v
                         Z ∞                               Z ∞
                     = n     vl σY2 (v)K 2 ( ) f (v)dv + n     vl [ m00 (0+ )v + ς (v)]2 K 2 ( ) f (v)dv
                         Z0
                                            h               0      2                          h
                                      ∞
                         = n              (uh)l σY2 (uh)K 2 (u)h( f (uh)du +
                                  0
                                                  1
                                 Z ∞
                             n            (uh)l [{ m00 (0+ )}2 u2 h2 + o(h2 )]K 2 (u) f (uh)hdu
                                 0                2
                         = nh    l+1
                                          σY2 (0+ ) f (0)(νl+ + o(1))


where the second last line follows from Assumption 10L and Taylor’s Theorem and the last line from the
Dominated Convergence Theorem as well as Assumptions 12, 13 and 14. Also note that

            n
                                        1                             Vi
       Var( ∑ ϒil+ ) 6 nE[DiVi2l {εi + m00 (0+ )Vi2 + ς (Vi )}4 K 4 ( )]
           i=1                          2                             h
                                                   1                                         Vi
                     6 27nE[{DiVi2l εi4 + DiVi2l (| m00 (0+ )|Vi2 )4 + DiVi2l ς 4 (Vi )}K 4 ( )]
                                                   2                                         h
                                                  1 00 +
                           Z ∞
                                     2l                             2l+8
                     = 27n     {(uh) κY (uh) + |m (0 )|(uh)              + (uh) ς (uh)}K 4 (u) f (u)hdu
                                                                                 2l 4
                            0                     2
                             = O(nh2l+1 )


where the second line follows from Jensen’s inequality and the last line from the Dominated Convergence

Theorem as well as Assumptions 12, 13 and 17. By Chebyshev’s Inequality,

                                                                          s
                                  n                      n                            n
                                 ∑     ϒil+    = E[ ∑         ϒl+
                                                               i ] + Op(      Var( ∑ ϒl+
                                                                                      i ))
                                 i=1                    i=1                          i=1
                                                                                                   1     1
                                               = nh     l+1
                                                              σY2 (0+ ) f (0)(νl+ + o(1)) + O p (n 2 hl+ 2 )

                                               = nhl+1 σY2 (0+ ) f (0)(νl+ + o p (1)).


Similarly,
                                               n
                                              ∑ ϒil− = nhl+1 σY2 (0− ) f (0)(νl− + o p (1)).
                                              i=1

Using matrix notations, we have
                                                                                                                
                                    σY2 (0− )ν0− + σY2 (0+ )ν0+   σY2 (0− )ν1− + σY2 (0+ )ν1+   σY2 (0+ )ν2+              
                     H   0  
                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                        0
  (i) = nh f (0)            σY2 (0− )ν1− + σY2 (0+ )ν1+
                                                                  σY2 (0− )ν2− + σY2 (0+ )ν2+   σY2 (0+ )ν2+               (1 + o p (1)).
                     0   h                                                                                         0   h
                                      σY2 (0+ )ν1+                         σY2 (0+ )ν2+           σY2 (0+ )ν2+


Next we investigate the asymptotic properties of (ii) and (iii). We write (ii) as

                                                                                                               

                                              n
                                                    1 Vi 0         1 Vi Vi 
                                                                              
                             (ii) = 2 ∑ [(1 − Di )       2              2   2 
                                                    Vi Vi 0  + Di  Vi Vi Vi ]
                                      i=1                                     
                                                     0 0 0            Vi Vi2 Vi2
                                                                                  R           Vi
                                           (Yi − XTi β Rsharp )XTi (β Rsharp − β̂ sharp )K 2 ( ).
                                                                                              h
We examine the matrix expression above entry by entry, and the basic building blocks are terms of the form

                               n
                                                                             R          Vi
                              ∑ DiVil (Yi − XTi β Rsharp )XTi (β Rsharp − β̂ sharp )K 2 ( h )
                              i=1
                                                                                  
                                   n                                 H−1      0  2 Vi
                          = { ∑ DiVil (Yi − XTi β Rsharp )XTi                    K ( )}
                                                              
                                  i=1                                  0     h−1      h
                              |                              {z                         }
                                                            ii(a)
                                         
                               H 0  R             R
                                    (β sharp − β̂ sharp ) .
                                0 h
                              |        {z                }
                                      ii(b)

Note that
                                 n
                                              1                          Vi Vi    Vi
                       ii(a) = { ∑ DiVil (εi + m00 (0+ )Vi2 + ς (Vi ))(1, , )K 2 ( )}
                                i=1           2                          h h      h

and

                                      1                          Vi Vi       Vi
                 E[ii(a)] = nE[DiVil ( m00 (0+ )Vi2 + ς (Vi ))(1, , )K 2 ( )]
                                      2                          h h         h
                                   l 1 00 + 2                  v v 2 v
                              Z ∞
                          = n     v ( m (0 )v + ς (v))(1, , )K ( ) f (v)dv
                               0     2                         h h       h
                                         1
                              Z ∞
                          = n     (uh)l [ m00 (0+ )(uh)2 + ς (uh)](1, u, u)K 2 (u) f (uh)hdu
                               0         2
                           = O p (nhl+3 )


where the integral operator is applied entry-by-entry. Since

                                        1                                Vi     Vi        Vi
      Var(ii(a)) 6 27nE[DiVi2l {εi2 + ( m00 (0+ )Vi2 )2 + ς 2 (Vi )}(1, ( )2 , ( )2 )K 4 ( )]
                                        2                                h      h         h
                                               1
                       Z ∞
                 = 27n     (uh)2l {σY2 (uh) + ( m00 (0+ ))2 (uh)4 + ς 2 (uh)}(1, u2 , u2 )K 4 (u) f (u)hdu
                        0                      2
                   = O p (nh2l+1 )


where 6 is defined entry-wise (for vectors a and b, a 6 b ⇒ a(i) 6 b(i) ), we have by Assumption 16L

                                                     p                     √
                             ii(a) = E[ii(a)] + O p ( Var(ii(a))) = O p (hl nh).
Similarly, we can show that
                                                                                                       
                      n                                                           H−1           0  2 Vi             √
                    ∑ (1 − Di )Vil (Yi − XTi β sharp )XTi                                                         l
                                                                                                    K ( ) = O p (h nh).
                                                          
                    i=1                                                               0        h−1      h


                                       1
Note that ii(b) = O p ((nh)− 2 ) from the proof of Proposition 6, so that

                                                                                                                
                                                      H                      0           H                 0 
                                              (ii) =                            O p (1)                       
                                                       0                      h              0                h
                                                                                                              
                                                      H                      0            H                 0 
                                                   =                            o p (nh)                      .
                                                       0                      h               0                h


Analogously, the building blocks of (iii) are terms of the form

                                                   n
                                                                       Vi
                          (β̂ sharp − β sharp )T { ∑ DiVil Xi XTi K 2 ( )}(β̂ sharp − β sharp ) = O p (hl )
                                                  i=1                  h

and it follows that
                                                                                                                
                                                       H                     0           H                  0 
                                              (iii) =                           O p (1)                        
                                                        0                     h              0                 h
                                                                                                               
                                                       H                     0            H                  0 
                                                    =                           o p (nh)                       .
                                                        0                     h               0                 h


Therefore,                                                                                                                 
                                              σ 2 (0− )ν0− + σY2 (0+ )ν0+    σY2 (0− )ν1− + σY2 (0+ )ν1+   σY2 (0+ )ν2+            
                                       H   0   Y                                                                            H   0
                Ŝsharp = nh f (0)            σY2 (0− )ν1− + σY2 (0+ )ν1+
                                                                             σY2 (0− )ν2− + σY2 (0+ )ν2+   σY2 (0+ )ν2+            (1 + o p (1)).
                                                                                                                          
                                       0   h                                                                                0   h
                                                        σY2 (0+ )ν1+                  σY2 (0+ )ν2+             2   +
                                                                                                             σY (0 )ν2  +




Putting together the expressions for S−1                                                        ±       ±
                                      XX and Ŝsharp and plugging in the numerical values for µ j and ν j

( j = 0, 1, 2), we come to the desired result,


                                                                                   12{σY2 (0+ ) + σY2 (0− )}
                                           nh3 eT3 Var(
                                                    ˆ β̂ sharp )e3 →
                                                                                            f (0)

for the local linear regression.
      2) Consistency of the fuzzy RKD variance estimator: we separately examine the asymptotic behavior of

SXW and Ŝ f uzzy .

                                n
                                                 Vi
                  SXW      =   ∑ Xi WTi K( h )
                               i=1
                                                                            

                                n
                                  1                  Vi             Bi      
                                                                             Vi
                           = ∑   Vi             Vi2               BiVi      K( )
                                                                              h
                             i=1                                            
                                   DiVi          DiVi2 Di BiVi
                                                                                                         

                              n
                                    1            Vi   Bi                1 Vi   Bi                        
                                                                                                            }K( Vi ).
                                                                                                         
                           = ∑ {Di 
                                    Vi                     + (1 − Di )  Vi Vi BiVi
                                                  Vi2 BiVi                    2
                             i=1                                       
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                h
                                      Vi          Vi2 BiVi                 0 0    0

As shown previously,

                                           n
                                                               Vi
                                          ∑ DiVil K( h )              = nhl+1 f (0)(µl+ + o p (1))
                                          i=1
                                     n
                                                               Vi
                                    ∑ (1 − Di )Vil K( h )             = nhl+1 f (0)(µl− + o p (1)),
                                    i=1


and we proceed to investigate the terms ∑ni=1 Di BiVil K( Vhi ) and ∑ni=1 (1 − Di )BiVil K( Vhi ). Because

                    n
                                 Vi                                      v
                                                       Z ∞
                 E[ ∑ Di BiVil K( )] = n                        r(v)vl K( ) f (v)dv
                   i=1           h                         0             h
                                                                                      1
                                                       Z ∞
                                               = n              {r(0+ ) + r0 (0+ )uh + r00 (0+ )(uh)2 + ξ (uh)}
                                                           0                          2
                                                      (uh)l K(u) f (uh)hdu

                                               = nhl+1 f (0)r(0+ )µl+ + nhl+2 f (0)(r0 (0+ )µl+1
                                                                                             +
                                                                                                 + o(1))


and

                           n
                                        Vi                        Vi
                      Var( ∑ Di BiVil K( )) 6 nE[Di B2i Vi2l K 2 ( )]
                          i=1           h                         h
                                                                                          v
                                                                Z ∞
                                                      = n      (r2 (v) + σB2 (v))v2l K 2 ( )dv
                                                          Z0 ∞
                                                                                          h
                                                      = n      (r (uh) + σB (uh))(uh)2l K 2 (u) f (uh)hdu
                                                                 2           2
                                                                    0

                                                      = nh          2l+1
                                                                           f (0){(r2 (0+ ) + σB2 (0+ ))ν 2l + o(1)},
by Assumption 16L, we have

                                n
                                               Vi
                               ∑ Di BiVil K( h )
                               i=1
                                                       s
                                     n                       n
                                            Vi                            Vi
                          = E[ ∑ Di BiVil K( )] + O p ( Var( ∑ Di BiVil K( )))
                              i=1           h               i=1           h
                          = nhl+1 f (0)r(0+ )µl+ + nhl+2 f (0)(r0 (0+ )µl+1
                                                                        +
                                                                            + o p (1)).


Similarly,

              n
                                Vi
             ∑ (1 − Di )BiVil K( h )     = nhl+1 f (0)r(0− )µl− + nhl+2 f (0)(r0 (0− )µl+1
                                                                                       −
                                                                                           + o p (1)).
             i=1


Therefore,
                                                                                       
                                            µ0+    hµ1+     r(0+ )µ0+ + hr0 (0+ )µ1+
                                                                           
                                                                          
                   SXW                    +   2  +      +   +    2 0
                         = nh f (0){ hµ1 h µ2 hr(0 )µ1 + h r (0 )µ2 
                                                                     +  +
                                                                           
                                                                          
                                          +   2  +      +   +    2 0  +  +
                                       hµ1 h µ2 hr(0 )µ1 + h r (0 )µ2
                                                                      
                                    −       −      −  −     0  −   −
                              µ0       hµ1     r(0 )µ0 + hr (0 )µ1 
                                                                      
                                     −   2 −       −  −    2 0 −     − 
                           + hµ1 h µ2 hr(0 )µ1 + h r (0 )µ2 }(1 + o p (1)).
                                                                      
                                   0      0              0
We investigate the properties of Ŝ f uzzy next:

                                 n
                                                    Vi
                  Ŝ f uzzy =   ∑ (Xi XTi )û2i K 2 ( h )
                                i=1
                                 n
                                                                                                    Vi
                          =     ∑ (Xi XTi )(Yi − WTi β f uzzy + WTi β f uzzy − WTi β̂ f uzzy )2 K 2 ( h )
                                i=1
                                 n
                                                                       Vi
                          =     ∑ (Xi XTi )(Yi − WTi β f uzzy )2 K 2 ( h )
                                i=1
                                |                   {z                      }
                                                   (iv)
                                     n
                                                                                                       Vi
                                + 2 ∑ (Xi XTi )(Yi − WTi β f uzzy )(WTi β f uzzy − WTi β̂ f uzzy )K 2 ( )
                                    i=1                                                                h
                                  |                                 {z                                    }
                                                                   (v)
                                   n
                                                                                   Vi
                                + ∑ (Xi XTi )(WTi β f uzzy − WTi β̂ f uzzy )2 K 2 ( ).
                                  i=1                                              h
                                  |                       {z                          }
                                                         (vi)


We write
                                                             

                         n
                                      1              Vi    0 
                                                                       F    F       F     2 2 Vi
                                                             
                 (iv) = ∑ {(1 − Di ) 
                                      Vi             Vi2      (Yi − γ0 − γ1 Vi − δ1 Bi ) K ( h ) +
                                                            0 
                        i=1                                  
                                       0              0     0
                                                    
                            1 Vi Vi                 
                                                      (Yi − γ0F − γ1F Vi − δ1F Bi )2 K 2 ( Vi )}
                                                    
                        Di         2   2
                            Vi Vi Vi                                                      h
                                                    
                             Vi Vi2 Vi2


We examine the matrix expression above entry-by-entry: let Θl+      l       F    F       F     2 2 Vi
                                                            i ≡ DiVi (Yi − γ0 − γ1 Vi − δ1 Bi ) K ( h ) and

Θl−             l       F    F       F     2 2 Vi
 i ≡ (1 − Di )Vi (Yi − γ0 − γ1 Vi − δ1 Bi ) K ( h ).

    First note that if the local outcome and first stage equations are


                                               Y    = c0 + c1V + d1 DV

                                               B = a0 + a1V + b1 DV
                                                       d1
then γ0F = c0 − δ1F a0 , γ1F = c1 − δ1F a1 and δ1F =   b1 .   Plugging in these relations, we have

                       1                                     1                                     Vi
         Θl+
          i  = DiVil {( m00 (0+ )Vi2 + ς (Vi ) + εi ) − δ1F ( r00 (0+ )Vi2 + ξ (Vi ) + φi )}2 K 2 ( )
                       2                                     2                                     h
                              1                                     1                                     Vi
         Θl−
          i  = (1 − Di )Vil {( m00 (0− )Vi2 + ς (Vi ) + εi ) − δ1F ( r00 (0− )Vi2 + ξ (Vi ) + φi )}2 K 2 ( )
                              2                                     2                                     h

where φi = Bi − r(Vi ) is the error term in the first stage relationship. Note that

                         n
                      E[ ∑ Θil+ ]
                        i=1
                             1                                   1                                     Vi
              = nE[DiVil {( m00 (0+ )Vi2 + ς (Vi ) + εi ) − δ1F ( r00 (0+ )Vi2 + ξ (Vi ) + φi )}2 K 2 ( )]
                             2                                   2                                     h
                                  Vi               1                             V i
              = nE[DiVil εi2 K 2 ( )] + nE[DiVil ( m00 (0+ )Vi2 + ς (Vi ))2 K 2 ( )]
                                  h                2                              h
                           l F 2 2 2 Vi                   l F 2 1 00 +                            Vi
                +nE[DiVi (δ1 ) φi K ( )] + nE[DiVi (δ1 ) ( r (0 )Vi + ξ (Vi ))2 K 2 ( )]
                                                                               2
                                           h                       2                               h
                                          Vi
                −2nE[DiVil εi δ1F φi K 2 ( )]
                                          h
                               1                           1                            Vi
                −2nE[DiVil ( m00 (0+ )Vi2 + ς (Vi ))δ1F ( r00 (0+ )Vi2 + ξ (Vi ))K 2 ( )]
                               2                           2                             h
              = nhl+1 f (0)σY2 (0+ )(νl+ + o(1)) + o(nhl+1 )

                      +nhl+1 f (0)(δ1F )2 σB2 (0+ )(νl+ + o(1)) + o(nhl+1 )

                      −nhl+1 f (0)2δ1F σBY (0+ )(νl+ + o(1)) − o(nhl+1 )

              = nhl+1 f (0)(σY2 (0+ ) − 2δ1F σBY (0+ ) + (δ1F )2 σB2 (0+ ))(νl+ + o p (1)).


Similarly,

                  n
             E[ ∑ Θil+ ] = nhl+1 f (0)(σY2 (0− ) − 2δ1F σBY (0− ) + (δ1F )2 σB2 (0− ))(νl− + o p (1)).
                 i=1


Also note that

          n
                          2l      1 00 + 2                    F 1 00 +        2               4 4 Vi
     Var( ∑ Θl+
             i ) 6 nE[DiVi {εi + m (0 )Vi + ς (Vi ) − δ1 ( r (0 )Vi + ξ (Vi ) + φi )} K ( )]
         i=1                      2                               2                               h
                                                1                                         Vi
                 6 216nE[{DiVi2l εi4 + DiVi2l (| m00 (0+ )|Vi2 )4 + DiVi2l ς 4 (Vi )}K 4 ( )]
                                                2                                         h
                                                     2l 1 00 +                                 Vi
                             F 4        2l 4
                   +216nE[(δ1 ) {DiVi φi + DiVi (| r (0 )|Vi ) + DiVi ξ (Vi )}K 4 ( )]
                                                                     2 4           2l 4
                                                        2                                      h
                        = 216O(nh2l+1 )
where the second line follows from Jensen’s inequality and the last line from the Dominated Convergence

Theorem as well as Assumptions 12, 13 and 17. As a result,

                                                                     s
            n                               n                                 n
          ∑ Θl+
             i  = E[ ∑ Θl+                  l+
                        i ] + O p ( Var( ∑ Θi ))
          i=1                             i=1                                i=1
                                                                                                                               1     1
                              = nh         l+1
                                                 f (0)(σY2 (0+ ) − 2δ1F σBY (0+ ) + (δ1F )2 σB2 (0+ ))(νl+ + o p (1)) + O p (n 2 hl+ 2 )

                              = nhl+1 f (0)(σY2 (0+ ) − 2δ1F σBY (0+ ) + (δ1F )2 σB2 (0+ ))(νl+ + o p (1)).


Similarly,
                                n
                             ∑ Θil− = nhl+1 f (0)(σY2 (0− ) − 2δ1F σBY (0− ) + (δ1F )2 σB2 (0− ))(νl− + o p (1)).
                             i=1

Using matrix notations, we have

                                                                                                                                                         
                                               2          − −     2          + +    σ2       (0− )ν1− + σ 2 F (0+ )ν1+            σ2           + )ν +
                                           σY −δ F B (0 )ν0 + σY −δ F B (0 )ν0   Y −δ1F B             Y −δ1 B                   Y −δ1F B
                                                                                                                                            (0     1            
                                                   1                  1
                                    H   0   
                                                          − −
                                                                                                                                                      H      0
           (iv) = nh f (0)                  2                  2          + +
                                             σY −δ F B (0 )ν1 + σY −δ F B (0 )ν1   σ2         (0− )ν2− + σ 2         (0+ )ν2+    σ2       (0+ )ν2+               (1 + o p (1))
                                                                                    Y −δ1F B               Y −δ1F B                Y −δ1F B
                                                                                                                                                    
                                    0   h   
                                                  1                  1                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                      0      h
                                                           2      +   +                         σ 2 F (0+ )ν2+                    σ 2 F (0+ )ν2+
                                                         σ   F (0 )ν1
                                                          Y −δ1 B                                Y −δ1 B                           Y −δ1 B




where σY2−δ F B (0± ) = σY2 (0± ) − 2δ1F σBY (0± ) + (δ1F )2 σB2 (0± ).
                   1

    Similar to the proof in the sharp case, we can show that
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                   H 0            H 0 
                                                     (v) , (vi) =       o p (nh)      
                                                                    0 h              0 h


so that
                                                                                                                                                         
                                               2          − −     2          + +    σ2        (0− )ν1− + σ 2 F (0+ )ν1+           σ2             + )ν +
                                           σY −δ F B (0 )ν0 + σY −δ F B (0 )ν0    Y −δ1F B             Y −δ1 B                   Y −δ1F B
                                                                                                                                             (0      1
                                                                                                                                                                
                                                   1                  1
                                    H   0   
                                                          − −
                                                                                                                                                      H      0
          Ŝ f uzzy = nh f (0)              2                  2          + +
                                             σY −δ F B (0 )ν1 + σY −δ F B (0 )ν1   σ2          (0− )ν2− + σ 2         (0+ )ν2+   σ2       (0+ )ν2+               (1 + o p (1)).
                                                                                     Y −δ1F B               Y −δ1F B                Y −δ1F B
                                                                                                                                                    
                                    0   h   
                                                  1                  1                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                      0      h
                                                           2      +   +                          σ 2 F (0+ )ν2+                   σ 2 F (0+ )ν2+
                                                         σ   F (0 )ν1
                                                           Y −δ1 B                                Y −δ1 B                          Y −δ1 B




Plugging in values of µl± and νl± , we have the desired result for the local linear fuzzy estimator:


                                             ˆ β̂ f uzzy )e3 = S−1
                                        eT3 Var(                              −1
                                                                XW Ŝ f uzzy SW X
                                                                                  2        +        2       −
                                                                            12 σY −δ1F B (0 ) + σY −δ1F B (0 )
                                                                     =          (                              + o p (1))
                                                                            nh3     {r0 (0+ ) − r0 (0− )}2
                                                                            12
                                                                     =          (ΩFRKD + o p (1)).
                                                                            nh3
Supplemental Appendix–A Job Search Model with Wage-Dependent UI Ben-

efits

This Appendix describes an equilibrium wage posting model with a wage-dependent UI benefit, and a

maximum benefit level. We ask to what extent the model is consistent with assumptions for identification in

the RKD, and reach two main conclusions. First, when there is a kink in the UI benefit formula, a baseline

model predicts a kink in the density of wages among job-losers at the level of wages corresponding to the

maximum benefit. Second, this prediction relies on complete information about the location of the kink in

the benefit schedule and is not robust to allowing for small errors in agents beliefs about the location of the

kink in the benefit schedule.

    Setup. Consider an infinite horizon, discrete-time, posted-wage model of job search with an exogenous

distribution of wage offers, and equally efficient search among employed and unemployed agents. With a

level of search intensity s the arrival rate of job offers is λ · s; there is also an exogenous job destruction

rate of δ . There is a strictly increasing and convex cost-of-search function c (·) with c (0) = 0. Wage offers

come from a stationary, twice continuously differentiable c.d.f. F (·). The setup is identical to the model

used by Christensen et al. (2005), except that we cast the problem in discrete time (with a discount rate β )

and assume a wage-dependent UI benefit.53

    Specifically, we assume that the UI benefit b is a function of the last wage received before being laid off,

w−1 , given by the formula b (w−1 ) ≡ b + ρ min (w−1 , T max ), where ρ < 1 and b(w) < w for all w. As in most

actual benefit systems, agents with a previous wage above the threshold T max receive a maximum benefit

level b̄ = b + ρT max . The dependence of benefits on previous wages adds two novel considerations to the

standard search model: 1) when choosing search intensity and whether to accept a wage offer, an agent must

take into account the effect of the wage on future UI benefits; 2) when taking a new job, an unemployed

worker resets their benefit level. Because we assume that UI benefits last indefinitely, and that the benefit

is reset immediately upon taking a new job, our model arguably over-emphasizes both these considerations

relative to a more realistic setting where benefits can expire, and UI entitlement is based on earnings over a

previous base period of several quarters’ duration.
    An agent’s choice problem is characterized by two value functions: Wem (w), the value function for being
  53 To translate the model to our generalized regression setting, note that we can allow for unrestricted heterogeneity and index all

the model’s elements by U, the unobserved type. The discussion below is conditional on the type U, and we suppress any notation
indicating the value of U.
employed with current wage w, and Wun (w−1 ), for being unemployed with previous wage w−1 :
                                                  Z                                                        
          Wem (w)   =     max w − c(s) + β (1 − δ ) λ s max{Wem (x),Wem (w)}dF(x) + (1 − λ s)Wem (w) + δWun (w)             (29)
                          s≥0



                                                       Z                                                    
             Wun (w−1 )    =    max b (w−1 ) − c(s) + β λ s max{Wem (x),Wun (w−1 )}dF(x) + (1 − λ s)Wun (w−1 ) .            (30)
                                s≥0



Note that Wun is an increasing function of the previous wage for w−1 < T max , since a higher previous

wage entitles the agent to higher benefits. Once the previous wage reaches the threshold T max , how-

ever, there is no further increase in Wun : thus the value function Wun is kinked at w−1 = T max , with
 0 (w ) > 0 for w                0                         max . Inspection of the value functions shows
Wun  −1          −1 < T max and Wun (w−1 ) = 0 for w−1 > T

that this in turn induces a kink in Wem (w) at w = T max , provided that δ > 0.

     Optimal Search Behavior. It can be shown that the optimal behavior is characterized by a reservation

wage strategy while employed, another reservation wage strategy while unemployed, and a choice of opti-

mal search intensity sem (w) when employed at wage w and sun (w−1 ) when unemployed with previous wage

w−1 .54 Clearly, an employed worker will accept any wage offer that exceeds her current wage. An unem-

ployed worker with previous wage w−1 will accept any wage offer w with Wem (w)≥Wun (w−1 ), implying a

reservation wage R (w−1 ) such that Wem (R(w−1 )) = Wum (w−1 ).

     It is well known that when the UI benefit is a fixed constant b the optimal strategy for an unemployed

worker is to take any job with w ≥ b , implying R(w−1 ) = b, since there is no extra disutility of work versus

unemployment, and the arrival rate and search costs are the same whether working or not. This simple rule is

no longer true when the benefits depend on w−1 . Consider an unemployed worker with an offer w = b (w−1 ) .

Taking the job will yield the same flow utility as remaining on unemployment, but when the job ends she

will receive a lower future UI benefit (assuming that the benefit-replacement rate is less than 1). Thus, a

higher wage offer is required for indifference, implying that R(w−1 ) > b(w−1 ) when w−1 < T max .

     Given the value functions above, and a strictly increasing, convex, and twice continuously differentiable

cost function c (·), we can implicitly solve for the optimal search functions sun (·) and sem (·) via the first
  54 It
      can be shown that Wem (w) is strictly increasing in w and that Wun (w−1 ) is increasing in w−1 , which leads to reservation
wage strategies in each case.
order conditions for interior solutions for (29) and (30),

                                                                           Z w̄
                                    c0 (sem (w)) = β (1 − δ )λ                    [Wem (x) −Wem (w)] dF(x)                                (31)
                                                                            w
                                                               Z w̄
                                  c0 (sun (w−1 )) = β λ                    [Wem (x) −Wun (w−1 )] dF(x),
                                                                 R(w−1 )


where w is the upper bound of the support of the offer distribution. Consideration of these first order

conditions shows that the optimal levels of search intensity both have a kink at the wage threshold T max . For

example, the right derivative of sem (w) at w = T max is:

                                                         −β (1 − δ )λ (1 − F(T )) 0
                                      s0em (T max+ ) =                           Wem (T max+ ),
                                                               c00 (sem (T ))

while the derivative from the left is:

                                                         −β (1 − δ )λ (1 − F(T )) 0
                                      s0em (T max− ) =                           Wem (T max− ).
                                                               c00 (sem (T ))

Since Wem (w) has a kink at w = T max , W 0 (T max+ ) 6= W 0 (T max− ) and the left and right limits of the derivative

of sem (w) are different at w = T max . A similar argument applies to the derivative of sun (w−1 ) at w−1 = T max .

     Steady State Wage Distribution. A standard wage posting model yields a steady state unemployment

rate u and a steady state distribution of wages G(w) that stochastically dominates the distribution of wage

offers F(w), reflecting the fact that employed workers are always searching for higher wage offers. When

the benefit level varies across unemployed workers, and workers with different benefit levels have different

reservation wages, there is also a steady state distribution of previous wages in the stock of unemployed

workers, which we denote by H(w).55
     In the steady state, the inflow into the set of workers employed with a wage of w or less must equal the
outflow:
            Z w̄                                                                                     Z        w
                                                                                                                               
      uλ           sun (x) [max{F(w) − F(R(x)), 0}] dH(x)    =      δ G(w)(1 − u) + (1 − δ )λ (1 − u)              sem (x)dG(x) (1 − F(w)) (32)
             0                                                                                             0
                                              In f low (w)   =      Layo f f (w) + O f f er (w) · (1 − F (w)) .                            (33)
  55 It   can be shown that:                                   Rw           dG(x)
                                                                0 λ sun (x)−λ sun (x)F(R(x))
                                                     H (w) =   R w̄         dG(x)
                                                                                               .
                                                                0 λ sun (x)−λ sun (x)F(R(x))
The quantity In f low (w) is the fraction of the stock of unemployed workers who receive a wage offer that

exceeds their reservation wage, but is less than w. On the right hand side, the proportion with a wage less

than w and displaced with probability δ is given by Layo f f (w)), while the proportion of individuals who

will leave jobs that pay less than w for jobs that pay more than w is given by (O f f er (w) · (1 − F (w))).
    Now consider a w within a neighborhood of the threshold T max .56 Consider the above flow equation for
observed wages between w + h and w. Some re-arrangement yields:

     In f low (w + h) − In f low (w) + O f f er (w) ((F (w + h)) − F (w))   =   Layo f f (w + h) − Layo f f (w)

                                                                                + (O f f er (w + h) − O f f er (w)) (1 − F (w + h)) .


Applying a mean value theorem for Stieltjes integrals on the right hand side, re-arranging, and dividing by

h, we obtain

                       In f low(w+h)−In f low(w)
                                   h         + O f f er (w) F(w+h)−F(w)
                                                                 h                         G (w + h) − G (w)
                                                                                     =
                      δ (1 − u) + (1 − δ ) λ (1 − u) cO (1 − F (w + h))                            h

where infx∈[w,w+h] sem (x) ≤ cO ≤ supx∈[w,w+h] sem (x).

    By assumption the distribution of wage offers F (·) is differentiable. Moreover, it can be shown that

the search intensity choice of employed workers is continuous, and that In f low(w) is differentiable in a

neighborhood of T .57 Taking the limit as h → 0, we obtain:

                                        In f low0 (w) + O f f er (w) f (w)
                                                                                    = g (w)                                         (34)
                               (δ (1 − u) + (1 − δ ) λ (1 − u) sem (w) (1 − F (w)))

which means that the density of wages g (w) is well-defined in this neighborhood.

    It can be shown that every function of w on the left-hand side of this equation is continuously differ-

entiable at w = T max except the search intensity function sem (·), which is kinked at T max . As noted above,

this arises because of the kinks in the value functions Wem (·) and Wum (·) at the wage threshold T max . As a

consequence, the density of wages among employed workers has a kink at w = T max . Assuming that the job

destruction rate is constant across all jobs, the population of new UI claimants has the same distribution of

previous wages as the pool of employed workers. As a consequence, this model implies that the density of
  56 We choose a neighborhood of T max in which w > R (T max ). Such a neighborhood always exists because T max > R(T max )–a

worker who accepts a wage T max will be strictly better off than remaining unemployed with the maximum benefit b̄.
  57 Differentiability of In f low (·) follows because in a neighborhood of T , w > R(x) for all x.              Thus In f low (w) =
uλ 0w̄ sun (x) [F(w) − F(R(x))] dH(x). We can differentiate under the integral sign because the derivative of the integrand with
   R

respect to w is continuous in the rectangle defined by the neighborhood of T and [0, w], and F (·) is differentiable by assumption.
wages among new UI claimants has a kink at w = T max .
    Model with Imperfect Information About Benefit Schedules. We now consider a variant of the
preceding model in which agents have imperfect information on the location of the kink point in the benefit
schedules. We show that the prediction of a kinked density is not robust to small errors. To proceed, assume
that the true kink in the benefit schedule occurs at w = T max , but the agent makes choices assuming the kink
is at T max + ε. This leads to value functions, indexed by the error ε, , Wem
                                                                            ε (w) and W ε (w) parallel to those
                                                                                       un
in equations (29) and (30). In addition, there is another value function defined by:
                                                   Z                                                    
            ε∗                                                ε      ε∗                          ε∗
           Wun (w−1 )    =   max b(w−1 ) − c(s) + β λ s max{Wem (x),Wun (w−1 )}dF(x) + (1 − λ s)Wun (w−1 ) .
                              s≥0


 ε (w ) is the perceived value of unemployment for a worker who is using an incorrect benefit formula,
Wun  −1

         ε∗ (w ) is the perceived value of unemployment of an unemployed worker who is receiving
whereas Wun   −1

benefits b(w−1 ) based on the correct formula, but is evaluating the value of potential future employment
        ε .
using Wem

    The result of this small optimization error is that actual search intensity for an individual (in the em-

ployed and unemployed state) will be given by the first-order conditions

                                                                       Z w̄
                                   0
                                  c    (sεem (w))   = β (1 − δ )λ                  ε
                                                                                [Wem        ε
                                                                                     (x) −Wem (w)] dF(x)
                                                                            w
                                                           Z w̄
                              0
                             c    (sε∗
                                    un (w−1 ))      = βλ                       ε
                                                                            [Wem       ε∗
                                                                                 (x) −Wun (w−1 )] dF(x).
                                                            Rε∗ (w   −1 )



Moreover, the reservation wage for employed agents is still their current wage, while the reservation wage

if unemployed is Rε∗ (w−1 ), implicitly defined by Wem
                                                     ε (Rε∗ (w )) = W ε∗ (w ).
                                                              −1     un    −1

    With an error in the perceived kink the steady state flow equation for the wage density G(w) is the same

as in equation (32), after replacing sem (·),sun (·) with sεem (·), sε∗
                                                                     un . As a result, the steady state density for

a population of agents of type ”ε” exhibits a kink at T max + ε. If the true population contains a mixture

of agents with different values of ε, drawn from a density φε (·), then the steady state flow equation for

the density of wages is the same as in equation (32), after replacing sem (·),sun (·) with E [sεem (·)], E [sε∗
                                                                                                             un (·)]

where expectations are taken with respect to φε (·). It can be shown that if ε is continuously distributed, then

E [sεem (x)] will be continuously differentiable, leading to a continuously differentiable steady state density

g (·).58 Thus, a continuous distribution of errors in agents’ beliefs about the location of the kink point will
  58 Specifically,                                                              dsεem (w)
                  E [sεem (w)] is continuously differentiable because              dw       is continuous at w = T max almost everywhere (it is
non-differentiable only when ε = 0, a measure zero event).
smooth out the kink that arises with full information.
                 Appendix Figure 1a: Fraction Exhausting UI Benefits
                                    Bottom Kink Sample
      .14
      .12
Fraction
   .1 .08
      .06




               -2000         0              2000               4000   6000
                             Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min



                  Appendix Figure 1b: Fraction Claiming UA Benefits
                                    Bottom Kink Sample
      .1
      .09.08
  Fraction
.07   .06
      .05




               -2000         0              2000               4000   6000
                             Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min
                 Appendix Figure 1c: Fraction Exhausting UI Benefits
                                       Top Kink Sample
           .14
           .12
Fraction
           .1
           .08




             -15000       -10000          -5000                0     5000
                              Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max



                 Appendix Figure 1d: Fraction Claiming UA Benefits
                                       Top Kink Sample
           .1
           .09
         .08
  Fraction
.07        .06
           .05




             -15000       -10000          -5000                0     5000
                              Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max
                   Appendix Figure 2: Covariates Bottom Kink Sample
                                  Age                                                                 Female




                                                                            .6




    34
                                                                            .5




 33
years
                                                                 Fraction
                                                                            .4
                                                                            .3




    32
           -1800                   0                      1800                    -1800                   0                      1800
                   Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min                                   Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min


                              Bluecollar                                                       Recalled to last job




    .68
                                                                            .22




    .66
                                                                            .2




  .64
                                                                  .18




Fraction
                                                                 Fraction




    .62
                                                                            .16




    .6
                                                                            .14




           -1800                   0                      1800                    -1800                   0                      1800
                   Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min                                   Base Year Earnings Relative to T-min
                        Appendix Figure 3: Covariates Top Kink Sample
                                  Age                                                                 Female




                                                                            .3




    38
                                                                            .25




 37
Years
                                                                 Fraction
                                                                            .2




    36
                                                                            .15
           -5000                    0                     5000                    -5000                    0                     5000
                   Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max                                   Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max


                              Bluecollar                                                       Recalled to last job




    .6
                                                                            .25




    .5
                                                                    .2




   .4
Fraction
                                                                 Fraction




    .3
                                                                            .15




    .2
           -5000                    0                     5000                    -5000                    0                     5000
                   Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max                                   Base Year Earnings Relative to T-max
                        Appendix Figure 4: Reduced Form Estimation with Varying Bandwidth
                                      Log Daily Benefit, Bottom Kink Sample
              .03
              .025
Coefficient
              .02
              .015
              .01




                             1000                        2000                         3000                            4000
                                                                  Bandwidth
                       Notes: local linear estimation, estimated coefficients (blue) with confidence bounds (dash),
                       vertical line denotes FG bandwidth




                       Appendix Figure 5: Reduced Form Estimation with Varying Bandwidth
                                       Log Daily Benefit, Top Kink Sample
              0
              -.005
Coefficient
              -.01
              -.015
              -.02




                      2000              4000                6000         8000                     10000               12000
                                                                Bandwidth
                       Notes: local linear estimation, estimated coefficients (blue) with confidence bounds (dash),
                       vertical line denotes FG bandwidth
                       Appendix Figure 6: Reduced Form Estimation with Varying Bandwidth
                                   Log Time to Next Job, Bottom Kink Sample
              .15
              .1
Coefficient
              .05
              0
              -.05




                            1000                        2000                         3000                            4000
                                                                 Bandwidth
                      Notes: local linear estimation, estimated coefficients (blue) with confidence bounds (dash),
                      vertical line denotes FG bandwidth




                       Appendix Figure 7: Reduced Form Estimation with Varying Bandwidth
                                     Log Time to Next Job, Top Kink Sample
              0
              -.02
Coefficient
              -.04
              -.06
              -.08
              -.1




                     2000              4000               6000         8000                      10000               12000
                                                              Bandwidth
                      Notes: local linear estimation, estimated coefficients (blue) with confidence bounds (dash),
                      vertical line denotes FG bandwidth
                       Appendix Figure 8: Reduced Form Estimation with Varying Bandwidth
                                    Log Claim Duration, Bottom Kink Sample
              .1
              .05
Coefficient
              0
              -.05




                            1000                        2000                         3000                            4000
                                                                 Bandwidth
                      Notes: local linear estimation, estimated coefficients (blue) with confidence bounds (dash),
                      vertical line denotes FG bandwidth




                       Appendix Figure 9: Reduced Form Estimation with Varying Bandwidth
                                      Log Claim Duration, Top Kink Sample
              .04
              .02
Coefficient
              0
              -.02
              -.04
              -.06




                     2000              4000               6000         8000                      10000               12000
                                                              Bandwidth
                      Notes: local linear estimation, estimated coefficients (blue) with confidence bounds (dash),
                      vertical line denotes FG bandwidth
Appendix Table 1: Test for Kinks in Density of Previous Wage Based on Models for Frequency
Distribution of Observations Estimated by Minimum Chi‐Squared


    Polynomial Order               Estimated Kink x 1000                Pearson χ2                  Akaike
   in Model for Density               (Standard Error)                   (P‐value)                 Criterion
           (1)                              (2)                             (3)                       (4)

A. Bottom Kink Sample (65 bins of width = 100 Euro/year)
             2                             ‐0.120                         100.52                    105.52
                                           (0.051)                       (0.08%)

             3                             ‐0.090                         96.04                     103.04
                                           (0.127)                       (0.13%)

             4                             ‐0.200                         95.33                     104.33
                                           (0.255)                       (0.08%)

             5                             ‐0.080                         95.10                     106.10
                                           (0.444)                       (0.05%)

B. Top Kink Sample (66 bins of width = 300 Euro/year)
             2                             ‐0.060                         124.80                    129.80
                                           (0.038)                       (0.00%)

             3                             ‐0.280                         104.99                    111.99
                                           (0.087)                       (0.00%)

             4                              0.158                          60.08                     69.08
                                           (0.129)                       (36.48%)

             5                              0.149                          57.80                     68.80
                                           (0.219)                       (37.22%)


Notes: See text. Bottom kink sample includes 181,623 observations (1856 observations in left‐most and right‐
most bins deleted). Top kink sample includes 183,056 observations (3031 observations in left‐most and left‐
most bins deleted). Models are estimated by minimum chi‐square estimation. Model for fraction of
observations in a bin is a polynomial function of the bin counter of the order indicated in column 1, with
interactions of poynomial terms with indicator for bins to the right of the kink point (main effect of indicator is
excluded). Estimated kink in column 2 is coefficient of interaction between linear term and indicator for bin to
right of kinkpoint. Akaike criterion in column 4 is chi‐squared model fit statistic plus 2 times the number of
parameters in the model.
Appendix	  Table	  2:	  Reduced	  Form	  Estimates	  of	  Kink	  Effects	  in	  Benefits	  and	  Durations,	  based	  on	  Alternative	  
Bandwidth	  Determination

                                                                                             Local	  Linear	  Models                                                                   Local	  Quadratic	  Models

                                                         FG	  Bandwidth                                                                  Estimated	  Kink       FG	  Bandwidth                                                         Estimated	  Kink
                                                                 (1)                                                                           (2)                        (3)                                                                  (4)

A.	  	  Bottom	  Kink:
Log	  daily	  UI	  benefit                       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  550	  
                                                                                                                                	            0.0251          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1,806	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                  0.0148
                                                                                                                                             (0.0070)                                                                                        (0.0048)

Log	  time	  to	  next	  job                     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1,547	                  0.0366          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,482	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                  0.0335
                                                                                                                                             (0.0166)                                                                                        (0.0316)

Log	  claim	  duration                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1,762	                  0.0317          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,799	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                  0.0437
                                                                                                                                             (0.0127)                                                                                        (0.0281)

B.	  	  Top	  Kink:
Log	  daily	  UI	  benefit                        	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1,606	                 -­‐0.0191        	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  5,753	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                 -­‐0.0154
                                                                                                                                             (0.0059)                                                                                        (0.0032)

Log	  time	  to	  next	  job                     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,510	                 -­‐0.0462        	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  8,329	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                 -­‐0.0525
                                                                                                                                             (0.0131)                                                                                        (0.0178)

Log	  claim	  duration                            	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,790	                  -­‐0.0259        	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  9,647	        -­‐0.0355
                                                                                                                                             (0.0106)                                                                                        (0.0149)
Notes:	  see	  Table	  2.	  	  In	  this	  table,	  the	  FG	  bandwidth	  determination	  is	  based	  on	  a	  first	  step	  global	  
polynomial	  with	  a	  continuous	  first	  derivative	  at	  kink.



Appendix	  Table	  3:	  Estimated	  Structural	  Coefficients	  from	  Fuzzy	  Regression	  Kink	  Design,	  Alternative	  
Bandwidth	  Determination


                                                                                             Local	  Linear	  Models                                                                   Local	  Quadratic	  Models

                                                                                                                                            Estimated	                                                                                     Estimated	  
                                                         FG	  Bandwidth                                                                     Elasticity           FG	  Bandwidth                                                            Elasticity
                                                                 (1)                                                                            (2)                       (3)                                                                   (4)
A.	  	  Bottom	  Kink:

Log	  time	  to	  next	  job                     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1,547	                   1.673          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,482	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                   1.604
                                                                                                                                              (0.772)                                                                                         (1.534)
Log	  claim	  duration                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1,762	                   1.383          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,799	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                   2.186
                                                                                                                                              (0.562)                                                                                         (1.450)

B.	  	  Top	  Kink:

Log	  time	  to	  next	  job                     	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,510	                   3.098          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  8,329	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                   3.186
                                                                                                                                              (0.954)                                                                                         (1.177)
Log	  claim	  duration                             	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  3,790	                   1.727          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  9,647	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                   2.565
                                                                                                                                              (0.728)                                                                                         (1.137)

Notes:	  FG	  bandwidth	  determination	  is	  based	  on	  a	  first	  step	  global	  polynomial	  with	  a	  continuous	  first	  derivative	  at	  
kink.	  	  FG	  bandwidth	  is	  based	  on	  determination	  for	  outcome	  variable.	  	  Estimated	  elasticities	  in	  columns	  2	  and	  4	  are	  
obtained	  from	  a	  2SLS	  procedure.	  	  See	  note	  to	  Table	  4.
Appendix	  Table	  4:	  Fuzzy	  RKD	  Estimates	  of	  Benefit	  Elasticities	  of	  Time	  to	  Next	  Job	  with	  Alternative
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Censoring	  Points

                                                                                     Local	  Linear	  Models                                              Local	  Quadratic	  Models
                                                                                                                            Estimated	                                                                     Estimated	  
                                                            FG	  Bandwidth                                                  Elasticity     FG	  Bandwidth                                                  Elasticity
                                                                    (1)                                                         (2)                 (3)                                                         (4)

A.	  Bottom	  Kink	  Sample
	  	  Censored	  at	  52	  weeks                                           2,615                                         1.726                             4,328                                         3.024
                                                                                                                             (0.440)                                                                         (1.501)
	  	  Censored	  at	  39	  weeks                                           2,616                                         1.549                             4,142                                         2.468
                                                                                                                             (0.410)                                                                         (1.396)
	  	  Censored	  at	  30	  weeks                                           2,579                                         1.521                             4,029                                         1.749
                                                                                                                             (0.382)                                                                         (1.315)
	  	  Censored	  at	  20	  weeks                                           2,509                                         1.254                             3,925                                         1.259
                                                                                                                             (0.337)                                                                         (1.134)
B.	  Top	  Kink	  Sample
	  	  Censored	  at	  52	  weeks                       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,148	       2.643         	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  7,521	       3.497
                                                                                                                             (0.715)                                                                         (1.278)
	  	  Censored	  at	  39	  weeks                       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,219	       2.039         	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  7,613	       3.012
                                                                                                                             (0.625)                                                                         (1.173)
	  	  Censored	  at	  30	  weeks                       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,262	       1.839         	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  7,687	       2.589
                                                                                                                             (0.559)                                                                         (1.056)
	  	  Censored	  at	  20	  weeks                       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4,314	       1.506         	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  7,838	       2.174
                                                                                                                             (0.471)                                                                         (0.906)
Notes:	  see	  notes	  to	  Table	  4.	  	  Dependent	  variable	  in	  all	  models	  is	  log	  of	  time	  to	  next	  job,	  censored	  at	  maximum	  
value	  indicated	  in	  row	  heading.	  	  
Appendix	  Table	  5:	  Fuzzy	  RKD	  Estimates	  of	  Benefit	  Elasticities	  of	  Alternative	  Measures	  of	  UI	  Claim	  Duration



                                                             Local	  Linear	  Models                             Local	  Quadratic	  Models
                                                                                Estimated	                                              Estimated	  
                                                      FG	  Bandwidth            Elasticity                   FG	  Bandwidth             Elasticity
                                                              (1)                   (2)                               (3)                    (4)

A.	  Bottom	  Kink	  Sample
	  	  Duration	  of	  First	  UI	  Spell              2,651                  1.250                            4,564                   2.816
                                                                                  (0.406)                                                  (1.401)
	  	  Total	  Days	  of	  UI	  Claimed                2,654                  1.462                            4,203                   1.984
                                                                                  (0.390)                                                  (1.324)

B.	  Top	  Kink	  Sample
	  	  Duration	  of	  First	  UI	  Spell              9,067                  1.313                            9,355                   2.500
                                                                                  (0.228)                                                  (1.103)
	  	  Total	  Days	  of	  UI	  Claimed                5,301                  1.568                            8,447                   2.347
                                                                                  (0.401)                                                  (1.009)

Notes:	  see	  notes	  to	  Table	  4.	  	  
Appendix Table 6: Summary of Estimated Benefit Elasticities in Existing Literature
 Authors (date)             Data                                     Design                            Elasticity Estimate or Range
 U.S. Studies
    Classen (1977)          CWBH*, Arizona                           Pre/post                                   0.6 - 1.0
    Moffitt (1985)          CWBH, 13 states                          Cross-sectional                               0.4
    Solon (1985)            CWBH, Georgia                            Diff-in-diff, tax policy change               0.7
    Meyer (1990)            CWBH, all states                         State-by-year                                 0.8
    Katz and Meyer (1990)   CWBH, all states                         State-by-year                                 0.8
    Meyer and Mok (2007)    New York State UI Records                Pre/post                                      0.3
    Chetty (2010)           SIPP (retrospective interviews)          State-by-year                                 0.5
    Landais (2012)          CWBH, Louisiana/Washington               RKD, maximum benefit                       0.4 - 0.7

 European Studies
   Carling et al. (2011)    Sweden, register data                    Diff-in-diff, repl. rate change               1.6
                            (outcome = time to next job)
    Roed and Zhang (2003)   Norway, register data, previous          Calendar vs. spell dating                 0.3 (female)
                            job < 2 years                                                                       0.9 (male)
    Lalive et al. (2006)    Austria, register/Social Security data   Diff-in-diff, repl. rate change               0.15
    Arraz et al. (2008)     Spain, register data                     Pre/post                                       0.8
* Note: CWBH is the Continuous Work and Benefit History data set, based on employment and unemployment records.
