                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE ¸˛DURING COMMODITY PRICE BOOMS
                           AND BUSTS

                                        Luis Felipe Céspedes
                                          Andrés Velasco

                                        Working Paper 18569
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18569


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




Prepared for the IMF-CBRT Conference "Policy Responses to Commodity Price Movements", held
on April 6-7, 2012. We are grateful to Juan Matamala for excellent research assistantship. We are
also grateful to Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Ayhan Kose (the editors), two anonymous referees and
our discussant Silvana Tenreyro for useful comments and suggestions. We thank Gustavo Adler, Cesar
Calderón, Luis Catao, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti and Nikola Spatafora for sharing their data with
us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Luis Felipe Céspedes and Andrés Velasco. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Macroeconomic Performance ¸˛During Commodity Price Booms and Busts
Luis Felipe Céspedes and Andrés Velasco
NBER Working Paper No. 18569
November 2012
JEL No. E52,E58,F31,F32,F36,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

Fluctuations in commodity prices are often associated with macroeconomic volatility. But not all nations
are created equal in this regard. The macro response to commodity booms and busts depends both
on the structural characteristics of the economy and on the policy framework that is in place. In this
paper we investigate the macro response of a group of commodity-producing nations in episodes of
large commodity prices shocks. First we provide a theoretical framework to analyze how shocks to
commodity prices affect the domestic economy. For this we use a simple open-economy model with
nominal rigidities and financial frictions. Then we provide empirical evidence (using commodity price
boom and bust episodes) that commodity price shocks have a significant impact on output and investment
dynamics. Economies with more flexible exchange rate regimes exhibit less pronounced responses
of output during these episodes. We also provide evidence that the impact of those shocks on investment
tends to be larger for economies with less developed financial markets. Moreover, we find that international
reserve accumulation, more stable political systems, and less open capital accounts tend to reduce
the real exchange rate appreciation (depreciation) in episodes of commodity price booms (busts).


Luis Felipe Céspedes
Universidad Adolfo Ibañez
lfcespedes@uai.cl

Andrés Velasco
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and Oxford University
and also NBER
andres_velasco@harvard.edu
I.     Introduction


Booms in commodity prices imply significant challenges for macroeconomic policy in
commodity-producing nations. Fluctuations in commodity prices are often associated with
macroeconomic volatility. Using a small open economy real business cycle model, Mendoza
(1995) estimates that roughly one-half of the variation in aggregate output in a sample of the G7
and 23 developing economies can be attributed to terms of trade shocks. Kose (2002) applies a
similar framework and finds that terms of trade shocks can explain almost all of the variance in
output in small open developing economies.


But not all nations are created equal in this regard. The macro response to commodity booms and
busts depends both on the structural characteristics of the economy and the policy framework
that is in place. In this paper we investigate the macro response of a group of commodity-
producing nations in episodes of large commodity prices booms and busts. We center our
analysis on the response of economic activity and the real exchange rate to commodity price
shocks controlling for the role played by financial market depth, the exchange rate regime and
other usual controls used in the literature.


Commodity price shocks are transmitted to the economy through different channels. One of them
is fiscal policy. In Céspedes and Velasco (2011) we revisited the issue of fiscal pro-cyclicality in
commodity republics, i.e. countries for which commodity-linked revenues represent a large
portion of total government revenue. Given that the behavior of commodity prices is a main
driver of fiscal policy outcomes in these countries, we focused on the behavior of fiscal variables
across the commodity cycle.


But fiscal policy is not the only factor that matters. There are other channels through which terms
of trade shocks (or shocks to commodity prices) affect the macroeconomic performance of a
country. The theoretical and empirical literature has stressed the role played by the exchange rate
regime. Under a fixed exchange rate regime, the domestic currency is pegged to another currency
or to a basket of currencies while under a flexible exchange rate regime the nominal exchange
rate is allowed to move freely in response to supply and demand conditions in the foreign
exchange market. In the presence of nominal rigidities, a flexible exchange rate regime helps

                                                  2	  
	  
stabilize the economy in response to terms of trade shocks as the nominal exchange rate adjusts
immediately to the real shock. The alternative under fixed rates is to wait until nominal wages
and goods’ prices adjust, increasing the volatility of output and employment.


The empirical evidence tends to support the view that more flexible exchange rate regimes tend
to insulate the economy better from terms of trade shocks. Broda (2002), using a sample of
developing countries, documents that in response to negative terms of trade shocks countries
with fixed exchange regimes experience large and significant declines in real GDP and the real
exchange rate depreciates slowly. The opposite occurs in the case of flexible exchange rate
regimes. Edwards and Levy Yeyati (2003) find evidence that indicate that terms of trade shocks
are amplified in countries that have more rigid exchange rate regimes. They also provide
evidence of an asymmetric response to terms of trade shocks. In particular, they find that the
output response is larger for negative shocks than for positive shocks. Finally, Aghion et al
(2008) provide evidence that the impact on productivity growth of terms of trade shocks also
depends on the nature of the exchange rate regime. They show that the impact is larger under a
fixed exchange rate regime and close to zero under a flexible rate regime.


In this paper we characterize the response of different macroeconomic variables in the episodes
of large commodity price shocks documented in Céspedes and Velasco (2011). First we review
the different channels through which shocks to commodity prices affect the domestic economy
using a simple open economy model with nominal rigidities and financial frictions. We provide a
closed-form solution for the output response to a commodity price shock as a function of the
degree of exchange rate flexibility and of financial market depth. As expected, the output
response is smaller for more flexible exchange rate regimes. We also show that the output
response to commodity price shocks is hump-shaped: it goes up as financial development rises
from a low level, but it eventually goes down as financial development becomes sufficiently
high.


Next, we provide empirical evidence regarding the role played by the exchange rate regime, the
development of financial markets, international reserve accumulation, political stability and the
degree of capital account openness of the economy in the transmission of commodity price



                                                 3	  
	  
shocks. We concentrate our analysis on the output and investment dynamics and the evolution of
the real exchange rate in those episodes of large commodity price shocks.


We find that, consistent with the theoretical predictions, more flexible exchange rate regimes are
associated with smaller responses of output during commodity price episodes. We also provide
evidence that the impact of those shocks on output tends to be larger for economies with less
developed financial markets. We find that higher financial depth tends to reduce the impact of
commodity price shocks on investment. We also provide evidence that suggests that for the
episodes before the 2000s, the presence of more developed financial markets mitigated the
impact of commodity price shocks on credit.


Finally, we provide evidence that the rate of international reserve accumulation tends to reduce
the appreciation of the real exchange rate in episodes of commodity price booms and busts. At a
first glance, this last result may be explained by the fact that less flexible exchange rate regimes
must accumulate international reserves in order to keep the parity. Nonetheless, when we control
for the flexibility of the exchange rate regime the result still holds, suggesting an independent
role for reserve accumulation.


We also find that countries with less open capital accounts and more stable political systems tend
to exhibit a more depreciated real exchange rate. Interestingly, our results indicate that the
impact of commodity price shocks on the real exchange rate is reduced when the political system
is more stable. If government expenditure is more intensive in non-traded goods, this result may
be connected to the one obtained in Céspedes and Velasco (2011), who showed that more stable
political systems tend to reduce the impact of commodity price shocks on government
expenditure.


The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we construct a simple model that captures
the role of financial constraints, nominal rigidities and the exchange rate regime in the
transmission of commodity price shocks. Then we turn to the empirical analysis. We first specify
the commodity price indexes used in the analysis and lay out the precise definition of a boom
and a bust. Then we present regression analysis on the determinants of output, investment, credit



                                                  4	  
	  
and exchange rate dynamics in our commodity boom episodes. A final section offers some
preliminary conclusions.


II.                                        A simple model


In this section we construct the simplest model that captures the role of financial constraints,
nominal rigidities and the exchange rate regime in the transmission of commodity price shocks to
the rest of the economy. The model has two periods, current and future;1 two produced goods,
foreign and domestic; and two kinds of people, capitalists and workers. It borrows from earlier
work by Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2003, 2004), and Velasco (2001).


Output of the domestic good is given by the following production function:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Y = K ! L1!! ,   (1)


where the capital stock K is given by history and labor L is supplied by workers. With this Cobb-
Douglas technology, competition and profit maximization by firms causes the wage bill to be
equal to a fixed share of nominal output


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WL = (1 − α ) PY ,       (2)


where W is the nominal wage and P is the price of domestic output in terms of the domestic
currency. If real wages are flexible, workers supply one unit of labor in equilibrium2:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L =1                     (3)


In addition to the two goods that are produced, there is a natural resource endowment of size R
that accrues to domestic capitalists. The price of this resource in terms of the foreign good (the
dollar price of the resource, if you wish), is given by Q, which is given to the small home
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
 Current-period variables have no time subscripts. Future-period variables have a 1 as subscript.
2
 This can be derived from utility maximization by workers if their objective function is logarithmic in
consumption and C.E.S. in labor effort. See Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2004) and Velasco (2001).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5	  
	  
economy. The natural resource is not consumed domestically. Therefore the dollar value of
natural resource exports in the initial period is QR.


Workers consume domestic and foreign goods, with shares γ and 1 − γ in total consumption. For
simplicity, they have no access to borrowing and lending, and consume the whole wage bill:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WL = P γ S 1−γ C ,         (4)


where C is a basket of total consumption and P S1- C is the price index corresponding to this                                                                                                                                                         γ   γ




basket. Notice that since the law of one price holds for foreign goods and their foreign currency
(or dollar) price is normalized to one, then S the nominal exchange rate is their peso price.
Define E ! S / P as the relative price of foreign goods, or real exchange rate.


The action in the model primarily involves the capitalists. They consume in the second period
only, and they consume only foreign goods. Hence, their objective is to maximize the dollar
value of their net worth at the end of next period.3 They do this by buying capital today, which
they finance resorting to their net worth N and to foreign loans F . The capitalists' budget
constraint is


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I = N + EF1 ,              (5)


where F1 denotes the amount borrowed abroad to be repaid next period and I investment in real
capital. Notice that capital is composed of domestic goods only. If no constraints on their ability
to borrow are present, capitalists maximize their end-of-next period net worth by choosing an
amount of investment such that the return to capital is equal to the expected cost of borrowing:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !Y1           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = (1+ " )( 1 )         (6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I            E

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3
  The assumption that capitalists consume only foreign goods (in the second period) does not affect
qualitatively the results. As it will become clear later, allowing capitalists to consume domestic goods in
the second period will affect the market-clearing condition for the second period do not altering
qualitatively our results.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6	  
	  
But their ability to borrow may be constrained. In particular, we assume that capitalists cannot
borrow more than a multiple λ of their net worth:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EF1 ≤ λN ,                              (7)


a condition that may or may not bind in what follows. Combining this last equation with the
budget constraint 5 we have


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I ≤ (1 + λ ) N ,                        (8)


which shows that investment can be no larger than a multiple of net worth.


At the beginning of each period, capitalists collect income from capital (equal to αY ), receive
their endowment R of the natural resource and repay old foreign debt, whose current home
output value is EF . As a consequence, their net worth is


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N = !Y + E [QR ! (1+ " )F ],                   (9)


where ρ is the world real interest rate.                                                                                                                                                                                                     Note that –holding real income constant— a real
devaluation, defined as an increase in E, may increase or reduce net worth, depending on
whether the expression QR ! (1+ ! )F is positive or negative.4


To close the model, markets for the domestic good must clear. In the current period that requires


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y = γE 1−γ C + I + EX ,                          (10)
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4
  Notice that we have assumed that all the natural resource endowment belongs to capitalists.
Alternatively, a fraction of this endowment may belong to workers or the government (in a model with a
government sector). In this case, the impact of terms of trade shocks on capitalists’ net worth will feature
an additional channel: revenues coming from domestic production associated to higher consumption and
government expenditures. Obviously, given differences in preferences over domestic and foreign goods,
the quantitative impact may be different depending on who owns the natural resource endowment. For
simplicity we shut down this channel.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7	  
	  
where X is the exogenous dollar value of exports.5 Given that the next period is the terminal
period and no investment takes place, we have


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y1 = γE11−γ C1 + E1 X 1 .       (11)


Finally, introduce money in the simplest way, using a cash-in-advance constraint on
consumption


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M ≤ P γ S 1−γ C ,             (12)


which we will assume binds in what follows. Combining 2, 4, and cash-in-advance constraint 12
yields


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M / P = (1! ! ) Y .           (13)


To allow for an intermediate exchange rate regime (somewhere between strict fixing and
floating), assume a policy rule so that the money supply follows


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '1/!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M /P !E$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =# &                  (14)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M /P "E%


where ! ! 0 and where a bar above a letter denotes the flexible price equilibrium. The case of
 ! = 0 implies fixed exchange rates: money adjusts instantaneously to ensure that the real
exchange rate is always equal to its flexible price level. Conversely, as ! ! " we have flexible
rates: real balances are always equal to their flexible price level, regardless of what happens to
the real exchange rate.



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5
  This is similar to Krugman (1999), and can be justified by positing that the foreign intratemporal
elasticity of substitution in consumption is one, but that foreigners' expenditure share on domestic goods
is negligible.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8	  
	  
This model can be reduced to an extremely simple system of equations. From market-clearing
(expression 10) combined with 2 and 4 we have


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   βY = I + EX           (15)


where β ≡ 1 − γ (1 − α ) > 0.


Carrying out analogous substitutions using 2, 4 (led one period), 7 and 11 we have


                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! I = " EX1 / (1+ # ) ,                               (16)


which gives current investment as a function of (the present value of) expected future exports.
This is the level of investment that would prevail if arbitrage were possible.


But arbitrage may not be possible if the financial constraint binds. To see exactly what shape that
constraint takes, combine 8 and 9 and arrive at


                                                                                                                                                                                     I ! (1+ ! )#$"Y + E [QR " (1+ ! )F ]%&                              (17)


That completes the presentation of the model. Which variables are endogenous or exogenous
depends on whether wages and prices are flexible. With full nominal flexibility, output is
exogenous6, and 15 and either 16 or 17 pin down investment and the real exchange rate
regardless of monetary or exchange rate policy. In that case 13 simply residually determines the
quantity of real balances and 14 is irrelevant.


But if prices and wages are predetermined (at least in the initial period, where all the action is),
then monetary and exchange rate policy matters, and unanticipated shocks to either exogenous
variables or policy can have effects on output of the home good, as well as investment and the
real exchange rate. In what follows we develop a simple diagrammatic approach to characterize
what the sticky-price, sticky-wage equilibrium looks like.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6
         It is given by production function 2, evaluated at the inherited K and L = 1 as indicated by 3.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9	  
	  
Our goal is to show all relevant determinants of short-run equilibrium in a diagram in Y,E space.
Combining 14 and 16 we have the levels of output and the exchange rate that would prevail if
arbitrage does indeed take place:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! X " X1 $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E =Y# + 2         &                (18)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       " ! ! (1+ # ) %


We call this the AI (arbitraged investment) schedule, which slopes up in Y,E space.


In turn, putting together 15 and 18 to eliminate I we have the combinations of output and the
exchange rate that are feasible if the financing constraint is indeed binding:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! " (1+ " )#
                                                                                                                                                                                 E !Y                                                                                 (19)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X + (1+ ! ) [QR " (1+ ! )F ]


We refer to this as the CF (constrained financing) schedule, which also slopes up in Y,E space.7


It is easy to see that a sufficient condition for schedule CF to be steeper than schedule AI is for λ
to be small enough: if the multiple of their net worth capitalists can borrow is tiny, then CF lies
everywhere above AI in Y,E space, and any equilibrium must be constrained.


Finally, money demand expression 12 and monetary rule 13 together yield


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !1/!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y /Y = E / E    )                        (20)


We term this the ME (monetary equilibrium) schedule, which slopes down in Y,E space. Notice
that under flexible exchange rates ( ! ! " ) schedule ME becomes vertical and output is always



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7
         For this to be the case we need ! > (1+ " )# , which we assume from now on.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10	  
	  
at its flexible-price level. Conversely, under fixed exchange rates ( ! = 0 ), ME is horizontal and
the real exchange rate is always at its (ex-ante) flexible-price level.


Let us now analyze possible equilibria. There are two candidates: unconstrained and constrained.
Figure 1A shows the case of an unconstrained equilibrium. The AI schedule lies above the CF
schedule. Equilibrium is at point A, where AI cuts ME. Note that in this case a (small) shock to
the terms of trade does not affect the position of the equilibrium. The same is true of shocks to
the initial level of debt. That is because Q and F only enter the CF schedule, which is irrelevant
in this case. Notice, however, that a large adverse drop in Q or a large rise in F could cause the
slope of the CF schedule to rise sufficiently, so that the equilibrium became constrained.


In the unconstrained equilibrium the level of external demand for the domestic good does matter
for output and the real exchange rate. Figure 1B shows what happens if either current exports X
or future exports X1 go up. Schedule AI becomes flatter and now cuts ME at point B. Output of
the domestic good goes up and the real exchange rate appreciates.


Alternatively, Figure 2A shows a constrained equilibrium. Now schedule AI lies below schedule
CF. Equilibrium is at point A, where CF cuts ME. Note that output of the domestic good is lower
and the exchange rate is more depreciated than it would have been if the equilibrium were
unconstrained.


In this case the terms of trade do matter for the position of the equilibrium. In particular, a fall in
Q causes the CF schedule to become steeper, reducing output and depreciating the real exchange
rate. The intuition is that capitalists’ net worth falls, and they can therefore borrow and invest
less, so that output is lower. The same effects (qualitatively at least) occur if current exports X
drop or initial debt F goes up. These are the cases depicted in Figure 2B.


To make the analysis of the effects of terms of trade shocks more systematic, and to identify
interaction effects, we finally consider the linearized version of the constrained equilibrium.


Taking logs of both sides of constrained financing equation 19 (assuming strict equality) we have


                                                   11	  
	  
                  log E = logY + log [ ! ! (1+ " )# ] ! log "# X + (1+ ! ) [QR ! (1+ " )F ]$%   (21)


Taking the total differential of this expression, keeping both export demand and initial debt
constant, we have


                       dE dY     dQ
                          =   !!    ,                                                           (22)
                        E   Y    Q


                           (1+ " )QR
where ! !                                       .
                   X + (1+ ! ) [QR " (1+ ! )F ]


Applying the same procedure to the monetary equilibrium equation (20) yields


                                        dE      dY
                                           = !!                                                 (23)
                                         E      Y


Finally, combining equations 22 and 23 yields


                                        dY   ! dQ                       !
                                           =      ,          where          >0                  (24)
                                        Y 1+ " Q                       1+ "


This equation summarizes the effects of terms of trade shocks on output of the domestic good. It
is clear from this expression that the impact of those shocks on output will depend on the term
       !
!!!
           . In particular, the impact of a terms-of-trade shock on output of the domestic good is larger

when ! is small and η is large.


Remember that a larger φ occurs when the exchange rate is relatively fixed. Therefore, for less
flexible exchange rate regimes, the impact of terms of trade shocks on output is larger. In line
with the implication of the Mundell-Fleming model we have that, with sticky wages and prices,
flexibility in the exchange rate helps stabilize output.



                                                              12	  
	  
The second key parameter is η. The value of η depends on initial debt in dollars, on the multiple
of their net worth that capitalists can borrow and the importance of the natural resource revenues
on the income of capitalists.


If initial debt in dollars is large, in which case ! is large, terms of trade shocks have a stronger
impact on current output of the domestic good. The intuition is that the associated real
devaluation (appreciation) reduces (increases) their ability to borrow more sharply when there is
a large debt denominated in foreign goods (dollars, say). This is because net worth falls
(increases) more and therefore –in a financially constrained equilibrium— investment falls
(increases) more as well. Notice that in this case, the more flexible the exchange rate has to be in
order to stabilize output around the flexible-price equilibrium.8


Moreover, the effect of the terms of trade shocks on output is also larger when ! is larger, so
that ! rises. The more capitalists can borrow against their net worth, the larger the impact on
investment and output of changes in the terms of trade, which affect net worth through the
natural resource endowment.


However, recall that when ! gets to be very large the equilibrium is no longer constrained, and
the terms of trade shocks cease to matter for short-term output. This suggests that the correlation
between output volatility and terms of trade volatility is hump shaped: it goes up as financial
development rises from a low level, but it eventually goes down as financial development
becomes sufficiently high.9


For instance, take copper producers: a fall in the price of copper matters more for non-copper
producers in Chile (medium financial development) than in Zambia (low financial development),
but in Australia (high financial development) it matters less than in Chile.




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8
  Under the flexible-price equilibrium, output of the domestic good should be equal to the output level
under the non-shock equilibrium.
9
  Given that the countries under empirical analysis are mainly middle-income economies, we expect to
capture the negative portion of the relationship described.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13	  
	  
Finally, notice also that the impact of terms of trade shocks on output is larger when QR is larger
(so that ! is larger as well).10 This is because when the natural resource is a large part of net
worth, then an increase in its price matters more for the ability of capitalists to borrow and
invest. Continuing with the example of copper: the effect of a drop in the price of copper should
be larger in Chile, which produces a great deal of copper, than in Argentina, which produces
much less.


III. Empirical evidence


In this section we present empirical evidence on the effects of commodity price shocks on
macroeconomic performance. We focus our analysis on episodes of large commodity price
booms and busts. We define those episodes as periods in which an index of country-specific
commodity prices surpasses or falls below its historical trend by a certain threshold margin.


In Céspedes and Velasco (2011) we construct a commodity price index for a group of 33
economies, using as weights the share of commodity i’ production in total commodity production
in country j. This strategy is an alternative to the common procedure of using as weights the
share of commodity i’ exports in total commodity exports in country j.


The advantage of our strategy is that it allows us to compute and update the weights beginning
early last century. This is not possible with commodity export shares, which are only available
from a much later date. This is relevant given that, as we will see later, a significant share of
commodity price boom episodes took place in the late 1960s and 1970s.


The disadvantage of our strategy is that we must leave out some countries due to data
restrictions. To get around this, we complement the production-based commodity index with an
export-based commodity index along the lines of Spatafora and Tytell (2009), Deaton and Miller
(1996) and Cashin, Céspedes, and Sahay (2004). In particular, we use a commodity price index
constructed using the weights of the relevant commodity exports in total exports. We deflate this

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !1
  This last effect requires X > (1+ ! ) (1+ ! ) F , meaning that exports of the home good have to be
sufficiently high relative to debt service.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14	  
	  
commodity export price index by the producer price index for the United States. This alternative
allows us to increase the number of countries in our empirical analysis to 59.


Following earlier work (Céspedes and Velasco (2011)), we define a commodity boom episode as
a period during which our commodity price index reaches a level at least 25% above its trend. A
commodity bust episode corresponds to a period during which the commodity price index
reaches a level lower than 25% below its trend. An episode ends when the commodity price
index comes back to a level lower (higher) than 10% above (below) its trend.


The trend is computed using a 50-year moving average in the case of the production-based
index.11 Given that the export-based commodity index is available since 1970, we construct a
pseudo export-based commodity index for the period 1930-2008. Due to data availability, this
pseudo index is constructed using a subset of the commodities used to construct the original
export-based index. Also, the weights used to construct the index correspond to the original
weights. Therefore, they correspond to the share of commodity i’ exports in total exports in
country j for the period 1999-2004. The pseudo index (available since 1930) is used exclusively
to identify the episodes, using the same procedure discussed for the production-based index.12


Using the production-based commodity index we obtain 87 episodes for a total of 33 countries.
In the case of the export-based commodity index we have 117 episodes for a total of 59
countries. For those countries with both indexes, the episodes we identify are quite similar (see
tables 1 and 2).


Most of the commodity price boom episodes are concentrated around two main periods: one
taking place in the 1970s and early 1980s, and another in the years immediately prior to 2008.
The busts are concentrated around the 1998-1999 period. As an example, in figure 3 we show the
two commodity price indexes we work with for Indonesia, Chile and Guatemala, mainly
producers of energy, metals and food commodities respectively. The episodes we find are
consistent with the episodes for boom and busts for energy, metal and food commodity prices
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11
   The 50-year moving average in each year is computed averaging 40 years back and 10 years ahead. The
commodity price trend for the 2000s is assumed to be equal to the commodity price trend for the year
2000.
12
   Nonetheless, the original export-based index is used in the regression analysis.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15	  
	  
discussed in WEO (2012), which are dated around the early 1970s, the end of the 1990s and the
2000s.


Given than the most recent boom episodes are still ongoing we study the macroeconomic
performance in the boom phase. In particular, we define an episode for our empirical purposes as
the period that goes from the beginning to the peak in our commodity price index.13 We assume
that the peak of the last episode was 2008.14


A. Output, investment and credit performance during commodity price boom and bust
episodes


The first objective of our analysis is to test the response of output, investment and credit to
commodity price shocks, taking into account the potential role of the exchange rate regime and
the degree of financial development as discussed in our theoretical section. For this purpose, we
begin by constructing a measure of the output gap using the HP filter. In order to reduce the end
point problem that arises with this method (and which may be particularly relevant for those
episodes ending in 2008), we extend our GDP series from 2010 to 2016 using the latest WEO
forecast of GDP growth for the countries in our sample. Given the potential problems that arise
from this strategy, we also study the response of the rate of investment to GDP and domestic
credit to the private sector (as a percentage of GDP) to commodity price shocks.


In our theoretical section we summarize the role of exchange rate flexibility through the
parameter ! . Larger values for that parameter imply more exchange rate flexibility. Our
empirical counterpart for that parameter comes from Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2008)’s
exchange rate system classification. In our analysis we use 13 different categories constructed by
these authors indexed from 1 to 13 according to the degree of exchange rate flexibility, with
higher values indicating more flexibility.15

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13
   For the bust episodes we consider the dynamics during the whole episode.
14
   The variables real output, investment, real exchange rate, domestic credit to the private sector and
international reserves come from the WDI. The sources of the remaining variables used in the empirical
analysis are described in the main text.
15
   In the exchange rate clasification constructed by Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff there are 14 categories:
no separate legal tender, pre announced peg or currency board arrangement, pre announced horizontal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16	  
	  
In order to measure financial development we use a variable that has been related to financial
depth: the rule of law index.16 The rule of law index is an assessment of the law and order
tradition of a country.17 We follow this strategy in order to avoid potential endogeneity problems
that could arise from using credit to the private sector (as % of GDP).


The set of regressions we study has the following structure:


  !yi = f ( !COM i , ERRi , RLi , POLi , KAOi ) ,


where ∆y! is the average output gap (investment rate or domestic credit to the private sector)
during episode i minus the average output gap (investment rate or domestic credit to the private
sector) in the two years prior to the beginning of episode i; ∆COM! is the percent change in the
average commodity price index during episode i with respect to the average commodity price
index in the two years prior to the beginning of episode i; ERR ! is the exchange rate classification
for the country during episode i; RLi corresponds to our measure of financial depth (rule of law);

  POLi is the political risk index that assess the political stability of the country i constructed by

ICRG (where the higher the index, the lower the political risk); and KAOi is a capital account
openness measure taken from Chinn and Ito (2008) (where the higher the index, the more open
the country is to cross-border capital transactions).


In the empirical analysis we allow for the interaction between the change in the commodity price
index and the exchange rate regime in order to capture our theoretical discussion that suggests


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%, de facto peg, pre announced crawling peg, pre announced
crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%, de factor crawling peg, de facto crawling band that
is narrower than or equal to +/-2%, pre announced crawling band that is wider than or equal to +/-2%, de
facto crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-5%, moving band that is narrower than or equal to
+/-2%, managed floating, freely floating and freely falling. In our analysis we ignore the freely falling
category in a similar way than Aghion, Bacchetta, Ranciere, and Rogoff (2009). In one extreme, a no
separate legal tender regime takes a value of 1 while in the other extreme a freely floating regime takes a
value of 13.
16
   See La Porta et al (1997).
17
   The rule of law index is constructed by the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG). It ranges from 0
to 6, where a higher number is associated with stronger law and order tradition.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17	  
	  
that higher exchange rate flexibility tends to reduce the impact of commodity price shocks on
economic activity. The equation is estimated by weighted least squares.


Given the larger sample size of the export-based index, we report it first. The results are in table
3. Our results indicate that a commodity price increase is positively associated with economic
activity in our sample of commodity price booms. Quantitatively, a 60% increase in the
commodity price index (around the average increase during the boom episodes) increases output
close to 1% with respect to trend output.18


The exchange rate regime is negatively associated to the output gap, which indicates that the
more flexible exchange rate regimes are associated with more moderate output dynamics. In
particular, according to our estimations, freely floating regimes in our sample experienced an
output level (with respect to trend GDP) close to 2.5% lower than de facto peg regimes.19 The
interaction of the exchange rate classification variable and the change in the commodity price
index is not significant in our specifications. Also, the depth of financial markets is associated to
more stable output gap dynamics. These results are not affected when we exclude from the
analysis the most recent boom episodes.


The second set of regressions we study replaces the output gap variable with the rate of
investment to GDP (see table 4). It can be argued that the investment rate may be a better
variable to study the interaction of financial constraints and commodity price shocks, so a closer
look may be worthwhile. We find that an increase in the commodity price index is positively
associated to the investment rate. In particular, an increase of 60% in the price index is
associated to an increase of the investment rate of around 3.5 percentage points.


We do not find a significant impact of the exchange rate regime on the investment rate. This
result may be reasonable given that we are using the investment rate as the variable of interest. If
the exchange rate regime tends to stabilize output and investment levels by a similar magnitude,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18
   We use for this computation the average for the statistically significant coefficients computed in table 3
for the response of changes in the output gap to changes in the commodity price index during the episode.
19
   A freely floating regime take a value of 13 while a de facto peg regime takes a value of 3. We use for
this computation the average for the statistically significant coefficients computed in table 3 for the
response of changes in the output gap to the exchange rate flexibility variable.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   18	  
	  
we should expect a non-significant coefficient when we estimate the effect of the exchange rate
regime on the investment rate.


Interestingly, we do not find a significant direct impact of financial depth on the investment rate.
Nonetheless, we do find a significant impact of the interaction term between the commodity
price increase and our measure of financial depth (rule of law). According to these results, the
investment rate of the countries with the highest financial depth in our sample is not affected by
the commodity price shock. The impact of commodity price shocks is higher for countries with
less developed financial market, consistent with our theoretical framework. The estimations that
exclude the most recent boom episodes yield similar results to the ones already discussed.


Finally, we study credit dynamics during our commodity price episodes (see table 5). In
particular, we study the determinants of the change in domestic credit to the private sector (as %
of GDP) in these episodes. Our results are less significant than the previous ones. Nonetheless,
they indicate that for episodes before the 2000s a commodity price increase has a positive impact
on credit, but this effect is reduced by the interaction of the commodity price shock and financial
market depth.


For the sample of commodity price episodes obtained using the production-based commodity
price index the results are similar to those obtained using the export-based commodity price
index. These results are reported in the first three panels of table 7.


B. Real exchange rate adjustment to commodity price shocks and international reserve
accumulation


In this subsection we study how the real exchange rate adjusts to the commodity price increase
during our boom and bust episodes. The mechanisms through which commodity price shocks
affect the economy in general, and the real exchange rate in particular, are varied. In the
theoretical section we provided a general framework to analyze the impact of those shocks in the
economy. In this general open economy framework, a positive commodity price shock tends to
appreciate the real exchange rate and the impact on the real exchange rate is larger when the
exchange rate regime is more flexible.

                                                   19	  
	  
In this empirical subsection we add one factor that has received significant attention, though
there is little agreement on its effect: international reserves accumulation as a proxy for foreign
exchange interventions.


Aizenman, Edwards and Riera-Crichton (2011) study whether active management of
international reserves affects the transmission of international price shocks to real exchange
rates, using a sample of Latin American countries. They provide evidence that indicates that
active reserve management lowers the short-run impact of terms of trade shocks on the real
exchange rate and affects its long-run adjustment. Adler and Tovar (2011), using a panel for 15
countries, find that sterilized interventions can slow the pace of appreciation, although the effect
decreases rapidly with the degree of capital account openness. They document that interventions
appear to be more effective when there are signs that the currency could already be overvalued.


We also control for the role played by the degree of capital account openness and political risk.
Political risk is used as a proxy for the political economy dimension of macroeconomic
adjustment to commodity price shocks, as discussed by Céspedes and Velasco (2011). In
particular, in that work we study the impact of the political economy process on fiscal outcomes.
As long as fiscal outcomes affect the exchange rate determination, there should be a link between
political economy variables and the exchange rate dynamics.


Using the commodity price episodes described in the previous section we run the following
regression:


  !RERi = f ( !COM i , !Ri , ERRi , RLi , POLi , KAOi )


where ∆RER ! is the percent change of the average real exchange rate during the episode i with
respect to the average real exchange rate in the two years prior to the beginning of episode i. A
positive value for this variable means an appreciation of the real exchange rate. !Ri is the

difference between average international reserves (as % of GDP) during the commodity boom
episode and average international reserves (as % of GDP) in the two years prior to the beginning


                                                          20	  
	  
of episode i. The remaining variables correspond to the ones described in the previous
subsection.


In our analysis we do not use foreign exchange interventions but rather changes in international
reserves. We know that reserves vary not only due to foreign exchange interventions, but also
due to valuation changes and income flows, and debt operations on behalf of other agents,
among other reasons. However, this is likely to be a major problem in estimations using high
frequency time series. This problem should be less intense in our episode approach.


Results are reported in table 6. The results indicate that there is a significant impact of the
commodity terms of trade on the real exchange rate. For the whole sample, a ten percent increase
in the commodity price index is associated with an appreciation of around 1.3 percent. This
coefficient is in the lower range of the results estimated in previous studies (see Chen and
Rogoff (2004), Cashin, Céspedes, and Sahay (2004), and Ricci, Milesi-Ferretti and Lee (2008),
among others).


We find a significant impact of reserve accumulation on real exchange rate dynamics. Our
estimations indicate that the accumulation of international reserves tends to reduce the
appreciation of the real exchange rate. Acknowledging the endogeneity problem that arises in
this estimation from the simultaneity between the intervention decision and the contemporaneous
exchange rate, it is important to notice that that endogeneity problem leads to obtaining a small
and incorrectly signed coefficient on contemporaneous interventions (see Kearns and Rigobon
(2005)). This is not the case in our estimations.


The negative coefficient between the real exchange rate change and the accumulation of
international reserves may be explained by the fact that less flexible exchange rate regimes must
accumulate international reserves in order to keep the parity. We control for the flexibility of the
exchange rate regime in order to determine if the significance of this result is reduced when
controlling for the exchange rate regime classification. Nonetheless, the results hold. In
particular, our results indicate that an accumulation of 10% of GDP in international reserves
tends to depreciate the real exchange rate by 5%.



                                                    21	  
	  
Moreover, we find that countries with less open capital accounts exhibit a more depreciated real
exchange rate. Finally, countries with more stable political systems tend to exhibit a more
depreciated real exchange rate. Interestingly, our results indicate that the interaction between
political stability and the commodity price change is significant, indicating that the impact of
commodity price shocks on the real exchange rate is reduced when the political system is more
stable. If government expenditure is more intensive in non-traded goods, this result may be
connected to the one obtained in Céspedes and Velasco (2011), which indicates that more stable
political systems tend to reduce the impact of commodity price shocks on government
expenditure.20


IV.                                        Final remarks
                                                                                  	  
In this paper we characterize the response of different macroeconomic variables during episodes
of large commodity price shocks. These shocks represent a significant challenge for
macroeconomic policy. Commodity price movements generate wealth effects, which in turn
affect the exchange rate and aggregate demand. How to manage monetary and fiscal policies to
reduce this macroeconomic volatility is therefore a key question.


As discussed by Céspedes and Velasco (2011), the implementation of a credible fiscal rule may
help to reduce the impact of these shocks on output volatility. The right institutional setup also
helps. Here we provide evidence that indicates that the impact of commodity price shocks on the
real exchange rate is reduced when the political system is more stable. If due to political
economy reasons –such as those discussed by Céspedes and Velasco (2011) and referenced
therein— a more stable political system tends to reduce the impact of commodity price shocks
on government expenditure, then it should also reduce the appreciation of the real exchange rate
during those episodes.


The monetary policy regime can also play a crucial role. We find that more flexible exchange
rate regimes tend to be associated with more stable output dynamics. But at the same time,
international reserve accumulation tends to reduce the impact of commodity price shocks on the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20
  The results obtained using the production-based commodity price index are similar to the ones obtained
using the export-based commodity price index. They are presented in the last panel of table 7.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   22	  
	  
real exchange rate. These two results together suggest that a mix of a more flexible exchange rate
regime (associated to an inflation targeting regime) with exchange rate interventions should help
reduce macroeconomic volatility.


De Gregorio and Labbé (2011) report similar findings. They construct a dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium model of a small open emerging-market economy to analyze the effects of a
commodity price shock on economic activity. They find that a monetary policy rule for the
interest rate that responds to exchange rate movements in the context of a commodity price
shock tends to reduce the volatility of exports, yet it increases the volatility of overall output and
inflation. They also argue that the combination of a monetary policy rule that targets inflation,
coupled with occasional exchange rate interventions, can lead to more stable inflation and output
dynamics.


Alternatively, Frankel (2010) proposes a monetary policy regime for small countries where a
single commodity makes up a large share of national production and exports: targeting the
domestic-currency price of exports. Under this framework, a commodity price shock should be
compensated by an appreciation of the nominal exchange rate in order to achieve the
stabilization of export prices in domestic currency. Notice, however, that under this framework
the competitiveness of other tradable goods industries could be reduced by the appreciation,
giving rise to classic Dutch disease concern.


We also provide evidence that the impact of commodity price shocks on output and investment
tends to be larger for economies with less developed financial markets. We find that financial
depth tends to reduce the impact of commodity price shocks on investment. The role of financial
market depth in the transmission of shocks is not new. What is new is its importance in countries
subject to commodity price volatility.




                                                   23	  
	  
References


Adler, G. and S. Sosa, (2011), “Commodity Price Cycles: The Perils of Mismanaging the
Boom,” IMF Working Paper #283, International Monetary Fund.


Adler, G. and C. Tovar, (2011), “Foreign Exchange Intervention: A Shield Against Appreciation
Winds?” IMF Working Paper #165, International Monetary Fund.


Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, R. Rancière, and K. Rogoff (2009), "Exchange rate volatility and
productivity growth: The role of financial development," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
56(4), pages 494-513.


Aizenman, Joshua, Sebastian Edwards & Daniel Riera-Crichton, (2011) "Adjustment patterns to
commodity terms of trade shocks: the role of exchange rate and international reserves policies,"
NBER Working Papers 17692, National Bureau of Economic Research.


Broda, Christian (2004), "Terms of Trade and Exchange Rate Regimes in Developing
Countries," Journal of International Economics 63, 31-58.


Cashin, Paul, Luis F Cespedes, and Ratna Sahay (2004), “Commodity Currencies and the Real
Exchange Rate”, Journal of Development Economics, 75:239-268.


Céspedes, L., Chang R., Velasco A. (2004), “Balance Sheets and exchange rate policy,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 94 No. 4. pp. 1183-1193.


Céspedes, L., Chang R., Velasco A. (2003), “IS-LM-BP in the Pampas,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol.
50. pp. 143-156.


Céspedes, Luis F. and Andres Velasco (2011), "Was This Time Different?: Fiscal Policy in
Commodity Republics," BIS Working Papers 365, Bank for International Settlements.




                                                24	  
	  
Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2008). “A New Measure of Financial Openness”. Journal of
Comparative Policy Analysis, Volume 10, Issue 3, p. 309 – 322.


Deaton, Angus, and Ronald Miller (1996), “International Commodity Prices, Macroeconomic
Performance, and Politics in Sub-Saharan Africa”, Journal of African Economies, vol. 5, pp. 99-
191.


De Gregorio, J. and F. Labbé (2011), “Copper, the Real Exchange Rate and Macroeconomic
Fluctuations in Chile,” in Arezki, R., T. Gylfason and A. Sy (eds.), Beyond the Curse: Policies to
Harness the Power of Natural Resources, Washington D.C.: International Monetary Fund.


Edwards, Sebastian, and Eduardo Levy Yeyati (2005), "Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock
Absorbers," European Economic Review 49(8), 2079-2105.


Frankel, J. (2010), “A Comparison of Monetary Policy Anchor Options, Including Product Price
Targeting, for Commodity-Exporters in Latin America,” NBER Working Paper No. 16362.


Ilzetzki E., Reinhart, C. M. and Rogoff, K. S. (2008), "Exchange Rate Arrangements Entering
the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?", Mimeo.


Kearns, Jonathan, and Roberto Rigobon, (2005), “Identifying the Efficacy of Central Bank
Interventions: Evidence from Australia and Japan,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 66
(May), pp. 31–48.


Kose, M. Ayhan (2002), “Explaining business cycles in small open economies ‘How much do
world prices matter?’ Journal of International Economics 56, 299-327.


Krugman, P. (1999), “Balance sheets, the transfer problem, and financial crises,” in Isard P.,
Razin A., Rose A. (Eds.) International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honor of Robert
Flood. Kluwer Academic Publishers-IMF.




                                                 25	  
	  
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1997), “The
Legal Determinants of External Finance,” The Journal of Finance LII(3), 1131-1150.


Mendoza, E.G. (1995), “The terms of trade, the real exchange rate, and economic fluctuations,”
International Economic Review 36, 101–137.


Ricci, L. A., G.M. Milesi-Ferretti, and J. Lee, (2008) “Real Exchange Rates and Fundamentals:
A Cross-Country Perspective” IMF Working Paper 13, International Monetary Fund.


Spatafora, Nikola and Irina Tytell (2009), “Commodity terms of trade: The History of booms and
busts”, IMF Working Paper 09205, September.


World Economic Outlook (2012), International Monetary Fund, April.




	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

                                               26	  
	  
	  
	  
	                    Figure 1A: Determination of Equilibrium in a Financially
	                                   Unconstrained Economy
	     !
	  
	  
                  !"
	                !
	     !          !       !          !   !                !       !                  !             !       !            !               !!!!!!!!
	     !
	                                                                                                              "#!
                  !
	  
	     !!!!!!!!
	                !       !          !   !                !       !                  !                                $%!           !              !!!
	  
                  !       !                         !         !!!!!!!
	                                           "!
	  
	     !                                                                             &'
	                !                                                                  '!
	                !                                     ! !       !                  !!!!!!!!!!!
	  
                  !
	                                                                                                               #"
	                !
	     !          !       !          !   !                !       !                  !             !       ""
	          Figure 1B: Export Demand Increase in a Financially Unconstrained
	                                    Economy
	  
	     !
	                !"
	                !
	  
       !          !       !          !   !                !       !                  !                                      !
	                                                                                                              "#!
	     !          !       !!!!!!!!
	     !                                                                                                         "#(!
	                !                                                                                              $%!
	  
	     !!!!!!!!                                                                                                  $%(!
	                                           "!                         !                !                                      !
	                                                 )!
       !          !                                                         !                !         !          !!!
	  
	                !       !          !   !!!!!!!                                         &'
	     !                                                                                 '!
	     !
	                                                                                                               #"
	  
	  
	  
                                                                            27	  
	  
	  
	                                                               !
	                     Figure 2A: Determination of Equilibrium in a Financially
	                                   Constrained Economy
	     !
       !
	  
	                !"
	                !
	     !          !     !          !   !                !        !          !        !        !             !            !!!!!!!!
	     !
	                                                                                                  $%!
                  !
	  
       !!!!!!!!
	  
	                !     !          !   !                !        !          !        !        !!!
	                                                           !          !        !       !!!!!!!           "#!
	     !                                   "!
	                !
                  !                                 !                       &'            !                                           ! !
                                                                            '!
                  !                                                                                  #"
                                                !
       Figure 2B: Terms of Trade Drop in a Financially Constrained Economy
       !
                  !"
                  !
       !          !     !          !   !                !        !          !                                        !
       !          !     !!!!!!!!
                                                                                                    $%)!
       !
                  !
       !!!!!!!!
                  !     !          !   !                !        !          !                        $%!         !              !!!

                  !     !          !                                                                      "#!
                                           (!
                                                        "!

                  !                                                         &'
                                                                            '!
       !
                                                                                                     #"




                                                                     28	  
	  
	  
                	  
                	  
                                                                                                                                                     	  
                                                                                                                                                     	  




                                                              !"#$%&'()'*+,,+-"./'0%"1&'23"4+-&4


                              *5"6&)'*+,,+-"./'3%"1&'"7-&8'                                       97-+7&4":)'*+,,+-"./'3%"1&'"7-&8'
                       &!!"                                                           %#!"
                       %#!"                                                           %!!"
                       %!!"
                                                                                      $#!"
                       $#!"
                                                                                      $!!"
                       $!!"
                        #!"                                                            #!"

                         !"                                                             !"




                              $'(!"
                              $'(%"
                              $'()"
                              $'(*"
                              $'(+"
                              $'+!"
                              $'+%"
                              $'+)"
                              $'+*"
                              $'++"
                              $''!"
                              $''%"
                              $'')"
                              $''*"
                              $''+"
                              %!!!"
                              %!!%"
                              %!!)"
                              %!!*"
                              %!!+"
                                                                                             $'(!"
                                                                                             $'(%"
                                                                                             $'()"
                                                                                             $'(*"
                                                                                             $'(+"
                                                                                             $'+!"
                                                                                             $'+%"
                                                                                             $'+)"
                                                                                             $'+*"
                                                                                             $'++"
                                                                                             $''!"
                                                                                             $''%"
                                                                                             $'')"
                                                                                             $''*"
                                                                                             $''+"
                                                                                             %!!!"
                                                                                             %!!%"
                                                                                             %!!)"
                                                                                             %!!*"
                                                                                             %!!+"




                              ,-./01234567"8976-"     :0/7;<=/9234567"8976-"                          ,-./01234567"8976-"   :0/7;<=/9234567"8976-"




       29	  
                                                           ;$:.&,:6:)'*+,,+-"./'3%"1&'"7-&8'
                                                    &!!"
                                                    %#!"
                                                    %!!"
                                                    $#!"
                                                    $!!"
                                                     #!"
                                                      !"




                                                           $'(+"
                                                           $'++"
                                                           $''+"
                                                           %!!+"




                                                           $'(!"
                                                           $'(%"
                                                           $'()"
                                                           $'(*"
                                                           $'+!"
                                                           $'+%"
                                                           $'+)"
                                                           $'+*"
                                                           $''!"
                                                           $''%"
                                                           $'')"
                                                           $''*"
                                                           %!!!"
                                                           %!!%"
                                                           %!!)"
                                                           %!!*"




                                                                ,-./01234567"8976-"          :0/7;<=/9234567"8976-"
                                            !"#$%&"'()*+,-.%,(/,+01(23-.456+-078",%.(90.%:
                                                                                                           -.+*)#%,2)%2    3%11%&#)42"+#5'2
                   !"#$%&'                   ()*+)            !,&           -.+*)#%,        /*0#1.1         /*0#1.1         #,&'02#,5+'*$'6   	  
       !""#$                                                                                                                                  	  
       7+8',)#,*                             9:;<            9:=>              9<              9:=?             =               <@ABC
                                                                                                                                              	  
       7+8',)#,*                             B??<            B??:              ;               B??=             @               >BA;C         	  
       7.$)+*D#*                             9:;<            9:=>              9<              9:=?             =               E=A=C
       7.$)+*D#*                             B??E            B??:              @               B??=             >               <9A<C         	  
       F%D#G#*                               9:;<            9:=>              9<              9:=?             =               ;<AEC         	  
       F%D#G#*                               B??<            B??:              ;               B??=             @               >BA;C
       F+*H#D                                9:;<            9:=9              :               9:=?             =               B:ABC         	  
       F+*H#D
       3*,*&*
                                             B??;
                                             9:;<
                                                             B??:
                                                             9:=>
                                                                               <
                                                                               9<
                                                                                               B??=
                                                                                               9:=?
                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                =
                                                                                                                                9;A9C
                                                                                                                                @;A:C
                                                                                                                                              	  
       3*,*&*                                B??<            B??:              ;               B??=             @               >;A<C         	  
       3I#D'                                 9:;?            9:=<              9E              9:=?             99              9=A9C
       3I#D'                                 B??@            B??:              E               B??=             <               EEA@C
                                                                                                                                              	  
       3*1'+%%,                              9:;E            9:=>              9B              9:;:             @               :9ABC         	  
       3*1'+%%,                              B??>            B??:              >               B??=             E               @@A<C
       3%D%1J#*                              9:;<            9:=>              9<              9:=?             =               @;A=C         	  
       3%D%1J#*
       3%$)*2K#5*
                                             B??>
                                             9:;;
                                                             B??:
                                                             9:=?
                                                                               >
                                                                               E
                                                                                               B??=
                                                                                               9:=?
                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                EEA?C
                                                                                                                                B=A?C
                                                                                                                                              	  
       -',1*+L                               B??>            B??:              >               B??=             E               @@A=C         	  
       -%1#,#5*,2K'".JD#5                    9:;<            9:;;              >               9:;E             B               ;9A:C
       !5.*&%+                               9:;E            9:=>              9B              9:=?             ;               :BABC
                                                                                                                                              	  
       !5.*&%+                               B??>            B??:              >               B??=             E               @=A9C         	  
       MI*,*                                 9:;;            9:=E              =               9:=?             E               E?A:C
       MI*,*                                 9:=;            9:==              B               9:==             B               9EA=C         	  
       MI*,*
       M.*)'1*D*
                                             B??;
                                             9:;<
                                                             B??:
                                                             9:=?
                                                                               <
                                                                               =
                                                                                               B??=
                                                                                               9:;;
                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                >
                                                                                                                                B=A?C
                                                                                                                                E?A<C
                                                                                                                                              	  
       N,&%,'$#*                             9:;E            9:=>              9B              9:=?             ;               ;=A>C         	  
       N,&%,'$#*
       N,&#*
                                             B??<
                                             9:;<
                                                             B??:
                                                             9:;>
                                                                               ;
                                                                               <
                                                                                               B??=
                                                                                               9:;E
                                                                                                                @
                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                                @EA?C
                                                                                                                                99?A@C
                                                                                                                                              	  
       N,&#*                                 9:;:            9:=<              >               9:=?             B               >BAEC         	  
       N,&#*                                 B??@            B??:              E               B??=             <               <?A>C
       N+*,                                  9:;E            9:=>              9B              9:=?             ;               BB@ABC        	  
       N+*,                                  9::?            9::B              <               9::?             9               9;A@C         	  
       N+*,                                  B??<            B??:              ;               B??=             @               ;;A=C
       O*1*#5*                               9:;E            9:;>              B               9:;E             9               E?A;C         	  
       P.Q*#)
       P.Q*#)
                                             9:;E
                                             9::?
                                                             9:=>
                                                             9::B
                                                                               9B
                                                                               <
                                                                                               9:=?
                                                                                               9::?
                                                                                                                ;
                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                                                B;?A;C
                                                                                                                                9=A>C
                                                                                                                                              	  
       P.Q*#)                                B??E            B??:              @               B??=             >               =@A9C         	  
       /'0#5%                                9:;E            9:=>              9B              9:=?             ;               :EA9C
       /'0#5%                                B??E            B??:              @               B??=             >               ;<A:C         	  
       /*D*4$#*                              9:;E            9:=>              9B              9:=?             ;               99BA9C
       /*D*4$#*                              B??<            B??:              ;               B??=             @               @EA>C
       R#8'+#*                               9:;E            9:=>              9B              9:=?             ;               9>>A9C
       R#8'+#*                               9::?            9::9              B               9::?             9               9@A>C
       R#8'+#*                               B??E            B??:              @               B??=             >               =BAEC
       R%+Q*4                                9:;E            9::?              9;              9:=?             ;               9?<A:C
       R%+Q*4                                B??E            B??:              @               B??=             >               ;9AEC
       R'Q2S'*D*,&                           9:;;            9:=>              :               9:=?             E               =BA<C
       R'Q2S'*D*,&                           B??<            B??:              ;               B??=             @               E?A@C
       T'+.                                  9:;E            9:=>              9B              9:=?             ;               @:A:C
       T'+.                                  B??>            B??:              >               B??=             E               @?A?C
       T*+*8.*4                              9:;<            9:;E              B               9:;<             9               B@ABC
       T*+*8.*4                              9:;:            9:=9              <               9:=?             B               B@A:C
       K.$$#*                                9:;<            9::<              B9              9:=?             =               9BEA@C
       K.$$#*                                B???            B??:              9?              B??=             :               99EA?C
       (*.&#27+*J#*                          9:;E            9:=>              9B              9:=?             ;               B@:A?C
       (*.&#27+*J#*                          9::?            9::B              <               9::?             9               9=A:C
       (*.&#27+*J#*                          B??E            B??:              @               B??=             >               =<A=C
       U+#,#&*&2V2U%J*8%                     9:;E            9:=;              9E              9:=?             ;               BBBA=C
       U+#,#&*&2V2U%J*8%                     9::?            9::<              E               9::?             9               B?A<C
       U+#,#&*&2V2U%J*8%                     B???            B??:              9?              B??=             :               99:A<C
       W+.8.*4                               9:;;            9:=?              E               9:=?             E               =EA>C
       X','H.'D*                             9:;<            9:=>              9<              9:=?             =               B<>AEC
       X','H.'D*                             9::?            9::B              <               9::?             9               9>AEC
       X','H.'D*                             B??E            B??:              @               B??=             >               ;:ABC
       (%.)I27Y+#5*                          9:;<            9::?              9=              9:=?             =               ;<A;C
       (%.)I27Y+#5*                          B??@            B??:              E               B??=             <               B=A>C

       7G'+*8'                                                                                                                   ;EA9C

       Z6[\23%11%&#)42"+#5'2#,5+'*$'25%++'$"%,&$2)%2)I'2"'+5',)25I*,8'2#,2)I'2*G'+*8'25%11%&#)42"+#5'2#,&'02&.+#,82)I'2'"#$%&'2Z$)*+)2)%2
       1*0#1.1[2Q#)I2+'$"'5)2)%2*G'+*8'25%11%&#)42"+#5'2#,&'02#,2)I'2)Q%24'*+$2"+'G#%.$2)%2)I'2J'8#,,#,82%Y2)I'2'"#$%&'A

                                                                                          30	  
	  
                                       !"#$%&#'()*+,-.%,(/,+01(23-.456+-078",%.(90.%:
                                                                                                      -.+*)#%,1)%1    2%00%&#)31"+#4'1
             !"#$%&'                    ()*+)            !,&           -.+*)#%,        /#,#0.0         /#,#0.0          #,&'516*778

  !"#$#

  9+:',)#,*                             ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;>@AB
  C%7#D#*                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;E@FB
  C+*G#7                                ;<<=            >EEH               I              ;<<=             ;                ?F@>B
  2J#7'                                 ;<<=            >EEH               I              ;<<=             ;               ?;A@AB
  2*0'+%%,                              ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;<@EB
  2%7%0K#*                              ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;I@FB
  -',0*+L                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?>E@EB
  -%0#,#4*,1M'".K7#4                    ;<=F            ;<=N               F              ;<=A             >               ?;I@=B
  !4.*&%+                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;<@>B
  OJ*,*                                 ;<<=            >EEH               I              >EE;             F               ?;=@>B
  P,&%,'$#*                             ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;A@<B
  P,&#*                                 ;<<=            >EEH               I              ;<<<             >               ?;F@;B
  P+*,                                  ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<<             >               ?;N@<B
  Q.R*#)                                ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?>E@FB
  /'5#4%                                ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;N@=B
  /*7*3$#*                              ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;F@NB
  S#:'+#*                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;<@IB
  S%+R*3                                ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;I@NB
  T'+.                                  ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;=@=B
  (*.&#19+*K#*                          ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;<@=B
  U','G.'7*                             ;<<=            ;<<<               >              ;<<=             ;               ?;=@NB

  9D'+*:'                                                                                                                  ?;I@AB

  V8WX12%00%&#)31"+#4'16*7714%++'$"%,&$1)%1)J'1"'+4',)14J*,:'1#,1)J'1*D'+*:'14%00%&#)31"+#4'1#,&'51&.+#,:1)J'1'"#$%&'1V$)*+)1)%10#,#0.0W1
  R#)J1+'$"'4)1)%1*D'+*:'14%00%&#)31"+#4'1#,&'51#,1)J'1)R%13'*+$1"+'D#%.$1)%1)J'1K':#,,#,:1%61)J'1'"#$%&'@                                  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  




                                                                                     31	  
	  
                                          !"#$%&"'()*+,-.%,(/,+01()2*-3456",%.(70.%2
                                                                                                        ()*+)2)%2      3%11%&#)42"+#5'2
              !"#$%&'                   ()*+)            !,&           -.+*)#%,       /*0#1.1          /*0#1.1          #,&'02#,5+'*$'6

  !""#$

  7+8',)#,*                             9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               9<ABC
  7+8',)#,*                             ?@@>            ?@@:              >              ?@@=               <               ?@A>C
  7.$)+*D#*                             9:;<            9::@              9;             9:=@               ;               9BA9C
  7.$)+*D#*                             ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               EEA@C
  7D8'+#*                               9:;<            9::E              ?@             9:=@               ;               ==A>C
  7D8'+#*                               ?@@@            ?@@:              9@             ?@@=               :               9?;A?C
  7.$)+*D#*                             9:;<            9::@              9;             9:=@               ;               9BA9C
  7.$)+*D#*                             ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               EEA@C
  F*G+*#,                               ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               ;:AEC
  F'D*+.$                               ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               B<A<C
  F%D#H#*                               9:;E            9::?              ?@             9:=@               =               E;A;C
  F%D#H#*                               ?@@>            ?@@=              <              ?@@=               <               E?A:C
  F%)$I*,*                              9:;:            9:=@              ?              9:=@               ?               ?EA<C
  F%)$I*,*                              ?@@B            ?@@=              E              ?@@=               E               <;A9C
  F.D8*+#*                              ?@@>            ?@@:              >              ?@@=               <               B;A9C
  3*,*&*                                9:;<            9::?              9:             9:=@               ;               E<A=C
  3*,*&*                                ?@@E            ?@@:              ;              ?@@=               B               <;AEC
  3G#D'                                 9:;:            9:=@              ?              9:=@               ?               9=A;C
  3G#D'                                 ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               >:A>C
  3*1'+%%,                              9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:;:               B               =:A:C
  3*1'+%%,                              ?@@>            ?@@:              >              ?@@=               <               <9A:C
  3%D%1J#*                              9:;<            9:=;              9<             9:=@               ;               9@=A>C
  3%D%1J#*                              ?@@>            ?@@:              >              ?@@=               <               <BAEC
  3%)'2&KLH%#+'                         9:;E            9:=9              :              9:;;               >               :EA>C
  3+%*)#*                               ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               <EA>C
  -',1*+M                               9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               <9A=C
  -',1*+M                               ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               ?;ABC
  -%1#,#5*,2N'".JD#5                    9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               :BA=C
  -%1#,#5*,2N'".JD#5                    ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               ?;A@C
  !5.*&%+                               9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:;:               B               =?A>C
  !5.*&%+                               ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               <EA?C
  !84")O27+*J2N'"A                      9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               9?;A@C
  !84")O27+*J2N'"A                      9::@            9::9              ?              9::@               9               9?A=C
  !84")O27+*J2N'"A                      ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               >EA;C
  !D2(*DH*&%+                           9:;<            9:=9              =              9:=@               ;               >?A<C
  P'%+8#*                               ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               E9A@C
  PG*,*                                 9:;E            9:==              9B             9:=@               =               ::A@C
  P.*)'1*D*                             9:;<            9:=9              =              9:=@               ;               <@A;C
  Q%,&.+*$                              9:;B            9:=@              >              9:;;               ?               9=A9C
  L,&%,'$#*                             9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               <BA>C
  L,&%,'$#*                             ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               B>A9C
  L,&#*                                 9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               9=A:C
  L+*,                                  9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               ?@9A:C
  L+*,                                  9::@            9::9              ?              9::@               9               ?9A@C
  L+*,                                  ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               ==A;C
  R*S*MG$)*,                            ?@@>            ?@@:              >              ?@@=               <               B:A;C
  R.I*#)                                9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               9:?A;C
  R.I*#)                                ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               ==A?C
  T#)G.*,#*                             ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               >>A@C
  /'0#5%                                9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               9EEA<C
  /'0#5%                                9::@            9::9              ?              9::@               9               9<A=C
  /'0#5%                                ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               ;;A<C
  /*D*4$#*                              9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               <=A@C
  /*D*4$#*                              ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               >@A=C
  /%,8%D#*                              ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               <;A@C
  /%+%55%                               9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:;:               B               <:A<C
  /%+%55%                               ?@@>            ?@@:              >              ?@@=               <               <BA9C
  U#8'+#*                               9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               ?@BA?C
  U#8'+#*                               9::@            9::?              E              9::@               9               9;A9C
  U#8'+#*                               ?@@>            ?@@:              >              ?@@=               <               =:AEC
  U%+I*4                                9:;<            9::?              9:             9:=@               ;               99<ABC
  U%+I*4                                ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               ;<A?C
  U'I2V'*D*,&                           9:;;            9::9              9>             9:=@               <               9>A<C
  W1*,                                  9:;<            9:=;              9<             9:=@               ;               9B>A9C
  W1*,                                  9::@            9::?              E              9::@               9               9<A9C
  W1*,                                  ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               =<ABC
  X'+.                                  9:;E            9:=<              9?             9:=@               =               >?A;C
  X'+.                                  ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               >>A@C
  X*+*8.*4                              9:;E            9:;<              ?              9:;E               9               B@A9C
  X*M#$)*,                              9:;E            9:;>              E              9:;<               ?               BEABC
  XG#D#""#,'$                           9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               ?EA@C
  XG#D#""#,'$                           ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               E?A>C
  N.$$#*                                9:;<            9::?              9:             9:=@               ;               =>A9C
  N.$$#*                                ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               ;@A=C
  (*.&#27+*J#*                          9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               ?9@A>C
  (*.&#27+*J#*                          9::@            9::?              E              9::@               9               9;A?C
  (*.&#27+*J#*                          ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               =:ABC
  YG*#D*,&                              9:;<            9:=9              =              9:=@               ;               ?>A:C
  Y+#,#&*&2Z2Y%J*8%                     9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               9E>A?C
  Y+#,#&*&2Z2Y%J*8%                     ?@@E            ?@@:              ;              ?@@=               B               =@A@C
  Y.,#$#*                               9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               9@>A=C
  Y.,#$#*                               9::@            9::9              ?              9::@               9               9>A=C
  Y.,#$#*                               ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               >>A=C
  [M+*#,'                               ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               E@A>C
  [,#)'&27+*J2!1#+*)'$                  ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               =<A:C
  [+.8.*4                               9:;;            9:=9              >              9:=@               <               9BA@C
  \','S.'D*                             9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               9:9ABC
  \','S.'D*                             9::@            9::?              E              9::@               9               9EA=C
  \','S.'D*                             ?@@<            ?@@:              B              ?@@=               >               =BA@C
  \#'),*1                               ?@@>            ?@@:              >              ?@@=               <               B9A@C
  (%.)G27]+#5*                          9:;<            9:=>              9?             9:=@               ;               E>A:C
  (%.)G27]+#5*                          ?@@B            ?@@:              <              ?@@=               E               E?A=C

  7H'+*8'                                                                                                                    BEA;C

                                                                                                                   32	  
  ^6_`23%11%&#)42"+#5'2#,5+'*$'25%++'$"%,&$2)%2)G'2"'+5',)25G*,8'2#,2)G'2*H'+*8'25%11%&#)42"+#5'2#,&'02&.+#,82)G'2'"#$%&'2^$)*+)2)%2

	  
  1*0#1.1_2I#)G2+'$"'5)2)%2*H'+*8'25%11%&#)42"+#5'2#,&'02#,2)G'2)I%24'*+$2"+'H#%.$2)%2)G'2J'8#,,#,82%]2)G'2'"#$%&'A                       	  
                                          !"#$%&#'()*+,-.%,(/,+01()2*-3456",%.(70.%2
                                                                                                      -.+*)#%,1)%1    2%00%&#)31"+#4'1
             !"#$%&'                    ()*+)            !,&           -.+*)#%,       /#,#0.0          /#,#0.0          #,&'516*778

  !"#$#

  9+:',)#,*                             ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?>@A;B
  C*D+*#,                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?;=AEB
  C'7*+.$                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?;<AFB
  C%)$G*,*                              ;<<=            >HH@               E             >HH;              I                ?>HA<B
  C+*J#7                                ;<<<            >HHI               E             >HH;              @                ?;IAEB
  2D#7'                                 ;<<=            >HH@               E             >HH;              I                ?>FA=B
  2*0'+%%,                              ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?;<A=B
  2%7%0K#*                              ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?;<A=B
  2+%*)#*                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?;<ALB
  -',0*+M                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?>IAIB
  !4.*&%+                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?;EAHB
  !:3")N19+*K1O'"A                      ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?>HAFB
  PD*,*                                 ;<<<            >HHF               L             >HHH              >                ?;HAIB
  Q,&#*                                 ;<<=            >HH@               E             >HH;              I                ?;IA>B
  Q+*,                                  ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<<              >                ?>HAEB
  R.G*#)                                ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?>HAEB
  /'5#4%                                ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?>HA>B
  /%+%44%                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?;EA;B
  S#:'+#*                               ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?>HAEB
  S%+G*3                                ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?;<A@B
  TD#7#""#,'$                           ;<<<            >HH@               F             ;<<<              ;                ?;;A;B
  O.$$#*                                ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?>HAHB
  (*.&#19+*K#*                          ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?>HAEB
  (%.)D196+#4*                          ;<<=            >HH@               E             ;<<=              ;                ?;IAEB
  U','J.'7*                             ;<<=            ;<<<               >             ;<<=              ;                ?>HA>B

  9V'+*:'                                                                                                                   ?;=A=B

  W8XY12%00%&#)31"+#4'16*7714%++'$"%,&$1)%1)D'1"'+4',)14D*,:'1#,1)D'1*V'+*:'14%00%&#)31"+#4'1#,&'51&.+#,:1)D'1'"#$%&'1W$)*+)1)%10#,#0.0X1
  G#)D1+'$"'4)1)%1*V'+*:'14%00%&#)31"+#4'1#,&'51#,1)D'1)G%13'*+$1"+'V#%.$1)%1)D'1K':#,,#,:1%61)D'1'"#$%&'A                                  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

                                                                                     33	  
	  
                                       !"#$%&'(&)*+,*+&-./"0123&1/&24004-1+.&,512%&#440&"/-&#*3+&%,134-%3

                                                                                        S/#/&</&'+,%)-%.$/T+=>%&?/+-&+(G'#G'+?%#+
  !"#$%&%'()*+,%)-%.$/                               012           032            042           052           062          072                        082            092


  :(;;(<-'*+#)-=/+-&</"+=>%&?/                      @A@1B         @A@17         @A@14              @A@14             @A@13             @A@31        @A@13          @A@@7
                                                  03A442CC      03A@72CC        01A692            01A752C            01A452            01A552       01A7@2         0@A812

  !"=>%&?/+)%'/+D$/"-.-$-'*                                       E@A@@3         E@A@@4           E@A@@4             E@A@@3         E@A@@3          E@A@@4          E@A@@5
                                                                0E3A@12CC      0E3A582CC        0E3A5B2CC           0E1AB52C       0E1A5@2C        0E1AB72C       0E3A752CC

  FG$/+(D+H%I                                                                    E@A@@6           E@A@@8              E@A@@8         E@A@@6                         E@A@@9
                                                                               0E3A162CC          0E1A692           0E3A512CC      0E3A162CC                      0E3A572CC

  J($-'-=K                                                                                        @A@@@
                                                                                                  0@A612

  :%#-'%$+%==(G&'+(#/&&/KK                                                                                           @A@@6
                                                                                                                     01A482

  !"=>%&?/+)%'/+D$/"-.-$-'*C=(;;(<-'*+                                                                                              E@A@@1
  #)-=/+-&</"+=>%&?/                                                                                                                0E@A812

  F3                                                @A@7          @A@9           @A11               @A13              @A15           @A13            @A@B            @A17
  LG;./)+(D+(.K/),%'-(&K                            118           1@8            1@7                1@7                94            1@7               7B             8@
  M+'/K'                                           6A54CC        4A78CC        6A73CCC            5A33CCC           5A@8CCC        5A46CCC           3A8BC         7A6@CCC
                                                                                                                                                   !"=$G<-&?+     !"=$G<-&?+
                                                                                                                                                    )/=/&'+         )/=/&'+
  N%;#$/                                             O$$           O$$            O$$                O$$               O$$               O$$       /#-K(</K       /#-K(</K

  O$+)/?)/KK-(&K+%)/+/K'-;%'/<+GK-&?+%+=(&K'%&'P+'+'/K'+-&+#%)/&'>/K-KA+!"#()'E.%K/<+=(;;(<-'*+#)-=/+-&</"A
  0CCC2Q0CC2Q0C2P+K-?&-D-=%&=/+$/,/$K+%'+1RP6R+%&<+1@R+)/K#/='-,/$*A+                                                                                                          	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
                               !"#$%&'(&)*+%,-.%*-&/0*".12,&1*&23..3/1-0&4512%&#33.&"*/&#6,-&%41,3/%,

                                                             R/#/&;/&'+,%)-%.$/S+<=%&>/+-&+)%'/+(D+-&,/K':/&'+%K+%+#/)</&'%>/+(D+TRU+
  !"#$%&%'()*+,%)-%.$/                                 012          032           042           052         062          072          082


  9(::(;-'*+#)-</+-&;/"+<=%&>/                       ?@?4A           ?@?56           ?@?47                   ?@?BA               ?@?AA            ?@?55           ?@118
                                                   03@882CCC       04@842CCC       03@762CCC               04@1B2CCC           03@632CC         04@?12CCC       04@A62CCC

  !"<=%&>/+)%'/+D$/"-.-$-'*                          ?@???                              ?@???                                   ?@???
                                                     0?@172                             0?@?A2                                  0?@162

  EF$/+(D+G%H                                                        I?@??4             I?@??5              ?@??3               ?@??1            I?@??6           ?@??1
                                                                     0I1@372            0I1@3B2             0?@6B2              0?@512           0I1@642          0?@312

  EF$/+(D+$%HC<(::(;-'*+#)-</+                                                                               I?@?16             I?@?16                            I?@?33
  -&;/"+<=%&>/                                                                                             0I3@342CC           0I1@B72C                         0I4@432CCC

  E3                                                  ?@15            ?@31               ?@16                ?@35                ?@1B              ?@35            ?@44
  JF:./)+(D+(.K/),%'-(&K                               B4             1?1                 B4                 1?1                  B4                76              76
  L+'/K'                                            5@3BCCC         A@??CCC             4@68CC             8@1?CCC              4@56CC           7@86CCC         7@76CCC
                                                                                                                                                !"<$F;-&>+      !"<$F;-&>+
                                                                                                                                                  )/</&'+         )/</&'+
  M%:#$/                                               N$$               N$$              N$$                 N$$                N$$            /#-K(;/K        /#-K(;/K

  N$+)/>)/KK-(&K+%)/+/K'-:%'/;+FK-&>+%+<(&K'%&'O+'+'/K'+-&+#%)/&'=/K-K@+!"#()'I.%K/;+<(::(;-'*+#)-</+-&;/"@
  0CCC2P0CC2P0C2O+K->&-D-<%&</+$/,/$K+%'+1QO6Q+%&;+1?Q+)/K#/<'-,/$*@+                                                                                                          	  
	  
	  
	  

                                                                                                34	  
	  
                               !"#$%&'(&)*+%,-./&/0%1.-&123"+./,&.3&/*++*1.-2&40./%&#**+&"31&#5,-&%4.,*1%,

                                                   R/#/&;/&'+,%)-%.$/S+<=%&>/+-&+)%'/+(D+;(:/K'-<+<)/;-'+'(+#)-,%'/+K/<'()+%K+%+#/)</&'%>/+(D+TRU+
  !"#$%&%'()*+,%)-%.$/                              012           032            042           052              062             072           082


  9(::(;-'*+#)-</+-&;/"+<=%&>/                      ?@??5            ?@?14                ?@?13               ?@?6?          ?@?56                 ?@??7           ?@?74
                                                    0?@482           01@342               01@?32             01@A?2B        01@C32B                0?@662        03@742BB

  !"<=%&>/+)%'/+D$/"-.-$-'*                        E?@??5                                E?@??4                             E?@??4                                E?@??5
                                                   0E1@682                               0E1@1C2                            0E1@382                               0E1@6C2

  FG$/+(D+H%I                                                         ?@?15               ?@?14               ?@?1C          ?@?18                 ?@??C           ?@?13
                                                                    03@332BB             03@?82B            03@A?2BBB      03@7C2BBB              01@842B        03@432BB

  FG$/+(D+$%IB<(::(;-'*+#)-</+                                                                               E?@?11         E?@?1?                                 E?@?3?
  -&;/"+<=%&>/                                                                                               0E1@452        0E1@312                              0E3@842BBB

  F3                                                ?@?3             ?@?6                 ?@?7                ?@?7           ?@?8                 ?@?5             ?@13
  JG:./)+(D+(.K/),%'-(&K                            1?6               114                  1?5                114            1?5                    86               7C
  L+'/K'                                            1@36             3@68B                3@17B              4@41BB         3@5CBB                1@61            4@63BB
                                                                                                                                                !"<$G;-&>+       !"<$G;-&>+
                                                                                                                                                 )/</&'+          )/</&'+
  M%:#$/                                             N$$                 N$$               N$$                 N$$               N$$            /#-K(;/K         /#-K(;/K

  N$+)/>)/KK-(&K+%)/+/K'-:%'/;+GK-&>+%+<(&K'%&'O+'+'/K'+-&+#%)/&'=/K-K@+!"#()'E.%K/;+<(::(;-'*+#)-</+-&;/"@
  0BBB2P0BB2P0B2O+K->&-D-<%&</+$/,/$K+%'+1QO6Q+%&;+1?Q+)/K#/<'-,/$*@+                                                                                                         	  
	  
	  
	  
                                 !"#$%&'(&)%"$&%*+,"-.%&/"0%&"123405%-0&6-&+75571608&9/6+%&#775&"-1&#340&%96471%4

                                                                                  T/#/&=/&'+,%)-%.$/U+>?%&@/+-&+)/%$+/">?%&@/+)%'/
  !"#$%&%'()*+,%)-%.$/                                012          032           042       052          062          072        082                     092         0:2


  ;(<<(=-'*+#)->/+-&=/"+>?%&@/                      AB131        AB136          AB137         AB135           AB151      AB166          AB15A          AB58A       AB557
                                                   03B512CC     03B3A2CC       03B582CC      03B412CC       03B812CCC   03B592CC       03B592CC      03B782CCC    03B452CC

  !">?%&@/+)%'/+D$/"-.-$-'*                                      EABAA8                                                  EABAA5         EABAA3
                                                                 0E1B412                                                 0EAB962        0EAB3:2

  FG$/+(D+H%I                                                                   ABA11
                                                                                0AB:92

  J&'/)&%'-(&%$+)/K/),/K+>?%&@/                                                                               EAB516      EAB537         EAB58A        EAB3:1     EAB367
                                                                                                            0E3B672CC   0E3BA:2CC      0E3B712CC      0E1B942C    0EAB982

  ;%#-'%$+%>>(G&'+(#/&&/KK                                                                    ABA4A                       ABA34         ABA44         ABA4A        ABA49
                                                                                             03B332CC                    01B992C       03B4:2CC      03B4:2CC     03B462CC

  L($-'->K                                                                                                                              EABAA4         ABAA1       ABAAA
                                                                                                                                       0E1B942C        0AB632      0ABA72

  L($-'->KC;(<<(=-'*+#)->/+-&=/"+>?%&@/                                                                                                                EABAA7      EABAA7
                                                                                                                                                     0E3B332CC    0E1B982C

  F3                                                 AB13         AB15          AB14           AB3A            AB18       AB37           AB37          AB41        AB48
  MG<./)+(D+(.K/),%'-(&K                              1A9          1AA           1A8            9:             1A6         89             98            97           71
  N+'/K'                                            6B94CC       4B5ACC        4B37CC        6B15CCC         6B31CCC     3B:8CC         4BA8CC        3B74CC      3B4:CC
                                                                                                                                                                 !">$G=-&@+
                                                                                                                                                                  )/>/&'+
  O%<#$/                                              P$$          P$$           P$$             P$$           P$$         P$$            P$$           P$$      /#-K(=/K

  P$+)/@)/KK-(&K+%)/+/K'-<%'/=+GK-&@+%+>(&K'%&'Q+'+'/K'+-&+#%)/&'?/K-KB+!"#()'E.%K/=+>(<<(=-'*+#)->/+-&=/"B
  0CCC2R0CC2R0C2Q+K-@&-D->%&>/+$/,/$K+%'+1SQ6S+%&=+1AS+)/K#/>'-,/$*B+                                                                                                         	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

                                                                                                   35	  
	  
	  
                                                            !"#$%&'(&)"*+,%*,-,./*&01-"./*2&/-&*,..,0/31&4+/*%&#,,.&"-0&#523&%4/2,0%2

                                                                                                                   T/#/&>/&'+,%)-%.$/
                                                                                     <@%&A/+-&+)%'/+(D+-&,/K'=/&'+%K+%+       <@%&A/+-&+)%'/+(D+>(=/K'-?+?)/>-'+'(+
                                                <@%&A/+-&+(G'#G'+A%#+                      #/)?/&'%A/+(D+UTJ+               #)-,%'/+K/?'()+%K+%+#/)?/&'%A/+(D+UTJ+    <@%&A/+-&+)/%$+/"?@%&A/+)%'/
!"#$%&%'()*+,%)-%.$/                           012       032       042                 052          062         072             082           092           0:2        01;2       0112       0132


<(==(>-'*+#)-?/+-&>/"+?@%&A/                 ;B;34       ;B;35       ;B;15            ;B;5;         ;B;47         ;B;:;        ;B;34         ;B;3:          ;B;:4      ;B141      ;B114      ;B146
                                            03B382CC    03B172CC     0;B9;2         04B;:2CCC      03B372CC     03B8;2CCC     01B812C       01B962C       03B362CC    03B172CC   03B142CC   03B512CC

!"?@%&A/+)%'/+D$/"-.-$-'*                               E;B;;1       E;B;;1                         ;B;;;                                    ;B;;4                    E;B;;6
                                                        0E;B542     0E;B542C                        0;B462                                   01B;;2                   0E;B912

FG$/+(D+H%I                                              E;B;;:     E;B;;3           E;B;;4        E;B;;3        ;B;;5          ;B;34         ;B;35        ;B;44
                                                        0E1B812C    0E;B642          0E;B972       0E;B712       0;B912       03B542CC      03B452CC     04B1;2CCC

J($-'-?K                                                 ;B;;1
                                                         01B512

<%#-'%$+%??(G&'+(#/&&/KK                                                                                                                                                          ;B;49      ;B;43
                                                                                                                                                                                 03B6;2CC   03B462CC




       36	  
L&'/)&%'-(&%$+)/K/),/K+?@%&A/                                                                                                                                                                 E;B549
                                                                                                                                                                                            0E3B362CC

!"?@%&A/+)%'/+                                                       ;B;;1
D$/"-.-$-'*C?(==(>-'*+#)-?/+-&>/"+                                   0;B592

FG$/+(D+$%IC?(==(>-'*+#)-?/+                                                                                     E;B;16                                    E;B;31
-&>/"+?@%&A/                                                                                                    0E1B962C                                  0E1B962C

F3                                           ;B;8        ;B;:        ;B;8             ;B19           ;B15         ;B33          ;B;:          ;B;:           ;B1       ;B;5        ;B33       ;B37
MG=./)+(D+(.K/),%'-(&K                        98           91         91               85             8;           85            95            8:            95         9;          93         89
N+'/K'                                      6B15CC       3B11C       1B39           5B:9CCC          1B97       5B8;CCC        4B15CC         1B:9         4B4;CC     4B3:CC     6B78CCC    5B5;CCC
O%=#$/                                        P$$          P$$        P$$              P$$            P$$          P$$           P$$           P$$           P$$        P$$         P$$        P$$

P$+)/A)/KK-(&K+%)/+/K'-=%'/>+GK-&A+%+?(&K'%&'Q+'+'/K'+-&+#%)/&'@/K-KB+J)(>G?'-(&E.%K/>+?(==(>-'*+#)-?/+-&>/"B
0CCC2R0CC2R0C2Q+K-A&-D-?%&?/+$/,/$K+%'+1SQ6S+%&>+1;S+)/K#/?'-,/$*B+
                                                                                                                                                                                                        	  
