NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

USING NEURAL DATA TO TEST A THEORY OF INVESTOR BEHAVIOR:
AN APPLICATION TO REALIZATION UTILITY
Cary Frydman
Nicholas Barberis
Colin Camerer
Peter Bossaerts
Antonio Rangel
Working Paper 18562
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18562

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

We are grateful for comments from participants at Indiana University, Notre Dame University, Stanford
University, the University of California at Berkeley, the University of Southern California, the University
of Texas at Austin, Washington University, the Fall 2010 NBER Behavioral Finance meeting, the
2010 Society for Neuroeconomics meeting, the 2010 Miami Finance Conference, the 2011 BEAM
Conference, the 2011 WFA conference, and the 2012 NBER-Oxford Saïd-CFS-EIEF Conference on
Household Finance. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science
Foundation (Camerer, Frydman, Rangel), the Betty and Gordon Moore Foundation (Camerer, Rangel),
and the Lipper Foundation (Rangel). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Cary Frydman, Nicholas Barberis, Colin Camerer, Peter Bossaerts, and Antonio Rangel.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Using Neural Data to Test a Theory of Investor Behavior: An Application to Realization Utility
Cary Frydman, Nicholas Barberis, Colin Camerer, Peter Bossaerts, and Antonio Rangel
NBER Working Paper No. 18562
November 2012
JEL No. G02,G11
ABSTRACT
We use measures of neural activity provided by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
test the "realization utility" theory of investor behavior, which posits that people derive utility directly
from the act of realizing gains and losses. Subjects traded stocks in an experimental market while we
measured their brain activity. We find that all subjects exhibit a strong disposition effect in their trading,
even though it is suboptimal. Consistent with the realization utility explanation for this behavior, we
find that activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, an area known to encode the value of options
during choices, correlates with the capital gains of potential trades; that the neural measures of realization
utility correlate across subjects with their individual tendency to exhibit a disposition effect; and that
activity in the ventral striatum, an area known to encode information about changes in the present
value of experienced utility, exhibits a positive response when subjects realize capital gains. These
results provide support for the realization utility model and, more generally, demonstrate how neural
data can be helpful in testing models of investor behavior.

Cary Frydman
University of Southern California
Marshall School of Business
3670 Trousdale Parkway, BRI 204G
Los Angeles, CA 90089
cfrydman@marshall.usc.edu
Nicholas Barberis
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P O Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
nick.barberis@yale.edu
Colin Camerer
Department of Economics
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
camerer@hss.caltech.edu

Peter Bossaerts
Department of Economics
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
pbs@rioja.caltech.edu
Antonio Rangel
Department of Economics
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
rangel@hss.caltech.edu

Over the past twenty years, economists have accumulated a large amount of evidence on how
individual investors manage their financial portfolios over time. Some of this evidence is
puzzling, in the sense that it is hard to reconcile with the simplest models of rational trading
(Barberis and Thaler (2003); Campbell (2006)). Theorists have responded to this challenge by
constructing new models of investor behavior. Empiricists, in turn, have started testing these
newly-developed models.
Most of the empirical work that tests theories of investor behavior uses field data (Barber
and Odean (2000); Barber and Odean (2001); Choi et al. (2009); Grinblatt and Keloharju (2009)).
A smaller set of studies uses data from laboratory experiments. The advantage of experimental
data is that it gives researchers a large degree of control over the trading and information
environment, which can make it easier to tease theories apart (Plott and Sunder (1988); Camerer
and Weigelt (1991); Camerer and Weigelt (1993); Weber and Camerer (1998); Bossaerts and
Plott (2004); Bossaerts et al. (2007)).1
In this paper, we show how another kind of data, namely measures of neural activity
taken using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while subjects trade in an
experimental stock market, can also be very useful in testing theories of investor behavior. In
particular, we use neural data to test the validity of the “realization utility” theory of trading, a
theory that has been used to address several facts about investor trading behavior, including the
so-called disposition effect.
The disposition effect is the robust empirical fact that individual investors have a greater
propensity to sell stocks trading at a gain relative to purchase price, rather than stocks trading at a
loss2. This fact has attracted considerable attention because it has proven challenging to explain

1

While economic behavior in the laboratory may not be subject to all of the forces that apply in real
financial markets, the predictions of any economic theory should be just as applicable inside the lab as
outside it, especially because of the advantages of experimental control. As a result, experiments provide an
ideal setting in which to try to falsify theories of economic behavior.
2
See for example, Shefrin and Statman (1985); Odean (1998); Genesove and Mayer (2001); Grinblatt and
Keloharju (2001); Feng and Seasholes (2005); Frazzini (2006); Jin and Scherbina (2011).

2

using simple rational models of trading behavior. This impasse has motivated the development of
multiple competing alternative theories, both rational and behavioral (Shefrin and Statman
(1985); Odean (1998); Barberis and Xiong (2009); Kaustia (2010)). The realization utility model
(Shefrin and Statman (1985); Barberis and Xiong (2012)) is based on the assumption that, in
addition to deriving utility from consumption, investors also derive utility directly from realizing
gains and losses on the sale of risky assets that they own. For example, if an investor realizes a
gain (e.g., by buying a stock at $20 and selling it at $40), he receives a positive burst of utility
proportional to the capital gain. In contrast, if he realizes a loss (e.g., by buying a stock at $20 and
selling it at $10), he receives a negative burst of utility proportional to the size of the realized
loss. The presence of realization utility is important because, in combination with a sufficiently
high time discount rate, it leads investors to exhibit a disposition effect (Barberis and Xiong
(2012)).
Testing for the validity of a theory such as realization utility is difficult because it, and
other theories of investor trading, often make similar predictions about behavior (see Weber and
Camerer (1998) for an exception). Furthermore, it is extremely difficult, using data on behavior
alone, to carry out direct tests of the computations driving behavior (e.g., tests of whether
potentially realizable capital gains rather than net expected values are tracked when selling). On
the other hand, a combination of neural measurement and careful experimental design allows for
direct tests of the extent to which the computations made by the brain at the time of decisionmaking are consistent with the mechanisms posited by different models.
In this paper, we describe the results of an fMRI experiment designed to test the
hypothesis that subjects experience realization utility while trading in an experimental stock
market, and that this is associated with trading patterns consistent with the disposition effect. The

3

experiment allows us to test several behavioral and neural predictions of the realization utility
hypothesis.3
Behaviorally, we find that the average subject in our experiment exhibits a strong and
significant disposition effect. This stands in sharp contrast to the prediction of a simple rational
trading model in which subjects maximize the expected value of final earnings. The reason is that
our experimental design induces positive autocorrelation in stock price changes, which, in turn,
implies that a risk-neutral rational trader would sell losing stocks more often than winning stocks,
thereby exhibiting the opposite of the disposition effect. The strong disposition effect displayed
by our subjects is, however, consistent with the existence of realization utility effects.
When taken literally as a model of the decision-making process, the realization utility
model makes several predictions about the neural computations that should be observed at
different points in time. We describe these predictions in detail in the main body of the paper, but
summarize them briefly here.
First, the realization utility model predicts that, at the moment when a subject is making a
decision as to whether to sell a stock, neural activity in areas of the brain that are associated with
encoding the value of potential actions at the time of a decision should be proportional to the
capital gain that would be realized by the trade (i.e. to the difference between the sale price and
the purchase price). In particular, the model implies that, at the time of decision, activity in the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), an area of the brain that has been reliably shown to be
involved in the computation of the value of the different options4, should be positively correlated
with the capital gain or loss associated with selling a stock.

3

We use the word “behavioral” in two different senses. Most of the time, as in the last sentence of this
paragraph, we take it to mean “pertaining to behavior.” Occasionally, we take it to mean “less than fully
rational” or “psychological,” as is common in the social sciences. It should be clear from the context which
of the two meanings is intended.
4
The vmPFC is located at the front of the brain directly behind the bridge of the nose. See Section II.C for
a detailed discussion of the relevant literature on the vmPFC.

4

Second, the realization utility model predicts that, across individuals, the strength of the
disposition effect should be correlated with the strength of the realization utility signal in the area
of the vmPFC that computes decision values. This follows from the fact that a subject who is
strongly influenced by realization utility should exhibit both a strong disposition effect and neural
activity in decision value areas that reflect the computation of the associated capital gain.
Third, the realization utility hypothesis states that realizing a capital gain generates a
positive burst of utility, while realizing a capital loss generates a negative one. This predicts that,
controlling for the size of the capital gain or loss, and regardless of the precise timing of the
actual utility bursts, realizing a capital gain should increase activity in areas of the ventral
striatum (vSt), while realizing a capital loss should decrease its activity. This is because the vSt is
known to encode so-called reward prediction errors, which measure the change in the expected
net present value of lifetime utility induced by new information or changes in the environment.
Since selling a stock at a gain generates a utility burst, it also generates a change in the expected
net present value of utility, one that should be reflected in the striatum at the moment of sale.5
Our fMRI measurements reveal patterns of neural activity that are largely consistent with
the three neural predictions. This provides novel and strong support for the key mechanisms at
work in the realization utility model. Furthermore, to our knowledge, this also provides the first
example of how neural evidence can be used to test economic models of financial decisionmaking. We emphasize that the results do not imply that realization utility provides a complete
description of the forces driving investor behavior, even in the context of our experiment.
However, the fact that activity in the decision-making circuitry corresponds to some of the
computations hypothesized by the realization utility model provides novel evidence in support of
the model. It further suggests that mechanisms of this kind might also be at work in the real-world
transactions of individual investors.

5

The vSt is a smaller structure compared to the vmPFC, and is located near the center of the brain. See
Section II.C for more details and for a discussion of the relevant literature on the vSt.

5

Using neural data to test an economic model is an unusual exercise in the field of
economics because a common view in the profession is that models make as-if predictions about
behavior, and are not to be taken as literal descriptions of how decisions are actually made (Gul
and Pesendorfer (2008); Bernheim (2009)). In contrast to this view, we adopt a neuroeconomic
approach which is based on the idea that knowledge about the computational processes that the
brain uses to make decisions should be of central interest to economists because, since these
processes describe the actual determinants of observed behavior, they provide valuable insights
into the drivers of economic behavior (Camerer et al. (2005); Camerer (2007); Rustichini (2009);
Glimcher (2010); Fehr and Rangel (2011)).
Our study contributes to the nascent field of neurofinance, which seeks to characterize the
computations undertaken by the brain to make financial decisions, and to understand how these
computations map to behavior. Several early contributions are worth highlighting. Lo and Repin
(2002) investigate the extent to which professional experience affects the emotional arousal of
traders in stressful situations, where arousal is measured using skin conductance responses and
changes in blood pressure. Kuhnen and Knutson (2005) measure neural responses using fMRI
during a simple investment task and find that activity in brain regions previously associated with
emotional processing, such as the nucleus accumbens and the insula, predict subjects’ subsequent
willingness to take risks. Knutson et al. (2008) take these ideas further by showing that
exogenous emotional cues (e.g., erotic pictures) can be used to affect investment behavior, and
that these cues increase activity in the same areas that they identified in their previous study.
More recently, Bruguier et al. (2010) show that neural fMRI measurements of the extent to which
subjects activate brain areas associated with concrete cognitive skills, such as the ability to
predict another person’s state of mind, might be useful in identifying which subjects would be
successful traders, and Wunderlich et al. (2011) discover how the brain tracks correlation in an
attempt to optimally hedge two sources of risk. DeMartino et al. (2012) show that fMRI
measures of activity in valuation and mentalizing (theory of mind) regions are associated with the

6

propensity to buy during experimental price bubbles. Our paper contributes to this literature by
showing that a combination of fMRI neural measurements and careful experimental design can be
used to test the validity of specific economic theories of financial decision making. Our work also
contributes more broadly to the rapidly growing field of neuroeconomics, which seeks to
characterize the computations made by the brain in different types of decisions, ranging from
simple choices to choices involving risk, self-control, and complex social interactions.6
The paper is organized as follows. Section I presents some background information about
the disposition effect and realization utility. Section II describes the experimental design and the
predictions of the realization utility hypothesis. Section III provides a detailed description of how
the neural predictions can be tested using fMRI. Section IV describes the results. Section V
briefly concludes.

I. Background: The Disposition Effect and the Realization Utility Model
Using an argument based on Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) prospect theory, Shefrin
and Statman (1985) predict that individual investors will have a greater propensity to sell stocks
trading at a gain relative to purchase price, rather than stocks trading at a loss. They label this the
“disposition effect” and provide some evidence for it using records of investor trading. More
detailed evidence for the effect is presented by Odean (1998), who analyzes the trading activity,
from 1987 to 1993, of 10,000 households with accounts at a large discount brokerage firm. The
phenomenon has now been replicated in several other large databases of trading behavior.7
It is useful to explain Odean’s (1998) methodology in more detail because we will adopt
a similar methodology in our own analysis. For any day on which an investor in Odean’s (1998)
sample sells shares of a stock, each stock in his portfolio on that day is placed into one of four
6

For recent reviews, see Fehr and Camerer (2007); Glimcher et al. (2008); Rangel et al. (2008); Bossaerts
(2009); Kable and Glimcher (2009); Rangel and Hare (2010); Fehr and Rangel (2011); and Rushworth et
al. (2011).
7 See for example, Shefrin and Statman (1985); Odean (1998); Genesove and Mayer (2001); Grinblatt and
Keloharju (2001); Feng and Seasholes (2005); Frazzini (2006); Jin and Scherbina (2011).

7

categories. A stock is counted as a “realized gain” (“realized loss”) if it is sold on that day at a
price that is higher (lower) than the average price at which the investor purchased the shares. A
stock is counted as a “paper gain” (“paper loss”) if its price is higher (lower) than its average
purchase price, but it is not sold on that day. From the total number of realized gains and paper
gains across all accounts over the entire sample, Odean (1998) computes the Proportion of Gains
Realized (PGR):

PGR =

# of realized gains
.
# of realized gains + # of paper gains

In words, PGR computes the number of gains that were realized as a fraction of the total number
of gains that could have been realized. A similar ratio, PLR, is computed for losses:

PLR =

# of realized losses
.
# of realized losses + # of paper losses

The disposition effect is the empirical fact that PGR is significantly greater than PLR. Odean
(1998) reports PGR = 0.148 and PLR = 0.098.
While the disposition effect is a robust empirical phenomenon, its causes remain unclear.
In particular, traditional rational models of trading have had trouble capturing important features
of the data. Consider, for example, an information model in which investors sell stocks with paper
gains because they have private information that these stocks will subsequently do poorly, and
hold on to stocks with paper losses because they have private information that these stocks will
rebound. This hypothesis is inconsistent with Odean’s finding that the average return of the prior
winners that investors sell is 3.4% higher, over the next year, than the average return of the prior
losers they hold on to. Another natural model involves taking into account the favorable treatment
of losses by the tax code. However, this model also fails to explain the disposition effect because
tax-loss selling predicts a greater propensity to sell stocks associated with paper losses. Another
model attributes the disposition effect to portfolio rebalancing of the kind predicted by a standard
framework with power utility preferences and i.i.d. returns. However, under this hypothesis,

8

rebalancing is the “smart” thing to do, which implies that we should observe a stronger
disposition effect for more sophisticated investors. In contrast to this prediction, the data show
that it is less sophisticated investors who exhibit a stronger disposition effect (Dhar and Zhu
(2006)).
Researchers have also proposed behavioral economics models of the disposition effect;
these can potentially explain the stylized facts that the rational frameworks just described cannot
explain. One popular model assumes that investors have an irrational belief in mean-reversion
(Odean (1998); Weber and Camerer (1998); Kaustia (2010)). If investors believe that stocks that
have recently done well will subsequently do poorly, and that stocks that have recently done
poorly will subsequently do well, their optimal trading strategy would lead to a disposition effect.
We label such beliefs “irrational” because they are at odds with Odean’s (1998) finding that the
winner stocks investors sell subsequently do well, not poorly. While the mean-reversion
hypothesis is appealing for its simplicity, and is consistent with some evidence from psychology
on how people form beliefs8, some studies cast doubt on its empirical validity. For example,
Weber and Camerer (1998) ask subjects to trade stocks in an experimental stock market, and find
that they exhibit a disposition effect in their trading. In order to test the mean-reversion
hypothesis, they add a condition in which subjects’ holdings are exogenously liquidated at full
value at random times, after which subjects are asked to reinvest the proceeds across stocks in
any way they like. Note that if subjects are holding on to stocks with paper losses because of a
belief in mean-reversion, we would expect them to re-establish their positions in these stocks. But
in fact, they do not.9
Another popular behavioral economics model posits that the disposition effect results
from prospect theory preferences (Kahneman and Tversky (1979)). Prospect theory is a
prominent theory of decision-making under risk which assumes that individuals make decisions
8

For a review, see Rabin (2002).
Odean (1998) and Kaustia (2010) provide additional evidence that is inconsistent with the mean-reversion
hypothesis.
9

9

by computing the utility of potential gains and losses. These gains and losses are measured
relative to a reference point that is often assumed to be the status quo, and utility is concave over
gains and convex over losses. At first sight, it appears that prospect theory preferences may be
helpful for understanding the disposition effect. If an investor is holding a stock that has risen in
value, he may think of it as trading at a gain. If, moreover, the concavity of the value function
over gains induces risk aversion, this may lead him to sell the stock. Conversely, if the convexity
of the value function over losses induces risk-seeking, the investor may be inclined to hold on to a
stock that has dropped in value. Contrary to this intuition, Barberis and Xiong (2009) have
recently shown that it is surprisingly difficult to derive behavior consistent with the disposition
effect using this model. In fact, they show that an investor who derives prospect theory utility
from the annual trading profit on each stock that he owns will often exhibit the opposite of the
disposition effect. Further theoretical arguments against this model are provided by Kaustia
(2010), who shows that it predicts that investors’ propensity to sell a stock depends on the
magnitude of the embedded paper gain in a way that is inconsistent with the empirical evidence.
Another behavioral model of the disposition effect, and the one we focus on in this paper,
is based on the realization utility hypothesis (Shefrin and Statman (1985); Barberis and Xiong
(2012)). The central assumption of this model is that investors derive direct utility from realizing
capital gains and losses on risky assets that they own: they experience a positive burst of utility
when they sell an asset at a gain relative to purchase price, where the amount of utility depends
on the size of the realized gain; and a negative burst when they sell an asset at a loss relative to
purchase price, where the amount of disutility again depends on the size of the realized loss.
Importantly, this hypothesis states that trades have a direct utility impact on investors, not just an
indirect one through their effect on lifetime wealth and consumption.10 Barberis and Xiong

10

Barberis and Xiong (2012) speculate that realization utility might arise because of the way people think
about their investing history. Under this view, some investors – in particular, less sophisticated investors -do not think about their investing history in terms of overall portfolio return, but rather as a series of
investing “episodes,” each of which is characterized by three things: the identity of the asset, the purchase

10

(2012) show that, when realization utility is linear and the time discount rate is sufficiently
positive, a trader who maximizes the expected discounted sum of future realization utility bursts
will exhibit a disposition effect. The intuition is simple. If an investor derives pleasure from
realizing capital gains and, moreover, is impatient, he will be very keen to sell stocks at a gain.
Conversely, if he finds it painful to sell stocks at a capital loss and also discounts future utility at
a high rate, he will delay selling losing stocks for as long as possible.11
While the realization utility hypothesis makes predictions about behavior that are
consistent with the disposition effect, as well as with other empirical patterns12, it is based on
assumptions that depart significantly from those of traditional models. In particular, its
predictions rely on the assumption that utility depends not only on consumption, but also on the
act of realizing capital gains and losses. Given the unusual nature of this assumption, it seems
especially important to carry out direct tests of the extent to which the hypothesized source of
utility is actually computed by subjects and affects their decisions. In the rest of the paper, we
show how this can be done using a combination of fMRI measures of neural activity and careful
experimental design.

II. Experimental Design and Predictions

price, and the sale price. “I bought GE at $40 and sold it at $70” might be one such episode, for example.
According to this view, an investor who sells a stock at a gain feels a burst of positive utility right then
because, through the act of selling, he is creating a positive new investing episode. Similarly, if he sells a
stock at a loss, he experiences a burst of disutility: by selling, he is creating a negative investing episode.
11

Time discounting is not a critical part of the realization utility hypothesis. The disposition effect also
follows from realization utility combined with an S-shaped value function, as in prospect theory (Barberis
and Xiong, 2009). Adopting this interpretation of the realization utility hypothesis would not significantly
affect the analysis that follows.
12 Barberis and Xiong (2012) show that realization utility can shed light on many empirical phenomena,
not just on the disposition effect. Some of the other applications they discuss are the poor trading
performance of individual investors, the greater volume of trading in bull markets than in bear markets, the
individual investor preference for volatile stocks, and the low average return of volatile stocks.

11

In this section, we first describe the experimental stock market that we set up to test the
realization utility model, and then lay out the specific behavioral and neural predictions of the
theory that we test.

A. Design
The design of the experimental stock market builds directly on an earlier non-neural
experiment conducted by Weber and Camerer (1998).
Subjects are given the opportunity to trade three stocks – stock A, stock B, and stock C –
in an experimental market. The experiment consists of two identical sessions separated by a oneminute break. Each session lasts approximately 16 minutes and consists of 108 trials. We use t to
index the trials within a session.13
At the beginning of each session, each subject is given $350 in experimental currency
and is required to buy one share of each stock. The initial share price for each stock is $100; after
the initial purchase, each subject is therefore left with $50. Every trial t > 9 consists of two parts:
a price update and a trading decision, each of which corresponds to a separate screen that the
subject sees (Figure 1). In the price update part, one of the three stocks is chosen at random and
the subject is shown a price change for this stock. Note that stock prices only evolve during the
price update screens; as a result, subjects see the entire price path for each stock. In the trading
part, one of the three stocks is again chosen at random and the subject is asked whether he wants
to trade the stock. Note that no new information is revealed during this part.
We split each trial into two parts to temporally separate different computations associated
with decision-making. At the price update screen, subjects are provided with information about a
change in the price of one of the three stocks, but do not have to compute the value of buying or
selling the stock, both because they are not allowed to make decisions at this stage, but also

13

We split our experiment into two sessions in order to avoid running the fMRI machine for too long
without a break, as this could lead to potential medical risks for the subjects.

12

because they do not know which of the three assets will be selected for trading in the next screen.
At the trading screen the opposite situation holds: subjects need to compute the value of buying or
selling a stock, but do not need to update their beliefs about the price process since no new
information about prices is provided.
Trials 1 through 9 consist only of a price update stage; i.e., subjects are not given the
opportunity to buy or sell during these trials. This initial set of trials was added to allow subjects
to accumulate information about the three stocks before having to make any trading decisions.
Each subject is allowed to hold a maximum of one share and a minimum of zero shares
of each stock at any point in time. In particular, short-selling is not allowed. The trading decision
is therefore reduced to deciding whether to sell a stock (conditional on holding it), or deciding
whether to buy it (conditional on not holding it). The price at which a subject can buy or sell a
stock is given by its current market price.
The price path of each stock is governed by a two-state Markov chain with a good state
and a bad state. The Markov chain for each stock is independent of the Markov chains for the
other two stocks. Suppose that, in trial t, there is a price update for stock i. If stock i is in the good
state at that time, its price increases with probability 0.55 and decreases with probability 0.45.
Conversely, if it is in the bad state at that time, its price increases with probability 0.45 and
decreases with probability 0.55. The magnitude of the price change is drawn uniformly from {$5,
$10, $15}, independently of the direction of the price change.
The state of each stock changes over time in the following way. Before trial 1, we
randomly assign a state to each stock. If the price update in trial t >1 is not about stock i, then the
state of stock i in trial t remains the same as its state in the previous trial, t-1. If the price update in
trial t >1 is about stock i, then the state of stock i in this trial remains the same as in trial t-1 with
probability 0.8, but switches with probability 0.2. In mathematical terms, if

si,t ∈ {good, bad} is

13

the state of stock i in trial t, then

si,t = si,t−1 if the time t price update is not about stock i, whereas

if the time t price update is about stock i, the state switches as follows:

si,t=good
si,t=bad

si,t+1=good
0.8
0.2

si,t+1=bad
0.2
0.8

The states of the stocks are never revealed to the subjects: they have to infer them from the
observed price paths. To ease comparison of trading performance across subjects, the same set of
realized prices is used for all subjects.
A key aspect of our design is that, conditional on the information available to subjects,
each of the stocks exhibits positive short-term autocorrelation in its price changes. If a stock
performed well on the last price update, it was probably in a good state for that price update.
Since it is highly likely (probability 0.8) to remain in the same state for its next price update, its
next price change is likely to also be positive.
At the end of each session, we liquidate subjects’ holdings of the three stocks and record
the cash value of their position. We give subjects a financial incentive to maximize the final value
of their portfolio at the end of each session. Specifically, if the total value of a subject’s cash and
risky asset holdings at the end of session 1 is $X, in experimental currency, and the total value of
his cash and risky asset holdings at the end of session 2 is $Y, again in experimental currency,
then his take-home pay in actual dollars is 15 + (X+Y)/24.14 Subjects’ earnings ranged from
$43.05 to $57.33 with a mean of $52.57 and a standard deviation of $3.35.
In order to avoid liquidity constraints, we allow subjects to carry a negative cash balance
in order to purchase a stock if they do not have sufficient cash to do so at the time of a decision. If
a subject ends the experiment with a negative cash balance, this amount is subtracted from the
terminal value of his portfolio. The large cash endowment, together with the constraint that

14

In other words, we average X and Y to get (X+Y)/2, convert the experimental currency to actual dollars
using a 12:1 exchange rate, and add a $15 show-up fee.

14

subjects can hold at most one unit of each stock at any moment, was sufficient to guarantee that
no one ended the experiment with a negative portfolio value, or was unable to buy a stock
because of a shortage of cash during the experiment.
N=28 Caltech subjects participated in the experiment (22 male, age range 18 – 60, std. of
age: 7.6).15 All subjects were right-handed and had no history of psychiatric illness, and none
were taking medications that interfere with fMRI. The exact instructions given to subjects at the
beginning of the experiment are included in the Appendix. The instructions carefully describe the
stochastic structure of the price process, as well as all other details of the experiment. Subjects
were not explicitly told that there was short-term positive autocorrelation in the stock price
changes. However, they were given details regarding the Markov chain governing the stock price
paths before the experiment, and so they had sufficient information to infer the positive
autocorrelation. Before entering the scanner, the subjects underwent a practice session of 25
trials to ensure familiarity with the market software.
Note that there is a straightforward way to measure the extent to which a subject exhibits
a disposition effect in his trading. We simply adapt Odean’s (1998) methodology, described in
Section I, in the following way. Every time a subject faces a decision about selling a stock, we
classify his eventual action as a paper gain (loss) if the stock’s current price is above (below) the
purchase price and he chooses not to sell; and as a realized gain (loss) if the stock’s current price
is above (below) the purchase price and he chooses to sell. We then count up the number of paper
gains, paper losses, realized gains, and realized losses over all selling decisions faced by the
subject and compute the PGR and PLR measures described earlier. We assign the subject a
disposition effect measure of PGR-PLR. When this measure is positive (negative), the subject
exhibits (the opposite of) a disposition effect.

15

One additional subject participated in the experiment but was excluded from further analyses because his
head motion during the scanning exceeded a pre-specified threshold, thereby interfering with the reliability
of the neural measurements.

15

B. Optimal trading strategy
We now characterize the optimal trading strategy for a risk-neutral Bayesian investor
who is maximizing the expected value of his take-home earnings – from now on, we refer to this
investor as an “expected value” investor. The optimal strategy for this investor is to sell (or not
buy) a stock when he believes that it is more likely to be in the bad state than in the good state;
and to buy (or hold) the stock when he believes that it is more likely to be in the good state.
Formally, let pi,t be the price of stock i in trial t, after any price update about the stock, and let

qi,t = Pr(si,t = good | pi,t , pi,t−1,..., pi,1 ) be the probability that a Bayesian investor, after seeing the
price update in trial t, would assign to stock i being in the good state in trial t. Also, let zt take the
value 1 if the price update in trial t indicates a price increase for the stock in question; and -1 if
the price update indicates a price decrease. Then qi,t = qi,t−1 if the price update in trial t was not
about stock i; but if the price update in trial t was about stock i, then:
(1)
qi,t (qi,t−1, zt ) =

=

Pr(zt | si,t = good)* Pr(si,t = good | qi,t−1 )
qi,t−1 Pr(zt | si,t−1 = good) + (1− qi,t−1 )Pr(zt | si,t−1 = bad)
(0.5 + 0.05zt )*[0.8* qi,t−1 + 0.2 * (1− qi,t−1 )]
qi,t−1[0.8* (0.5 + 0.05zt ) + 0.2 * (0.5− 0.05zt )]+ (1− qi,t−1 )[0.2 * (0.5+ 0.05zt ) + 0.8 * (0.5− 0.05zt )]

The optimal strategy for an expected value investor is to sell (if holding) or not buy (if not
holding) stock i in trial t when qi,t < 0.5 ; and to hold or buy it otherwise.
Note that a trader who follows the optimal strategy described above will exhibit the
opposite of the disposition effect. If a stock performed well on the last price update, it was
probably in a good state for that price update. Since it is very likely to remain in the same state
for its next price update, its next price change is likely to also be positive. The optimal strategy
therefore involves selling winner stocks relatively rarely, and losing stocks more often, thereby
generating the reverse of the disposition effect.

16

Of course, it is difficult for subjects to do the exact calculation in equation (1) in real time
during the experiment. However, it is relatively straightforward for subjects to approximate the
optimal strategy: they need simply keep track of each stock’s most recent price changes, and then
hold on to stocks that have recently performed well while selling stocks that have recently
performed poorly. The fact that a stock’s purchase price is reported on the trading screen makes it
particularly easy to follow an approximate strategy of this kind: subjects can simply use the
difference between the current market price and the purchase price as a proxy for the stock’s
recent performance.16

C. Behavioral and neural predictions of the realization utility model
We now lay out the behavioral and neural predictions of the realization utility model, and
contrast them with the predictions of the expected value model which assumes a risk-neutral
optimal Bayesian decision-maker. The realization utility model we have in mind is one where, as
in Barberis and Xiong (2012), realization utility has a linear functional form, the time discount
rate is strongly positive, and the agent maximizes the discounted sum of current and future
expected realization utility flows.
Consider the behavioral predictions first. During the instruction session, subjects were
given the structure of the data generating process for stock prices. From this, it is straightforward
to infer that price changes are positively autocorrelated. In such a market, an expected value
investor will exhibit the opposite of the disposition effect: for the actual price process that our
subjects see, the value of the PGR-PLR measure under the optimal trading strategy for an
expected value investor is -0.76. In other words, this investor will have a much greater propensity
16

Our rational benchmark assumes risk-neutrality because the monetary risk in our experiment is small. We
have also considered the case of risk aversion, however, and have concluded that its predictions do not
differ significantly from those of risk neutrality. In some frameworks, risk aversion can generate a
disposition effect through rebalancing motives. This is not the case in our experiment, however, because
the volatility of stock price changes is independent of the level of the stock price. Furthermore, any
rebalancing motives would be of second-order importance relative to time variation in the mean stock
return.

17

to realize losses than to realize gains. By contrast, a trader who experiences bursts of realization
utility and who discounts future utility at a high rate will sell winner stocks more often than the
expected value trader and loser stocks less often. After all, he is keen to realize capital gains as
soon as possible and to postpone realizing capital losses for as long as possible. Recall that the
disposition effect is simply the statement that PGR-PLR>0; this statement is consistent with the
realization utility hypothesis and not with the expected value model. Our first prediction is as
follows.

Prediction 1 (Behavioral): For an expected value investor, the value of the PGR-PLR measure is
given by -0.76. On the other hand, for the realization utility investor, the value of PGR-PLR is
greater than -0.76.

We now turn to the neural predictions of the expected value and realization utility
models. As noted earlier, a key goal of the paper is not only to test the behavioral predictions of
these models, but also to test if the models’ basic assumptions are consistent with the
computations that subjects actually make during the choice process.
The neural predictions build on a basic finding from the field of decision neuroscience. A
sizable number of studies have found evidence consistent with the idea that, in simple choice
situations, the brain makes decisions by assigning values (often called “decision values”) to the
options under consideration, and then comparing them to make a choice. These value signals are
thought to reflect the relative value of getting the option under consideration versus staying with
the status quo. In the context of our experiment, during selling decisions this variable would
reflect the value of selling a stock versus keeping it, while during a buying decision it would
reflect the value of getting the stock versus not buying it. A substantial body of work has shown

18

that, in particular, activity in an area of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) reliably
encodes decision value computations at the time of choice. 17
Since this finding is critical to our analysis, it is important to summarize the key lines of
evidence that support it. First, activity in the vmPFC reliably correlates with behavioral measures
of the value of the objects of choice, across a wide class of stimuli and choice paradigms, and
regardless of whether the object is actually chosen or not.18 Second, additional studies have
shown that the activity in these areas of the vmPFC is more likely to be associated with the
computation of value than with alternative signals that are often correlated with values, but are
distinct from them. For example, Plassmann et al. (2010) rule out that the vmPFC responses can
be attributed to confounding anticipatory emotions or anticipatory emotion signals, and also show
that these responses cannot be attributed to attentional, motor, or saliency signals. Litt et al.
(2011) carry out an additional test that also rules out the interpretation of vmPFC activity as
attentional, motor, or saliency signals, but show that activity in many other areas of the brain that
has often been interpreted as a putative value signal (e.g., anterior insula activity) actually fits
these alternative descriptions better.19 Third, patients with lesions in their vmPFC exhibit
impairments in decision-making (such as an increase in the the inconsistency of their choices,
such as GARP violations) that has been widely interpreted as causal evidence for the role of
vmPFC decision value signals in choice ((Fellows and Farah (2007); Camille et al. (2011);
Camille et al. (2011)). Taken together, these findings provide strong support for the view, now

17

See, for example, Hsu et al. (2005); Padoa-Schioppa and Assad (2006); Kable and Glimcher (2007);
Knutson et al. (2007); Tom et al. (2007); Hare et al. (2008); Kennerley et al. (2008); Chib et al. (2009);
Hare et al. (2009); Hsu et al. (2009); Hare et al. (2010); Levy et al. (2010); Rangel and Hare (2010); Litt et
al. (2011).
18 The evidence on this point is extensive: Kable and Glimcher (2007); Plassmann et al. (2007); Tom et al.
(2007); Hare et al. (2008); Boorman et al. (2009); Chib et al. (2009); De Martino et al. (2009); FitzGerald
et al. (2009); Hare et al. (2009); Peters and Buchel (2009); Talmi et al. (2009); Basten et al. (2010); Hare et
al. (2010); Plassmann et al. (2010); Prevost et al. (2010); Smith et al. (2010); Tusche et al. (2010);
Wunderlich et al. (2010); Hare et al. (2011); Hare et al. (2011); Levy and Glimcher (2011); Lim et al.
(2011); Litt et al. (2011); Park et al. (2011); Hutcherson et al. (2012); Janowski et al. (2012); Kahnt et al.
(2012); Lin et al. (2012); Sokol-Hessner et al. (2012).
19 Roesch and Olson (2004) report similar findings using neurophysiology data from monkeys.

19

widely held in neuroscience, 20 that vmPFC responses at the time of choice encode valuation
signals for the different stimuli for the purpose of guiding choice.21
The first two neural predictions involve comparing the decision value signals that we
observe in the vmPFC to the decision value signals that would be predicted by the realization
utility model and by the expected value model. To see the restrictions implied by these two
theories, consider the decision value signal that would be computed at the time of making a
selling decision by an individual who makes choices according to the expected value model. In
the context of our experiment, the decision value of selling a stock is given by the value of selling
the stock minus the value of holding it. For the expected value investor, the value of selling the
stock is zero: if he sells it, he will no longer own any shares of it, and so it can no longer generate
any value for him. In contrast, the value of holding the stock can be approximated by the stock’s
expected price change on its next price update:

Et [∆pi,t+1 | qi,t , ∆pi,t+1 ≠ 0] = 0.6(2qi,t −1).
It follows that the decision value signal at the time of making a selling decision is given by
0-0.6(2qi,t-1), or 0.6(1-2qi,t); we will refer to this quantity throughout the paper as the net expected
value of selling, or NEV. Note that this is only an approximation because the exact value of
holding a stock is the stock’s expected cumulative price change until the subject decides to sell it.
However, this approximation has little effect on our later results because the value of holding a
stock until its next price change is highly correlated with the value of holding the stock until it is
actually optimal to sell it (the latter quantity can be computed by simulation).
20

See Rangel and Hare (2010); Grabenhorst and Rolls (2011); Wallis (2011); Levy and Glimcher (2012);
Rangel and Clithero (Forthcoming); Rushworth et al. (In press).
21 Some fMRI studies that look for neural correlates of value at the time of choice have also found such
correlations in areas like the posterior cingulate cortex, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the insula, and the
ventral striatrum (vSt). There are two important differences with the vmPFC, however. First, activity in all
of these other areas is correlated with decision values in some studies but not in others, whereas the vmPFC
value signals are always present (except for studies in which the scanning parameters are not optimized to
carry out measurements in this area, which is especially difficult to image well). Second, the additional
tests described above (which are needed to make sure that the signals are really decision values, and not
correlated but distinct variables) have not been carried out in these areas. As a result, the computational
basis of these areas in the process of making a decision remains an open question.

20

Now consider the decision value signal that would be computed at the time of making a
selling decision by an individual who makes choices according to the realization utility model. In
particular, consider a simple form of the model in which subjects maximize the sum of expected
discounted realized capital gains and losses. For such a trader, the value of selling is linearly
proportional to the capital gain or loss, given by pi,t − c , where c is the purchase price, or cost
basis. However, the expected impact of holding the stock on realization utility is approximately
zero, as long as the discount rate is sufficiently high. Thus, for such an investor, the decision
value of selling should be linearly related to pi,t − c .22 This, together with the fact that decision
value signals have been found to be reliably encoded in the vmPFC, leads to the next prediction.

Prediction 2 (Neural): For expected value traders, activity in the areas of the vmPFC associated
with the computation of decision value should be linearly proportional to the NEV (given by
0.6(1-2qi,t)) at the time of making selling decisions, and thus independent of the cost basis. In
contrast, for subjects who experience realization utility proportional to realized capital gains and
losses, activity in these areas of the vmPFC should be linearly related to the realizable gain or
loss, pi,t − c .

22

We say that the value of holding a stock is “approximately” zero for a realization utility investor
because, in principle, there is some value to holding, namely expected future realization utility flows.
However, under the realization utility hypothesis, the trader is essentially myopic – he discounts future
utility flows at a high rate. To a first approximation, then, the value of holding is zero. It may initially seem
surprising that a subject would discount future utility at a high rate in the context of a 30-minute
experiment. However, the literature on hyperbolic discounting suggests that discounting can be steep even
over short intervals, perhaps because people distinguish sharply between rewards available right now, and
rewards available at all future times. Furthermore, what may be important in our experiment is not so much
calendar time, as transaction time. A subject who can trade stock B now may view the opportunity to trade
it in the future as a very distant event -- one that is potentially dozens of screens away – and hence one that
he discounts heavily. Finally, we note that discounting is not a critical part of our hypothesis. The
disposition effect also follows from a model that combines realization utility with an S-shaped utility
function, as in prospect theory. To a first approximation, this model would produce the same decision value
as the discounting-based model. The reason is that, under an S-shaped utility function, the utility of selling
a stock at a gain (loss) immediately is significantly higher (lower) than the expected utility of holding on to
it.

21

The previous arguments predict that subjects who place a larger weight on realization utility when
making decisions should exhibit neural activity in the vmPFC that is more strongly correlated
with the realizable capital gain or loss. At the same time, subjects with a larger weight on
realization utility when making decisions should also exhibit a stronger disposition effect. It
follows that the degree to which vmPFC activity correlates with the realizable capital gain should
be correlated, across subjects, with the strength of the disposition effect that is observed in their
trading.

Prediction 3 (Neural): The degree to which vmPFC activity correlates with the realizable capital
gain should be correlated, across subjects, with the strength of the disposition effect in their
trading.

The final neural prediction is qualitatively different, in that it seeks to test directly if
subjects experience bursts of realization utility that are proportional to the realized capital gains.
One difficulty in testing this prediction is that, while the theory of realization utility says that the
trader receives a utility burst at the moment of trade, it is hard to know, in practice, when exactly
this burst occurs. For example, in our context, does it occur at the moment the subject presses a
button to indicate his decision, or does it occur a little later when he reflects on the trade?
Moreover, it is unclear what the duration of the burst is, in practice. In fact, the realization utility
model leads to identical predictions under all of these variations of the utility burst, provided that
the net present value of the utility burst is held constant. This makes it very difficult to test the
model by looking for neural markers of the hedonic response, since we do not know when exactly
to look for them.
Fortunately, however, an idea from computational neuroscience comes to the rescue. A
sizable body of work has shown that an area of the brain called the ventral striatum (vSt)

22

computes a quantity known as a prediction error in response to new information23. The prediction
errors measure the change in the expected net present value of utility before and after the news,
taking into account all sources of utility. They are positive if the news indicates an improvement
in the expected net present value of utility, and negative otherwise. Importantly, they reflect the
change in discounted utility, but are insensitive to the precise timing of the hedonic impact of the
news. This is useful because it means that we can test for hedonic effects associated with the
realization of capital gains and losses by looking for a burst of activity in the vSt consistent with
the change in utility that they generate. In short, when a trader sells a stock, this is associated with
a utility burst; while we do not know the exact timing or duration of the burst, we do know that it
generates a change in the expected net present value of utility, one that should be reflected at the
moment of sale in the prediction error computed by the vSt.

Prediction 4 (Neural): Under the realization utility hypothesis, neural responses in the area of the
vSt known to encode prediction errors should increase at the precise moment that individuals
decide to realize a capital gain, and decrease at the moment they decide to realize a capital loss.

III. fMRI data collection and analysis

In this section, we describe how the fMRI measures of neural activity were collected and
analyzed. The section contains enough detail to serve as a brief primer on the subject to those
unfamiliar with fMRI. For more details, see Huettel et al. (2004), Ashby (2011), and Poldrack et
al. (2011).

A. fMRI data collection and measurement
23

See, for example, Schultz et al. (1997); McClure et al. (2003); O'Doherty et al. (2003); Bayer and
Glimcher (2005); Pessiglione et al. (2006); Hare et al. (2008); Caplin et al. (2010); Glascher et al. (2010);
Daw et al. (2011); Lin et al. (2012).

23

We collected measures of neural activity over the entire brain using BOLD-fMRI, which
stands for blood-oxygenated level dependent functional magnetic resonance imaging. BOLDfMRI measures changes in local magnetic fields that result from the local inflows of oxygenated
hemoglobin and outflows of de-oxygenated hemoglobin that occur when neurons fire. fMRI
provides measures of the BOLD response of relatively small “neighborhoods” of brain tissue
known as voxels, and is thought to measure the sum of the total amount of neural firing into that
voxel as well as the amount of neuronal firing within the voxel. 24
One important complication is that the hemoglobin responses measured by BOLD-fMRI
are slower than the associated neuronal responses. Specifically, although the bulk of the neuronal
response takes place quickly, BOLD measurements are affected for up to 24 seconds thereafter.
Figure 2A provides a more detailed illustration of the nature of the BOLD response. The top
panel depicts the path of the BOLD signal in response to one (arbitrary) unit of neural activity of
infinitesimal duration at time zero. The function plotted here is called the canonical hemodynamic
response function (HRF). It is denoted by h(τ), where τ is the amount of time elapsed since the
neural activity impulse, and has been shown to approximate well the pattern of BOLD responses
for most subjects, brain areas, and tasks.
Fortunately, there is a standard way of dealing with this complication. In particular, the
BOLD response has been shown to combine linearly across multiple sources of neural activity
(Boynton et al. (1996)). This property, along with knowledge of the specific functional form of
the HRF, allows us to construct a mapping from predicted neural activity to predicted BOLD
responses. Specifically, if the predicted level of neural activity at any particular time is given by
a(t), then the level of BOLD activity at any instant t is well approximated by

 =  ℎ  −  ,
Note that the neural activity measured by fMRI in a 1-mm3 cube (about the size of a grain of salt)
represents the joint activity of between 5,000 to 40,000 neurons, depending on the area of the brain.

24

24

which is the convolution between the HRF and the neural inputs. The integral can be interpreted
in a straightforward way: it is simply a lagged sum of all the BOLD responses triggered by
previous neural activity. The properties of the BOLD response are illustrated in Figure 2B, which
depicts a hypothetical path of neural activity (solid line), together with the associated BOLD
response (dashed line).
During our experiment, we acquired two types of MRI data in a 3.0 Siemens Tesla Trio
MRI scanner with an eight-channel phased array coil. First, we acquire BOLD-fMRI data while
the subjects perform the experimental task with a voxel size of 3 mm3. We acquire this data for
the entire brain (~ 100,000 voxels) every 2.75 seconds. 25 We also acquire high-resolution
anatomical scans that we use mainly for realigning the brains across subjects and for localizing
the brain activity identified by our analyses.26

B. fMRI data pre-processing
Before the BOLD data can be analyzed to test our hypotheses, it has to be converted into
a usable format. This requires the following steps, which are fairly standard – see Huettel et al.
(2004), Ashby (2011), and Poldrack et al. (2011) – and which were implemented by way of a
specialized but commonly-used software package called SPM5 (Wellcome Department of
Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, London, UK).

25

More precisely, we acquired gradient echo T2*-weighted echoplanar (EPI) images with BOLD contrast.
To optimize functional sensitivity in the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), a key region of interest, we acquired
the images in an oblique orientation of 30° to the anterior commissure–posterior commissure line
(Deichmann et al. (2003)). Each volume of images had 45 axial slices. A total of 692 volumes were
collected over two sessions. The imaging parameters were as follows: echo time, 30 ms; field of view, 192
mm; in-plane resolution and slice thickness, 3mm; repetition time, 2.75 s.
26
More precisely, we acquired high-resolution T1-weighted structural scans (1 x 1 x 1 mm) for each
subject. These were coregistered with their mean EPI images and averaged across subjects to permit
anatomical localization of the functional activations at the group level.

25

First, we correct for slice acquisition time within each voxel. This is necessary because
the scanner does not collect data on all brain voxels simultaneously. This simple step, which
involves a non-linear interpolation, temporally realigns the data across all voxels.
Second, we correct for head motion to ensure that the time series of BOLD measurements
recorded at a specific spatial location within the scanner is always associated with the same brain
location throughout the experiment.27
Third, we realign the BOLD responses for each individual into a common
neuroanatomical frame (the standard Montreal Neurological Institute EPI template). This step,
called spatial normalization, is necessary because brains come in different shapes and sizes; as a
result, a given spatial location maps to different brain regions in different subjects. Spatial
normalization involves a nonlinear reshaping of the brain to maximize the match with a target
template. Although the transformed data are not perfectly aligned across subjects due to
remaining neuroanatomical heterogeneity, the process suffices for the purposes of most studies.
Furthermore, any imperfections in the realignment process introduce noise that reduces our
ability to detect neural activity of interest.
Fourth, we also spatially smooth the BOLD data for each subject by making BOLD
responses for each voxel a weighted sum of the responses in neighboring voxels, with the weights
decreasing with distance. 28 This step ensures that the error structure of the data conforms to the
normality assumptions about the error structure of the regression models that we will later use to
test our hypotheses (Huettel et al. (2004); Poldrack et al. (2011)).

27

BOLD measurements were corrected for head motion by aligning them to the first full brain scan and
normalizing to the Montreal Neurological Institute’s EPI template. This entails estimating a six-parameter
model of the head motion (three parameters for center movement, and three parameters for rotation) for
each volume, and then removing the motion using these parameters. For details, see Friston et al. (1996).
28
Spatial smoothing was performed using an 8 mm full-width half-maximum Gaussian kernel. Essentially,
this step entails replacing every measurement at every voxel with a weighted sum of the measurements in a
neighborhood centered on the voxel, and using weights that are given by the Gaussian kernel.

26

Finally, we remove low-frequency signals that are unlikely to be associated with neuronal
responses to individual trials.29 An example of such a signal is the effect of a continuous head
movement over the course of the experiment that is not fully removed by the second correction
step described above.

C. fMRI main data analyses
The key goals of our analysis are to test if the region of the vmPFC that has been
repeatedly shown to encode decision values at the time of choice exhibits activity consistent with
Predictions 2 and 3; and if the area of the vSt known to encode prediction errors at the time of
receiving utility-relevant news exhibits activity consistent with Prediction 4. To do this, we run
statistical tests to see if there are areas within these regions of the brain, given by collections of
spatially contiguous voxels called clusters, where the BOLD response reflects neural activity that
implements the computations of interest (e.g., realization utility computations). This is
complicated by the fact that, since every voxel contains thousands of neurons, the BOLD
responses in a voxel can be driven by multiple signals. Fortunately, the linear properties of the
BOLD signal allow for the identification of the neural signals of interest using standard linear
regression methods.
The general statistical procedure is straightforward, and will be familiar to most
economists (see Figure 3 for a summary). The analysis begins by specifying two types of
variables that might affect the BOLD response: target computations and additional controls. The
target computations reflect the signals that we are looking for (e.g., a realization utility signal at
the time of selling a stock). They are specified by a time series si(t) describing each signal of
interest. For each of these signals, let Si(t) denote the time series that results from convolving the

29

Specifically, we applied a high-pass temporal filter to the BOLD data with a cut-off of 128 seconds.

27

signal si(t) with the HRF, as described above30. The additional controls, denoted by cj(t), are other
variables that might affect the BOLD time series (e.g., residual head movement or time trends).
These are introduced to further clean up the noise inherent in the BOLD signal, but are not
explicitly used in any of our tests. The control variables are not convolved with the HRF because
they reflect parameters that affect the measured BOLD responses, and not neural activity that
triggers a hemodynamic response. 31
The linearity of the BOLD signal implies that the level of BOLD activity   in any
voxel v at time  should be given by
  = constant + ∑    + ∑    + ,

where  denotes AR(1) noise. This model is estimated independently in each of the voxels that
fall within the relevant region of interest (the vmPFC for Predictions 2 and 3, and the vSt for
Prediction 4).
Our hypotheses can then be restated as tests about the coefficients of this regression
model: signal i is said to be associated with activity in voxel v only if  is significantly different
from zero.
Two additional considerations apply to most fMRI studies, including this one. First, we
are interested in testing hypotheses about the distribution of the signal coefficients in the
population of subjects, not hypotheses about individual coefficients. This would normally require
estimating a random effects version of the linear model specified above which, given the size of a
typical fMRI dataset, is computationally intensive. Fortunately, it has been shown that there is a
straightforward shortcut that provides a good approximation to the full mixed effects analysis

30

In all analyses, we assume that anytime si (t) takes on a non-zero value, it does so for an infinitesimal
duration.
31
For example, linear trends are often included because the scanner heats up with continuous operation and
this induces a linear change in the measured BOLD responses.

28

(Penny et al. (2006)). It involves estimating the parameters separately for each individual subject,
averaging them across subjects, and then performing t-tests. This is the approach we follow here.
Second, since our tests are carried out in each of the voxels in the relevant regions of
interest (429 voxels for the vmPFC, and 68 for the vSt), there is a concern about false-positives.
To address this problem, we correct for multiple comparisons within the relevant region of
interest, a procedure known in the fMRI literature as a small volume correction (SVC). We report
results as significant if they pass SVC correction at a level of p<0.05.32
As noted earlier, we will conduct our tests in an area of the vmPFC that, in prior work,
has been linked to the computation of decision values; and also in an area of the vSt that has been
linked to the computation of prediction errors. Specifically, for the vmPFC region of interest, we
construct a sphere with a 15 mm radius around the coordinates (MNI-space, x=3, y=36, z=-18)
that were found to exhibit peak correlation with decision values at the time of choice in
Plassmann et al. (2010), and then intersect this sphere with an anatomical mask of the vmPFC33.
For the vSt region of interest, we construct a sphere with a 15 mm radius around the coordinates
(MNI-space, x = -15, y=6, z=-12) that were found to exhibit peak correlation with prediction
errors in Lin et al. (2012), and then intersect this sphere with an anatomical mask of the vSt34. As
discussed in Section II, many studies have found very similar results; it is therefore not crucial
which exact papers are used to define the regions of interest (so long as the radii of the spheres
are sizable, as they are here).

IV. Results

32

Specifically, we report results as significant if voxels within the pre-specified ROI pass p<0.001
uncorrected with a 15 voxel extent threshold and if they pass SVC with a family-wise error rate of less than
0.05.
33
The vmPFC anatomical mask was identified using the AAL digital atlas of the human brain (TzourioMazoyer et al. (2002)) and includes the rectus, the orbital part of the superior frontal gyrus, and the orbital
part of the middle frontal gyrus.
34
The anatomical mask of vSt is taken from Chib et al. (2012), and is comprised of the nucleus accumbens
and the ventral putamen.

29

A. Test of Behavioral Prediction 1
We begin our test of Prediction 1 by computing the strength of the disposition effect for
each subject using the PGR-PLR measure described at the end of Section IIA. We find that the
average PGR and PLR across subjects are 0.412 and 0.187, respectively. This implies an average
PGR-PLR value of 0.225, which is significantly greater than 0 (p<0.001, in a two-tailed t-test
against 0). In other words, not only is the average value of PGR-PLR significantly greater than
the expected value benchmark of -0.76, but it is actually significantly positive. These results are
inconsistent with the hypothesis that our subjects are all expected value investors, but are
consistent with the hypothesis that some of them are influenced by realization utility.
Figure 4 depicts tests of Prediction 1 at the individual level. Each vertical bar shows the
value of PGR-PLR for a particular subject. The horizontal dashed line near the bottom of the
figure marks the -0.76 value of PGR-PLR that corresponds to an expected value investor. The
figure shows that every subject exhibits a disposition effect greater than -0.76. The hypothesis
that the average disposition effect is not different from -0.76 is rejected with a t-statistic of
16.52.35
The figure also shows that there is significant heterogeneity in the strength of the
disposition effect across subjects: the value of PGR-PLR ranges from -0.41 to 0.83 and has a
standard deviation of 0.32. This cross-individual variation is consistent with Dhar and Zhu (2006)
who, using data on actual trading decisions, also find significant variation in the strength of the
disposition effect across investors. Interestingly, while each of PGR and PLR varies a good deal
across our subjects, the two variables have a correlation of only 0.03: subjects who are slow to

35

We also test for the possibility that, due to learning effects, the disposition effect decreases in size over
time. We find that the mean disposition effect is smaller in the second half of the experiment compared to
the first half (0.145 vs. 0.259, p=0.087, a reduction of 11.2% relative to the optimal level of -0.76), but that
it is still positive and sizable in the second half (0.145 vs. the optimal level of -0.76, p<0.001).

30

sell losing stocks are not necessarily also quick to sell winning stocks.36 This independence
between selling behavior in the gain domain and in the loss domain is also consistent with the
empirical findings of Dhar and Zhu (2006).
Figure 5 provides additional insight into our subjects’ selling behavior by showing, for
each of the four types of decisions that a subject could make – decisions to realize a gain,
decisions to realize a loss, decisions not to realize a gain, and decisions not to realize a loss -- the
fraction of the decisions that are optimal, where “optimal” is defined by the expected value
benchmark. For example, the figure shows that there were a total of 495 occasions in which our
subjects realized gains, and that most of these decisions were suboptimal. Given that stocks
exhibit short-term price momentum in the experiment, it is generally better to hold on to a stock
that has been performing well. This explains why most (77.9%) of subjects’ decisions to hold on
to winning stocks were optimal, and why most (67.5%) of subjects’ decisions to sell winning
stocks were suboptimal. Similarly, in the experiment, it is generally better to sell a stock that has
been performing poorly. This explains why most (79.2%) of subjects’ decisions to sell losing
stocks were optimal, while most (80.3%) of their decisions to hold these stocks were suboptimal.
The disposition effect exhibited by our subjects is stronger than that found in empirical
studies (Odean (1998); Frazzini (2006)). One possible reason for this is that the current price and
the cost basis of a stock are both prominently displayed on the trading screen. 37 If, because of

36

The low correlation between PGR and PLR is not inconsistent with realization utility; it simply suggests
that realization utility is not the only factor driving subjects' trading. For example, if our subjects care to
varying extents about realization utility but also differ in how much they enjoy trading in general, they may
exhibit a near-zero correlation between PGR and PLR: the negative correlation between the two variables
induced by realization utility will be offset by the positive correlation induced by the taste for trading.
37 One natural question about our experiment is: How much of the realization utility effect that we have
found depends on the fact that we display the original purchase price on the trading screen in a highly
salient way? We emphasize that it is unlikely that the presence of a realization utility effect depends
critically on this aspect of the design. In follow-up work, we have carried out behavioral experiments to
investigate the impact of the saliency with which the purchase price information is displayed (Frydman and
Rangel (2012)). We find that eliminating the purchase price from the trading screen diminishes the size of
the disposition effect, but that the effect is still well above the optimal level that an expected value investor
would exhibit. This suggests that reporting the purchase price on the trading screen is not a critical aspect
of our current design. Moreover, given that most investors in naturally occurring financial markets have at

31

realization utility, a subject has a preference for realizing gains and for not realizing losses, the
fact that we report the purchase price might make it particularly easy for him to cater to this
preference, and hence to exhibit a disposition effect.38
In summary, the behavioral results indicate that all of our subjects exhibit a strong
disposition effect. This is inconsistent with the expected value model, but is consistent with the
realization utility model.

B. Test of Neural Prediction 2
We now turn to Prediction 2. This states that, for subjects who experience realization
utility, activity in an area of the vmPFC known to encode decision values at the time of making a
decision should be correlated with the capital gain variable (pt - ct). By contrast, it states that, for
expected value subjects, activity in this area should correlate with the NEV variable, but not with
the capital gain.
The pre-specified region of the vmPFC in which we test for the decision value signals – a
region we defined at the end of Section III -- is shown in Fig. 6 (light yellow). To carry out the
main test of Prediction 2, we estimate the following general linear model (GLM) of BOLD
activity for each individual:

1

  = constant +  !"#$ %& − &  + ' !"#$ ()*& + + controls + εt.

least a rough sense of the price at which they purchased a stock, displaying the cost basis on the trading
screen is likely a better approximation of reality.
38

At the same time, because our experimental design induces a negative correlation between the capital
gain and the NEV of selling (r= - 0.55), the fact that we report the purchase price also makes it easy for an
expected value subject to trade in a way that is close to his optimal strategy, namely to hold a stock when it
has a capital gain and to sell it when it has a capital loss. If a subject is an expected value investor, then, we
do not think that presenting the purchase price on the trading screen should bias him towards exhibiting a
disposition effect.

32

As noted earlier,   denotes the BOLD signal at time t in voxel v. Idec(t) is an indicator
function that equals one if, at time , the subject is presented with an opportunity to sell a stock.
(pt - ct) is the realizable capital gain, and NEVt is the net expected value from selling the stock
under consideration at time t, namely 0.6(1-2qi,t).39 Finally, the controls vector includes the
following variables: 1) an indicator function denoting the onset of a selling opportunity, 2) an
indicator function denoting the onset of a buying opportunity , 3) an indicator function denoting
the onset of a buying opportunity interacted with the NEV of buying the asset, 4) an indicator
function denoting the onset of a price update screen when the subject owns the asset, 5) an
indicator function denoting the onset of a price update screen when the subject owns the asset
interacted with the price change, 6) an indicator function denoting the onset of a price update
screen when the subject does not own the asset, 7) an indicator function denoting the onset of a
price update screen when the subject does not own the asset interacted with the price change, 8)
regressors controlling for physical movement inside the scanner, and 9) session indicator
variables. Controls (1) - (7) are convolved with the HRF, whereas controls (8) and (9) are not.40
As described in Section III.A, these controls are necessary because the BOLD signal is affected
up to 24 seconds after the initial neural impulse generated by the onset of a decision screen or
price update screen41 (Figure 2). Therefore, a fraction of the variance in the BOLD signal we
observe at the time subjects are computing their sell/hold decision can be attributed to the specific

39

Recall that NEVt is, under the expected value model, calculated as the value of selling the stock (zero)
minus the value of holding until the next price change (0.6(2qi,t -1)).
40

The onset of a decision or price update screen, the amount of the price change during the price update
screen, and the NEV during a buying opportunity are convolved with the HRF because they will generate a
BOLD response. Controls for physical movement inside the scanner and session-specific effects are not
convolved because they do not generate a BOLD response.
41

The computations that take place during the price update screen are not the focus of the current study,
since they do not play a role in testing the realization utility model of investor behavior. However, we have
analyzed the neural activity during the price update screens in a companion paper (Frydman et al. (2012))
in which we use this dataset to test regret-based models of investment. We find that activity in the ventral
striatum correlates positively with price changes at the time of a price update for assets that are owned by
the subject. Interestingly, the sign of these correlations reverses for stocks that are not owned by the
subject.

33

events we are controlling for. We will use this same vector of control variables in each GLM
estimated in this paper. Finally, inferences about the extent to which the signals of interest are
encoded in a given voxel are made by carrying out a one-sided t-test of the average of the
individually estimated coefficients (i.e.,  and ' ) against zero, and by correcting for multiple
comparisons within the pre-specified vmPFC region-of-interest.
As shown in Figure 6, the results from these tests are consistent with the predictions of
the realization utility model, but not with those of the Bayesian expected value model. We find a
cluster of 27 voxels where  > 0 within the pre-specified vmPFC ROI associated with the
computation of decision values in previous studies. Below, we refer to these 27 voxels as the
vmPFCROI. In contrast to the significant results we find for the capital gain regressor, there are no
clusters that significantly relate to the NEV variable at our statistical threshold.42
The previous analysis identifies a region of the vmPFC in which responses at the time of
choice are consistent with the computation of the decision value predicted by the realization
utility model. We carried out two additional post-hoc region-of-interest (ROI) tests of the
properties of the signals in this area. The first test investigates if the extent to which the capital
gains variable is reflected in the vmPFCROI is different in trials involving capital gains and capital
losses. To do this, we estimated the following GLM:

2

   = constant +  !"#$  !234.6378 %& − &  + ' !"#$  !234.9:;; %& − &  +

+ controls + εt,

where Icap.gain and Icap.loss are indicator variables for trials involving capital gains and capital losses,
respectively. For each individual, we then compute both the mean  and the mean ' across the
42

We ran an additional GLM where we also include the capital gain as a regressor of interest during the
price update screen to test whether subjects might compute a sell decision as a function of the capital gain
before the opportunity to trade. However, we find no areas of the brain in which BOLD responses during
the price update screen significantly correlate with the capital gain regressor.

34

voxels in the vmPFCROI,. We find that the mean values, across subjects, of  = 0.028 and ' =
0.029 are not significantly different from each other (p=0.94), and thus we cannot reject a linear
functional form of the net capital gain signal.
The second test checks whether, as predicted by the realization utility model, the signal in
the vmPFC related to decision values is both positively correlated with pt and negatively
correlated with ct. This test is important because it goes to the core of the “irrationality” implicit
in the realization utility model, namely that people are influenced by the cost basis when deciding
whether to sell an asset. The test is based on the following GLM:

3

   = constant +  !"#$ %& + ' !"#$ & + + controls + εt.

The key hypothesis of interest is that ' < 0. Importantly, we cannot carry out this test in
vmPFCROI, because, since this region consists of voxels that correlate with pt – ct , the test will be
biased in favor of the hypothesis. To avoid this bias, we first estimate model (3) for each of the
429 voxels in the independent vmPFC target region (taken from Plassmann et al. (2010) and an
anatomical mask of vmPFC) and then identify voxels that exhibit significant correlation with pt
(p<.05, SVC). We define this set of voxels as vmPFCp and then test whether voxels in this region
significantly correlate with the cost basis. The effect size, averaged across voxels in vmPFCp for
each subject, and then across subjects, is given by β2=-0.019 (p=0.03). This provides further
evidence in support of the realization utility hypothesis.

C. Test of Neural Prediction 3
We now test Prediction 3. Specifically, we check whether, as predicted by the realization
utility hypothesis, subjects whose neural activity in the vmPFC at the time of a sell decision is
particularly sensitive to the realizable capital gain also exhibit a stronger disposition effect.

35

The test is carried out as follows. For each subject, we compute a neural measure of the
degree to which a positive capital gain is represented in the vmPFC at the time of choice; and also
a neural measure of the degree to which a negative capital gain – in other words, a capital loss –
is represented in the vmPFC at the time of choice. These individual statistics are given by the
maximum beta value across voxels in the vmPFCROI for the capital gain and capital loss
regressors from model (2). 43
Consistent with Prediction 3, we find that the correlation between  and PGR is 0.58
(p=0.001), indicating that subjects who exhibit stronger vmPFC activation in response to a capital
gain do have a greater propensity to realize gains. In contrast, we do not find a significant
correlation between ' and PLR (p=0.475). Figure 7 depicts this graphically.
The results in this section are consistent with Prediction 3 for the case of selling decisions
involving capital gains, but not for those involving capital losses. In Section V, we discuss in
some detail why this might be the case.

D. Test of Neural Prediction 4
Prediction 4 tests another basic assumption of the realization utility model. The model
posits that selling a stock at a gain should lead to a positive hedonic effect, and that selling a stock
at a loss should lead to a negative hedonic effect, independently of the impact of the trade on lifetime consumption. As described in section II, while in theory this hedonic impact occurs at the
moment of sale, in practice it is hard to know what its precise timing and duration are. However,
we do know that the utility burst corresponds to a change in discounted lifetime utility; as such, it
should generate a prediction error at the moment of sale. This leads to the following form of

43

We use the maximum statistic instead of the average statistic because of the heterogeneity in anatomical
and functional structure of the vmPFC across subjects. Since we are using this beta value to test for a
correlation, rather than for a particular value of the mean, using the max statistic will not bias our results.

36

Prediction 4: controlling for the size of the capital gain, a decision to sell at a gain should lead to
a positive response in the areas of the vSt known to correlate positively with prediction errors.
The yellow region in Figure 8 depicts the pre-specified region of the vSt that has been
identified in previous studies as being involved in the computation of predictions errors, and over
which we look for a positive effect of realizing capital gains.44 The test of Prediction 4 is based on
the following GLM:

4

   = constant +  !"#$  !234.6378 %& − & 
+ ' !"#$  !234.6378  !B#CC  + + !"#$  !234.9:;; +D EFGEHI + εt

As before, !"#$ is an indicator function denoting an opportunity to sell a stock, !234.6378 is an
indicator function denoting that the subject has an opportunity to sell a capital gain, and !234.9:;; is
an indicator function denoting that the subject has an opportunity to sell a capital loss. Finally,
!;J99 is an indicator function denoting that the subject sold the stock. Note that this model allows
us to estimate the marginal effect that realizing a capital gain (the second non-constant regressor)
has on neural activity in the vSt, after controlling for the size of the capital gain (the first nonconstant regressor)45. The key test of interest is whether there are voxels within the target vSt
region for which ' > 0.
Consistent with Prediction 4, we find a region of the vSt in which activity correlates
positively with the realization of capital gains (see Figure 8a, p<.05, SVC), while controlling for

44

Before describing our test of Prediction 4, we can further validate that our a priori ROI of vSt is
responsible for computing a prediction error signal within our sample of 28 subjects. Specifically, we can
test whether the revelation of news about a positive price change for an owned stock – an event that should
induce a positive prediction error – is positively correlated with activity in our vSt ROI. We are able to use
the estimation results from GLM (1) to test this hypothesis because the price change during the price update
screen is included as a control in this model. Our estimation results indicate that voxels within our vSt ROI
do indeed exhibit positive correlation with the price change (p<0.05 whole-brain corrected FWE). This
therefore provides independent validation that our vSt ROI computes a prediction error.
45

We include the onset of the decision screen for capital loss trials only as a control variable in this model.

37

the magnitude of the capital gain. Figure 8b shows the timecourse of average BOLD response in
the vSt when subjects issue a command to sell a capital gain (blue) compared to when they issue a
command to hold a capital gain (red.)46
Ideally, we would also carry out a test for the case of capital losses; specifically, we
would test for the presence of a negative impact in the same area of the vSt when a capital loss is
realized. Unfortunately, there is an aspect of the data that does not allow us to do this. As
predicted by the realization utility hypothesis, subjects realized very few losses over the course of
the two fMRI sessions (the mean number of realized losses per subject scanning block is 3). We
therefore do not have the necessary statistical power to look at the difference in neural responses
in the conditions of realized vs. paper losses.

E. Tests of the mean-reversion theory of the disposition effect
As discussed in Section I, one prominent alternative behavioral theory of the disposition
effect is that investors believe that stock prices mean-revert (Odean (1998); Weber and Camerer
(1998); Kaustia (2010)). In our setting, such a belief would be irrational: stock prices in our
experiment exhibit short-term positive autocorrelation. Nonetheless, if, for some reason, our
subjects think that the stock prices in our experiment are mean-reverting, this could potentially
explain why they tend to sell stocks that have recently gone up and hold on to stocks that have
46

The characterization of the timecourse of BOLD responses is based on a GLM specification that uses a
series of “event-locked” dummy variables to our events of interest: holding a capital gain and selling a
capital gain. For each of these two events, x=hold and x=sell, (and with additional controls for the onset of
price update screens, buying opportunities, and capital loss trials) and for n=1,….,T, define a series of
1 if x occurred at  − FV
dummy variables, |L, F = N
. The general linear model is then specified as:
0
otherwise

  = constant + W XYL,F |L, F + Y1 IZII[EF + Y2 \EYZ\ZF + 
L,F

The estimate of the change in the BOLD response n seconds after the presentation of stimulus x is then
given by X],^ . “Session” and “movement” are control vectors for session specific effects and physical
movement inside the scanner, respectively.

38

recently gone down. In this section, we test this alternative theory using both behavioral and
neural data.
To investigate whether a belief in mean-reversion is driving our subjects’ behavior, we
estimate the following mixed effects logistic model. The model tests whether, as predicted by the
mean-reversion hypothesis, recent price changes can significantly predict subjects’ decisions to
sell or hold a stock:

5

IZHH&,B =  +  ()*&,B + ' `%&,B − &,B a + + Δ %&,B + D Δ' %&,B + &

Here, sellt,s =1 if subject i sold stock s at time t and 0 if he held it, and Δc %&,B denotes the mth
most recent price change for stock s (these price changes may not have occurred in consecutive
trials because price updates in the experiment take place at random times). We find that the
capital gain has a coefficient of 0.017 and is a significant predictor of the propensity to sell, (tstat=2.93), but that none of the other variables are. In particular, neither β3 nor β4 is significantly
different from zero (p=0.569 and p=0.197, respectively). In other words, contrary to the meanreversion hypothesis, recent price changes do not significantly predict the decision to sell.47
We can also use the neural data to test the mean-reversion hypothesis. In particular, we
test if neural activity in the target region of the vmPFC is correlated with recent price changes.
This is done by estimating the following GLM:

6

  = constant + !"#$ [ `%& − & a + ' ∆ %&,B + + ∆' %&,B ] + D controls + εt

47

We note that our experimental design implies a high correlation between NEV and recent price changes.
To check the robustness of our result to any collinearity issues, we also estimate the same logistic
regression without the NEV variable. We again find that the capital gain significantly predicts the sell
decision, but that neither of the two most recent price changes is predictive of the sell decision.

39

Under the mean reversion hypothesis, the decision value of selling should be positively correlated
with recent price changes: a recent price increase indicates a lower expected future return and
hence a higher decision value of selling. Under this hypothesis, then, responses in the vmPFC
(i.e., the area involved in the computation of decision values) should correlate positively with past
price changes. Contrary to this hypothesis, we do not find any activity in the vmPFC that is
significantly associated with the past price regressors at our omnibus threshold of p<.05 SVC.
In summary, then, both the behavioral and the neural analyses cast doubt on the meanreversion hypothesis.48

V. Discussion
In this paper we use neural data, obtained through fMRI while subjects traded stocks in an
experimental market, to test the key assumptions of the “realization utility” theory of investor
trading. We find broad (albeit not perfect) support for the neural predictions of the realization
utility model. First, we find that activity in the vmPFC, an area known to encode decision values,
is correlated with the capital gain (the decision value under realization utility), but not with a
measure of the net expected value of future returns (the decision value under the expected value
model). Second, we find that the strength with which the capital gain is reflected in the vmPFC
decision value signal is correlated, across subjects, with the magnitude of proportion of gains
realized; we do not, however, find the analogous correlation for capital losses. Finally, and
perhaps most striking of all, we find that activity in the ventral striatum (an area known to encode

48

While our results cast doubt on the hypothesis that mean-reverting beliefs are driving our subjects’
decisions, one can ask whether there are other non-Bayesian belief specifications that could explain the
observed trading patterns (see, e.g., Kuhnen and Knutson (2011)). In Frydman and Rangel (2012), a
companion behavioral paper, we shed some light on this issue. In that paper, we compare subjects’ trading
behavior across a variety of treatments that differ only in the information provided on the trading screen.
One of the treatments is the one used here. In another treatment, however, we also give subjects the NEV
statistic on each trading screen; in other words, we effectively give them the correct Bayesian beliefs. As a
result, if subjects persist in exhibiting a disposition effect, it is very difficult to attribute this to nonBayesian beliefs. We find that the addition of the NEV statistic decreases the size of the disposition effect
that subjects exhibit, but that it nonetheless remains substantial. This suggests that at least some portion of
the disposition effect that we find in the current study cannot be attributed to non-Bayesian beliefs.

40

information about changes in the expected value of lifetime experienced utility) exhibits a
positive response when subjects realize capital gains, while controlling for the size of those gains.
This finding is striking because it provides a direct test of the key mechanism at work in the
realization utility model, and one that would have been very hard to carry out without neural data.
As noted in the previous paragraph, we do not find a correlation across individuals
between the strength with which a capital loss is reflected in the vmPFC and the proportion of
realized losses. Here we speculate as to why. One possibility is that the simple model of linear
realization utility that we test is incomplete in important ways. For example, the model currently
assumes that individuals react to capital gains and capital losses in symmetric and similar ways.
But there are reasons to believe that this may not be fully correct. First, an asymmetry between
the effect of capital gains and losses on the selling decision can be caused by the interaction of
realization utility and myopic discounting, both of which are necessary to induce selling mistakes.
Recall that individuals who experience realization utility at the time of selling, and who are
sufficiently myopic, will accelerate the sale of assets involving capital gains and delay the sale of
assets involving capital losses in order to maximize their present well‐being, even though it is
suboptimal under the expected value model. If the cross-individual variation in the discount rate
for losses is sufficiently larger than that for gains (a hypothesis that has not yet been tested), then
the decision value of selling a loss would be measured in our regression models with more noise
than the decision value of selling a gain49. If this is the case, then we would expect to see a
behavioral--‐neural correlation for capital gains, but not for losses, even if subjects experience
realization utility in both cases. Second, we find that the cross-subject correlation between the
strength with which capital gains and capital losses are reflected in the vmPFC is only 0.01, and

49

Recall that our definition of the decision value of selling assumes a discount rate of a myopic agent, and
therefore any (unobserved) variability in the discount rate across subjects will lead to misspecification of
the decision value. Under the assumption that the distribution of discount rates is bounded on one side, a
larger cross-subject variability in discount rates should lead to a more severe misspecification of the
decision value.

41

that the cross-subject correlation between their propensity to realize gains and their propensity to
realize losses is 0.03. This suggests the possibility that individuals might exhibit a differential
tendency to pay attention to capital gains and losses that is not captured by the theory (Karlsson et
al. (2009); Kuhnen and Knutson (2011)).
These modifications of the benchmark realization utility model are inspired by the data,
but are clearly also post-hoc and speculative. The good news, however, is that the same
methodology developed here could be applied to test these alternative specifications directly.
We emphasize that the methods we present in this paper are not a substitute for
traditional empirical methods in finance. On the contrary, brain imaging techniques are
complementary tools that can be used to test assumptions about investor behavior that are
difficult to evaluate using field data or experimental data alone. In particular, we see neural data
as a valuable resource when studying the more psychological dimensions of investor behavior,
precisely because these may derive from variables that are only observable at the neural level.
For example, using the same data set as in this study, we are examining how neural measures of
regret, which are very difficult to measure objectively in the field, can impact trading behavior in
a systematic way (Frydman et al. (2012)). The identification of investors’ reference point – the
reference rate of return that they use to determine whether an investment outcome is a “gain” or a
“loss” – is another challenging question that neural data may help us answer.

42

REFERENCES

Ashby, F. Gregory, 2011. Statistical analysis of fmri data (The MIT Press).
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth:
The common stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal
of Finance 55, 773-806.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: Gender,
overconfidence, and common stock investment, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116, 261-292.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Richard Thaler, 2003, A survey of behavioral finance, in
Handbook of the economics of finance (Elsevier).
Barberis, Nicholas, and Wei Xiong, 2009, What drives the disposition effect? An
analysis of a long-standing preference-based explanation, Journal of Finance
64, 751-784.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Wei Xiong, 2012, Realization utility, Journal of Financial
Economics 104, 251-271.
Basten, U., G. Biele, H. R. Heekeren, and C. J. Fiebach, 2010, How the brain integrates
costs and benefits during decision making, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 107, 21767-21772.
Bayer, Hannah M., and Paul W. Glimcher, 2005, Midbrain dopamine neurons encode
a quantitative reward prediction error signal, Neuron 47, 129-141.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, 2009, On the potential of neuroeconomics: A critical (but
hopeful) appraisal, American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 1, 1-41.
Boorman, E. D., T. E. J. Behrens, M. W. Woolrich, and M. F. S. Rushworth, 2009, How
green is the grass on the other side? Frontopolar cortex and the evidence in
favor of alternative courses of action, Neuron 62, 733-743.
Bossaerts, Peter, 2009, What decision neuroscience teaches us about financial
decision making, Annual Review of Financial Economics 1, 383-404.
Bossaerts, Peter, and Charles Plott, 2004, Basic principles of asset pricing theory:
Evidence from large-scale experimental financial markets, Review of Finance
8, 135-169.
Bossaerts, Peter, Charles Plott, and William R. Zame, 2007, Prices and portfolio
choices in financial markets: Theory, econometrics, experiments,
Econometrica 75, 993-1038.
Boynton, Geoffrey M., Stephen A. Engel, Gary H. Glover, and David J. Heeger, 1996,
Linear systems analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging in human
v1, The Journal of Neuroscience 16, 4207-4221.
Bruguier, Antoine J., Steven R. Quartz, and Peter Bossaerts, 2010, Exploring the
nature of “trader intuition”, Journal of Finance 65, 1703-1723.
Camerer, Colin F., 2007, Neuroeconomics: Using neuroscience to make economic
predictions, The Economic Journal 117, C26-C42.
Camerer, Colin, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec, 2005, Neuroeconomics:
How neuroscience can inform economics, Journal of Economic Literature 43,
9-64.

43

Camerer, Colin, and Keith Weigelt, 1991, Information mirages in experimental asset
markets, Journal of Business 64, 463-93.
Camerer, Colin, and Keith Weigelt, 1993, Convergence in experimental double
auctions for stochastically lived assets, in Daniel Friedman, and John Rust,
eds.: The double auction market: Theories, institutions and experimental
evaluations (Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, CA).
Camille, N., C. A. Griffiths, K. Vo, L. K. Fellows, and J. W. Kable, 2011, Ventromedial
frontal lobe damage disrupts value maximization in humans, The Journal of
Neuroscience 31, 7527-7532.
Camille, N., A. Tsuchida, and L. K. Fellows, 2011, Double dissociation of stimulusvalue and action-value learning in humans with orbitofrontal or anterior
cingulate cortex damage, The Journal of Neuroscience 31, 15048-15052.
Campbell, John, 2006, Household finance, Journal of Finance 61, 1553-1604.
Caplin, Andrew, Mark Dean, Paul W. Glimcher, and Robb B. Rutledge, 2010,
Measuring beliefs and rewards: A neuroeconomic approach, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 125, 923-960.
Chib, V. S., B. De Martino, S. Shimojo, and J. P. O'Doherty, 2012, Neural mechanisms
underlying paradoxical performance for monetary incentives are driven by
loss aversion, Neuron 74, 582-594.
Chib, V.S., A. Rangel, S. Shimojo, and J. O'Doherty, 2009, Evidence for a common
representation of decision values for dissimilar goods in human
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, Journal of Neuroscience 29, 12315-12320.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2009,
Reinforcement learning and savings behavior, Journal of Finance 64, 25152534.
Daw, Nathaniel, Samuel Gershman, Ben Seymour, Peter Dayan, and Raymond Dolan,
2011, Model-based influences on humans' choices and striatal prediction
errors, Neuron 69, 1204-1215.
De Martino, Benedetto, Dharshan Kumaran, Beatrice Holt, and Raymond J. Dolan,
2009, The neurobiology of reference-dependent value computation, The
Journal of Neuroscience 29, 3833-3842.
De Martino, Benedetto, John O'Doherty, Debajyoti Ray, Peter Bossaerts, and Colin
Camerer. Theory of mind is associated with inflated neural values during
financial bubbles, Caltech Working Paper.
Deichmann, R., J. A. Gottfried, C. Hutton, and R. Turner, 2003, Optimized epi for fmri
studies of the orbitofrontal cortex, NeuroImage 19, 430-441.
Dhar, Ravi, and Ning Zhu, 2006, Up close and personal: Investor sophistication and
the disposition effect, Management Science 52, 726-740.
Fehr, Ernst, and Colin F. Camerer, 2007, Social neuroeconomics: The neural circuitry
of social preferences, Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11, 419-427.
Fehr, Ernst, and Antonio Rangel, 2011, Neuroeconomics for economists: Why
economists should care about what the brain does, Working Paper.
Fellows, L. K., and M. J. Farah, 2007, The role of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in
decision making: Judgment under uncertainty or judgment per se?, Cerebral
Cortex 17, 2669-2674.

44

Feng, Lei, and Mark S. Seasholes, 2005, Do investor sophistication and trading
experience eliminate behavioral biases in financial markets?, Review of
Finance 9, 305-351.
FitzGerald, T. H. B., B. Seymour, and R. J. Dolan, 2009, The role of human
orbitofrontal cortex in value comparison for incommensurable objects, The
Journal of Neuroscience 29, 8388-8395.
Frazzini, Andrea, 2006, The disposition effect and underreaction to news, Journal of
Finance 61, 2017-2046.
Frydman, Cary, Colin Camerer, Peter Bossaerts, and Antonio Rangel, 2012, Neurally
measuring counterfactuals and their effect on investment decisions, Caltech
Working Paper.
Frydman, Cary, and Antonio Rangel, 2012, Attention to realization utility modulates
the disposition effect, Caltech Working Paper.
Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer, 2001, Loss aversion and seller behavior:
Evidence from the housing market, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 12331260.
Glascher, Jan, Nathaniel Daw, Peter Dayan, and John P. O'Doherty, 2010, States
versus rewards: Dissociable neural prediction error signals underlying
model-based and model-free reinforcement learning, Neuron 66, 585-595.
Glimcher, P. W., 2010. Foundations of neuroeconomic analysis (OUP USA).
Glimcher, Paul W., Ernst Fehr, Colin Camerer, and Russell A. Poldrack, 2008.
Neuroeconomics: Decision making and the brain (Academic Press,
Amsterdam).
Grabenhorst, F., and E. T. Rolls, 2011, Value, pleasure and choice in the ventral
prefrontal cortex, Trends in Cognitive Sciences 15, 56-67.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, What makes investors trade?, Journal of
Finance 56, 589-616.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2009, Sensation seeking, overconfidence, and
trading activity, Journal of Finance 64, 549-578.
Gul, Farak, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer, 2008, The case for mindless economics, in
Andrew Caplin, and Andrew Shotter, eds.: The foundations of positive and
normative economics (Oxford University Press).
Hare, T. A., J. Malmaud, and A. Rangel, 2011, Focusing attention on the health aspects
of foods changes value signals in vmpfc and improves dietary choice, The
Journal of Neuroscience 31, 11077-11087.
Hare, T. A., W. Schultz, C. F. Camerer, J. P. O'Doherty, and A. Rangel, 2011,
Transformation of stimulus value signals into motor commands during
simple choice, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 1812018125.
Hare, Todd , Colin F. Camerer, Daniel Knoepfle, John O'Doherty, and Antonio
Rangel, 2010, Value computations in ventral medial prefrontal cortex during
charitable decision making incorporate input from regions involved in social
cognition, Journal of Neuroscience 30, 583-590.
Hare, Todd, Colin F. Camerer, and Antonio Rangel, 2009, Self-control in decisionmaking involves modulation of the vmpfc valuation system, Science 324, 646648.

45

Hare, Todd, John O'Doherty, Colin F. Camerer, Wolfram Schultz, and Antonio Rangel,
2008, Dissociating the role of the orbitofrontal cortex and the striatum in the
computation of goal values and prediction errors, Journal of Neuroscience 28,
5623-5630.
Hsu, Ming, Meghana Bhatt, Ralph Adolphs, Daniel Tranel, and Colin F. Camerer,
2005, Neural systems responding to degrees of uncertainty in human
decision-making, Science 310, 1680-1683.
Hsu, Ming, Ian Krajbich, Chen Zhao, and Colin F. Camerer, 2009, Neural response to
reward anticipation under risk is nonlinear in probabilities, The Journal of
Neuroscience 29, 2231-2237.
Huettel, Scott, Allen Song, and Gregory McCarthy, 2004. Functional magnetic
resonance imaging (Sinauer Associates).
Hutcherson, C. A., H. Plassmann, J. J. Gross, and A. Rangel, 2012, Cognitive regulation
during decision making shifts behavioral control between ventromedial and
dorsolateral prefrontal value systems, The Journal of Neuroscience 32, 1354313554.
Janowski, V., C. Camerer, and A. Rangel, 2012, Empathic choice involves vmpfc value
signals that are modulated by social processing implemented in ipl, Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience.
Jin, Li, and Anna Scherbina, 2011, Inheriting losers, Review of Financial Studies 24.
Kable, Joseph W., and Paul W. Glimcher, 2007, The neural correlates of subjective
value during intertemporal choice, Nat Neurosci 10, 1625-1633.
Kable, Joseph W., and Paul W. Glimcher, 2009, The neurobiology of decision:
Consensus and controversy, Neuron 63, 733-745.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: An analysis of
decision under risk, Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Kahnt, T., L. J. Chang, S. Q. Park, J. Heinzle, and J. D. Haynes, 2012, Connectivity-based
parcellation of the human orbitofrontal cortex, The Journal of Neuroscience
32, 6240-6250.
Karlsson, N., G. Loewenstein, and D. Seppi, 2009, The ostrich effect: Selective
attention to information, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 38, 95-115.
Kaustia, Markku, 2010, Prospect theory and the disposition effect, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 1-36.
Kennerley, Steven W., Aspandiar F. Dahmubed, Antonio H. Lara, and Jonathan D.
Wallis, 2008, Neurons in the frontal lobe encode the value of multiple
decision variables, Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 21, 1162-1178.
Knutson, Brian, Scott Rick, G. Elliott Wimmer, Drazen Prelec, and George
Loewenstein, 2007, Neural predictors of purchases, Neuron 53, 147-156.
Knutson, Brian, G. Elliott Wimmer, Camelia M. Kuhnen, and Piotr Winkielman, 2008,
Nucleus accumbens activation mediates the influence of reward cues on
financial risk taking, NeuroReport 19, 509-513.
Kuhnen, Camelia M., and Brian Knutson, 2005, The neural basis of financial risk
taking, Neuron 47, 763-770.
Kuhnen, Camelia M., and Brian Knutson, 2011, The influence of affect on beliefs,
preferences, and financial decisions, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 46, 605-626.

46

Levy, D. J., and P. W. Glimcher, 2011, Comparing apples and oranges: Using rewardspecific and reward-general subjective value representation in the brain, The
Journal of Neuroscience 31, 14693-14707.
Levy, D. J., and P. W. Glimcher, 2012, The root of all value: A neural common
currency for choice, Current Opinion in Neurobiology.
Levy, Ifat, Jason Snell, Amy J. Nelson, Aldo Rustichini, and Paul W. Glimcher, 2010,
Neural representation of subjective value under risk and ambiguity, Journal
of Neurophysiology 103, 1036-1047.
Lim, S. L., J. P. O'Doherty, and A. Rangel, 2011, The decision value computations in
the vmpfc and striatum use a relative value code that is guided by visual
attention, The Journal of Neuroscience 31, 13214-13223.
Lin, Alice, Ralph Adolphs, and Antonio Rangel, 2012, Social and monetary reward
learning engage overlapping neural substrates, Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience 7, 274-281.
Litt, Ab, Hilke Plassmann, Baba Shiv, and Antonio Rangel, 2011, Dissociating
valuation and saliency signals during decision-making, Cerebral Cortex 21.
Lo, Andrew W., and Dmitry V. Repin, 2002, The psychophysiology of real-time
financial risk processing, Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 14, 323-339.
McClure, Samuel M., Gregory S. Berns, and P. Read Montague, 2003, Temporal
prediction errors in a passive learning task activate human striatum, Neuron
38, 339-346.
O'Doherty, J. P., P. Dayan, K. Friston, H. Critchley, and R. J. Dolan, 2003, Temporal
difference models and reward-related learning in the human brain, Neuron
38, 329-337.
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, Journal of
Finance 53, 1775-1798.
Padoa-Schioppa, Camillo, and John A. Assad, 2006, Neurons in the orbitofrontal
cortex encode economic value, Nature 441, 223-226.
Park, S. Q., T. Kahnt, J. Rieskamp, and H. R. Heekeren, 2011, Neurobiology of value
integration: When value impacts valuation, The Journal of Neuroscience 31,
9307-9314.
Penny, William, Karl Friston, John Ashburner, Stefan Kiebel, and Thomas Nichols,
2006. Statistical parametric mapping: The analysis of functional brain images
(Academic Press).
Pessiglione, Mathias, Ben Seymour, Guillaume Flandin, Raymond J. Dolan, and Chris
D. Frith, 2006, Dopamine-dependent prediction errors underpin rewardseeking behaviour in humans, Nature 442, 1042-1045.
Peters, J., and C. Buchel, 2009, Overlapping and distinct neural systems code for
subjective value during intertemporal and risky decision making, The Journal
of Neuroscience 29, 15727-15734.
Plassmann, H., J. O'Doherty, and A. Rangel, 2007, Orbitofrontal cortex encodes
willingness to pay in everyday economic transactions, J Neurosci 27, 9984-8.
Plassmann, Hilke, John P. O'Doherty, and Antonio Rangel, 2010, Appetitive and
aversive goal values are encoded in the medial orbitofrontal cortex at the
time of decision making, The Journal of Neuroscience 30, 10799-10808.

47

Plott, Charles R., and Shyam Sunder, 1988, Rational expectations and the
aggregation of diverse information in laboratory security markets,
Econometrica 56, 1085-1118.
Poldrack, Russell A., Jeanette Mumford, and Thomas Nichols, 2011. Handbook of
functional mri data analysis (Cambridge University Press).
Prevost, C., M. Pessiglione, E. Metereau, M. L. Clery-Melin, and J. C. Dreher, 2010,
Separate valuation subsystems for delay and effort decision costs, The
Journal of Neuroscience 30, 14080-14090.
Rabin, Matthew, 2002, Inference by believers in the law of small numbers, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117, 775-816.
Rangel, Antonio, Colin Camerer, and P. Read Montague, 2008, A framework for
studying the neurobiology of value-based decision making, Nat Rev Neurosci
9, 545-556.
Rangel, Antonio, and John Clithero, Forthcoming, The computation of stimulus
values in simple choice, in P. W. Glimcher, and Ernst Fehr, eds.:
Neuroeconomics: Decision-making and the brain, 2nd ed.
Rangel, Antonio, and Todd Hare, 2010, Neural computations associated with goaldirected choice, Current Opinion in Neurobiology 20, 262-270.
Roesch, M. R., and C. R. Olson, 2004, Neuronal activity related to reward value and
motivation in primate frontal cortex, Science 304, 307-310.
Rushworth, Matthew F. S., Nils Kolling, Jerome Sallet, and Rogier B. Mars, In press,
Valuation and decision-making in frontal cortex: One or many serial or
parallel systems?, Current Opinion in Neurobiology.
Rushworth, Matthew, MaryAnn Noonan, Erie Boorman, Mark Walton, and Timothy
Behrens, 2011, Frontal cortex and reward-guided learning and decisionmaking, Neuron 70, 1054-1069.
Rustichini, Aldo, 2009, Is there a method of neuroeconomics?, American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics 48-59.
Schultz, Wolfram, Peter Dayan, and P. Read Montague, 1997, A neural substrate of
prediction and reward, Science 275, 1593-1599.
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 1985, The disposition to sell winners too early
and ride losers too long: Theory and evidence, Journal of Finance 40, 777790.
Smith, D. V., B. Y. Hayden, T. K. Truong, A. W. Song, M. L. Platt, and S. A. Huettel, 2010,
Distinct value signals in anterior and posterior ventromedial prefrontal
cortex, The Journal of Neuroscience 30, 2490-2495.
Sokol-Hessner, P., C. Hutcherson, T. Hare, and A. Rangel, 2012, Decision value
computation in dlpfc and vmpfc adjusts to the available decision time,
European Journal of Neuroscience 35, 1065-1074.
Talmi, D., P. Dayan, S. J. Kiebel, C. D. Frith, and R. J. Dolan, 2009, How humans
integrate the prospects of pain and reward during choice, The Journal of
Neuroscience 29, 14617-14626.
Tom, Sabrina M., Craig R. Fox, Christopher Trepel, and Russell A. Poldrack, 2007,
The neural basis of loss aversion in decision-making under risk, Science 315,
515-518.

48

Tusche, A., S. Bode, and J. D. Haynes, 2010, Neural responses to unattended products
predict later consumer choices, The Journal of Neuroscience 30, 8024-8031.
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N., B. Landeau, D. Papathanassiou, F. Crivello, O. Etard, N. Delcroix,
B. Mazoyer, and M. Joliot, 2002, Automated anatomical labeling of activations
in spm using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the mni mri singlesubject brain, NeuroImage 15, 273-289.
Wallis, J. D., 2011, Cross-species studies of orbitofrontal cortex and value-based
decision-making, Nature Neuroscience.
Weber, Martin, and Colin F. Camerer, 1998, The disposition effect in securities
trading: An experimental analysis, Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 33, 167-184.
Wunderlich, K., A. Rangel, and J. P. O'Doherty, 2010, Economic choices can be made
using only stimulus values, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
107, 15005-15010.
Wunderlich, K., M. Symmonds, P. Bossaerts, and R. Dolan, 2011, Hedging your bets
by learning reward correlations in the human brain, Neuron 71, 1141-1152.

49

Figure 1. Sample screens from a typical trial in the fMRI experiment. For trials 10-108,
subjects saw the price update screen for two seconds, followed by the trading screen for
which they had up to three seconds to enter a decision (a blank screen was displayed in
between in order to temporally separate neural activity associated with decision-making.)
Because the blank screen is displayed for a random amount of time (uniformly distributed
between 1 and 3 seconds), the average length of a trial, consisting of the three screens, is 7
seconds. The screens shown below are for a trial in which the subject owns a unit of both
stocks A and B. If the subject had not owned stock A at the price update screen, the
purchase price would not be displayed. If the subject had not owned stock B at the trading
screen, he would have had the opportunity to buy stock B. The screens were displayed
while subjects were inside the fMRI scanner, and decisions were entered with a handheld
device. For trials 1-9, subjects only saw the price update screen and the blank screen, which
allowed them to accumulate information about the price changes before they were asked to
make a decision starting on trial 10.

50

Figure 2. BOLD measurements of neural activity. (A) Because fMRI measures the blood
oxygen level dependent (BOLD) response, and not neural activity directly, the mapping
from neural activity to BOLD response is necessary in order to make inference about
changes in neural activity. This mapping is widely known as the canonical hemodynamic
response function, and is displayed here as a function of one arbitrary unit of instantaneous
neural activity at time 0. (B) The BOLD response combines linearly across multiple sources
of neural activity. This figure displays the BOLD response (dashed) as a function of three
sequential sources of neural activity (solid).

51

Figure 3. Process of constructing a general linear model (GLM). There are two sets of
regressors: target computations and additional controls. Target computations reflect the
signals of interest whereas additional controls are used to clean up noise that is inherent in
the BOLD signal. Because target computations are induced by neural activity, we convolve
these regressors, while we do not convolve additional controls because these variables do
not trigger a hemodynamic response. Finally, we enter the two sets of variables, one of
which is convolved, into a GLM with AR(1) noise.

52

Figure 4. Measures of the disposition effect (PGR-PLR) for each subject. Standard
error bars are computed as in Odean (1998) and the dotted line indicates the optimal level
of the disposition effect that an expected value trader would exhibit, namely -0.76. All
subjects exhibit a disposition effect greater than the optimal level and a majority of subjects
have a disposition effect that is significantly positive. The figure indicates that there is
significant heterogeneity in the size of the disposition effect across subjects (SD: 0.32).

100%

Disposition effect (PGR-PLR)

80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
-20%
Subject ID
-40%
-60%
-80%

53

Figure 5. Total number of sell decisions by decision type and optimality. Realized
gains and losses refer to decisions where subjects sold a stock trading at a gain (loss.)
Paper gains (losses) refer to decisions where subjects decided to hold a stock trading at a
gain (loss). The optimality measures show an important aspect of our design: selling
winners and holding losers, which leads to a disposition effect, are typically suboptimal
decisions. Decisions are pooled across all subjects.

1200

Sub-optimal
Optimal

# of Decisions

1000
800
600
400
200
0
Realized Gains Paper Gains Realized Losses Paper Losses

54

Figure 6. vmPFC activity reflects realization utility. Estimation results from GLM 1,
1

  = constant +  !"#$ %& − &  + ' !"#$ ()*& + + controls + εt

The yellow area depicts our pre-specified region of interest of the vmPFC. Red voxels are
those which exhibit activity at the time of trading screen onset that significantly correlate
with the realizable capital gain. Orange voxels satisfy both features. For illustration
purposes, the significance threshold for the image is p<0.001 with a 15 voxel extent
threshold, but all statistics reported in the paper are also small volume corrected at p<0.05
using FWE. The z=-21 coordinate and the y=39 coordinate indicate which 2-dimensional
plane is shown in each of the two brain maps.

z=-21

y=39

55

Figure 7. Correlation between brain activity and measures of the disposition effect.
Each data point in the figure represents a single subject. (A) We find that activity in the
vmPFC at the time subjects are offered the opportunity to sell a capital gain is highly
correlated with their proportion of gains realized. (B) We do not find a similar correlation
between vmPFC activity and the proportion of losses realized.
A)

Propor on of Gains Realized

100%

80%

60%

r=0.58
p=0.001

40%

20%

0%
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

vmPFC beta on Capital Gain
B)

Propor on of Losses Realized

100%

80%

60%

40%

r=0.14
p=0.475

20%

0%
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

vmPFC beta on Capital Loss

56

Figure 8. Direct tests of the realization utility hypothesis. (A) Red voxels are those
which exhibit greater activity when subjects realize capital gains compared to when they
hold capital gains (shown at p<0.001 uncorrected with a 15 voxel extent threshold for
illustrative purposes only). Yellow voxels indicate our a priori region of interest (ROI),
which is based on peak voxels that correlate with prediction error in Lin et al. (2012) and an
anatomical mask of vSt. Orange voxels indicate overlap between our a priori ROI and voxels
which exhibit activity that correlates with realization of a capital gain. The y=6 coordinate
indicates which 2-dimensional plane is shown in the brain map. (B) Activity in the vSt
(averaged over a priori ROI) during trials when subjects were offered the opportunity to sell
capital gains. The blue time series plots the average activity in trials where subjects realized
capital gains, while the red time series plots the average activity in trials where subjects
decided to hold capital gains. ** denotes p<0.01, * denotes p<0.05 (paired t-test). t=0
corresponds to the instant at which the subject enters his trading decision on a hand-held
device.
A)

y=6

B)

**
0.07

Sold Gains

% vSt Signal Change

*

-6

Held Gains

0.05

0.03

*
0.01
-4

-2
0
-0.01

2

4

6

8

10

12

-0.03

Seconds A er Decision Entered

57

Appendix: Experimental Instructions
Buying your stock
In this experiment you will be given 350 experimental dollars to invest in three
different stocks. Your job is to choose when to buy and sell each stock, so that you
earn the most money by the end of the experiment. Throughout the experiment,
you will see the price of each stock changing (more detail below), and you will use
this information to decide when to buy and sell. When you sell a stock, you receive
an amount of cash equal to the price of the stock. When you buy a stock, you receive
one unit of the stock, but you must give up an amount of cash equal to the current
price of the stock.
The three stocks you can buy or sell are simply called Stock A, Stock B, and Stock C.
To begin the experiment you MUST buy all three stocks, where each stock costs
$100. Therefore, after you buy the three stocks, you will own one unit of each stock
and have a total of $50 remaining. For the remainder of the experiment, you are
only allowed to hold a maximum of 1 unit of each stock, and you cannot hold
negative units (no short selling.) However, you can carry a negative cash balance by
buying a stock for more money than you have, but any negative cash balances will
be deducted from your final earnings.

Structure of the market
In the experiment, you will see two types of screens, a price update screen and an
action screen. In the price update screen, one stock will be randomly selected and
you will be told if the selected stock price has gone up or down, and by how much.
Note that you will only see an update for one stock at a time. You will not be asked
to do anything during this screen, you will simply see information about the change
in price.
Following the price update screen, another stock will be randomly chosen (it may be
the same one you just saw) and you will be asked to take an action. If you currently
hold a unit of the stock, you will be asked if you would like to sell the stock at the
current price. If you do not currently own a unit of the stock, you will be asked if
you would like to buy a unit at the current price.
The experiment will start out with 9 consecutive price update screens, and then you
will have the opportunity to buy or sell after each subsequent price update screen.

58

How the stock prices change
Each stock changes price according to the exact same rule. Each stock is either in a
good state or in a bad state. In the good state, the stock goes up with 55% chance,
and it goes down with 45% chance. In the bad state, the stock goes down with 55%
chance and it goes up with 45% chance.
Once it is determined whether the price will go up or down, the size of the change is
always random, and will either be $5, $10, or $15. For example, in the bad state, the
stock will go down with 55% chance, and the amount it goes down by is $5, $10, or
$15 with equal chance. Similarly, the good stock will go up with 55% chance, and
the amount it goes up by will either be $5, $10, or $15.
The stocks will all randomly start in either the good state or bad state, and after
each price update, there is a 20% chance the stock switches state.
Stock price changes
+
-

Good state
55%
45%

Bad state
45%
55%

State changes

Good state tomorrow
Bad state tomorrow

Good state today
80%
20%

Bad state today
20%
80%

Earnings and payout
You will play this market game TWO SEPARATE TIMES in the scanner. Each game
will last approximately 15 minutes, and each game is independent from the previous
one. This means when you start the second game, you will have to buy the three
stocks at $100 again, and the stocks will start randomly in each state again.
Your earnings at the end of the experiment will be equal to the amount of cash you
accrued over the two scanning sessions from buying and selling stocks, plus the
current price of any stocks that you own.
Earnings=cash + price A*(Hold A) + Price B*(Hold B) + Price C*(Hold C)

Finally, your earnings will be converted using an exchange rate of 12:1. That means
we divide your earnings by 12, and pay you this amount plus the $15 show up fee.

59

Button presses
During the Action screens, you will either be given the option to “Buy?” or “Sell?”
depending on whether you hold the stock or not. The LEFT (blue) button indicates
“YES”. And the RIGHT (yellow) button indicates “NO.” You have three seconds to
enter your response, otherwise the computer will randomly select a response for
you.

60

