                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PUBLIC LIABILITIES AND HEALTH CARE POLICY

                                         Kristopher J. Hult
                                         Tomas J. Philipson

                                        Working Paper 18571
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18571


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




Previously circulated as "Health Care Reforms and the Value of Future Public Liabilities." We are
thankful to Gary Becker and Casey Mulligan for comments and to Ralph Koijen for many discussions.
We are also grateful to seminar participants at Peking University, University of Chicago, University
of Southern California, and Yale University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Kristopher J. Hult and Tomas J. Philipson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Public Liabilities and Health Care Policy
Kristopher J. Hult and Tomas J. Philipson
NBER Working Paper No. 18571
November 2012, Revised May 2013
JEL No. I1,I11,I13,I18

                                             ABSTRACT

Many countries have large future public liabilities attributable to health care programs. However, little
explicit analysis exists about how health care policies affect these program liabilities. We analyze
how reimbursement and approval policies affect public liabilities through their impact on the returns
to medical innovation, a central factor driving spending growth. We consider how policies impact
innovative returns through expected earnings, their risk-adjustment, and their timing and defaults through
the approval process. Our analysis implies that cutbacks in government programs may raise government
liabilities and expansions may lower them. We quantitatively calibrate these non-standard effects for
the US Medicare program.


Kristopher J. Hult
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
khult@uchicago.edu

Tomas J. Philipson
Irving B. Harris Graduate School
of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction
Many developed nations are increasingly concerned about the growth of future government liabilities
in health care and how to assess the effects of changes in health policy on these liabilities. In the US,
many private and public efforts have attempted to limit the growth in overall health care spending
and public liabilities, including prospective payment Medicare reforms in the 1980s, the dramatic rise in
managed care firms in the 1980s and 1990s, and the current expansions of consumer-oriented health care.
The most recent incarnations include Accountable Care Organizations, bundled payments, and other
measures of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Despite these repeated efforts, the health care economy
has grown and is predicted to continue to grow faster than the rest of the economy.
    These private and public efforts to slow down spending growth run into difficulty partly because
they are motivated by their impact on incentives at a given point in time rather than the impact on
the growth in spending across time. For example, many argue that prospective payment or bundling
reforms reduce the incentive to spend at a given time without any explicit understanding of why growth
may be altered. Indeed, little explicit economic analysis exists of how various policies will affect the
growth of future health care spending over time. As a result, there is little explicit analysis on how
various reforms affect the present value of future public liabilities. This paper addresses this gap in the
literature by offering a framework in which they can be analyzed explicitly and quantitatively.
    We analyze how health care policies affect future spending growth through their impact on the
returns from medical innovation. Following the work of Newhouse (1992), research suggests that medical
innovation is central to the growth in health care spending. Moreover, public programs are central to
driving global innovative returns, as a large share of the world’s care is publicly financed in rich countries.
Therefore, public reforms have large impacts on the uncertain future profits associated with medical
innovation, which drive future spending growth in both the public and the private sector.
    We consider cases in which the impact of government policies on medical research and development
(R&D) returns comes from three different sources: expected earnings, their risk-adjustment, and their
timing and “defaults” through the approval process. For the impact on expected earnings, we stress
the non-monotonic effects of government expansions on innovative returns. In particular, we stress that
government expansions often lower both demand prices (premiums plus copays) to raise access but also
supply prices (reimbursements) through government monopsony power. This result may imply that R&D
returns rise when government expansions include poorer parts of the population by raising quantity more
than lowering markups. For example, Medicaid may slightly raise innovative returns in this manner.
However, innovative returns fall when expansions include richer parts of the population when markups
may fall more than quantity rises. For example, the single-payer European payment systems may lower
innovative returns in this manner. The non-monotonic impact of government expansions across the
income distribution implies that innovation incentives may rise with program cut backs and fall with
program expansions.
    The second way in which reforms may affect innovative returns is through risk-adjustments of ex-
pected earnings due to both private-sector risk such as the business cycle as well as public-sector risk
such as future policy uncertainty. For private sector risk, if pro-cyclical earnings are undesirable (e.g., a
CAPM world), a means-tested program such as Medicaid lowers risk because means-testing buffers the
demand of the poor in recessions. For public sector risk, policy uncertainty surrounding new reforms
may counteract expected earnings effects. An example would be the uncertainty of the ACA Medicaid
expansions, which may lower R&D even though under certainty such expansions should raise R&D.


                                                      2
    We analyze the impact common policy changes have on the present value of public program liabil-
ities through affecting innovative returns. More precisely, we consider when the innovation incentives
discussed drive the future growth rate of a public program. The present value of liabilities of any pro-
gram, such as say Medicare, is determined by the discounted value of all future annual spending levels
of the program. Given the non-monotonic effects of program expansions on innovation incentives, they
may impact future program liabilities in non-standard ways. In particular, government cutbacks may
raise future public liabilities and government expansions may lower them. This occurs when innovation
incentives are negatively related to program expansion. If this is the case, then a smaller program grows
faster, potentially offsetting that it started at a lower level in determining the present value of liabilities.
    We calibrate these program effects using existing utilization and reimbursement data in the US.
First, we show that our calibration methods performed well on the historical program expansion for
the Medicare Part D program for drugs. In particular, using pre-implementation data, we calibrate the
price and quantity effects and show they were close to those observed post-implementation of about a
20% fall in supply prices and about a 5-10% rise in utilization. Consequently, as prices fell more than
quantity rose, innovation incentives declined with this program expansion, making differences in short-
and long-run effects relevant. We then use the same type of calibration methods to assess the impact of
cut-backs in the Medicare part A&B program covering hospital and physician services, and indirectly
the devices and products used in supplying those services. In particular, we consider means-testing the
program to a larger extent than is done presently. We calibrate the non-monotonic nature of innovative
returns due to such mean-testing using existing utilization and reimbursement data. As implied by
our analysis, we calibrate that cutting the program by means-testing Medicare Part A&B would raise
innovative returns by about 22%. We calibrate the upward pressure this program cut would have on
Medicare program liabilities.
    Our analysis naturally relates to several strands of previous work. Chernew and Newhouse (2011)
summarize models of health care spending growth in the literature. Baumgardner (1991) presents the
role of managed care in controlling spending. Weisbrod (1991) discussed forms of third-party pricing
affecting the profits and type of medical R&D undertaken, and Finkelstein (2004) and Clemens (2012)
documented evidence on the link between third party coverage and innovation. More closely related to
this paper, Koijen, Philipson, and Uhlig (2012) documented a large “medical innovation premium” that
historically is paid to medical R&D investors and the growth of the health care sector this premium
implied. Malani and Philipson (2012) considered the nonstandard impacts of reforms on clinical trials,
by far the largest component of medical R&D costs. Our work extends this work by providing an explicit
and quantifiable framework for analyzing the policy impacts on program liabilities. The purpose of this
work is mainly positive in nature; we do not argue that more or less spending, whether privately or
publicly financed, is desirable or not. Rather, we are primarily concerned with predicting how program
changes affect program liabilities.


2     Health Policy and Public Liabilities: A General Formulation
Let a government program be defined by a set of policy variables represented by a vector g, such as the
supply price (reimbursement), demand price (premium or copay), eligibility criteria (e.g., means-testing),
and payment structures (such as fee-for-service or capitation), all of which ultimately drive quantity and
markups in both the private and public sector. Let F (g) denote the share of the population eligible for


                                                       3
the public program, potentially 100% if it is a universal single-payer program. For a firm engaged in
medical innovation, let πG (g) and π(g) denote the per capita variable profits in the public and private
sector. The overall profits from both sectors are then given by:

                                        Π(g) ≡ F (g)πG (g) + (1 − F (g))π(g)                                             (1)

This specification is general in the sense that both quantity and markups in both sectors may be
affected by the government policies. This formulation considers only variable profits after marketing
the innovation and not the total profits netting out the fixed costs of R&D. The argument here is that
larger variable profits lead to larger R&D investments to receive those larger profits. At this level of
generality, changing an element of the policy vector g affects profits as in:

                                      dΠ                   dπG            dπ
                                         = Fg [πG − π] + F     + (1 − F )
                                      dg                    dg            dg

The first effect is if the policy affects eligibility, in which case public profits replace private ones for the
newly eligible part of the population. The second is the effect on per capita profits in the two different
sectors, weighted by their size. For example, consider when the policy change concerns expanded
eligibility by some dimension such as age, income, or disease status. Such an eligibility change may not
only affect the newly eligible through the first effect but also the per capita profits if, for example, the
larger public program lowers future reimbursement. We will consider special cases of these within- and
between-sector effects by specifying more precisely what policy levers are under consideration and what
they imply for profitability.


2.1     Innovation Incentives and Public Liabilities
The impact of reforms on the present value of future liabilities comes from how they affect the level of
spending today and from how they affect future growth rates of spending through medical innovation.
Innovative returns of medical products are affected not only by yearly earnings but also by the approval
process affecting the timing and nonpayment of those earnings. Approval reforms affect the “duration”
(or value-weighted timing) of returns and the implicit “default” rates of R&D investments.For a given
innovation with a patent life of l years, the present value is denoted P (g) at the start of the patent life.
If development is regulated to last for τ years, this present value discounts the annual profits in the
patent window of l − τ years:
                                             l−τ
                                             X       Π
                                     P (g) ≡                 = A(τ, l)Π
                                             t=0
                                                 (1 + r)τ +t
                          Pl−τ       1
where now and A(τ, l) ≡ t=0 (1+r)      τ +t is defined as the value of a dollar paid each year of the effective

patent life. Profits clearly rise with the length of the patent and a rise development time has two
reinforcing negative effects; it delays a shortened effective patent life1 .
   1 There are some noteworthy aspects of uncertainty in the approval process not considered here. First, given that

discounting is decreasing but convex in development times, Aτ < 0 and Aτ τ > 0,an increase in development risk may
raise expected profits. Increased variance in development time raises the value of early profits more than it lowers the
loss in later profits. Second, non-approval probablities are the analog of “defaults” on the “R&D loan” made by investors.
DiMasi (2001) estimated the cumulative such default probability in 1990s of about 83% Naturally, as default probabilities
raise discounting further, this lowers overall returns. The earlier in development the more sensitive the overall profits are
to changes defaults vis a vis variable profits post marketing. Venture capital investors are more concerned with approval
risk than investors in later rounds of funding, such as private- or public-equity, who are concerned with reimbursement



                                                             4
    The full innovative value P is a function of policies g that includes the approval process, as well as
reimbursement prices affecting variable profits once the innovation is marketed. These innovative returns
drive future spending growth on the public program, and as a result the present value of future liabilities
of the program. Consider when program spending in a given year is denoted S(g) and assume that the
growth factor in spending is a function γ(P (g)) of the returns to innovation. There are many different
models that would generate a relationship between the degree to which the sector expands/contracts
and incentives for innovation2 . This reduced form relationship between innovative returns and spending
growth represents that a larger incentive to innovate may either imply a larger or smaller growth in
spending in the future. The present value of public liabilities, V , is given by the discounted value of
current spending and its future growth:
                                                 ∞
                                                 X S(g)[1 + γ(P (g))]t
                                           V =
                                                 t=0
                                                              [1 + r]t

Direct algebra yields that a policy change affects the relative value of public liabilities according to3 :

                                             Vg   Sg    1
                                                =    +     AγP Πg
                                             V    S    r−γ

This says that the effect on liabilities is affected by current spending effects corrected by how the policy
change affects future growth through the incentives for innovation. Approval policies affects program
liabilities of the program through their effect on the degree of “effective” intellectual property protection
provided (A). For example, FDA approval policies that prolong development lowers future Medicare
liabilities, and policies that strengthens intellectual property raises those liabilities. If profits are not
affected by the policy change Πg = 0 or future spending growth is not affected by the incentives to
                                                                                                       V      S
innovate γP = 0 then naturally the effect on liabilities coincides with the effect on spending, Vg = Sg ,
because future spending growth is not affected. If there are effects on future spending growth then
                                                                         V
discounting makes it matter less to the value of liabilities, that is, Vg is decreasing in r. Moreover, the
closer spending growth is to the discount rate before the policy change the larger is the innovation effect
on liabilities. This occurs because present values are convex in the net discount rate r − γ because a rise
in discounting lowers the present value less the larger the discount rate is. Lastly, intellectual property
                                                               V
protection amplifies the growth effects of reforms, that is, Vg is increasing in a
                                                                                               S
    When spending and profits move in the same direction due to a policy change, Sg Πg > 0,then
spending reductions or expansions are associated with reductions or expansions in the value of future
liabilities. When spending cuts reduce innovation incentives, then the negative spending effect is re-
                                  V      S
inforced by the lower growth, Vg < Sg < 0 and when expansion fuels innovation liability effects are
              V     S
magnified, Vg > Sg > 0. However, when profits and public spending move in different directions due
                       S
to a policy change, Sg Πg < 0, then spending and liability effects may differ in sign so that cut-backs in
spending may lead to larger liabilities and vice versa. If the cut raises profits the two effects are offsetting;
risk. Scientific or regulatory approval risk is likely to be diversifiable, but reimbsuremnt risk may be less so.
   2 For example, consider when the chance of discovery is denoted by the increasing and concave function K(R) as a

function of fixed RD costs R. Expected profits would be K(R)P (g) − R resulting in a positive realtionship between RD
and innovative return R(P (g)), that could be subsequently related to growth or contraction in the sector dependent on
the type of RD was undertaken.
   3 This follows from V = S(g)(1 + r)/(r − γ(P (g))) and P (g) = AΠ(g), which implies V = S + 1+r γ AΠ =
                                                                                                  g    g     (r−γ)2 P g
Sg           1
S
     V +        γ AΠg V
           (r−γ) P




                                                          5
                            Figure 1: Level versus Growth Effect of Spending

                                                                                              V          S
the initially smaller program may grow faster, which may be more than fully offsetting Vg > 0 > Sg .
In general, the innovation effects on growth may reinforce or counteract the level effects. If the level
and growth effects counteract each other, liabilities may fall with a program expansion or rise with a
program cutback. Because the change in the level of spending is front-loaded and growth effects are
back-loaded, more discounting means the growth effects are less likely to offset spending effects .
    Figure 1 shows two qualitative cases when reforms affect the present value of liabilities differently
than they affect the levels of initial spending. The solid line in the middle is program spending over
time in the case of no reform. The area beneath it is the present value of liabilities under the status quo.
The dashed line is the scenario of a spending cut that raises R&D incentives and hence future spending
growth. In this case, with a program cut, spending initially decreases. However, if the cut raises profits
this raises future spending and may thus cause liabilities to rise. The other case in the figure concerns
when a program expansion causes spending to rise but growth falls as may be the case when going to a
universal single-payer program. In this case, liabilities may fall with the program expansion even though
current spending may rise.
    In the figure, when discounting becomes smaller the divergence in paths induced by changes in growth
is more likely to dominate the initial spending effects. More precisely, the liability effect is determined
by the change in the relative growth rate, which may be large for small changes in the absolute growth
rate. For example, if the current spending of a program is cut 20%, then if growth rates go from 3%
to 4%, this entails a relative growth rate difference of 33%, which may offset the spending cut under
common discount rates.
    This discussion concerned the case when future profits raised spending through innovation. However,
the discussion does not preclude that there may be a negative relationship between profits and spending
growth. An example of when future profits may be associated with lower spending growth is when
innovation leads to lower real prices of health care and demand is inelastic, say when drug spending
replaces hospital services. In most of our discussions, however, we will consider positive effects of profits
on spending growth motivated by historical evidence relating medical innovation and spending growth.



                                                     6
                                         Figure 2: Profit by Sector


3     Program Changes and Public Liability Effects
The general formulation above needs to be specified in more detail to study specific program changes.
We consider the impact of expanding public coverage across the income distribution as well as changes
in reimbursement and copays altering the supply and demand prices the program induces.


3.1    Changes in Eligibility
We argue that income-based eligibility expansion has important non-monotonic effects on innovative
returns. Let πG (y) and π(y) denote per capita profits in the two sectors for a given level of income y.
Figure 2 shows the case we will assume throughout that profits rise in both sectors but are higher in the
public sector for the relatively poor, who buy more care with lower demand prices, and higher in the
private sector for the relatively rich, who may buy care at higher supply prices outside the program. In
this case, we have that πG (y) > π(y) for y < x and πG (y) < π(y) for y > x for some level of income x
at which the two coincide.
    For a given income distribution F (y) with density f (y), a means-tested program may be defined
by a cutoff level of income z below which eligibility occurs, making a share F (z) eligible and 1 − F (z)
ineligible. For example, in the US multiples of the federal poverty line are often used as a Medicaid
eligibility cutoff. The total profits across the public and private sector for a given level of eligibility are
then:
                                          ˆz                  ˆ∞
                                 Π(z) =       πG (y)f (y)dy +    π(y)f (y)dy
                                        y=0                  y=z

As depicted in Figure 2, the total profits peak where per capita profits cross at x. Profits increase below
x by bringing in the poor at larger profits, and decrease above x by bringing in the rich at lower profits.




                                                      7
More precisely, the marginal impact on profits from raising eligibility is:

                                         dΠ
                                            = f (z)[πG (z) − π(z)]
                                         dz

and is thus positive below x and negative above x. As a result, there is a bell-shaped non-monotonic
relationship between profits and eligibility whereby profits first rise and then fall with eligibility.
    A special case of these overlapping profits occurs when expanded eligibility for public coverage may
replace either private insurance with profits πI (y) or uninsurance with profits πU . If we denote by I(y)
the increasing private insurance rate as a function of income the profits in the private sector are:

                                           π = IπI + (1 − I)πU

Consider when profits among privately insured and uninsured rise with income but vanish without
income; πI (0) = πU (0). Then if insured per capita profits rise above public per capita profits at some
point as income rises, the overall private profits will rise above public profits as well if the insurance
rate I rises to full uninsurance for large enough income. As a special case of above, the profits are
non-monotonic as a function of eligibility.

3.1.1   Markup and Quantity Effects from Eligibility Changes

In the most general case, policies g may affect quantities, prices, and costs. Consider when overall profits
are driven by the medical care quantities or utilization (m), with reimbursement (supply prices) pS and
p0S in the public and private sector, premiums and co-pays (demand prices) pD and p0D , and production
costs c:
                          Π(g) = F [(pS − c)mG (pD )] + (1 − F )[(p0S − c)m(p0D )]                      (2)

The intermediary relationships between payers and providers are therefore subsumed in this particular
specification through the direct relationship between government policies and profits that result from
the quantity and markups implied by any such intermediary relationships. A medical product may
be used more if government reimbursement of doctors and hospitals is higher. For example, in the
US Medicare program, the producer may sell to hospitals that participate in part A, doctors in part B,
private payers in part C, or drug plans in part D. In this case, the quantities and prices of the formulation
above may then be interpreted as those induced by the policies and regulations g governing the four
programs. This formulation therefore merges the effects of provider adoption of innovations developed.
The effect of supply prices on innovation may be direct when the government sets administrative price
for drugs and biologics directly. Alternatively, it may set prices for procedures by providers that then
determine the willingness of those providers to demand technologies under such reimbursement rates,
e.g. a more generous DRG rate to hospitals may raise demand for technologies within that DRG.
Indeed, device manufacturers in the US are often more concerned with marketing to providers than
payers for this reason. In addition, non-patented procedural innovation is very often accompanied
with device innovation in the sense that the new procedure involves a new device. This implies that
innovative returns of non-patentable procedural innovation are often protected in a similar way to that
of patentable medical product innovation, whether drugs or devices. In sum, the formulation above
assumes that the end payer, not intermediary payers, matters for for innovation incentives.
    To consider eligibility effects in this formulation assume demand is a function of price and income


                                                     8
                 Figure 3: Profits Broken into Quantity Expansion and Markup Reduction


so that profits are πG (y) = (pS − c)m(pD , y) and π(y) = (p0S − c)m(p0D , y). The effect of an expansion
of eligibility on overall profits is then:

                                 dΠ
                                    = f (z)[(pS − c)m(pD , z) − (p0S − c)m(p0D , z)]
                                 dz
Changes in the levels of eligibility have two offsetting effects on overall profit. First, the program raises
utilization by lowering demand prices which has a positive effect on profits. Second,the public program
may lower supply prices which has a negative effect on profits. Thus profits rise or fall depending on
whether the positive utilization effect dominates the negative markup effect:

                                           dΠ     m(pD , z)  (p0 − c)
                                              >0⇔    0      ≥ S
                                           dz     m(pD , z)  (pS − c)

Now if subsidy has the greatest impact on the utilization of the poor, mpy > 0, then the quantity effect
likely dominates for the poor and the markup effect likely dominate for the rich.
    These effects are illustrated in Figure 3, which depicts the quantity gains and markup reductions
associated with a public program.
    At the extreme left when the poorest people are being added, the quantity effect will likely dominate
the markup effect. At the other extreme is when very rich individuals are added, in which case their
demand will not be affected much by the lower copay in the public program but their markup will be
lowered if they are subsumed under a government buyer. The positive impact may be exemplified by
US Medicaid expansions and the negative impact by universal European single payer programs. The
end result is a bell-shaped profits curve as a special case of the crossing per capita profits in the two
sectors.4
   4 Although overall eligibility expansions may have large and non-monotonic innovation effects, the most recent eligibility

reforms in the US may not have altered such incentives much. The recent ACA reforms eligibility criteria for health
insurance subsidies were widened to expand both the Medicaid population as well as well as the private coverage population
through exchange subsidies. CBO estimates that an increase in insurance coverage from ACA by about 8 percent, about


                                                             9
    These effects can be expanded to include eligibility effects on the demand and supply price of the
program, such as for example falling reimbursements with larger program size. Denote by πG (z) ≡
(pS (z) − c)m(pD (z), z) the profits on program participants as a function of eligibility when eligibility
affects pricing. Then the total effect of eligibility on profits becomes

                                           dΠ                            dπG
                                              = f (z)[πG (z) − π(z)] + F
                                           dz                             dz

    A program expansion now has two effects; the first is the marginal impact of those newly added to
the program as before and the second is through the price effects of the ones already in the program.
For example, if one were to means-test a previously universal program, then this would first entail a rise
in profits for the richer part of the population no longer in the program. In addition, if program size
drives down reimbursements there would be a second reinforcing effect due to the increased profits of
those remaining in the program.

3.1.2    Liabilities and Changes in Eligibility

For any public program, total spending is the size of the eligible program population times the per
capita spending of its beneficiaries. In our framework, program size and per capita spending are given
by the fraction eligible and the reimbursement and utilization of the eligible populations care:

                                                      S(g) = F pS mG                                                        (3)

   Consider the effect of changes in eligibility, z, when those changes may simultaneously affect future
per capita spending levels through innovation.As discussed previously, changing eligibility impacts the
growth of public liabilities V through the current level of public spending and the effect on profits that
determine future spending growth:

                              dΠ                           dS                        dps
                                 = f (z)(πG − π)              = f (z)mG pS + F (z)mG
                              dz                           dz                        dz

    Both profits and the level of spending may increase or decrease depending on the marginal income
level where eligibility expansions occur. For profits, if eligibility is expanded marginally for the poor,
then the profit effect may be positive but if eligibility is expanded for the rich, then profit may fall.
For spending, increased eligibility can raise or reduce spending levels depending on whether the rise in
beneficiaries is offset by the fall in the reimbursement from greater monopsony power. Public liabilities
will rise (fall) with eligibility if both the spending and innovation effects increase (decrease) dS     dΠ
                                                                                                    dz , dz > 0
(< 0). However, public liabilities will fall with increased eligibility or rise with decreased eligibility if the
two effects have different signs. When dS         dΠ
                                             dz , dz < 0, then cut backs may raise liabilities and expansions
may reduce them.5
half coming from Medicaid and the other half from increased private coverage. Many studies exist on the impact of
Medicaid on health care spending centered at about a 25% increase in spending from such coverage. Under the same
maintained effect of private coverage, this would thus simply result in a 2 percent increase in overall spending, a modest
growth especially taking into account that the US market is only roughly half of the world market driving innovation,
which we discuss further below.
    5 The issue arises whether a full public program leads to lower profitability than no program at all. As long as the profits

fall with larger coverage, this is not central to whether marginal changes in means-testing raises or lowers liabilities. The
important point is that when profitability falls with program eligibility in the relevant range, marginally larger programs
may mean reduced innovation incentives and potentially a reduction in the present value of liabilities.




                                                              10
3.2     Changes in Demand and Supply Prices
Now consider when the policies are g ≡ (pS , pD ) representing reimbursement to providers or innovators
(supply price) and the premiums or copays to patients (demand price). For any subsidy program, the
supply is larger than the demand price because the government pays for the wedge between them.
Therefore, unlike in the private sector where supply and demand prices coincide, increasing the supply
price raises price without lowering quantity, and thus has the monotonic positive profit effect. Increasing
the demand price discourages utilization without affecting markups and thus has the monotonic negative
profit effect.6

                       dΠ     dπG                        dΠ     dπG              dmG
                           =F     = F mG > 0                 =F     = F (pS − c)     <0
                       dpS    dpS                        dpD    dpD              dpD
When supply and demand prices vary freely, textbook arguments imply that demand subsidy programs
raise the equilibrium supply price and lower the equilibrium demand price, thereby raising profits (see,
e.g., Varian (2010)). What is less recognized, but relevant to health care, is that many times expansions
in demand subsidy programs will simultaneously lower both demand and supply prices. The total effect
on profits of the expansion of a demand subsidy program then depends on whether greater quantity
through lower demand prices dominates lower markups through reductions in supply prices.

                                                dΠ           dΠ
                                                    (dpD ) +     (dpS )
                                                dpD          dpS

For example, Medicare in the US raises utilization by expanding the pool of customers, but they do
so at discounted prices, making the profit effects ambiguous. An example of the dual price effects
of government expansions is the recent Medicare Part D program for outpatient drugs in the US.
This program lowered total demand prices (premium plus copay) dramatically, while at the same time
instituting pricing transparency regulations that implied lower supply prices to manufacturers. 7 There
exist an ongoing current debate about the desirability of lowering supply prices further through direct
price negotiations between the US government and manufacturers. This is suggestive of the European
experience in which government expansions reduce incentives for innovation.
    These arguments maybe extended to consider interactions between public pricing and the private
market. For example, fee schedules in the public sector may be adopted in the private sector, or if there
are cross-subsidies, private prices may rise when public prices fall. The total effect of public pricing
when there are also private market effects is given by:

                          dΠ     dπG            dπ             dΠ     dπG             dπ
                              =F     + (1 − F )                    =F     + (1 − F )
                          dpS    dpS            dpS            dpD    dpD            dpD

    If utilization or markups respond in different ways in the two sectors, the effects of changes in public
pricing may differ. A rise in public profits from increased public reimbursement may potentially be
offset by reductions in private profits, for example if cross-subsidies fall more. Likewise, the fall in
public profits from higher copays may potentially be offset by higher private profits if, say, program
   6 Total demand prices (premium plus co-pays) are reduced by a public program even though co-pays alone may be

higher or lower than in the private sector. For example, Medicare part D sometimes have higher co-pays than private
coverage, but it subsidizes the premium by about 75%.
   7 This is consistent with the overall findings of several papers that found a rise in utilization and fall in prices upon

Part D implementation (Yin et al. (2008), Lichtenberg and Sun (2007), Neuman et al. (2007), Duggan and Scott-Morton
(2008), Ketcham and Simon (2008), Yin et al. (2008)).



                                                            11
                          Figure 4: Levels vs Growth Effects for Price Reforms


participants go outside the public program as a result.

3.2.1   Liabilities and Changes in Demand and Supply Prices

Consider the effect of changes in public prices on program liabilities. Figure 4 depicts iso-profit curves
as a function of the two prices, {(pD , pS ) : Π(pD , pS ) = π}. The curves involve higher profit levels to the
northwest in the figure as supply prices raise profits and demand prices lower them. The implementation
of a program that lowers both demand and supply prices from point A to point B concerns a southwest
shift in the figure and thus depends on whether the slope of the iso-profit curves will raise or lower
profits. Determining if profits increase depends on whether the utilization gains dominate the markup
reductions.
    The figure also depicts the iso-spending curves {(pD , pS ) : S(pD , pS ) = s} of the public program.
Changes in the levels of public program may be reinforced or offset by changes in growth in spending
due to higher innovative returns depending on whether they have the same or different signs. Overall
profits and public spending are related by the fact that the public profits come from public spending as
in:
                                                             pS − c
                              Π = F πG + (1 − F )π = S[             ] + (1 − F )π
                                                               pS
Without any interactions between the private and public sector, the overall profit effects of price changes
are likely to be the same sign as the public program effects. In other words, lower reimbursements lower
both public spending and profits, and lower copays raises both public spending and profits. However,
when a public program expansion lowers both demand and supply prices, it is possible that the total
effect on growth versus levels may differ as indicated in Figure 1. This occurs when slopes of the iso-
profit line and the iso-spending line differ substantially. When they do differ, there is always a reform
with reductions in two prices that affects spending in the opposite direction of profits. When this is the
case, level effects are counteracted by growth effects.
    An important case when iso-profit and iso-spending slopes may differ is when there are interactions
between private and public pricing. In this case, the level and growth effects on public pricing reforms



                                                      12
may differ. Consider when the private price is p(pD , pS , g) as a function of the public pricing. For
example, fee schedules in the public sector may be adopted in the private sector or a direct government
intervention with price controls in the private sector may take place in conjunction with public price
changes. Now the total effect of prices on profits are given by:

                         dΠ     dπG            dπ    dS               dp dπ
                             =F     + (1 − F )     =     + (1 − F )[    ][ ]
                         dpS    dpS            dpS   dpS             dpS dp

                        dΠ     dπG             dπ    dS              dp dπ
                            =F     + (1 − F )     =     + (1 − F )[    ][ ]
                        dpD    dpD            dpD   dpD             dpD dp
Thus, the difference in the profit and spending effects dΠ   dS
                                                        dp − dp are attributable to spillovers in the private
market. Because price effects on spending are ambiguous when demand slopes downward, when there
are interactions between the private and public sector growth effects may offset level effects. Offsetting
occurs when reimbursement increases in the public sector lowers profits in the private sector or when
copay increases in the public sector raise profitability in the private sector. One set of interactions
between the two sectors that may occur is through cross-subsidies where lower public prices raise private
prices. Another interaction is through competitive effects on providers when a higher public price
raises private prices in order to compete for patients. Regardless of the sign and the magnitude of the
interactions, they drive a wedge between spending and profit effects and thus between levels and growth
effects.


4    Risk-Adjustment of Innovative Returns
The previous discussion focused on how reforms affected the expected earnings from innovation. This
section discusses the implications of non-diversifiable systematic risk on the risk-adjustment of those
earnings. We consider a standard stochastic discount factor (SDF) framework for valuing innovative
returns under uncertainty (see, e.g., Cochrane (2002)). In this framework, there is a discount factor
that varies across future states of nature to discount the payoffs in each of those states. We consider
when future uncertainty comes from both the private sector, in terms of the business cycle, or the public
sector, in terms of political risk concerning the government policy that will prevail. For example, such
policy uncertainty may be argued to be present currently both in the US, due to the implementation of
the ACA, and in Europe, due to the fiscal pressures of many countries.
    Consider first the general valuation problem when a given random vector X affects profits according
to Π(x) as well as the SDF M (x) by which future claims in a given state x are valued. The value of the
firm in the first period equals future profits in each state discounted by the SDF:

                                                  E[Π]
                                      E[M Π] =         + Cov(M, Π)
                                                  1+r

Here we have used that a certain payment of one dollar in each state has value E[M ] = 1/(1 + r) with
r denoting the risk-free interest rate. The value of the firm is made up of expected earnings or earnings
(the first term) that are risk-adjusted by how much the flows covary with future discounting (the second
term). Downward risk-adjustment of expected earnings occurs when the profits of medical innovation
pays off more in “good” times , which are discounted more than “bad” times: Cov(M, Π) < 0. This
standard formulation does not assume that firms are risk-averse but rather that owners of firms are risk


                                                     13
averse and thus take into account how the risk of the firm affects their overall portfolio risk. A larger
return required from investors to hold the firm raises the cost of capital of the firm and hence lowers its
R&D investments into new medical innovations. Generally, a health care policy thus affects the present
value of profits from medical innovation through both expected profits and the risk-adjustment of those
profits:
                                dE[M Π]     dE[Π/(1 + r)] dCov(M, Π)
                                         =                 +
                                  dg              dg                dg
The first is due to the expected earnings effects of reforms, such as those discussed in the previous
section. The second term is due to the effects reforms have on the risk-adjustment of earnings which we
address in more in detail here.


4.1     Risk-Adjustment under Private Sector Risk
Consider first when the uncertainty stems from private sector risk. Generally, risk-adjustment associated
with the cycle will depend on income effects of the subsector in question. Cyclical sectors of health care,
such as preventive and elective care, are predicted to lower returns and raise investments compared to
less cyclical sectors, such as curative or emergency medicine. To analyze how health policy affects risk-
adjustment consider when the aggregate private sector risk is the state of the economy or business cycle.
We represent this as the mean income e in the income distribution F (y; e) which is thereby increasing
in y but assumed decreasing in e as a larger mean income means a lower share of the population has
income below a certain level.
    Under a given level of eligibility z the size of the eligible population is then F (z; e) and the profits
for a given state of the economy are:

                                       Π(e) = F (z; e)πG (e) + (1 − F (z; e))π(e)

where πG (e) ≡ E[πG (y)|y ≤ z; e] and π(e) ≡ E[π(y)|y > z; e] are the average per capita profits in the
two sectors given a state of the economy. We assume that countercyclical earnings are desirable so that
the SDF M (e) is decreasing in the state of the economy. This implies that when profits Π(e) increase
(decrease) with the state of the economy, downward (upward) risk-adjustment of earnings occurs.
    Figure 5 below depicts how recessions and booms affect such risk-adjustment. It depicts the per
capita profits in the two sectors as a function of income as discussed in previous sections. Without a
public program the profits vary according to the average along the private profit line, π(y). The slope
of the private profit line is higher than the slope of the public one so that overall profits covary to the
maximum degree with the cycle, which implies the largest amount of risk-adjustment.
    Now consider how a means-tested public program affects the risk-adjustment of earnings. For a
means-tested program, the size of the eligible population covaries negatively with the economy, as
recessions raise the eligible population; F (z; e) falls in e.8 For example, the Medicaid program has
counter-cyclical participation, as opposed to say the Medicare program where eligibility is by age,
and thus does not depend on the cycle. In Figure 5, the overall profits are now made up from both
sectors. Moreover, for some disease classes, such as say HIV, the share of demand coming from Medicaid
dominates and is highly cyclical. The darker part of the public profit line are for those eligible for the
   8 For recent empirical work that implicitly relates to this risk, see Cawley et al. (2011) who found a limited effect of the

recent “great recession” on overall insurance. Private coverage dropped at the same time Medicaid coverage expanded in
this recession.



                                                              14
                            Figure 5: Means-Testing and the Business Cycle


program (y < z) and the darker parts of the private profits are for those not eligible (y > z). Thus, the
overall profits are a mix of the two darker lines dependent on the income distribution. When a recession
hits there are two effects. People who were on the private profit line jump up to the public profit line
providing a counter-cyclical boost to profits because some poor become eligible in recessions. This effect
is counteracted by the fact that profits fall for those not changing eligibility with the cycle.
    More precisely, business cycle risk can be broken down into two components: one due to eligibility
risk and one due to risk in per capita profits as in:

                                 dΠ   dF              dπG            dπ
                                    =    [πG − π] + F     + (1 − F )
                                 de   de               de            de

The first term shows that booms contract eligibility and the two remaining terms show that booms affect
per capita profits. The cyclicality of per capita profits is weighted by their relative sizes so naturally if
an innovation’s demand is financed more by Medicaid, public sector per capita risk matters more.
    There are several factors which determine this overall profit effect of the cycle. First, the location
of the innovation’s demand in the income distribution matters; means-testing buffers the demand for
products with patients near eligibility, e.g. HIV patients financed by Medicaid, more than it does
for product with relatively richer patients. Second, the income elasticity in both sectors is central,
whether conditional on coverage or due to changes in employment-based coverage when the cycle covaries
with employment. Some forms of care are more sensitive to the cycle such as preventive and elective
care compared with curative or emergency care. Third, recessions may induce governments to restrict
reimbursement and copays, which may dampen the counter-cyclicality due to eligibility expansions. For
many European countries with single payer systems this is taking place currently and the cyclicality
of markups is more important than no changes in universal eligibility. Lastly, under the maintained
assumption that per capita profits in the public sector are less sensitive to income than those in the
private sector, reflected in the lower slope in the figure above, a larger public market share of the product
means less of a downward risk-adjustment.
    Pricing reforms, in terms of changes in supply or demand prices (pS , pD ), also affect the impact of the


                                                     15
business cycle. Because profits are monotonic in the two prices, changes in either of them shift the public
sector line up or down. This may increase or decrease the sensitivity of profits to the cycle dependent
on the price change considered. For example, more generous reimbursement lifts the public sector profit
line upwards, thereby providing less sensitivity to the cycle and lower risk-adjustment partly because
the boost of eligibility in recessions raises profits more.


4.2    Risk-Adjustment under Public Sector Risk
When the policy itself is uncertain it may be represented by a random variable X with distribution
K(x; g) where the previous vector of policies g we now interpret as a set of parameters of this distribution.
Reforms under policy uncertainty affect the distribution of policy outcomes, with the special case of the
previous analysis of certain policies concerning the degenerate case with no variability; K = 1{g} .
   Consider when there is uncertainty about future public per capita profits πG (x) and reforms affect
the distribution of these profits. For example, this may be the case when there is uncertainty about
future reimbursement rates, copays, or any other regulations that affect per capita profits in the public
program. Under public sector risk, the value of profits is:

                            E[Π]               F E[πG ] + (1 − F )π
                 E[M Π] =        + Cov(M, Π) =                      + F Cov(πG , M )
                            1+r                       1+r

This equation has the direct implication that risk-adjustment of returns is proportional to the public
program’s share of demand for the innovation. A larger public share means a larger exposure to sys-
tematic government risk. For example, firms whose products have larger market shares in Medicare and
Medicaid would be risk-adjusted more as they are more exposed to, say, reimbursement shocks.
    Generally, new policy activity will introduce both changes in the expected mean level of the policy,
but also potentially raise the variance or covariance of the policy due to the new more uncertain nature of
what policy will eventually prevail. Consider when uncertainty is represented by a normal distribution,
N (x; g) and the policy variable represented by the vector g = (µ, σ, v) of its mean, standard deviation,
and covariance with the SDF M . Now reform initiatives may impact expected per capita profits E[πG ]
through the mean, µ, and variance, σ, in a reinforcing or counter-acting manner. The effect of a change
in the mean will depend on the first-derivative of πG (x) and the impact of the increase in risk will
depend on the second derivative of πG (x).
    Consider the impact of uncertain eligibility reforms as captured by the normal distribution N (z; g)
over future eligibility levels. Assume as discussed before that profits as a function of eligibility, Π(z),
are a bell-shaped function which is concave; the first derivative decreases by first being positive and
then negative; Π00 <0. If we ignore any covariance with stochastic discounting, the expected eligibility
first raises and then lowers expected profits; E[Π] first rises then falls with µ. However, the future
eligibility risk always lowers expected profits; E[Π] falls with σ. An example would be the recent
Medicaid expansions under ACA; the mean effect likely raised expected profits but the uncertainty
of ACA lowered expected profits and R&D investments. Generally, the risk-adjustment due to the
uncertainty surrounding new eligibility reforms is likely to be negative.
    Consider now the impact of uncertain future reimbursement reforms when the uncertain policy
is the supply price x = pS with a distribution N (pS ; g). Changes in its distribution through g =
(µ, σ, v) represents changes in expected future reimbursement rates, the degrees of uncertainty over
future reimbursement, and the covariance of reimbursement with stochastic discounting. In this case it


                                                     16
follows that:
                                                F (µ − c)mG + (1 − F )π
                                   E[M Π] =                             + F mG v
                                                         1+r
As a result, reforms have the following effects on profits:

                       dE[M Π]    F mG                  dE[M Π]                 dE[M Π]
                               =                                =0                      = F mG
                         dµ      (1 + r)                  dσ                      dv

    The mean effect is as discussed in previous sections. Since reimbursements mark up each unit of
utilization, an increase in the expected future reimbursement matters more for public programs with
higher total utilization. Because of the linearity in the supply price, reimbursement risk per se does not
affect expected profits in this formulation. However, a change in the covariance with discounting does
raise risk-adjustment and does so again proportional to the total utilization in the public sector.
    Related to the last effect, Koijen et al. (2012) documented a very large “medical innovation premium”
of about 4-6% annually for publicly traded medical R&D firms in the US the last 3 decades.9 If investors
require a premium for holding the additional risk of the medical R&D sector, this reduces medical R&D
investments, whose returns must at least cover this premium paid to investors. In the formulation
above, such a medical innovation premium comes from the covariance term Cov(M, Π) < 0. Koijen et
al. (2012) analyzed the implications of such a premium for the growth of the health care sector when
the premium reflected markup uncertainty in the sense that supply prices were negatively correlated
with discounting v = Cov(pS , M ) < 0.


5     Domestic Health Care Policy and World Innovative Returns
Innovation incentives are determined by world returns. The larger the share of world returns a reformed
domestic program affects the larger the change in innovation incentives that reform produces. Put
differently, reforms in a small or poor country will not affect innovative returns much compared to
changing the US Medicare program. By the same reasoning, the US states serving as “laboratories”
for US federal reforms will not be highly informative about one of the central impacts of those federal
reforms: how they affect spending growth induced by innovation.10
    Consider when N1 denotes the potential size of the population under the reformed program and
N0 and Π0 denote the size and per capita profits of the world population outside the program. The
population outside the program may be inside the country of the program being reformed. For example,
for Medicare reforms the nonprogram population would include both the nonelderly within the US and
all populations outside the US. The aggregate world profits Πw are given by:

                               Πw ≡ N0 Π0 + N1 Π = N0 Π0 + N1 [F πG + (1 − F )π]

Naturally, the effect of any reform on the absolute and relative world profits falls the less significant the
    9 The risk-adjustment of returns R ≡ Π/E[M Π] rather than prices comes from using E[M R] = 1. Applying this to the

riskless asset, one obtains E[M R − Rf ] = 0 where Rf is the risk-free interest factor. This in turn implies the risk-premium
formulation E[R] − Rf = −Rf Cov(M, R) which says when profits are high when the SDF is low (profits pay off in good
times) larger excess returns are required.
   10 Consistent with this argument; Kolstad and Kowalski (2012) find no growth effects of the reforms in the state of

Massachusetts, while the similar reforms embedded in the national ACA will clearly have large effects on innovation
incentives.




                                                             17
program demand is relative to world demand:

                                            dΠw          N1 dΠ
                                                            dg
                                                /Πw ≡
                                             dg       N0 Π0 + N1 Π

This has the direct implication that the future R&D effects of reforms must be evaluated in how they
interact with any simultaneous other changes in world innovative returns. For example, innovative
returns may rise over time through the growth of emerging markets, even if Medicare is reformed to
reduce its per capita profits. Put differently, world markups may be declining in developed markets
at a slower pace than world quantity is rising in emerging markets. Just as policies of a small single
European country today do not affect world profits and innovation much, the US may affect innovation
less over time even though it dominates world profits today. In addition, if the flow of new innovations
occurs irrespective of US reforms because of the market size expansion of emerging economies, this alters
optimal US policy.
    In addition, domestic versus world returns to innovation have a bearing on attributing domestic
liabilities to domestic reforms or other factors. One such factor is aging, which existing growth account-
ing has argued does not substantially contribute to total spending growth (see Newhouse (1992) and
Zweifel et al. (1999)). Indeed, as an anecdotal confirmation the US population is younger than other
rich countries but spends more on health care. This analysis has been an accounting exercise tracing out
how domestic aging patterns and age profiles contribute to overall domestic spending growth. However,
innovation and growth in domestic per capita spending is driven by world aging as opposed to a given
country’s domestic aging. More precisely, consider when the two groups above represent two countries
with growth factors A0 and A1 induced by aging, then the sizes of the populations are N0 At0 and N1 At1
after t years. Now consider a growth rate γ(Π(A0 , A1 )) of domestic spending as a function of world
aging that drives world innovative returns. The value of public liabilities for the first country is then:

                                     + γ(Π(A0 , A1 ))]t
                                                                                                
                    X           [1                                           1+r
             V1 =       SN1 At1                         = SN1
                                        [1 + r]t                1 + r − βA1 [1 + γ(Π(A0 , A1 ))]

This implies that domestic aging has a dual effect on domestic liabilities; domestic aging (A1 ) affects
the people on the domestic program but world aging (A0 and A1 ) affects its per capita growth rate in
spending through innovation. This makes domestic aging assessments misleading; a country may have
no aging (A1 = 1) but be greatly affected by world aging through medical innovation (A0 > 1) as would
be the case for some European countries. To illustrate this point, consider the US Medicare program,
which according to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services has doubled in its beneficiaries since
1980 but risen about 12 times in aggregate spending. According to domestic growth accounting, this
suggests that per capita spending growth rather than aging is far more important to aggregate Medicare
spending growth. However, according to the World Health Organization, the world’s elderly population
doubled during the same period, raising innovative returns in absolute terms dramatically. It therefore
seems an open question whether market size expansions through world aging may play a larger role in
explaining Medicare spending growth than currently estimated. Indeed, existing evidence by Acemoglu
and Linn (2004) suggests that a doubling in Medicare aging alone would be associated with a 400-600%
growth in medical innovation, which could explain part or all of the growth in per capita spending of
the program.




                                                        18
6     Calibration of Effects of Medicare Program Changes
In this section we calibrate the effects of future program changes to Medicare Part A&B. For validation
purposes, we first show that our calibration methods using pre-implementation data performed well at
predicting the effect of the Medicare Part D program for drugs; Calibrated revenue effects were close to
the revenue effects estimated for the program change. We then use the same type of calibration to assess
the impact of substantially means-testing Medicare Part A&B covering hospital and physician services,
and indirectly the devices and products used in supplying those services. We analyze how means-testing
Medicare Part A&B would affect innovative returns and find that it would raise them by about 22%.
We calibrate the upward pressure this means-testing has on Medicare program liabilities despite cutting
the program.


6.1     Expansion of Medicare Part D as Validation of Calibration Methods
We first calibrate the revenue effects of Part D of Medicare using observed parameters prior to when the
program was implemented, and compare those to estimated program effects in the literature. A simple
back of the envelope calculation is illustrative of why our calibration matches the observed program
effects on revenues. For the price effects, consider when supply prices fall with eligibility linearly. In
2003, the Medicaid prescription drug rebate was about 31 percent with Medicaid enrollment at 18
percent of the population according to CBO (2005). We predict Part D enrollment to be 8 percent
of the population, so, with linearity, the prescription drug rebate is 44 percent of 31 percent, or 14
percent.11
    For the utilization effects, consider when insurance coverage produces a 50 percent increase in pre-
scription drug utilization as estimated by Manning et al. (1988). Since 34 percent of the elderly do not
have prescription insurance before Part D was implemented and the literature estimates that in general
63 percent of uninsured individuals take up public coverage when eligible, 21 percent of the elderly pop-
ulation is predicted to switch to insurance coverage.12 A 50 percent increase in utilization for 21 percent
of the elderly population implies an overall utilization effect of about 11 percent for the elderly. These
price and utilization effects are in line with the estimates in the literature using post-implementation
data. This literature finds that supply prices declined as a result of Part D by about 20 percent and
utilization increased by about 5-10 percent.13 Moreover, as price declined more than quantity rose, this
government expansion lowered profits and is on the downward sloping part of the inverted U-shaped
profit function discussed.
   11 Using the Sommers et al. (2012) estimate that 63 percent of uninsured individuals take up public coverage when

eligible, we estimate that 63 percent of the elderly will enroll in Part D (or 63 percent of the 13 percent of the population
which is elderly). Since the projected Part D enrollment of 8 percent of the population is 44 percent of Medicaid enrollment
of 18 percent of the population, the Part D rebate is 44 percent of the Medicare rebate.
   12 Prescription coverage estimate is from the MEPS and literature estimate is from Sommers et al. (2012).
   13 Duggan and Scott Morton (2010) find that Part D plans lowered supply prices for top-selling branded pharmaceutical

treatments by approximately 20 percent and estimate that the the number of prescriptions increased 10 percent due to
Part D. See also Carroll (2008). Note that other studies look at the effect on demand price not supply price, such as
Lichtenberg and Sun (2007). They estimate that the prices faced by patients declined by over 15 percent and prescriptions
increase 7% for Part D eligibility individuals. Ketcham and Simon (2008) find that Part D reduced out of pocket costs
for the elderly medication by 21.7% and increased utilization by 4.7%.




                                                             19
6.1.1    Background

Medicare is a program in the US since 1965 that guarantees health insurance to individuals 65 and over as
well as to younger individuals with certain disabilities or diseases. Medicare Part D is a prescription drug
coverage program for Medicare eligible individuals in the US that was part of the Medicare Modernization
Act of 2003 (MMA), and it was implemented in January 2006. Under Part D, eligible individuals
can obtain prescription-only plans, full Medicare plans that include prescription drug benefits, or can
maintain their current prescription drug coverage. The premium subsidy for such plans are around
75%. Copays vary with the level of spending and plan choice.14 Before Part D, according to MEPS
data, 66% of the elderly had prescription drug insurance; 15% had only public coverage, 41% had only
private coverage, and 11% had both public and private coverage. The majority of the public coverage
came from Medicaid for low income individuals. After the introduction of Part D, 49% of the elderly
population enrolled in Part D and 82% had some form of prescription drug coverage.15

6.1.2    Calibration of Post-Implementation Effects using Pre-Implemenation Data

Our theoretical discussion stressed the quantity and markup effects by income that generated non-
standard innovation incentives from program expansions. We calibrate quantity expansion and markup
reductions at each income decile to calibrate the implied overall profit effects. Since Medicare Part
D is for the elderly, we use income deciles for individuals 65 and older in the US. Using such pre-
implemenation data, we calibrate that Part D decreased prices 21% and raised utilization by 16%. We
calibrate that it reduced profits by about 8%.
    We first calibrate the positive effects of program expansion on utilization. We make three assumptions
to simplify the calibration. First, utilization does not change for individuals who do not change insurance
coverage. Second, the implementation of Part D only induces people to change to public coverage.
Third, private and public insurance have the same utilization because they have similar demand prices.
Therefore, the effect of Part D on utilization is equal to the fraction of individuals who switched from
no coverage to public coverage times the effect of insurance on utilization. We calibrate the fraction of
individuals who switched to public coverage from no coverage using an estimate that 63% of uninsured
individuals take up public coverage when eligible (Sommers et al. 2012). We assume drug utilization to
be 50% higher for those that switched using estimates from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment
(Manning et al., 1988).16
    We estimate the negative effect of program expansions on supply prices by using data on Medicaid
enrollment and rebates for the period 1995-2003. Specifically we run a regression of the total Medicaid
prescription drug rebate, as defined by the CBO, on the log of the fraction of the US population enrolled
in Medicaid. We assume that the effect of expansion on the rebate follows a log relationship, which
increases the markup reduction at a high rate initially and then declines with expansion.
    The results are reported in the Appendix. The regression coefficient of 12.78 means that if 10 percent
  14 After the first $250 of spending, Part D had a co-insurance rates that decrease with spending except for drug ex-

penditures between $2,500 and $5,100 which have no coverage and is know as the “donut hole”. For spending less than
the donut hole the co-insurance rate is 25% and for spending exceeding the donut hole level co-insurance is 5%. In 2007,
approximately 30% of prescription drug costs for individuals over 65 and covered by Part D were paid out of pocket
(MEPS).
  15 The before estimates are for 2005 wave and the after estimates are for 2007 wave of the Medical Expenditure Panel

Survey (MEPS). See also Engelhardt and Gruber’s (2011).
  16 According to the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (HIE), going from a 95 percent coinsurance rate to a 25 percent

coinsurance rate increases prescriptions by 50 percent (Manning et al., 1988).



                                                          20
                 Table 1: Estimation results : Total Medicaid Prescription Drug Rebate
                                  Variable           Coefficient (Std. Err.)
                          Ln(Enrollment Fraction)       12.78          (2.54)
                          Intercept                     -5.96          (7.02)
Notes: Estimate for 1995-2003. Total Medicaid Prescription Drug rebate, source: Congressional Budget Office. Enrollment
as a fraction of US population, source: Bruen and Ghosh (2004)


of the population is added to the program, then the drug rebate is 23% and increases to 53% with full
enrollment. For Medicare Part D, which has an enrollment rate around 6 percent of the US population,
the results would imply a supply price rebate of 17 percent.17 This price effect is similar to the effects
cited in the literature of observed supply price declines post-implementation around 20 percent.
    Using these calibrated quantity and price effects, we calibrate and graph the markup reduction,
quantity expansion, and profits for the introduction of Part D in the figure below. The relative profits
are given by
                                                           z       
                                     Π(z)    (pS (z) − c) X m(i)
                                          =
                                     Π(0)    (pS (0) − c) i=0 m(0)

where pS (z) and m(z) are the supply price and utilization at income decile z. Due to costs being unob-
served, we approximate relative markups by relative prices, (p   S (z)−c)   pS (z)
                                                               (pS (0)−c) ∝ pS (0) , which is more accurate
for larger innovative markups. For example, many drugs markups are almost equal to prices if pills
cost pennies to produce. We plot the calibrated program implementation effects under two conditions.
The first condition is a counterfactual with no Medicaid coverage and the second condition includes
Medicaid.18 Under both conditions, graphed in Figure 6, markup reduction and quantity expansion
follow the crossing pattern and profits follow a bell shaped curve discussed.




                          Figure 6: Quantity Expansion, Price Markup, and Profits

   Without Medicaid, profits initially increase reaching a peak at a 5% gain at a 20% eligibility level.
Profits with full eligibility decline 8% below profits with no program. Profits are higher without Medicaid
  17 The elderly are 13% of the US population according to the Census and 49% of the elderly have Part D coverage which

gives us the enrollment rate of 6%.
  18 We use the Cutler and Gruber (1996) estimate that 72% of publicly insured individuals would be uninsured if public

coverage is not available, to calibrate that 72% of individuals with Medicaid coverage are uninsured and the other 28%
are privately insured.



                                                          21
because prior public coverage crowds out the effect of public expansion on quantity.


6.2     The Impact of Means-Testing Medicare Part A&B on Innovation Incen-
        tives
Medicare covers hospital care under Part A and outpatient medical services under Part B. For simplicity,
we refer to Medicare Part A&B as Medicare in this section. The previous section used our framework
to predict post-implementation effects from pre-implemenation data on part D. Here we use existing
data on part A&B to calibrate the counterfactual effects of means-testing those parts of the program.
Using a similar method to the one we used in the validation exercise for Part D, we calibrate the
counterfactual effects of substantively means-testing Medicare on prices, utilization, and profits. We
consider making Medicare similar to Medicaid by excluding richer individuals, as opposed to means-
testing their premiums. Calibrating the effect of a 30 percent decrease in eligibility due to such means-
testing, we find that we predict prices would increase by 22, utilization decrease by 28%, and profits
increase by 16% with such a program cut.

6.2.1   Calibration of Revenue Effects

There is an abundant literature on the effects of Medicare. We are specifically interested in the effect
of Medicare on prices and utilization to examine the non-monotonic profit effects discussed. Consider
first the previously discussed effect of eligibility on profits:

                                    dΠ                            dπG
                                       = f (z)[πG (z) − π(z)] + F
                                    dz                             dz

From this, we concluded that there are two effects of means-testing a previously universal program.
The first was the positive profits from the richer part of the population no longer in the program. The
second was that there are increased profits of those remaining in the program.
    To get a feel for the magnitudes, consider the following back-of-the-envelope calculation of the profit
effects from means-testing, which considers price changes alone, holding utilization constant. Figure 7
shows this price effect. The figure depicts the case when a universal Medicare program has a 1/3 markup
reduction and no markup reduction with no eligibility, and prices are linearly interpolated in between.
With full eligibility, revenue is the area C+D with area 2/3. With a 1/3 cut in Medicare eligibility, the
revenue of rich individuals no longer eligible rises from D to B+D, since they face higher private supply
prices. For the remaining 2/3 of eligible individuals the supply price increases, so that revenue from
them rises from C to A+C. Under this scenario, revenue increases roughly 19% from going from 2/3
(the area C+D) to 23/27 (the area A+B+C+D). Added to these price effects would be the offsets due
to any drop in utilization of the rich made ineligible.




                                                    22
               Figure 7: Price Change with 1/3 Medicare Cut, Holding Utilization Constant

    Because Medicare Part A&B covers a large variety of medical services and the medical products used
within them, including hospital stays and outpatient costs, it is more difficult to define the units used
for price and utilization. Using estimates from Part A&B, the literature finds that utilization increases
between 7-46 percent with Medicare coverage.19

Effects by Income Decile To fully calibrate the effects of means-testing of Medicare, we calibrate
quantity expansion and markup reductions for each income decile similar to the way we calibrated it
in the validation of the methods for Part D. We make two significant changes. First, since universal
Medicare coverage for the elderly has existed for nearly 50 years, we use individuals just below the age
cut off (60 to 64 year olds) to estimate coverage levels without eligibility and we assume full Medicare
enrollment when eligible. Second, since we are not making an out of sample prediction, we use Medicare
estimates to calibrate quantity expansion and markup reductions from Medicare. We find that means-
testing raises prices, lowers utilization, and increases profits.
    For quantity effects, based on the existing literature, we assume that individuals who switch from
no insurance to Medicare increase utilization by 35 percent and individuals who switch from private
insurance to Medicare increase utilization by 10 percent.
  19 For Part A, which covers hospital care, Card et al. (2008) uses regression-discontinuity at age 65 to estimate the effect

of Medicare. They find that hospital admissions increase by 10 percent between 64 and 65 year olds relative to private
insurance. Finkelstein et al. (2012) estimates that Medicare increased hospital admissions 46 percent between 1965 and
1970. For Part B, which covers outpatient services, Newhouse and Phelps (1974) estimate a coinsurance rate elasticity on
outpatient visits of -0.1 which for an approximately 66% coinsurance decrease with Medicare relative to no insurance leads
to a 7% increase in utilization. Wallen et al. (1986) find that similar coinsurance elasticity for mental health services,
which a subsection of outpatient care. Their elasticity of -0.32 with a 66% coinsurance decrease with Medicare leads to a
21% increase in utilization.



                                                             23
    For price effects, we use estimates from the literature of the effect of Medicare on hospital and
physician reimbursements ranging from roughly 20 to 50 percent.20 We assume that a universal Medicare
program has a 35 percent markup reduction and no markup reduction with no eligibility, and prices are
linearly interpolated in between.
    Relative profits given the quantity and price effects are as before:
                                                                 z             
                                        Π(z)   (pS (z) − c) X            m(i)
                                             =
                                        Π(0)   (pS (0) − c) i=0          m(0)

As with Part D, we estimate and graph the markup reduction, quantity expansion, and profits for the
introduction of Part D under two conditions. The first condition is a counterfactual with no Medicaid
and the second condition includes Medicaid coverage. As shown in Figure 8, markup reduction and
quantity expansion cross and profits follow a bell shaped curve which are predicted in the theory.
Without Medicaid, profits increase up to 22% with a 30% eligibility decline from full eligibility. With
Medicaid, this profits increase amounts to 22%.




                Figure 8: Profits Broken into Quantity Expansion and Markup Reduction


6.3     The Impact of Means Testing Medicare Part A&B on Medical R&D
        and Public Liabilities
With our calibrated profit effects, we can calibrate the impact of means-testing Medicare part A&B on
their program liabilities.

6.3.1    Impact on Innovative Returns

The associated effect on public spending is shown in the figure below. When eligibility increases, spend-
ing initially increases but falls when expansions lower reimbursements more than they raise utilization.
  20 Historical Medicare rebate estimates for physician fees range from roughly 20% to 40% with recent estimates around

17% (Direct Research, 2003). Medicare rebate estimates for hospitals vary geographically, and range from 32% to 52%
relative to private insurance (Ginsburg, 2010).




                                                          24
                         Figure 9: Public Spending as a function of eligibility


6.3.2   The Impact of Program Size on Future Liabilities

To calibrate the effect that means-testing Medicare has on Medicare liabilities, we first need the cal-
ibrated effect on profitability, dΠ/dz, and then the effect of profitability on future spending growth,
dγ/dΠ. We are interested in what we refer to as the “profit-to-growth effect” (PGE). More precisely,
the PGE is the effect on the absolute percent of growth for a given percentage change in profits. For
example, if profits increase by 10% and the PGE is 0.05, then the absolute percentage of spending
growth increases by 0.5 percentage points, say from 6% percent to 6.5%.
    Cutting the program through means-testing decreases current program spending but raises the
growth rate of the program. The key relationship concerns the one between the world profit increase
and future spending growth. Figure 10 maps out different liability effects as a function of PGE. For
example, for an PGE of 0.2, the program liabilities increase 226% for a 30% cut.




                         Figure 10: Liability Effects as a function of the PGE

    To illustrate these magnitudes, consider the following hypothetical calculation. Suppose we cut
Medicare for the top 20% of the income distribution. If they have 30% higher prices in the private
sector, that means overall profits increase 6% with constant utilization. A 6% increase in profits raises

                                                   25
the spending growth rate by about 1 percentage point if the PGE is 0.16. A 1 percentage point increase
in growth rate affects the present value of future growth by 15% over 25 years when the discount rate
is 3% and initial growth is 6%. Thus, the 20% spending reduction is offset by a 15% rise in the present
value of increased growth.
    These calibrations highlight that although a cut in Medicare eligibility may have small negative
effects on spending initially, it has a large effect on the innovative returns that drive future spending
growth. A cut in a government program, even with conservative estimates for the PGE, may raise govern-
ment liabilities substantially. We are not aware of any reliable estimates of the impact of profitability
on spending growth. Therefore, we report the smallest PGE for which means-testing actually raises
liabilities- in other words, the smallest effect dγ/dΠ for which means-testing does not affect liabilities,
V 0 = V .21
    Figure 11 depicts the lowest PGE level consistent with no change in liabilities as a function of
common values of the discount rate used for medical spending for a finite horizon of 30 years. For
example, if the growth rate without reforms is 6% (γ = 0.06) and the discount rate is 3.5% (r = 0.035)
then the figure tells us that for an PGE of .02 the present value of public liabilities, V , is the same for
a 30% cut in the program and no cut in the program. For PGE greater than .02, V is greater with a
30% cut than with no cut; for PGE less than .02, V is greater with no cut than with a 30% cut. The
larger the cut in the program, the larger the PGE required to equate V .




                             Figure 11: PGE that Equates V for Cut and No Cut

    There exists some evidence on the degree to which innovative returns drive the future spending
growth that underlies the PGE calculations. Acemoglu and Linn (2004) estimated an elasticity of about
4 for the effects of revenue on new product innovations; a 10% increase in revenues was associated with
a 40% increase in new molecular entities introduced.22 These effects are magnitudes larger than the
PGEs we discuss.
  21 To  exemplify the threshold effect, consider when growth is proportional to profits γ = θP . In this case θ(= dγ/dΠ)
satisfies:                                                                       0
                                          0       0
                                                    !
                                                                            r( SS − 1)
                                                                
                                       V        S      r − θP
                                            =                     = 1 ⇒ θ =     0
                                        V       S      r − θP 0             P S − P0
                                                                             S
because when the future growth is discounted more, more of it is required to offset current spending effects.
  22 These elasticities translate directly into profit elasticities when profits are proportional to revenues. For example,

under constant marginal costs and constant elasticity of demand, prices are marked up over costs according to p = ac so
that profits are proportional to revenues π = m(p − c) = (1 − a1 )mp


                                                            26
    As we discussed, the relative size of the Medicare program in world returns is important for assessing
how means-testing Medicare affects innovation. The program only covers about 12% of the US popu-
lation, and hence about half a percent of the world’s population. However, as is well known, the US
dominates world health care consumption and the US elderly represent a large share of overall US health
care consumption for many products and diseases. Furthermore, the share of the world prevalence of a
given disease in the Medicare program may differ, as for example between low levels for HIV or pediatric
diseases and high levels for Alzheimer’s. Figure 12 modifies the calibration for different assumed rates of
the share of world profits coming from Medicare. For example, this share would be zero for a non-elderly
non-US disease and close to 100 percent for an exclusively US elderly disease. The x-axis measures the
fraction of world returns coming from Medicare. The y-axis measures the impact on world profits. The
separate lines concern different levels of means-testing.




                         Figure 12: Share of Program Profits to World Profits

    Naturally, the more important the program is to world innovative returns, the larger is the overall
profit effect and hence the growth effect on innovation. In the extreme case of a US elderly disease,
all profits come from Medicare and the right tail effects apply. In the other extreme case when the
disease is for the non-elderly or outside the US, the left tail effects apply. For example, a 30% cut in
the Medicare program for a technology for which a 25% share of the world profits initially came from
Medicare would increase world profits by over 5%. These profit effects can be fairly substantial even for
modest means-testing.


7    Concluding Remarks and Future Research
Focusing on the return to medical innovation as the major determinant of spending growth, we analyzed
the effects of health care policies on public liabilities. We derived how reforms affected medical R&D
returns in terms of earnings, the risk-adjustment of those returns, their duration as well as the default
through the approval process. We argued that government expansions and price regulations have non-
monotonic effects on R&D, that means-testing greatly affected risk-adjustment of returns, and that
approval risk may raise innovative returns. The analysis implied that cutbacks in government programs
may raise the value of government liabilities and that expansions may lower them. We assessed the


                                                    27
implications of these arguments for means-testing Medicare and found that modest effects of profits on
future spending growth may induce such cuts to raise Medicare liabilities.
    It is important to stress that our analysis does not take a normative position on whether higher
or lower spending and public liabilities are desirable, but rather only assesses the positive impacts of
common reforms on them. It is also noteworthy that most of our analysis, although not our general
formulation, assumed that higher overall profits would result in larger spending growth. This may not
be the case if cost pressures pushed larger profits to be obtainable only for cost- and spending-reducing
innovations. For example, under certain forms of government programs, such as defined contributions
plans, larger profits may be obtained only by lowering spending. More generally, positive growth effects
may be applicable under existing payment structures but not if those payment structures change.
    Our analysis suggests many future avenues of research. First, valuation of government health care
liabilities should use discount rates observed in asset markets rather than Treasury rates as is often done
by agencies such as the CBO in the US. This is particularly relevant for valuing spending under the Part
D program whose spending should be discounted by the discount rates observed for the firms generating
the product sales of the program. Given the findings reported in Koijen et al. (2011) of a large “medical
innovation premium,” it is likely that the present value of Medicare Part D spending is far lower than
commonly estimated using Treasury rates. Future empirical work may usefully investigate whether firms
that are exposed differentially to government risk, for example from different shares of demand coming
from Medicare or Medicaid, have different risk-returns patterns as implied by our discussion.
    Second, our discussion of aging effects raises a more general issue about growth accounting of health
care spending. Our discussion suggests that a major issue with previous work in this area is that de-
compositions based on independent factors are invalid. For example, changes in domestic income, aging,
and insurance coverage all affect world innovative returns. However, when any of these factors raise
R&D incentives, then it is partly the reason why per capita spending levels grow over time. A more sat-
isfactory decomposition of overall growth in health care spending must analyze innovation being jointly
determined by the various independent factors discussed in previous work. A quantitative structural
model of how factors contribute to spending growth, rather than just statistical decompositions, seems
needed for this.
    Third, our analysis concerned a single public program but has alternative implications for when
individuals choose between multiple public programs. For example, in the US, older individuals have
the choice between traditional Medicare or Medicare Advantage. As is true for most subsidy programs,
the relative demand for the two programs seems to have been driven by the relative subsidy rates, as
implied by various federal budget reforms in the past. A better understanding of innovation effects
under multiple public programs is needed, when participation is endogenous and public prices change
participation.
    Fourth, our analysis does not distinguish between centralized health care pricing (as in Medicare Part
A and B) and centralized health insurance pricing (as in Part C). Public pricing of health care versus
health insurance may have different impacts on innovation incentives and is a useful avenue for future
work. This would potentially involve making the supply prices of our analysis a function of various
insurance reforms, presumably positively related to insurance generosity.
    Fifth, our analysis has important implications for the many reforms worldwide aimed at lowering
government spending but preserving medical innovation incentives. Many European nations face this
issue with great fiscal imbalances and cost pressure. Our analysis implies that if fiscal pressures lead



                                                    28
to further means-testing, it may raise innovation incentives. Thus, innovation incentives are preserved
under fiscally induced government cutbacks by reducing government spending on the wealthier in favor
of the poor. This will induce short-run effects that may differ from the long run liability effects we
discussed.
    Sixth, more analysis needs to be done on how the composition of innovation changes with public
health care policy. Given that medical product innovation is commonly argued to be the source of
observed spending growth, our analysis was focused on how such innovation incentives are altered by
health policy. Of equal importance for future research should be how organizational innovation is
affected by health policy, such as providers responding to changes in reimbursement incentives such as
e.g. ACOs of the ACA. The focus on product innovation here is due to that few people argue that
organizational innovations is what has made health care sector expanded, indeed the argument is often
that the lack of such organizational innovation has contributed to the growth of the sector.
    Lastly, the negative impact of government risk on health care investment deserves more general
attention. If direct R&D stimuli are partially or fully offset by the government risk that accompanies
them, this may mitigate their intended effects. In other words, push or pull measures that are associated
with great legislative risk may not stimulate R&D much. For example, the uncertainty surrounding the
current health care policies in the US seems to have reduced investment incentives even though some
reforms are clearly pro-innovation.
    Generally, the overall argument we hope to have made, that we think deserves more general consid-
eration, is that explicit and quantitative analysis of the impacts of reforms on innovative returns and
the implied future spending growth must be developed. These analyses seem fundamental to health
economics and very important for both positive and normative analysis of health care policies.


References
 [1] Acemoglu, D., and Linn, J. Market size in innovation: theory and evidence from the pharmaceutical industry. The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 3 (2004), 1049–1090.
 [2] Baumgardner, J. R. The interaction between forms of insurance contract and types of technical change in medical
     care. The RAND Journal of Economics 22 (1991), 36–53.
 [3] Bruen, B. K., and Ghosh, A. Medicaid prescription drug spending and use. Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation,
     2004.
 [4] Card, D., Dobkin, C., and Maestas, N. The impact of nearly universal insurance coverage on health care utilization
     and health: evidence from medicare. American Economic Review 98, 5 (2008), 2242–2258.
 [5] Carroll, N. V. Estimating the impact of medicare part d on the profitability of independent community pharmacies.
     J Manag Care Pharm 14, 8 (2008), 768–79.
 [6] Cawley, J., Moriya, A. S., and Simon, K. I. The impact of the macroeconomy on health insurance coverage:
     Evidence from the great recession. NBER Working Paper (2011).
 [7] CBO. The rebate medicaid receives on brand-name prescription drugs. retrieved August 26, 2012, from
     http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/ftpdocs/ 64xx/doc6493/06–21–medicaidrebate.pdf.
 [8] Chernew, M. E., and Newhouse, J. P. Health care spending growth. Handbook of Health Economics 2 (2012),
     1–43.
 [9] Clemens, J. The effect of us health insurance expansions on medical innovation. SIEPR Discussion Paper No.
     11-016 (2012).
[10] Cochrane, J. H. Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, 2001.
[11] Cutler, D. M., and Gruber, J. Does public insurance crowd out private insurance? The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 111, 2 (1996), 391–430.


                                                          29
[12] DiMasi, J. A., et al. Risks in new drug development: approval success rates for investigational drugs. Clinical
     Pharmacology and Therapeutics 69, 5 (2001), 297–307.
[13] Duggan, M., and Morton, F. S. The effect of medicare part d on pharmaceutical prices and utilization. The
     American Economic Review 100, 1 (2010), 590–607.
[14] Engelhardt, G. V., and Grubera, J. Medicare part d and the financial protection of the elderly. American
     Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3, 4 (2011), 77–102.
[15] Finkelstein, A. Static and dynamic effects of health policy: Evidence from the vaccine industry. The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 119, 2 (2004), 527–564.
[16] Ginsburg, P. B. Wide variation in hospital and physician payment rates evidence of provider market power. Center
     for Studying Health System Change Brief No 16 (2010).
[17] Ketcham, J., and Simon, K. Medicare part d’s effects on elderly patients’ drug costs and utilization. The American
     journal of managed care 14, 11 Suppl (2008), SP14.
[18] Koijen, R. S., Philipson, T. J., and Uhlig, H. Financial health economics. Working Paper, The University of
     Chicago (2012).
[19] Kolstad, J. T., and Kowalski, A. E. Mandate-based health reform and the labor market: Evidence from the
     massachusetts reform. NBER Working Paper (2012).
[20] Lichtenberg, F. R., and Sun, S. X. The impact of medicare part d on prescription drug use by the elderly. Health
     Affairs 26, 6 (2007), 1735–1744.
[21] Malani, A., and Philipson, T. J. Can medical progress be sustained? implications of the link between development
     and output markets. NBER Working Paper (2011).
[22] Manning, W. G., Newhouse, J. P., Duan, N., Keeler, E. B., and Leibowitz, A. Health insurance and the demand
     for medical care: evidence from a randomized experiment. The American Economic Review (1987), 251–277.
[23] Neuman, P., Strollo, M. K., Guterman, S., Rogers, W. H., Li, A., Rodday, A. M. C., and Safran, D. G.
     Medicare prescription drug benefit progress report: findings from a 2006 national survey of seniors. Health Affairs
     26, 5 (2007), w630–w643.
[24] Newhouse, J. P. Medical care costs: how much welfare loss? The Journal of Economic Perspectives 6, 3 (1992),
     3–21.
[25] Phelps, C. E., and Newhouse, J. P. Coinsurance, the price of time, and the demand for medical services. the
     Review of Economics and Statistics 56, 3 (1974), 334–342.
[26] Philipson, T., Berndt, E. R., Gottschalk, A. H., and Sun, E. Cost-benefit analysis of the fda: The case of the
     prescription drug user fee acts. Journal of Public Economics 92, 5 (2008), 1306–1325.
[27] Proctor, B. D. Income, poverty, and health insurance coverage in the united states: 2010. Current Population
     Reports. US Census Bureau (2006).
[28] Sommers, B. D., Tomasi, M. R., Swartz, K., and Epstein, A. M. Reasons for the wide variation in medicaid
     participation rates among states hold lessons for coverage expansion in 2014. Health Affairs 31, 5 (2012), 909–919.
[29] Varian, H. R. Intermediate Microeconomics: A Modern Approach. WW Norton, 1993.
[30] Wallen, J., Roddy, P., and Meyers, S. M. Male-female differences in mental health visits under cost-sharing.
     Health services research 21, 2 Pt 2 (1986), 341.
[31] Weisbrod, B. The health care quadrilemma: an essay on technological change, insurance, quality of care, and cost
     containment. Journal of economic literature 29, 2 (1991), 523–552.
[32] Werblow, A., Felder, S., and Zweifel, P. Population ageing and health care expenditure: a school of red herrings?
     Health economics 16, 10 (2007), 1109–1126.
[33] Yin, W., Basu, A., Zhang, J. X., Rabbani, A., Meltzer, D. O., and Alexander, G. C. The effect of the medicare
     part d prescription benefit on drug utilization and expenditures. Annals of Internal Medicine 148, 3 (2008), 169–177.
[34] Zweifel, P., Felder, S., and Meiers, M. Ageing of population and health care expenditure: a red herring? Health
     economics 8, 6 (1999), 485–496.




                                                           30
Appendix: For Online Publication
Data Description
Prescription Insurance Coverage

We estimate both aggregate prescription insurance coverage and prescription insurance coverage frac-
tions by income decile using the 2005 wave of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). We define
public prescription insurance in 2005 to be individuals with Medicaid coverage in 2005 or individuals
who had at least 30 percent of their prescription drug expenditures covered by a public program. We
define private insurance coverage as individuals listing that they are enrolled in private prescription
insurance or individuals who had at least 30 percent of their prescription drug expenditures covered by
a private program. We do not include under 65 disability Medicare recipients in the dataset.
    Our definition of the prescription insurance coverage categories differs slightly from Engelhardt and
Gruber (2011) who use the same dataset. They use 2002-2005 for pre-Part D. They define public
coverage to be anyone who was enrolled in Medicaid at any year between 2002 and 2007, enrolled in
Part D in 2007, or had any amount of their prescription drug coverage paid for by a public program.
They defined private coverage to be anyone who was listed as enrolled in a private prescription drug
plan or had any amount of their prescription drug coverage paid for by a private program

Health Insurance Coverage

We use the same 2007 wave of the MEPS to estimate health insurance coverage for 60-64 years old. We
use this estimate as the counterfactual health insurance coverage rates for the elderly population if they
were not eligible for Medicare. Since Medicare has full eligibility for the elderly has has been implemented
for almost 50 years, we do not have an elderly counterfactual estimate. We define public coverage to
be individuals who were described in the MEPS as publicly insured in December or individuals who
were enrolled in Medicare or Medicaid in December of 2007. We define private coverage as individuals
who were listed as having insurance but did not meet our criterion for public coverage, or individuals
who had ESI/Union insurance, group insurance coverage, or non-group insurance coverage of December
2007. We assume full enrollment when eligible for Medicare. We assign individuals to private insurance
coverage if they are listed as having both private and public coverage.

Calibration Table

Below we list the prescription and health insurance coverage, quantity expansion, markup reduction and
profit calibrations by income decile.




                                                    31
     Income Decile   No Insurance: Pre-Part D   Markup Reduction     Quantity Expansion   Profit
     1                         .34                   -8.89                  10.64         102.05
     2                         .29                   -1.01                   9.07         102.19
     3                          .4                    5.36                  12.74         101.46
     4                         .39                    9.44                  12.21         100.27
     5                         .43                   12.85                  13.66          98.66
     6                         .32                   14.91                  10.22          96.89




32
     7                         .35                    16.8                  10.93          94.85
     8                         .34                   18.41                  10.62          92.63
     9                         .28                   19.59                   8.76          90.32
     10                        .26                   20.62                   8.30          87.88

                           Table 2: Prescription Insurance Coverage, Part D
     Income   No Insurance:   Private Insurance:    Markup     Quantity    Profit
     Decile       60-64             60-64          Reduction   Expansion
     1             .45                .28             3.5        16.81     101.27
     2             .28                .17              7         15.98     101.65
     3             .55                .22            10.5        18.98     101.48
     4             .41                .46             14         18.43     100.44
     5             .41                .51            17.5        17.06      98.45




33
     6             .29                .64             21         14.28      95.42
     7             .17                .81            24.5         13.2      91.51
     8             .09                .89             28         13.31      86.82
     9             .11                .89            31.5        12.51      81.28
     10            .05                .95             35         12.67      74.96

                   Table 3: Health Insurance Coverage, Part A&B
