NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS INFLATION TARGETING STILL ON TARGET?
Luis Felipe Céspedes
Roberto Chang
Andrés Velasco
Working Paper 18570
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18570

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

We are grateful to Alessandro Rebucci and Andrew Powell for very useful comments and suggestions.
We also acknowledge the financial support of the Inter American Development Bank. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Luis Felipe Céspedes, Roberto Chang, and Andrés Velasco. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is Inflation Targeting Still On Target?
Luis Felipe Céspedes, Roberto Chang, and Andrés Velasco
NBER Working Paper No. 18570
November 2012
JEL No. E52,E58,F41
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the recent experience of a half-dozen Latin American inflation-targeting (IT) nations.
We document repeated and large deviations from the standard IT framework: exchange market interventions
have been lasting and widespread; the real exchange rate has often become a target of policy, though
this target is seldom made explicit; a range of other non-conventional policy tools, especially changes
in reserve requirements but occasionally also taxes or restrictions on international capital movements,
also came into common use. As in developed nations, during the 2008-2009 crisis issues of liquidity
provision took center stage. We also attempt a first evaluation of the emerging modified framework
of monetary policy. In general terms, the new approach seems to have been effective, at the very least
since the region weathered the crisis reasonably well. But also, and perhaps more importantly, many
questions remain about the desirability of non-conventional monetary policies in Latin America.

Luis Felipe Céspedes
Universidad Adolfo Ibañez
lfcespedes@uai.cl
Roberto Chang
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
chang@econ.rutgers.edu

Andrés Velasco
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and Oxford University
and also NBER
andres_velasco@harvard.edu

I.

Introduction

Is inflation targeting still on target? The system has served many countries well over the
last couple of decades, but changes may be desirable –perhaps inevitable—if IT is to be just
as useful in the next decade or two. That, as least, is what the recent experience of several
developed and emerging economies suggests.
The reaction to the recent financial crisis has involved repeated and large deviations from
the standard IT framework. This paper reviews the recent experience of a half-dozen Latin
American inflation-targeting nations, and concludes that some of those deviations may be
here to stay.
A simple summary of received wisdom on what IT should do might go like this: a) inflation
is the main (perhaps the only) target of monetary policy; b) authorities use the short interest
rate (both its current setting and announcements about its future course) to achieve their
inflation target; c) the exchange rate floats freely.
In addition, according to prevailing wisdom liquidity and prudential concerns belong in the
monetary framework, but more in the background than in the foreground. This is because
the conventional view assumes that other (i.e. non-monetary) tools are best suited to deal
with prudential issues.
In the recent experience of rich and not-so-rich inflation targeting nations, most of these
precepts were thrown out of the window most of the time. In developed countries, the onetarget, one-instrument approach came to an abrupt end: liquidity and prudential concerns
took center stage and a vast array of non-conventional tools became key to the monetary
policy toolkit. Some developed countries –though not all— intervened in currency markets
in order to control the nominal exchange rate.
In emerging markets (EMs) an analogous transformation took place. Exchange market
interventions have been lasting and widespread, even in countries such as Chile where

	  

2

monetary authorities had made vows to let the currency float freely. In many EMs the real
exchange rate has often become a target of policy, though this target is seldom made
explicit. And a different range of non-conventional policy tools –especially changes in
reserve requirements for bank liabilities of varying maturities and currency denominations,
but occasionally also taxes or restrictions on international capital movements— also came
into common use. And, as in the developed nations, during the 2008-2009 crisis issues of
liquidity provision took center stage.
In this paper we analyze the experience of six countries –Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico,
Peru and Uruguay. We find that all these inflation-targeting nations deviated from the
standard framework, though in different ways and using different instruments. A major
objective of the paper is to document what these countries did, and understand why they did
it.
Based on those experiences, in this paper we attempt a first evaluation of the emerging
modified framework of monetary policy. We find that in general terms the new approach
was effective, at the very least since the region weathered the crisis reasonably well. But
perhaps most important, we find that a number of questions remain as to whether these are
optimal policies, and under which conditions they might be expected to yield desirable
results.
The next section provides a conceptual framework to understand the standard components
of inflation targeting and also the possible deviations from that standard policy stance. The
section after that documents the shocks and policy responses in the six countries
considered. A final section aims to extract lessons from these experiences and understand
wither monetary policy in Latin America.
II.

A conceptual framework

In this section we review the conceptual framework behind inflation targeting. We begin by
revisiting the canonical model used to justify the approach. We then highlight a number of

	  

3

deviations from the standard set of assumptions that in turn may call for a modified or
enlarged inflation-targeting policy.
The canonical IT framework
The canonical framework behind inflation targeting has been most convincingly developed
by Svensson and Woodford (see Svensson (1999), Svensson (2010), Svensson and
Woodford (2005), Woodford (2003)). Svensson (1999) considers a central bank that at
some time T is instructed to minimize a loss function of the form

∞

ET ∑β s LT + s
s =0

where Lt is a period loss function. Often, the loss function is assumed to depend on
inflation π t and the output gap y! t , say, and to be quadratic, as in

Lt = ! t2 + ! y! t2

where θ is a parameter indicating the relative importance of inflation and the output gap in
the loss function. This is one formulation but certainly not the only one. More generally, Lt
can be assumed to be a quadratic function of a target vector Yt .
Svensson assumes that the central bank is constrained by the law of motion of the
economy, assumed to be linear:

⎡ X t +1 ⎤
⎡ X t ⎤
⎡vt +1 ⎤
⎢ E x ⎥ = A ⎢ x ⎥ + Bit + ⎢ 0 ⎥
⎣ ⎦
⎣ t t +1 ⎦
⎣ t ⎦

	  

4

where it is the policy instrument (typically an overnight interest rate), xt a vector of
jumping variables, X t a vector of states, vt an i.i.d. sequence of shocks, and A and B are
matrices.
In this setup, Svensson (1999) showed that the optimal policy is given by a system of
equations of the form:

GT (YT , ET YT +1 , ET YT + 2 ,...) = 0
This system can, in principle, be solved for YT , ET YT +1 , ET YT + 2 ,..., thus yielding an optimal
expected path for the target variables. Then the current and future expected values of the
policy instrument, iT , ET iT +1 ,... can be derived. Svensson (1999) called this solution
inflation forecast targeting and argued that it resembles actual IT implementation, in which
central bankers periodically announce projections for their policy instrument and the
resulting expecting path of the economy.
An important implication of the solution is that any variable not included in the target
vector Yt can affect the setting of the policy instrument it if it affects the expectation of the
target variables. In addition, this is the only way in which such a variable can affect optimal
policy.
It is crucial for the analysis, therefore, to justify the form of the central bank's loss function

Lt , and in particular to determine what variables “should” be included in the vector of
targets Yt . The current approach to this question is based on the work of Woodford (2003),
who showed that, in the context of a canonical New Keynesian framework, the lifetime
utility of the representative agent can, under some conditions, be locally approximated with
a quadratic function of the inflation rate and the output gap. This result, in fact, then implies
that zero inflation is optimal since, under the same maintained assumptions, the aggregate
supply function depends only on inflation and the output gap, so that zero inflation is also

	  

5

consistent with a zero output gap. This can be, hence, interpreted as saying that an IT
system (with a target of zero inflation) is optimal.
Finally, in the canonical New Keynesian model, control of the policy interest rate allows
the central bank to choose a point in the inflation-output gap tradeoff given by the
aggregate supply equation. The central bank can, in fact, set the interest rate so as to make
inflation and the output gap both zero. This can be used to justify the view that the
conventional policy, which consistes of controlling a policy interest rate, is sufficient for
optimality in an IT regime.
Departures from the conventional wisdom
Both Svensson and Woodford assumed that the central bank chooses policy at T with
perfect commitment. In the absence of commitment, the usual time consistency problem of
monetary policy appears. In fact, the possibility of time inconsistency provides a different
justification for inflation targeting. From this viewpoint, IT can be seen as a commitment
mechanism that, in Barro-Gordon style, eliminates the inflationary bias of monetary policy
(Woodford has also mentioned and developed this point). While the question of how IT is
in fact an effective response to time inconsistency seems to be faded from academic work,
much of the actual rhetoric justifying IT owes a great deal to this issue. The often-heard
argument that IT “enhances credibility and transparency” should be interpreted in this light.
While the Svensson-Woodford framework delivers clear cut and stark support for targeting
inflation at zero and the conventional policy of setting an interest rate, extensions of the
basic New Keynesian model easily lead to qualifications of that prescription:
Cost Push Shocks: If the aggregate supply schedule linking inflation and the output gap is
hit by an exogenous shock, then it is generally impossible for the central bank to set its
policy rate so as to make inflation and the output gap simultaneously zero. Optimal policy,
then, usually requires some inflation and a non zero output gap, with both fluctuating over
time. (This point is developed e.g. by Gali (2008)).

	  

6

An alternative possibility, not considered in the literature, is that the central bank could be
endowed with a second policy instrument, which together with conventional interest rate
management could restore its ability to deliver both zero inflation and a zero output gap.
The loss function: In Woodford's basic framework, the fact that the welfare of the
representative agent can be approximated by a function of inflation and the output gap
depends crucially on the details of the basic New Keynesian model. Ultimately, the
representative agent's welfare depends on consumption and labor effort; in the New
Keynesian model, roughly speaking, a nonzero output gap indicates a suboptimal tradeoff
between consumption and labor, while nonzero inflation leads to price dispersion, which is
costly because symmetric goods are produced in different quantities. This suggests that
modifications of the economy's structure may imply that inflation and the output gap may
not suffice to summarize how economic equilibrium affects the welfare of the
representative agent.
In this same line, Aoki (2001) showed that if a closed economy has two sectors, one subject
to price rigidities and one that is not, then the correct approximation to welfare must
include a relative price of the two goods in addition to inflation and the output gap. This
result has been generalized by Woodford (2003), who identified the crucial assumption for
Aoki’s result in the difference in nominal rigidities across sectors. Woodford shows, in
particular, that it is not necessary to include the relative price in the welfare approximation
if the two sectors have the same degree of price rigidity.
Similar results have been obtained for the open economy, where the relevant price is an
exchange rate, and distortions other than nominal price rigidities appear naturally.
Following Corsetti and Pesenti (2001), in many models a central bank has the ability to
affect the relative world price of exports, which can raise national welfare (this is often
called the “terms of trade externality”). This implies that an approximation to national
welfare should include the real exchange rate or the terms of trade (e.g. De Paoli 2009),
reflecting the potential benefits of terms of trade manipulation.

	  

7

More recently, Engel (2009) has emphasized that, if it is assumed that export prices are set
in the currency of the buyer (the “pricing to market” case), deviations from the Law of One
Price will occur, leading to inefficiencies. Consequently, a welfare approximation should
include a term reflecting “exchange rate misalignment”.
In short, there seem to be several plausible deviations from the standard setup in which a
relative price such as the real exchange rate could enter the objective funcion. Again, this
could conceivable lend theoretical support for the attempts to influence this relative price
which, as we will document below, have been present in practically all the recent Latin
American experiences.
Following along these lines, one might also ask whether financial prices or credit spreads
should be included in the loss function. This question, which seems particularly relevant
after the financial crisis, has attracted considerable attention recently. However, definitive
results have been few and far between. The most notable effort is by Curdia and Woodford
(2009), who modify a basic New Keynesian model assuming that agents could be “savers”
or “borrowers”, according to their marginal utility of consumption. The model also assumes
a costly financial intermediation technology, which implies a positive and time varying
spread between borrowing and lending interest rates. The key new distortion, therefore, is
that the spread results in a difference between the marginal utility of consumption of
borrowers and savers. Curdia and Woodford show that this leads to a welfare
approximation that depends on a measure of credit spreads.
In short: all of these papers suggest that the conventional loss function, which depends only
on inflation and the output gap, may have to be modified to include additional variables
(such as the real exchange rate or some credit spread). This, of course, weakens the case for
the canonical IT framework. Yet it should also be mentioned that many of these papers find
that basing policy on the conventional loss function, while not theoretically correct, leads to
a good approximation to optimal policy under plausible parameterizations.

	  

8

Transmission Mechanism: If, as in the Curdia-Woodford model, there are several interest
rates, the question emerges as to which one is best assigned as the instrument of monetary
policy. This question, of course, does not emerge in the canonical New Keynesian model,
in which the policy rate is the one and only rate. The importance of the issue became patent
during the recent crisis, in which several central banks lowered their policy rates to zero,
only to see that other rates, such as bank lending rates, barely moved. This was taken to
signal a breakdown in the “transmission mechanism”.
In a sense, the essential issue is this: the basic New Keynesian model, or any model that
features a single interest rate for that matter, is not the right model. If the central bank
identifies the correct model that accounts for different interest rates, presumably it could
identify how policy should be adjusted to deal with such breakdowns in the transmission
mechanism.
But the issue has additional facets. One of them is the existence and role of nonlinearities, a
prominent example of which is the zero lower bound on interest rates. Another example is
the interaction of financial frictions, collateral constraints, and asset prices, as developed
recently in Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2009). In these cases, the
key problem is that the conventional policy instrument (an overnight rate) can in some
cases become insufficient to steer the economy towards a desired path. This can justify the
search for alternative, “unconventional” instruments.
Following this logic, Garleanu, Ashcraft and Pedersen (2010), study the effects of two
monetary instruments: interest rates and haircuts, defined as the willingness by the central
bank to accept collateral for loans on terms that are more generous than those prevailing in
the market. They find that, if borrowing constraints take a certain form, this second
instrument can affect asset prices and hence real allocations.
Again, this line of argument is reminiscent of the kinds of real-world policies to be
documented below. Several non-conventional policies were justified precisely on the

	  

9

grounds that the transmission (or the arbitrage) mechanism had broken down and more
direct interventions (for instance in the market for longer-term bonds) were called for.
III. Case studies
In what follows we describe the main policy innovations adopted in each country, along
with their results. Analysis and policy lessons follow in subsequent sections. 1
A. The experience of Brazil
2007 to Lehman
Like other Latin American countries in our sample, at the start of 2007 Brazil was starting
to experience a boom. Market doubts about the orientation of the Lula government,
expressed in country risk spreads of more than 1500 basis points in 2002, had completely
disappeared by 2006. The Brazil EMBI spread (figure B1), which had hovered around 400
bps during mid-2005, fell to about 200 bps by the beginning of 2007, and kept falling until
the middle of 2007, when the global crisis started.
High interest rates had also kept activity in check and pushed inflation down. As seen in
figure B2, yearly CPI inflation closed 2006 at 3.14, exhibiting a clear downward trend. The
continuation of the trend would have, in fact, brought inflation below the lower limit of the
Central Bank’s tolerance band centered at 4.5%, plus or minus two%.
GDP growth in 2006 was 4% and accelerating. It would reach 6.1% in 2007 (figure B3)
Investment was strong and foreign capital inflows robust, leading to an appreciating
exchange rate (figure B4).

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
The sources for the analysis presented in this section are monetary policy reports, annual reports,
public statements of monetary policy meetings, official press releases, financial stability reports and
central banks’ databases.
	  

10

In response to falling inflation, the Central Bank of Brazil had embarked in successive
reductions of its policy rate (the Selic, an overnight interbank rate). As seen in figure B5,
the Selic rate stood at 18% at the beginning of 2006. From there, the Selic was reduced in
small steps, so that it had fallen to 11.25% by September 2007.
As shown in figure B2, the Selic reductions were followed by a reversal of inflation trends.
Year-over-year inflation began increasing in the second quarter of 2007. Yet the impact on
the exchange rate was insignificant, and appreciation continued.
As a result, the Central Bank of Brazil continued the program of reserve accumulation
started in mid-2006. As discussed in Chang (2007), the program was explained as an effort
to combat the appreciation of the Real and, at the same time, as a way to build a war chest
of reserves to deal with future financial turbulence. Net international reserves would
increase from US$ 62 billion in June 2006 to US$ 205 billion by September 2008 (figure
B6).
In this scenario, Brazilian authorities view the onset of the global financial crisis in 2007 as
a non-event for Brazil. Indeed, the minutes of the December 2007 Monetary Policy
Committee meeting stated that
“The Brazilian economy… does not seem to have been significantly affected by the
recent turmoil, and should sustain its growth trajectory, essentially driven by
domestic demand.”
The global crisis did increase country risk, but the effect proved to be small and ephemeral
(see figure B1). Capital inflows and the appreciation of the Real continued unabated until
September 2008.
Strong activity was coupled with rising inflation, which would surpass 6% by the 3rd
quarter of 2008. This situation eventually prompted a reversal of monetary policy. Starting

	  

11

in April 2008 the Selic was gradually increased from its level of 11.25. It would reach
13.75% by September 2008.
Another component of the policy response was a 1.5% tax on foreign purchases of fixed
income securities, applied in March 2008. The restriction to fixed income securities was to
signal that the target was short-term inflows, while long-term inflows were not to be
discouraged. The tax remained in place until October 2008.
So the Lehman collapse found Brazil in the middle of an overheating episode that was
being addressed via monetary tightening. In mid 2007 a few regulations were amended to
reduce the foreign exchange exposure of financial institutions.2 And Brazil intervened in
the FX market and discouraged short-term capital inflows. But to keep inflation from
surpassing the upper edge of its tolerance bands, the Central Bank of Brazil relied on
conventional interest rate management.
The Lehman Period
The Lehman collapse resulted in a sudden halt to capital inflows to Brazil and to other
emerging economies. Between early September 2008 and mid-October, Brazil’s EMBI
spread shot up by more than 400 basis points. During the same period, the Real lost more
than 20% of its value (adjusted for inflation). Mesquita and Toros (2010, p. 114) describe
many aspects of the subsequent liquidity crunch:
“The exchange rate depreciation was magnified by the effects of non-financial
corporate exposure to foreign exchange derivatives. BCB research…shows that
such exposure was close to US$ 37 billion (delta) by the end of September
2008….The volume of export finance contracts, dubbed ACC, fell by 30% between
September and October, while the rollover ratio of external debt fell from an
average of 167% in January-October to only 22% in November. Short-term foreign
funding of Brazilian banks contracted sharply from August…externally funded
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2
Circulares 3351, 3352, and 3353.
	  

12

domestic credit, adjusting for exchange rate changes, fell by 11% between August
and October 2008.”
The same authors stress that the first line of defense deployed by the BCB was to provide
liquidity in different ways. The program of reserve accumulation quickly became one of
dollar sales, both in the spot market and in repo auctions. Between September 2008 and
February 2009, the BCB sold US$ 26 billion, or about 13% of its net foreign reserves.
Since many firms had gone short in US dollar swaps to protect themselves against future
Real appreciation, Real depreciation jeopardized the financial condition of the nonfinancial
corporate sector. So, in October 2008 the BCB announced that it would offer up to US$ 50
billion, or about one-fourth of its reserves, in foreign exchange swaps. This move seems to
have succeeded in reducing market volatility, and at the end actual demand for swaps was
limited to US$ 12 billion.
The BCB decision to provide ample amounts of dollar liquidity was facilitated by the large
war chest (more than US $200 billion) that had been accumulated in the preceding period.
In addition, the BCB was also helped by an October 2008 currency swap agreement with
the Federal Reserve, by which the latter committed up to US $ 30 billion to Brazil. This
facility was not used, but market commentary is clear in that its availability contributed to
calming the markets.
In the last quarter of 2008, the BCB was reluctant to reduce the Selic rate. Indeed, the rate
was maintained at 13.75 until the end of January 2009. One reason for the delay was to
avoid giving a contradictory signal with respect to the achievement of the inflation target
(recall the Lehman collapse interrupted a process of dealing with overheating). Moreover,
the steep depreciation of the Real was bound to exacerbate inflationary pressures.
Instead, the BCB sought to increase domestic liquidity in other ways –chiefly, via a
reduction in reserve requirements. Montoro and Moreno (2010, p. 61) calculate that the
effective reserve requirement ratio (the ratio of reserve requirements held by banks over

	  

13

deposits subject to requirements) fell by 10%age points. This reduction was coupled with
incentives (lower requirement ratios) for large banks to finance smaller institutions, in order
to cope with an observed “flight to quality” problem.
In addition, the BCB changed discount window regulations to extend the maturity of
discount loans and to widen the range of acceptable collateral. Finally, deposit guarantees
were broadened, including the creation of guaranteed time deposits.
As markets stabilized, the Selic rate was reduced gradually: from 13.75 at the start of 2009
to 8.75 in July. By the middle of 2009 the economy was in neutral gear. Inflation pressures
had subsided and GDP growth was zero or slightly negative. Confidence seems to have
returned gradually in the second half of 2009. By the end of the year, the EMBI spread and
the real exchange rate were both back at their pre-Lehman levels.
As emphasized by Mesquita and Toros (2010), the BCB response was complemented by a
strong expansion of state owned banks: “large public sector banks accounted for 34% of
total credit by June 2009, compared with 28% by August 2008”.
Developments since the crisis
A lackluster 2009 was followed by a strong recovery in 2010, which recorded 7.5% GDP
growth. Country risk eased, capital inflows resumed, and real appreciation was initially
steady: the Real appreciated by 15% in real terms between the start of 2010 and mid-2011.
The strong pace of activity was reflected in accelerating inflation. As shown in figure B2,
year-over-year inflation crept up to reach 7.5% in the 3rd quarter of 2011. This figure was
outside the inflation-targeting tolerance band.
The policy response had, again, conventional and unconventional components. On the
conventional side, the Copom initiated a series of increases of the Selic rate, which brought
it from 8.75% in April 2010 to 12.50% in July 2011.

	  

14

Because interest rate increases fostered the appreciation of the Real, the BCB reinitiated FX
purchases. Net foreign reserves, which stood around US $ 200 billion at mid-2009, climbed
to about US $ 325 billion by mid- 2011. As this proved insufficient, the government
reestablished taxes on capital inflows. In October 2009, a 2% tax on foreign purchases of
both fixed income securities and equities was applied. The rate of the tax was increased to
4% and then to 6% in October 2010, but only for bonds. In March 2011, a 6% tax on shortterm foreign loans was imposed.
Finally, the BCB raised reserve requirements in December 2010: required ratios jumped
from 8 to 12% for cash deposits and 15 to 20% for time deposits (these increases were
reversed).
Results have been mixed. One does not know the counterfactual, but it is unclear that
policies enacted had a substantial impact on Real appreciation. Indeed officials switched
from combative statements that “they had an infinite amount of weapons at their disposal”
to the admission that “the currency war had been lost”. Growth slowed down markedly in
2011 and inflation returned to acceptable levels. Whether these developments reflect the
effectiveness of policy actions or the impact of foreign events is not evident. At the time of
this writing, the BCB is trying to prevent further deceleration.
B. The experience of Chile
2007 to Lehman
At the beginning of 2007 Chile was experiencing a period of high terms of trade caused by
the exceptional price of cooper (see figure CL1). The terms of trade were almost 75%
higher than the average for the previous 10 years. The economy was growing rapidly:
5.5% in annual terms in the first half of 2007 (see figure CL2). This strong GDP growth
was the result of expansionary domestic macroeconomic policies and favorable
international conditions (figures CL3 and CL4).

	  

15

In the course of 2007 inflation picked up due to increases in specific prices, mainly related
to jump in the international food prices. Additionally, the domestic price of perishables was
increasing because of unusually harsh weather in the 2007 winter (figures CL5 and CL6).
Core inflation measures were below the inflation target of 3%.
Lack of rain, coupled to the reduction in natural gas imports from Argentina, caused
electricity generators to shift to towards more expensive, less value-added technologies,
such as burning coal and diesel. This change increased the price of energy significantly and
resulted in a lower rate of growth of output during the second half of 2007.
Despite the significant improvement in the terms of trade, in 2007 the real exchange rate
remained close to the average value for the period 1986-2006 (figure CL7). Things started
to change by the end of 2007, as the nominal exchange rate began to appreciate
significantly (figure CL8). By March 2008, the nominal exchange rate had appreciated
more than 11% with respect to December 2007. In real terms the appreciation of the real
exchange rate reached 7.5% in the same period, while the price of copper increased more
than 25%. At that point the Central Bank intervened in the FX market and began buying
dollars.
The combination of high oil prices and a more depreciated exchange rate increased tradable
goods inflation. At that point, inflation expectations in the monetary policy horizon (2
years) started to deviate significantly from the inflation target (figure CL9).
Because core inflation measures were still below the target, the CBCH believed (and
publicly stated) that the increase in headline inflation did not come from inflationary
pressures related to the business cycle. The key challenge for the Central Bank was to
increase interest rate just enough to avoid second round effects that could affect inflationary
expectations. The monetary policy rate was raised by 100 basis points in the course of
2007. Headline inflation went from 2.8% in January to 7.8% in December.

	  

16

With the peso appreciating strongly, in April 2008 the Central Bank announced a program
of international reserve accumulation. The program involved daily purchases of US$50
million, for a total of US$8 billion (around 4.5% of GDP). The stated objective of the
program was to improve Chile’s liquidity in the context of the incipient financial turbulence
in international capital markets (figure CL10). Three months after the intervention was
announced, the exchange rate had depreciated more than 12%.
Between January 2008 and June 2008, the monetary policy rate was kept unchanged. In the
same period, annual inflation rate went from 7.5% to 9.5%. In this context, inflation
expectations rose significantly, as mentioned earlier. Then, starting in June 2008 and
through September 2008, the Central Bank raised the interest rate from 6.25% to 8.25%.
So when the rest of the world came crashing down in the last quarter of that year, inflation
was the chief problem facing the Chilean economy.
The Lehman period
Starting in late September the spreads of Chilean external debt suffered a significant
increase, in line with the increase in many other emerging markets. Rates charged on
foreign loans to local banks rose far above the levels observed in the second half of 2001,
while sovereign spread (EMBI) and corporate spreads also went up and got close to the
2001 levels (figure CL11).
Although foreign liabilities (mainly used to finance foreign trade operations) represented no
more than 10% of total liabilities for the majority of domestic banks, the squeeze on the
main global banks raised doubts regarding the capacity of the local banking sector to roll
over external credit lines. These doubts in turn triggered a sharp increase in demand for
liquidity in domestic and foreign currency. This situation translated into a significant
increase in domestic interest rates. Deposit rates in domestic and foreign currency increased
significantly in local markets (figure CL12).

	  

17

The policy response aimed at the transmission channels through which the external crisis
was manifesting itself in Chile. A first channel was financial: reduced access to external
financing and higher costs for that financing. A second channel was Real: weaker external
demand and lower commodity prices.
Given tighter external financing conditions and strong demand for liquidity, at the end of
September of 2008 the Central Bank of Chile announced a program of repos and swaps
with the objective of providing domestic and foreign liquidity to domestic financial
intermediaries. The stated goal was “to mitigate the effects of the external turmoil on the
local economy, thereby safeguarding the stability of the financial system and the normal
functioning of internal and external payments”.
The international liquidity provision program consisted initially in 28-day dollar swap
auctions for a period of 4 weeks, with transactions of US$500 millions per week. These
operations were sterilized with repos of the same maturity. The length and terms of the
swap program were expanded gradually. On October 2008, the Central Bank extended the
program from 1 to 6 months and extended its length to 60 and 90 days. In December 2008,
the Central Bank extended the maximum maturity of the swaps to 180 days and extended
the program for all 2009. The operations of this program between late September and mid
December of 2008 are presented in table CL1.
The international liquidity program of the Central Bank was not the only measure to foster
foreign currency provision to domestic markets. In early October 2008, the Ministry of
Finance transferred US$1.05 billion of its own assets, previously deposited abroad, to time
deposits in local banks. Later that year, with the Central Bank acting as fiscal agent, the
Ministry of Finance auctioned US $700 million in dollar deposits (see table CL2 for
operations in late 2008 of this program).
With dollars scarce, official dollar purchases on the FX market had to be suspended. On
September 29, the Central Bank announced the end its international reserves accumulation

	  

18

program. At the time of the announcement, the Central Bank had completed US$5.75
billion in dollar purchases.
In October the Central Bank temporarily authorized financial institutions to use local
currency, euros, and yen to complete their foreign currency reserves holdings.
On October 10 the Central Bank increased the range of collateral accepted in their domestic
currency operations in order to ease peso liquidity pressures. In particular, it accepted bank
deposits as collateral for seven-day repo operations for a period of six months. Since this
announcement, in the fourth quarter of 2008 43% of repo operations were guaranteed with
bank deposits.
In addition to expanding eligible collateral for domestic currency operations, in December
2008 the Central Bank of Chile extended the use of bank deposits as collateral through the
end of 2009 and expanded the eligible transactions (up to 28 days). It also introduced a
longer-term mechanism (over 28 days) to provide liquidity, based on a line of credit that
took Treasury bonds, among others, as effective collateral.
All this liquidity provision by the Central Bank reduced the deposit interest rates in
domestic markets, which in turn allowed the deposit interest rate in domestic currency to
align itself with the monetary policy rate.
In the first phase of the response to the external shock the monetary policy rate remained
constant. True, the short rate had been expected to rise and it did not. But despite the
severity of the shock, it did not go down either. The key was inflation. The Central Bank
indicated in the monetary policy statements of October and November that inflation
measures, including core inflation, remained significantly high.
Gradually things began to change. In the monetary policy statement of December 2008, the
Central Bank indicated that in the most likely scenario, a period of interest rate cuts would
begin initiated in January 2009.

	  

19

Inflation, which had reached almost 10% in October 2008 due to high food and energy
prices, dropped quickly as commodity prices reverted from record highs (figure CL5). In
less than 5 months, the inflation rate fell below 2%. And despite the strong depreciation of
the peso in late part of 2008, inflation continued to fall.
In spite of the policy response, domestic financial conditions tightened significantly. By
early 2009 was clear than the credit market was going through a period of significant
reduction in credit growth (figure CL13). The slowdown in the economy led to a rapid
adjustment in monetary policy rate expectations. The forward curve changed dramatically
in that period (figure CL14).
Domestic demand fell 9.2% in the first half of 2009 with investment falling 14.8%.
Nonetheless private consumption fell only 1.9% in that period. Once inflation rates started
to fall and the effects of the negative external scenario on the Chilean economy started to
materialize, the Central Bank cut the monetary policy rate aggressively in the first half of
2009 (figure CL4).
With the economy losing traction and inflation expectations still falling, the Central Bank
reduced the policy rate to 75 basis points in June 2009 and added one additional statement
in its monetary policy communiqué: “The Board considers that, in the most likely scenario,
it will be necessary to maintain the monetary stimulus for a longer period than the one
implicit in financial asset prices. This permits projected inflation to stand at 3% over the
policy horizon.” This statement reflected the intent bythe Central Bank to signal a more
expansionary path for the monetary policy rate than what was contemplated by private
agents.
In its next monthly monetary policy meeting, the CBCH cut the monetary policy interest
rate by 25 basis points, to 0.50%, and to adopt complementary monetary policy measures.
The communiqué from the July 2009 monetary policy meeting stated that “…for projected
inflation to reach 3% over the policy horizon within a context of a foreseen widening of the

	  

20

output gap and reduced imported cost pressures, it is necessary to increase the monetary
stimulus. Therefore, the monetary policy rate will be held at this minimum level for a
prolonged period of time.”
Additionally, in order to reinforce this decision and align financial asset prices with the
path of monetary policy, the Central Bank of Chile implemented the following
complementary monetary measures:

•

To establish a term liquidity facility (Facilidad de Liquidez a Plazo, FLAP) for
banking institutions, offering 90- and 180-day liquidity at the prevailing level of the
monetary policy rate.

•

To adjust the program of Central Bank note issuance at maturities below one year,
consistent with the earlier decision.

•

To suspend, for the rest of 2009, the issuance of debt instruments maturing in one
year or more (two-year Central Bank peso-denominated bonds (BCP-2) and oneyear Central Bank notes (PDBC-360)).

Eligible collateral for the FLAP included Central Bank instruments, time deposits, and
bank mortgage bills. The FLAP was widely used by local banks, with use peaking at CLP
$3.284 trillion in mid-January 2009, an amount equivalent to 40% of the banking system’s
capital and reserves. To sterilize the injection of resources associated with the FLAP, the
Central Bank issued additional short-term bonds (PDBCs), with a maximum of CLP $3.0
trillion in early February.
These measures seemed to have an immediate impact. The swap curve flattened. This,
together with the drop in Central Bank bond rates, implied a reduction on the order of 100
basis points in the expected monetary policy rate over the relevant policy horizon (figure
CL15). Time deposit rates recorded a similar drop. In the September Inflation Report, the
Central Bank of Chile indicated that the interest rate path implicit in financial asset prices
was now consistent with the path considered in its baseline scenario.

	  

21

These unconventional policy measures affected not only the interest rate structure, but also
the monetary aggregates. The FLAP caused an expansion of local-currency assets on the
Central Bank’s balance sheet by generating credit to the banking institutions (figure CL16).
The economy started to recover rapidly starting in the 3rd quarter of 2009. During 2009Q3
the economy grew 7.3% quarter-on-quarter (annualized rate). In the last quarter of that year
the economy experienced an annualized quarter-on-quarter rate of growth of 8%. Financial
conditions for households and firms started to normalize during this period.
Developments since the crisis
The earthquake of February 2010 postponed but did not abort the recovery of the Chilean
economy. In fact, GDP growth in 2010 surprised on the upside, and ended up being higher
than forecasted by the Central bank in its Monetary Policy report of December 2009.
In this context, the Central Bank initiated a process of normalization of the monetary policy
rate in June 2010. The speed of this process was not without controversy due to its potential
effect on the nominal exchange rate. In fact, the nominal exchange rate appreciated more
than 11% between June 2010 and the end of that year while the real exchange rate
appreciated close to 7% in the same period.
In this context, the Central Bank once again announced a process of international reserve
accumulation. The Central Bank justified the intervention alluding to the need to strengthen
its international reserve position. Unlike during the 2008 intervention, the exchange rate did
not depreciated significantly. Nevertheless, the speed of appreciation after the intervention
was lower than in the previous months.
C. The experience of Colombia
2007 to Lehman

	  

22

At the beginning of 2007, Colombia was experiencing an incipient overheating episode. As
shown in figure C1, GDP growth had been steadily accelerating: from less than an annual
rate of 2% in 2001 to almost 7% in 2007.
Faster growth during that period seems to have had several causes. Like other Latin
American countries, Colombia benefited from a favorable world environment, including
falling world interest rates and strong markets for its exports. Yet Colombia’s terms of
trade improved less (only about 10% between 2004 and 2007) than those of Chile and Peru.
Hence domestic developments –in particular improvements in political stability and
security— as well as prudent macroeconomic management, may have been more important
than external variables in fostering growth.
The increase in local business confidence was coupled with a continuous fall in foreign
credit spreads: the EMBI spread, which had touched 600 basis points in 2004, would fall
below 100 bps by mid-2007 (figure C2). Domestic investment growth, which had been less
than 10% before 2003, increased to more than 12% between 2003 and 2005, and surpassed
19% in 2006 (figure C3). Much of that growth was financed from abroad, especially via an
increase in net FDI flows (figure C4).
Against this backdrop three worrisome trends became apparent. One was accelerating credit
growth, which would exceed annual rates of 30% in 2006-7 (figure C5). A second was
gradually increasing inflation, especially between May 2006 and May 2007 (figure C6).
Some of the run up in inflation was attributed to higher world food prices. But similar
trends were visible in other price indicators, especially those of non-tradables, confirming
that inflation was widespread and most likely related to excess demand.
The other cause for concern was a strong appreciation of the Colombian peso. Figure C7
shows that, between June of 2006 and June of 2007, the nominal appreciation was about
30%, as the exchange rate went from about 2500 pesos per US dollar to 1925 pesos per
dollar during that period.

	  

23

Colombia adopted an inflation-targeting regime fully in 1999, when a system of exchange
rate bands was abandoned. The Banco de la Republica has a long run target for inflation of
3%. Targets and tolerance bands are announced towards the end of each calendar year for
the next two years. For 2006 the inflation target was 4.5% with a plus or minus 0.5%
allowance. For 2007 the target was 4%, still with a 0.5% allowance.
The Banco de la República identified inflationary pressures early in 2006. As a
consequence, it carried out a series increases of its policy rate, an overnight repo rate. This
move would gradually bring the policy rate from 6% in April 2006 to 10% in August 2008,
in 25 basis points steps, as displayed in figure C8.
Increasing interest rates in this manner, however, was insufficient to curb growth by
enough to stop inflation from accelerating. CPI in 2007 would reach 5.7%, more than 1%
above the 3.5-4.5 band. The policy options were further complicated by the strong
appreciation of the peso.
To combat peso appreciation, in early 2007 the Banco de la República resorted to very
large purchases of US dollars: between January and April of that year, discretionary dollar
purchases topped US$ 4.5 billion, increasing net foreign reserves by more than one third
(figure C9). However, dollar purchases were at odds with the contractionary interest policy
and the attainment of the inflation target (Chang (2007)). As a result, foreign exchange
intervention appears to have backfired and fostered carry trade: witness the unusual growth
of the financial account surplus during 2007, over and above the growth of net FDI flows
(figure C4). Perhaps due to these factors, the Banco de la República discontinued dollar
purchases in May 2007.
Neither interest rate increases nor foreign exchange intervention had made a dent at
controlling credit whose growth, at more than 30% annual rates, seemed unsustainable
(figure C5). In view of this, in May 2007 the Banco de la República announced the
reintroduction of capital controls, which had not been seen since 2000, and a tightening in
reserve requirements.

	  

24

The key move on capital controls was a requirement of 40% (increased to 50% in April
2008) of foreign portfolio investment to be held without interest at the Banco de la
República for six months. In addition, it placed a limit (of five times capital) on the
exposure of financial intermediaries to foreign exchange derivatives.
As for reserves, starting May 2007, a marginal requirement of 27% on checking and sight
deposits, and of 12.5% on savings deposits, was added to an existing average reserve
requirement of 13% on demand and sight deposits and 6% on savings deposits. A month
later, in June 2007, the marginal requirement on savings deposits was raised to 27%, the
same as with demand and sight deposits. To compensate in part, all deposits were to be paid
interest of 37.5% of the inflation target (previously, only savings deposits were paid interest
of 75% of the target).
As shown by figure C5, the capital controls together with the increase in reserve
requirements was followed by gradually lower credit growth, although by the middle of
2008 annual growth rates were still in excess of 20%. Overall, the combination of higher
policy rates and higher reserve requirements seem to have had some but limited success in
preventing overheating.
By the middle of 2008, inflation was still clearly over the 3.5-4.5% target range for the
Banco de la República. The June 2008 Inflation Report attributed most of the previous year
inflation to rising food prices. However, other inflation indicators, most notably the
inflation rate for non-traded goods and the PPI, were also well above the target range. Real
GDP growth in 2007 reached 6.9% --a figure that, as the Inflation Report noted, was close
to historical highs.
The onset of the global financial crisis towards the second half of 2007 did not affect
Colombia as much as other Latin American countries. The EMBI spread increased from
about 100 bps in June 2007 to about 270 bps in March 2008, but then it fell back to about
185 bps by June 2008. The exchange rate continued appreciating, and at first financial

	  

25

flows seem to continue unabated. Indeed, the Banco de la República stated in its June 2008
Inflation Report (page 50) that
[The Bank’s] central scenario assumes that the decisions of foreign investors about
ongoing projects will not be affected by uncertainty about recession in the US. So, it
is expected that FDI flows will reach similar levels as those of 2007.
The Lehman Period
The Lehman collapse, in September of 2008, was followed in Colombia by much slower
growth and a fall in inflation. GDP growth in 2009 was only 1.45%, and investment growth
was negative. CPI inflation fell to 2%, significantly below the tolerance inflation band of
4.5-5.5% that had been set for 2009.
The importance of external factors seems, however, relatively minor. We have seen above
the Banco de la República not only had enacted a series of policy rate increases until July
2008, but had also tried to curb credit growth by increasing reserve requirements and
imposing capital controls. And (as figure C5 shows) the growth of credit to the private
sector had been falling since mid 2007. Both GDP growth and investment growth had also
been markedly slower in 2008 than in 2007.
Moreover, the impact of the Lehman episode on external indicators was comparatively mild
and short lived. Colombia’s EMBI spread jumped up about 500 basis points (to more than
740 bps) in October 2008. But by mid-2009 the spread had fallen to 420 bps, and by the
end of 2009 it was back to pre-Lehman levels. The peso depreciated by about 25% between
September 2008 and February 2009, but by June 2009 the exchange rate was back to where
it was pre-Lehman.
Credit for the relative stability of the Colombian economy in the face of the Lehman crisis
should go, at least in part, to the rapid reaction of the Banco de la República. As in other
Latin countries, the most immediate response was unconventional. In October 2008,

	  

26

average reserve requirements were reduced (marginal requirements had been eliminated in
June 2008), and in January 2009 interest on reserves was cut. Likewise, in October 2008
controls on capital inflows were lifted. Finally, Banco de la República purchased Treasury
debt to the tune of 500 billion pesos (approximately US$ 250 million).
The conventional response was to a sequence of reductions of the policy rate, starting in
December 2008 from 10%, in steps ending with a 3% rate by May 2010.
Developments since the crisis
2010 was a strong year for Colombia. Real GDP growth reached 4.3%, and the growth of
investment surpassed 12%. Foreign capital inflows resumed, although FDI inflows were
somewhat below those of 2006-7 (but 2011 FDI inflows appear to be much stronger).
As before the global crisis, these favorable developments have come together with some
worrisome signs. Credit growth, which had touch zero in 2009, has since accelerated, and
recently it reached 35% year-on-year rates (figure C5). Inflation has picked up, although it
remains close to the current target of 3%. Most notably, the peso has been appreciating
continuously.
The response from the Banco de la República has been again multifaceted. Most notably,
the bank explicitly cited “signs of exchange rate misalignment” to embark in a program of
dollar purchases, starting in March 2010. It purchased US$ 400 – 400 million every month
until last October, except for a brief interruption in July- August 2010. One result is that
Colombia’s net foreign exchange reserves have swollen from US $ 25 billion in March
2010 to US $ 32 billion as of last October.
The impact on the exchange rate is less clear. Banco de la República, in several documents,
claims that foreign exchange intervention has been effective, and indeed that the
Colombian peso depreciated while other Latin American currencies appreciated against the

	  

27

US dollar. Figure C7 shows, however, that since the first quarter of 2009 the trend is
decidedly towards appreciation.
To prevent overheating, Banco de la República raised its policy rate starting in February of
2011, taking it from 3% to 4.5% in July. Whether these increases will be effective to put a
check on growth remains to be seen.
It is noteworthy that the recent interest rate increases took place at the same time as Banco
de la República was committed to a dollar-purchasing program. Foreign exchange
intervention was again at odds with the overall policy stance, in a way reminiscent of the
2006-2007 period (Chang 2007). This fueled speculation about the return of capital
controls, to the point where Finance Minister J.C. Echeverry had to go on record
disavowing the idea.
D. The experience of Mexico
2007 to Lehman
By the beginning of 2007 the Mexican economy was decelerating relative to the solid
growth exhibited in 2006 of 5.2% (figure M1). In annual terms, in the first half of 2007 the
economy grew at an average rate of 3%. The deceleration was partly the result of a less
dynamic US economy, Mexico’s main trading partner. Nevertheless, domestic Mexican
demand continued expanding at a healthy clip.
Inflation was a problem, though a diminishing one. Since mid-2006 the Mexican economy
had experienced several supply shocks that had pushed the inflation rate from 3.1% in July
2006 to 4.2% in March 2007. This figure was above the 4% upper limit of the comfort band
defined around the 3% inflation target.
The Banco de México was expecting a reduction in the inflationary pressures due to an
anticipated drop in world economic growth and in energy prices. The hope was that

	  

28

inflation rate would converge to the inflation target by the beginning of 2008. This was
consistent with the view that the increases in food and energy prices were changes in
relative prices that would not contaminate inflation dynamic in the context of wellanchored inflation expectations.
By mid 2007, the perspectives for that year had improved relative to what was expected at
the beginning of the year. Positive second quarter data for the US helped fuel that
perception (figure M2). The improved external conditions were reflected in local activity
data: during the second half of 2007 the Mexican economy grew at an average rate of 3.5%.
At the same time it was becoming clear that food and energy prices would follow a higher
trajectory than had been expected earlier. In order to prevent potential un-anchoring of
inflation expectations, Banco de México increased the overnight interbank interest rate 25
bps in April and 25 bps again in October of 2007 to reach 7.5% (figure M3).
Headline CPI inflation ended the year 2007 at 3.8%, below the 4.1% of December 2006.
But core inflation reached 4%, above the 3.6% in December of 2006. Headline inflation
dynamics were clearly influenced by the freezing in the prices of gasoline, gas and
electricity decreed by the government in the last quarter of 2007, which contained the
increase in the inflation rate.
By mid 2008, external financial turbulence and the drop in US growth (due to the
contraction in residential investment and the significant increase in commodity prices) were
beginning to affect Mexico. The local economy slowed while, pushed again by commodity
prices, in the first half of 2008 inflation exhibited an increasing trajectory (figure M4).
By June 2008, the inflation rate reached 5.3% in annual terms, up from 3.8% in December
of 2007. Economic activity increased only 2.8% in annual terms in the first half of 2008,
below the 3.8% exhibited in the second half of 2007. In the opinion of the Central Bank,
the impact of the deceleration of the US economy in the Mexican economy was of limited
magnitude.

	  

29

During this period inflation expectations for the short-run increased but remained relatively
unchanged for longer horizons (see figure M5). In this context, Banco de México decided
to increase the monetary policy rate 25 bps in each of three consecutive months (June, July
and August 2008), taking it to 8.25%. The yield curve during this period continued
steepening. This process increased the interest rate differentials with the US, which in turn
generated pressures towards the appreciation of the nominal exchange rate. Between
January and July 2008, the nominal peso/dollar exchange rate appreciated almost 10%.
In July 2008, the (Foreign) Exchange Commission (a governmental entity composed by
officials from the Ministry of Finance and Banco de México, whose remit is exchange rate
policy) announced it was suspending a 2003 mechanism whose objective was to reduce the
rate of exchange rate accumulation. The commission indicated that the changed aimed to
compensate the anticipated accumulation of 8 billions dollars announced the Ministry of
Finance. This decision by the Commission implied a lower provision of dollars to market
participants.
The Lehman period
The uncertainty triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers generated a significant
increase in long and medium term interest rates in Mexico (figure M6). Investors shifted
their portfolios from longer maturity government bonds towards short-term government
bonds. Ten-year government bonds went form interest rates around 8.5% to rates close to
11.5% in a short period of time.
Foreign currency liquidity dropped significantly in October 2008 due to the strong demand
for dollars by non-financial and financial institutions trying to meet margin calls or cover
their financial exposure. As discussed by Sidaoui, Ramos-Francia and Cuadra (2010), in
Mexico the impact of the shock was magnified by the exposure of large corporates to
foreign currency through complex derivatives instruments. Those corporates had engaged
in derivatives transactions and had open positions such that, in the view of the authorities, a
sharp depreciation of the Mexican peso would have caused massive losses.

	  

30

In this context, the authorities decided to use part of their international reserves to curb
foreign exchange volatility and to reestablish the orderly functioning of financial markets.
The Exchange Commission carried out an exchange rate intervention whose stated
objective was to reduce financial stability risks due to exchange rate volatility. The
Exchange Commission indicated that this intervention was not intended to support any
predetermined exchange rate but rather to provide liquidity to satisfy the unusual demand
brought about by exchange rate fluctuations.
The intervention was carried out through large scale and repeated supply of U.S. dollars
channeled to the market via auctions. In the first place, the Commission reintroduced the
mechanism to auction US dollars on a daily basis at a minimum exchange rate of 2% higher
than the previous business day’s exchange rate. The maximum daily amount for these
auctions was fixed at 400 million US dollars. During October 2008, more than 2 billion US
dollars were auctioned through this mechanism. Moreover, extraordinary auctions were
carried out for a total of 11 billion US dollars.
At that time Banco de México also created new liquidity facilities.3 The purpose of these
facilities was to support monetary policy by encouraging institutions with excess liquidity
to transfer it to those that lacked it. These new liquidity facilities gave commercial banks
access to Banco de Mexico’s funding for the amount they required under eligible collateral.
The Ministry of Finance also adjusted its programmed allotments in such a way as to keep
total net domestic financing unchanged. These adjustments reduced the amount auctioned
as long-term fixed rate bonds.
Despite the negative outlook for the world economy, in October 2011 Banco de Mexico
indicated that the outlook for inflation was not modified compared to the one expected in
the previous quarter. The reason was that those factors that were expected to reduce
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

Under the existing facilities commercial banks could obtain financing from Banco de México at a
rate twice the overnight interbank interest rate or could make non-interest bearing deposits in the
central bank.	  
	  

31

inflationary pressures were compensated by the depreciation of the nominal exchange rate.
Nominal depreciation between the end of July and October was close to 25% (see figure
M7).
During the last quarter of 2008 inflation continued increasing in line with official estimates.
By December 2008, the inflation rate had reached 6.5%, up from 5.45% in September
2008. Banco de México indicated that the increase in inflation was explained mainly by
two factors: increases in administered prices (low-octane gasoline, LP gas, and electricity
among them) that took place in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the impact of the
depreciation on food and non-food merchandises.
The weakening of the world economy, and especially in the U.S., led to a contraction of
Mexican manufacturing exports (figure M8). It also affected revenues from workers’
remittances and international travelers. The associated decline of international commodity
prices, including oil, lowered Mexico’s terms of trade. In this context economic activity
suffered, with GDP contracting 1.1% yoy in the last quarter of 2008.
The deterioration in the external financial outlook generated uncertainty about the
availability of financing for the 2009 current account deficit. With the purpose of reducing
such uncertainty and its effect on the exchange rate market, Banco de Mexico and the
government adopted a series of measures in March 2009.
The measures announced were: i) daily US dollar auctions (without pre-announced
minimum prices) for 100 million dollars; ii) daily US dollar auctions with pre-announced
minimum prices were cut from 400 to 300 million dollars; and, iii) extraordinary foreign
currency auctions to be carried out depending on market needs. Up to April of 2009, 3.2
billion US dollars were sold through the daily auctions mechanism.
On April 17 the International Monetary Fund approved Mexico for its Flexible Credit Line
(FCL) facility, making available 47 billion US dollars for one year. Additionally, Banco de

	  

32

Mexico began holding US dollar auctions for Mexican commercial and development banks,
tapping into resources from the temporary facility agreed with the U.S. Federal Reserve.
Responding to the much-deteriorated outlook for the economy, in early 209 Banco de
México began a cycle of deep cuts in the monetary policy rate. This process took the
monetary policy rate from 8.25% in December 2008 to 4.5% in July 2009.
After suffering a significant GDP contraction in the first half of 2009 (-8.6% yoy), the
economy started to recover in the second half of that year. Nonetheless, Mexico ended 2009
with a GDP contraction of 6.1% --the worst performance among the larger Latin American
countries. Predictably, in the course of 2009 inflation fell sharply. After peaking at 6.6% in
December of 2008, 2009 inflation was just 3.6%.
Developments since the crisis
After the significant contraction in 2009, the Mexican economy rebounded strongly (figure
M1). In 2010 GDP growth reached 5.4%. Preliminary estimations indicate that GDP
growth for 2011 was 4%. The recovery of the economy in 2010 was initially led by the
dynamic performance of manufacturing exports, helped along by the recovery in industrial
activity in the US at that time. But by the beginning of 2011 it was clear that domestic
demand was starting to pick up as well.
The mechanisms implemented to provide foreign liquidity to the markets were gradually
discontinued. In September of 2009, the Exchange Commission decided to suspend the
daily US dollar auctions without pre-announced minimum prices. In turn, in April 2010, the
commission decided to suspend the daily US dollar auction with pre-announced minimum
prices.
After worrying about depreciation of the peso for a couple of years, now the problem was
appreciation. The nominal exchange went from around 13 pesos per US dollar to around 12
pesos per US dollar (far above the 10 pesos per US dollar before the bankruptcy of Lehman

	  

33

Brothers). At that point, the Exchange Commission decided to intervene in the exchange
rate market. On February 22 2010, the Exchange Commission announced the reintroduction of the put options auctions that enabled buyers to sell dollars to Banco de
México. The action was publicly justified by the need to increase international reserves,
whose usefulness had been underscored by the financial crisis of 2008-2009 (see figure
M9).
The new policy would not last long. In the context of the sovereign debt problems in
Europe, the nominal exchange rate depreciated more than 20% significantly between
August and October of 2011. On November 29, 2011, the Exchange Commission
announced that the monthly auctions of put options would be temporarily suspended and
that dollar auctions with a minimum price would be reactivated until further notice.
Starting in August 2009 and up to the time of writing, the monetary policy rate has been
kept unchanged. This policy decision has resulted from a stable inflation rate during this
period (slightly above the 3% target) and a gradual reduction in the output gap.
E. The experience of Peru
2007 to Lehman
At the beginning of 2007 Peru was experiencing a boom that could be attributed to several
factors. One is the favorable world market for Peru’s exports. Between the end of 2004 and
the middle of 2007, Peru’s terms of trade improved by more than 40%, led by a
quadrupling of the price of copper (figure P1). This was reflected in a sizable increase in
the value of exports, which jumped from 18.4 of GDP in 2004 to about 26% of GDP in
2006 and 2007 (table P1).
A second factor was the reduction in political uncertainty and the continuation of a sound
macroeconomic policy environment. Investors had been reluctant to keep money in Peru
during 2006, as presidential elections produced the return of Alan García, whose populist

	  

34

policies had led the country to hyperinflation two decades before. García, however,
surprised markets by appointing a conservative, market-oriented economic team, clearly
committed to monetary and fiscal discipline.
The return of confidence was evident in the steady reduction of country risk indicators:
Peru’s EMBI spread fell from more than 200 basis points at the beginning of 2006 to about
103 bps in June 2007 (figure P2). Capital flows decidedly reversed direction: while during
the first nine months of 2006, there had been a cumulative net outflow of US$ 1 billion in
the financial account of the balance of payments, the last quarter of 2006 and the first
quarter of 2007 saw net inflows of about US$ 1.3 billion. This trend would only become
stronger later in 2007, as expressed in a surplus in financial account of 7.8 of GDP, a
marked turnaround relative to 2005 and 2006 (with surpluses of only 0.2 and 0.4 of GDP
respectively) (table P2).
The surge in capital inflows was a source of several concerns for the central bank. One
issue was the behavior of credit: the growth of bank credit to the private sector jumped
from about 10% at the end of 2006 to more than 30% at the end of 2007 (figure P3). A
second development was the appreciation of the Peruvian Sol: the exchange rate went from
3.40 soles per US$ in January 2006 to 3.19 in Jan. 2007 and 2.98 in Jan. 2008 (figure P4).
Finally, the economy started to display signs of overheating. GDP growth, which had
weakened some in 2006, returned to the 8­‐10% range. And the inflation rate, which had
fallen to almost zero in April 2007, started to increase rapidly. It would reach 4% at the end
of 2007, and surpass s4% by mid­‐2008, well above the 2% official inflation target (figure
P5).
Peru had established an explicit inflation-targeting regime in 2002. The 2002 Monetary
Program set a 2.5% inflation target, together with a tolerance band of plus or minus 1%. In
January 2007 the target was lowered to 2%, where it has been since.

	  

35

Under this regime the main policy instrument has been the interest rate for overnight
interbank loans. But the Peruvian Central Bank has not refrained from resorting to other
instruments, in particular to foreign exchange intervention. In fact, Peru’s central bank has
both accumulated a vast stock of foreign exchange reserves and felt free to intervene in the
foreign exchange market to tame volatility (see Chang (2007) for a discussion).
The incipient overheating problem at the start of 2007 was met at first with a conventional
interest rate response: the policy rate was raised from 4.5% at the beginning of 2007 to 5%
at the end of the year (figure P6). At the same time, the central bank engaged in a massive
reserves accumulation drive. Between July 2006 and June 2007 the central bank purchased
more than US$ 9 billion, bringing international reserves from US$ 14.2 billion to US$ 21.5
billion (figures P7 and P8). It is note-worthy that, at the time, short-term foreign debt was
only US$ 4.6 billion.
With the onset of the world financial crisis in the third quarter of 2007, capital inflows did
not abate. Rather, they intensified. The central bank then embarked in a three-pronged
strategy. First, the intervention rate continued to be increased, reaching 6.5% by September
2008. Second, dollar purchases accelerated: between July 2007 and April 2008 the central
bank bought more than US$ 14 billion, bringing the stock of international reserves over
US$ 35 billion.
A third and new element in the central bank response was to increase reserve requirements
on the banking system. Prior to February 2008 the central bank had imposed marginal
reserve requirements on domestic currency deposits in the banking system of 6%, and of
30% for foreign currency deposits. Those requirements were raised in successive steps, so
that by September 2008 the marginal reserve requirements were 25% on domestic currency
deposits and 49% on foreign currency deposits (figures P9 y P10) In addition, reserve
requirements on deposits held by foreign residents were set at 120% in May 2008. To
compensate for these moves, reserve requirements on long-term (two years or longer)
foreign obligations of the banks were eliminated altogether.

	  

36

It is unclear whether these policies had much of an effect in curbing the overheating
problem. Credit growth continued to accelerate, and by the time of the Lehman collapse
annual rates of growth were easily over 30%. By the end of 2008, the 12-month inflation
rate reached 6.8%.
On the other hand, the central bank policies did have a noticeable effect on the vulnerability
of the economy to a sudden capital outflow, like the one associated with the Lehman
bankruptcy. As already mentioned, the stock of international reserves was a multiple of
short-term foreign debt. And the increase in reserve requirements for short term foreign
liabilities coupled with the elimination of such requirements for long-term liabilities did
result in a substantial change in the maturity structure of the banks’ foreign debt. In
September 2007 only 22% of the banking system’s foreign debts were long term; a year
later, the percentage was 58%.
The Lehman Period
The Lehman bankruptcy in September 2008 and the associated global financial meltdown
resulted in a retrenchment by international capital away from emerging markets. In the case
of Peru the EMBI spread, which had been hovering below 200 basis points prior to the
Lehman episode, rose to more than 500 bps towards the end of 2008. The turnaround in
capital flows was quite dramatic: while the financial account had cumulated a surplus of
more than US$ 14 billion from the last quarter of 2007 to the third quarter of 2008, the last
quarter of 2008 saw a deficit of US$ 2.3 billion. This was clearly driven by short-term
capital outflows, which amounted to US$ 2.6 billion during that quarter (figure P11).
The capital outflows reversed the trend towards appreciation of the sol: the exchange rate,
which had been around 2.90 soles per US$ before Lehman, would close 2008 at 3.12. The
growth of credit came to a halt: the year­‐to­‐year growth in bank credit to the private sector,
which had surpassed 30% before Lehman, would steadily decline virtually to zero by the
end of 2009.

	  

37

The credit crunch was also evident in the behavior of domestic spreads between the prime
lending rate and the policy rate, which jumped from about 60 basis points prior to Lehman
to 130 bps in October 2008 (figure P12 – Quispe and Rossini (2011)). Aggregate demand
and production collapsed (figure P13). The inflation rate, which had been increasing,
started to fall, and would become almost zero by the end of 2009.
Remarkably, the Peruvian central bank response to the Lehman crisis was not to lower the
policy interest rate immediately. In fact, the policy rate was raised by 25 bps, to 6.5%, in
September 2008. It would stay there until February 2009.
Instead, the central bank relied on “unconventional” instruments: reserve requirements,
foreign exchange intervention, and some other liquidity measures. This stance seems to
have followed from at least two factors: first, the belief that the credit crunch was
essentially a liquidity shock, and hence that the policy response should be based on
ensuring the provision of liquidity to the markets; second, that until the markets had
stabilized, preserving credibility required that the central bank not start reversing the drive
towards higher interest rates that had been interrupted by the Lehman crisis. Hence, Quispe
and Rossini (2011, p. 309) wrote:
As of October 2008, the BCRP interrupted the process of gradual adjustments to its
monetary stance and reoriented its efforts to providing liquidity to the domestic
financial system and reducing extreme exchange rate volatility to neutralize possible
balance sheet effects in the economy, without neglecting its role of preserving price
stability.
Thus, the central bank reversed the increases in reserve requirements that it had enacted just
half a year earlier: marginal reserve requirements on domestic currency bank deposits were
lowered back to 6%, from 25%, and to 30%, from 40% on foreign currency deposits. In
addition, the reserve requirement of 120% on short-term bank liabilities against
nonresidents was lowered to 35%.

	  

38

Enhanced liquidity provision was also sought through the expansion of central bank repo
operations. Notably, the maturity of repo operations was increased to one year, and the
range of acceptable collateral was widened. Likewise, the central bank started a new swap
facility, with the express intention of extending liquidity to agents that did not have the
collateral to qualify for repos. Finally, the central bank repurchased its own CDs from
banks. All in all, Peru’s central bank estimates it injected about 9.6% of GDP in the six
months following the Lehman bankruptcy (Quispe and Rossini (2011), p. 310).
To tame volatility in the exchange rate, Peru’s central bank sold US$ 6.8 billion between
September 2008 and February 2009. In addition, it issued US$ 3.3 billion in US dollar
indexed certificates.
These moves seem to have been effective. The exchange rate was remarkably stable after
the initial depreciation. And, starting February 2009, the Peruvian sol resumed its
appreciation. At that time domestic spreads fell: the difference between the prime rate and
the central bank policy rate dropped by 50 basis points, to 87 basis points, by February
2009.
Believing that the financial turbulence had abated, and that the global crisis had brought a
more lasting recession than originally hoped for, in February the central bank also started to
reduce its policy rate. By August 2009, this rate was 1.25%, a fall of five and a quarter
percentage points relative to the beginning of the year.
Developments since the crisis
While the Peruvian economy suffered from a slowdown and bottomed out around mid­‐
2009, it recovered quickly and has enjoyed healthy growth recently. Aside from sound
macroeconomic management, perhaps the most favorable factor has been the recovery of
its terms of trade which –led by the prices of copper and silver– have returned to their peak
pre­‐Lehman levels. Domestic stability and favorable external conditions have resulted in a
recovery of external creditworthiness: the EMBI spread now stands at the same levels as

	  

39

before the Lehman crisis. Concomitantly, capital inflows have resumed with gusto: in 2010
the financial account experienced a surplus of more than US$ 13 billion.
Domestic credit growth has been increasing, from annual rates of about 10% at the
beginning of 2010 to more than 20% at the end of 2010. Aggregate demand and production
have resumed strong growth rates, and inflation has picked up.
In response, the central bank has continued resorting to conventional and unconventional
policy instruments. In 2010, the policy rate was raised between April and September from
1.25% to 3%; it was raised again in successive steps since the beginning of 2011, and now
it stands at 4.5%.
In 2010, also, the central back resumed dollar purchases, adding about US$ 11 billion to its
reserves. As of this writing, net foreign reserves are almost US$ 50 billion, in contrast with
US$ 33 billion at the end of 2009.
Finally, to check the accelerating growth in credit, reserve requirement were raised again.
Between July 2010 and October 2010, marginal reserve requirements for domestic currency
bank deposits jumped from 6% to 25%, and from 30% to 55% for foreign currency
deposits. Hence, the same policy instruments were used in the downswing and upswing
phases of the cycle. In this sense, Peru behaved like several of the other inflation-targeting
nations in the region.
F. The experience of Uruguay
Uruguay adopted a crawling peg exchange rate regime starting in 1990. This regime was
established as a central component of the stabilization plan aimed to reduce inflation, which
in 1990 had reached 110%. By contrast, in 1998 inflation was around 10%.
The system was to be tested during the Argentinean crisis of 2001-02. At first the pressure
on the Uruguayan peso was strong and increases in the width of the exchange rate band

	  

40

were applied to accommodate it. But no amount of financial engineering could erase the
real effects on the Uruguayan economy, which were significant particularly because of the
drastic reduction in exports to Argentina.
The bank run in Argentina also affected the Uruguayan financial sector, which experienced
a significant decrease in deposits. At that point international reserves were too small to
secure the exchange rate regime. In June 2002 Uruguay abandoned the crawling band
exchange rate regime and started to use the monetary base as the nominal anchor for the
economy. At the same time some inflation targets were announced but there was no firm
commitment to them.
But starting in 2004 the central bank started to signal a stronger commitment to the
inflation target. The target for the monetary base was changed from a point target to a band
in order to gain flexibility to fulfill the inflation targets. The final change came in 2005:
since then the monetary base target is no longer the target final for the central bank, leaving
the inflation target as the “only” target of monetary policy.
In 2002 Uruguay also it would follow a flexible exchange rate regime. Nevertheless, the
monetary authorities recognized early on that given the high dollarization of the economy,
excessive potential volatility was going to require “occasional” interventions. Those
occasional interventions would become semi-permanent interventions in later years.
The June 2003 letter of intent to the IMF stated: “The government intends to maintain this
framework as a means of anchoring inflationary expectations, building a track record for
monetary policy credibility, and laying the groundwork for future adoption of inflation
targeting. The Central Bank is committed to creating a deeper and more liquid market for
peso instruments by expanding further the available range of peso instruments for liquidity
management and by promoting market acceptance of inflation-indexed instruments.”
But in November 2004, the same letter of intent to the IMF the government stated: “The
monetary program is on track, and we expect to meet the end-December program targets on

	  

41

NDA and NIR with comfortable margins. Base money growth targets have been maintained
at the level announced in June, consistent with the attainment of a targeted inflation range
of 6-8% by September 2005. The government will maintain the floating exchange rate
policy.”
The change in language suggests a clear shift in monetary policy strategy, toward a system
based on inflation targets. However, the adoption of inflation targets cannot be interpreted
as the implementation of a full-fledged inflation-targeting regime. Greater transparency and
accountability were necessary to fulfill the state-of-the-art standard (see Aboal, Lorenzo
and Noya (2003)).
Some authors have argued that the exchange rate in Uruguay was effectively floating
between 2002 and 2005. Nevertheless, since 2006 the vigorous activism on the part of the
Central Bank started to change this view (see Aboal, Lanzilotta and Perera (2006)).
The Central Bank of Uruguay is relatively autonomous. Its objective is “price stability that
contributes with the objectives of growth and employment”. It is also in charge of the
proper functioning of the payments system and of the financial sector. A monetary policy
committee comprised of three board members plus three members of the staff makes
monetary

policy

committe.

The

Comité

de

Coordinación

Macroeconómica

(Macroeconomic Coordination Committee), made up of the three members of the board of
the Central Bank of Uruguay plus representatives from the Ministry of Finance, sets the
inflation target.
2007 to Lehman
After the 2002 crisis, Uruguay recovered quickly (figure U1). Appreciation pressures in late
2005 were dealt with by significant exchange rate interventions (figure U2). However,
those interventions were not sterilized, and that generated a significant increase in money
growth. The Central Bank felt this was not a problem since headline inflation had fallen
significantly (figure U3). At that point the country moved to a managed float. In 2007

	  

42

foreign exchange purchases were mainly undertaken by the government to meet its foreign
currency needs.
By 2007 inflation had increased above the inflation targets announced by the authority
(figure U4). This deviation was seen as transitory, due mostly to adverse supply shocks
affecting the economy (drought in 2006 and floods in 2007). Nevertheless, core inflation
measures were also picking up, suggesting nascent demand pressures. At the beginning of
2007, the unemployment rate was at its lower level for the decade and real wages were
increasing rapidly.
In this context, the Central Bank initiated a monetary policy tightening cycle in March
2007, reducing the (intermediate) M1 target and sterilizing exchange rate interventions. In
this period the Central Bank was seen as having both an inflation objective and also an
exchange rate objective of 24 pesos per dollar (figure U5). The authorities claimed that the
pressure on the local currency was mainly due to temporary FDI flows (associated to pulp
mills). Given that international reserve levels were below a comfortable level given
Uruguay degree of dollarization an “opportunistic approach to reserve accumulation” was
carried out (figure U6).
With food prices increasing rapidly, CPI inflation increased and so did core inflation
measures and inflation expectations. Starting in mid-2007 the exchange rate appreciated
significantly (from 24 pesos per dollar in May 2007 to 19 pesos per dollar in July 2008).
This appreciation of the exchange rate occurred despite a 10% of GDP increase in
international reserves due to exchange rate interventions.
By the beginning of 2008 the inflationary situation had improved. Nevertheless, given the
risk of additional pressure on domestic prices due to the evolution of international food and
energy prices and the fact that core inflation measures were still above the inflation target,
the Central Bank of Uruguay decided to kept the restrictive bias for monetary policy.

	  

43

At that point (January 2008), the Committee of Macroeconomic Coordination decided to
change the inflation target for the relevant policy horizon (June 2009) from a range of 4%
to 6% to a range of 3% and 7% (figure U4). This was done when inflation expectations for
the monetary policy horizon reached 6.5% (figure U7). After some reductions at the
beginning of 2008, those expectations started to increase again in April 2008. During this
period the Central Bank continued intervening in the foreign exchange rate market.
In May 2008, the Central Bank decided to reinforce the restrictive stance of monetary
policy by increasing the reserve requirements on short-term deposits. The Central Bank of
Uruguay indicated that by changing the reserve requirements rather than the interest rate it
was looking to make monetary policy more restrictive without introducing undesirable
effects on the exchange rate.
The Lehman Period
The external shock caused the Uruguayan peso to depreciate by close to 30% between
August and December 2008. This initial strong depreciation of the exchange rate did not
have an adverse impact on balance sheets because of low leverage levels by the private
sector (see Berkmen, Gelos, Rennhack, and Walsh (2009)).
At the beginning of October, just after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the Central Bank
of Uruguay raised the policy interest rate from 7.25% to 7.75% (figure U8). This was done
in a context in which the economy grew 13.4% in annual terms in the third quarter of 2008
while inflation was close to 10%.
The global financial crisis generated an increase in sovereign risk, which reached around
700 basis points (figure U9). At that point in time the authorities stressed there was no
urgency to issue new debt, since the bulk of amortizations were to take place in 2026 or
later. The authorities also indicated that their main objective at that time was the
preservation of financial sector health. That implied preventing exchange rate depreciation
from generating a financial crisis. The situation of the financial sector was very solid, with

	  

44

low leverage and plenty of reserves, mostly because the financial sector was just emerging
from the banking crisis of 2002. The Central Bank of Uruguay nonetheless provided
abundant dollar liquidity through the selling of reserves.
Somehow surprisingly, in this period of financial the Central bank of Uruguay chose to
raise the interest rate repeatedly. In December of 2008, it raised the interest rate to 9.5%
and an additional increase to 10% occurred at the beginning of 2009. The Central Bank
argued that inflation rates were still above the target and in order to ensure convergence a
cut in the monetary policy stimulus was needed. Moreover, the depreciation of the
exchange rate was a factor mentioned as one that justified the decision to increase the
policy rate despite the negative external scenario.
In March of 2009 the Central Bank of Uruguay changed reversed its strategy by cutting the
interest rate to 9% but keeping the contractionary bias. The Central bank argued that the
decrease in the inflation rate gave space for a cut despite keeping the real interest rate
positive.
The economy quickly felt the effects of the global financial crisis. It contracted 2.9% in the
first quarter of 2009 (with respect to the last quarter of 2008). But economic growth
resumed rapidly.
In June 2009 the inflation rate was within the inflation target zone. Given that inflation was
decreasing and in order to keep the real rate stable, the Central Bank reduced the nominal
interest rate to 8%. In December of 2009 the Comité de Coordinación Macroeconómica
kept the inflation target in the policy horizon of 18 months at 5% while reducing the
tolerance range to 1% (from 2%). Again the Central Bank reduced the nominal interest rate
to 6.25% so as to keep the real interest rate constant.
In addition to the monetary policy rate cuts, the Central Bank reduced reserve requirements
in 2009.

	  

45

Developments since the crisis
At the beginning of 2010 the possibility that actual inflation would not be consistent with
the inflation target started to emerge. The economy was recovering rapidly from a mild
recession in 2009. During 2010 inflation expectations were above the upper limit of the
inflation target zone. In response, during September of 2010 the Central Bank increased the
interest rate to 6.5%. By the end of 2010 was clear that aggregate demand was growing
much faster than potential output, prompted in part by a sharp increase in local currency
credit. Nevertheless, the Central Bank kept the monetary policy rate unchanged in
December of 2010.
The Uruguayan economy grew an extraordinary 8.5% in 2010. During that year the Central
Bank continued intervening in the foreign exchange rate market. Those interventions were
sterilized using long-term bonds (Letras de Regulación Monetaria).
By March 2011 it was very clear that inflation was not being controlled. Inflation
expectations were above the inflation target range. In this scenario the Central Bank raised
the policy interest rate to 7.5%. In its communiqué, the Central Bank indicated that the
perspective of reduction in the inflation rate were consistent with need to give continuity to
the harmonious development of production, the competitiveness of domestic firms, the
reduction in poverty and the improvement in income distribution.
Because of the inflation situation the Central Bank raised the monetary policy rate to 8% in
June 2011. Earlier, in May 2011, marginal reserve requirements were created for deposits
denominated in pesos and foreign currency. Average reserve requirements were increased
on the same occasion. The Central Bank indicated that the purpose of these measures was
“to prop up the monetary policy rate through the credit channel” in a context of inflationary
pressures.
The Central Bank’s idea was to increase the cost of funding and through this mechanism to
reinforce the monetary policy channel. The bank indicated that this was even more

	  

46

important given the fact that the Uruguayan economy was dollarized (with no control of the
onshore dollar interest rate). It also indicated that this “prop-up” would not have a major
impact on the exchange rate because it mostly affects the spread between the lending and
deposit rates.
IV.

Learning from these experiences

The recent experience of a group of countries in Latin America indicates that central banks
of the region have used a wide variety of instruments to fulfill their goals. This has
occurred in periods in which the monetary policy rate has been away from it slower bound.
Therefore, the implementation of unconventional monetary policy has occurred in periods
in which the monetary policy rate was “available” to be used in conventional fashion.
We center our analysis in the period from 2007 (before the September 2008 Lehman
bankruptcy) until shortly after the crisis. The period previous to September 2008 was
characterized by a rapid increase in inflation associated to high international food and
energy prices, in a context of rapid growth in most of the economies under analysis fueled
by strong terms of trade and rapid trading partners’ growth. This period was also
characterized by a significant appreciation of the exchange rate. Policy responses in this
period vary but include:

•

Increases in the monetary policy rate

•

Programs of international reserves accumulation

•

Exchange rate interventions

•

Taxes on foreign purchases of fixed income securities

The simultaneous increase in the inflation rate and appreciation of the exchange rate
created some tension during this period. Despite the rapid increase in inflation central banks
were reluctant to let the exchange rate to appreciate in order to reduce inflationary
pressures. Inflation expectations increased significantly and went above the inflation target
in the corresponding monetary policy horizon, in a sign of credibility loss.

	  

47

The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 was the starting point for a period
of unprecedented monetary policy activism. The first part of the monetary policy responses
in the region corresponded to measures to alleviate the financial tensions that domestic
financial intermediaries were suffering. These measures included:

•

Provision of international liquidity. Countries that had been accumulating reserves
switched to dollar sales. Injections of international liquidity included foreign
exchange swaps and the elimination of controls on short-term capital inflows.

•

Reduction in reserve requirements.

•

Increase in the maturity of discount loans.

•

Widening of acceptable collateral for Central Bank operations.

Remarkably, the monetary policy response to the Lehman crisis did not include lowering
the policy interest rate immediately. In fact, in some cases the policy rate was raised. Most,
central banks initiated a process of monetary policy rate cuts at the beginning of 2009. In
some cases, this process was complemented with unconventional policy measures such as
a) the explicit announcement regarding the course of the monetary policy rate in the future;
b) special lending facilities to the banking system.
The effects of the global financial crisis on economic activity and inflation were significant.
Most of the countries under analysis went to a process of rapid deceleration in economic
growth and significant fall in inflation. Nevertheless, the impact was clearly less persistent
and damaging than in previous episodes of large external shocks. One key difference with
previous episodes is that the health of the financial sector was kept intact. International
liquidity provision was crucial to avoid lasting damage in the financial system.
Something else also helped to reduce uncertainty and to limit its negative effects on the real
economy: the fact that central banks had ample space to implement “unconventional”
measures to reduce the impact of the global financial crisis in the domestic economy. In
particular, high levels of reserves and relatively limited stocks of short-term debt helped

	  

48

avoid some of the bigger shocks to expectations associates with earlier episodes of financial
turbulence.
After the crisis began to recede and capital flows were gradually restored, all countries
quickly undid most of the measures adopted during the crisis. Indeed, if a credit crunch and
a sharply depreciating exchange rate were problems sharply after Lehman, by early 2010
the problems were once again excessive credit growth and too-strong a currency. That is,
the six nations under consideration returned to a pre-crisis state remarkably quickly. This
was a contrast to earlier international crisis, in which the return to “normality” had been
much slower. The speed of normalization this time around was partially due to the ample
world liquidity and notably high international commodity prices that occurred in the
aftermath of the crisis. But it was also due to the speed and boldness with which most
monetary and fiscal authorities around Latin America reacted to this outsized external
shock.
Yet before we declare these policy experiences unambiguously successful, it seems
worthwhile to underscore a number of questions that are, at least in our view, still calling
for answer. We list them here not in the hope of providing definitive answers ourselves, but
rather to stimulate further research and analysis.
Responding to an adverse shock with an interest rate hike
A notable feature of this episode, already noted above, is that all but one countries under
consideration raised interest rates long after the crisis had begun in the US, and only began
cutting rates in early 2009 or thereabouts. Granted, 2007-08 was a period of surging
commodity prices, higher domestic inflation and (in some countries) incipient overheating.
But by the last quarter of 2008 it most have seemed evident that all these tendencies would
quickly unwind themselves –as indeed they did.
That does raise the question, therefore, of whether a suitably forward-looking assessment of
inflation risks would have called for a different interest-rate response in the course of 2008.

	  

49

Doubtlessly, the answer to this question will differ from country to country. But it needs to
be asked because, as we saw in the conceptual framework above, theory (at least as
developed by Svensson), calls for inflation forecast targeting, in a manner that is decidedly
forward-looking.
An alternative interpretation is that central banks at least suspected the inflationary episode
would quickly be unwound, but felt that inflation expectations could become unanchored if
they failed to respond aggressively to the spike in prices. If put this way, then one must
conclude that perhaps the Latin central banks did not enjoy the credibility required to carry
out IT in the manner prescribed by theory. This could be a function of the relatively short
period of time IT had been in place in most of the countries in question.
Why the credit crunch?
An unsavory aspect of this episode is that in spite of the stronger initial conditions, the
abundant reserves and well regulated banks, and the aggressive unconventional response to
the crisis by most central banks, credit slowed down considerably in most of the countries
in question. A case in point is Chile, where in spite of the strong macroeconomic
framework in place and the addition of an aggressive fiscal policy response (in addition to
the strong monetary policy response) to the crisis, credit ground to a halt in the second half
of 2008 and the first half of 2009. Calvo (2010) has emphasized the point for Chile and
several other countries in the region.
One possible answer is that credit stopped because capital inflows stopped. But that only
begs the question of why money stopped flowing to countries that were well managed, had
strong banks and no obvious public or private debt problem.
Another alternative answer is that credit slowed down because interest policy was
contractionary (as seen above) at the outset of the episode. But a short-lived increase in
interest rates seems hard to square with a sudden stop in credit, especially since the rate
hikes were soon followed by aggressive rate cuts everywhere.

	  

50

If asked, Latin bankers often claim that they stopped lending because credit demand
collapsed. Aside from the standard identification problems, this also fails as a complete
answer. If the economy was (plausibly) going to weather the shock, why would domestic
firms and households stop demanding credit?
In short: a great deal more research seems warranted on this issue.
Interest rates versus reserve requirements
A remarkable feature of this episode is the re-discovery of reserve requirements as a useful
monetary policy tool. We say re-discovery, because they were extensively used before the
90s, when they were mostly discarded.
One reason for not using reserve requirements is that they amount to an implicit tax, which
could discourage intermediation. In the limit –think for instance of the Diamond-Dybvig
model—very high reserve requirements entirely eliminate the risk of runs and crises, but
also eliminate the benefits of financial intermediation.
Another reason, as we saw at the outset, is that in the benchmark model there is nothing
that non-conventional instruments (such as reserve requirements) can do that interest rate
policy cannot do just as well.
By contrast, most Latin policymakers used both instruments at the same time in the recent
episode. The most common reason was that increasing rates would attract capital and
appreciate the exchange rates, while raising reserve requirements would achieve the same
target of curtailing credit without creating unwanted interest rate differentials.
But of course in the standard model that logic does not hold, because the policymaker is not
free to set the quantity and the price of money at the same time. Some deviation from the
standard model –a financial friction, most likely, or several —is necessary for the

	  

51

policymakers’ logic to be consistent. Exactly what those frictions are, and what optimal
policy is in their presence, is a promising topic for future research.
How effective was ER intervention?
Many academic studies find that sterilized intervention has little impact on the nominal
exchange rate, and that the effects such as they are turn out to be far from persistent. At first
sight, the same would seem to be the case here. Latin currencies kept depreciating when
fundamentals and expectations turned sour after Lehman, and they have mostly kept
appreciating since the crisis, in spite of massive intervention by practically all the central
banks in the region.
But needless to say, this informal evidence is far from enough to draw conclusions. For
one, we do not know what the counterfactual would have been. Currencies would have
been even stronger had they not sold dollars, most central bankers would claim. It seems to
us their claim should be taken seriously and studied systematically. That is an empirical
challenge (getting the econometrics right) but also a conceptual one: under what conditions
prevalent today in Latin America would one expect interventions to be effective?
A new regime or simply IT Mark II?
Are countries in the region moving toward a new monetary policy framework? Or are they
simply adding bells and whistles to the basic IT logic? We are inclined to take the second
alternative. What seems to be emerging is not an alternative regime to IT, but rather an
expanded and enriched version. The old IT may no longer be on target, but perhaps a new
version soon will be.

	  

52

References
Aboal, D., F. Lorenzo and N. Noya, (2003), “Metas de Inflación en Uruguay: Un Análisis
de los Mecanismos de Transmisión de la Política Económica,” Revista de Economía del
BCU 10 (1).
Aboal,D., B. Lanzilotta and M. Perera, (2006), “¿Flotación de jure y de facto?: La Política
Monetaria-Cambiaria en el Período Pos Crisis en Uruguay,” Centro de Investigaciones
Económicas (CINVE-Uruguay).
Aoki, K., (2001), “Optimal Monetary Policy Responses to Relative Price Changes,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 48, pp. 55-80.
Berkmen, P., G. Gelos, R. Rennhack, and J. Walsh, (2009), “The Global Financial Crisis:
Explaining Cross-Country Differences in the Output Impact,” IMF Working Paper 09/280
(Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Chang, R., (2007), “Inflation Targeting, Reserves Accumulation, and Exchange Rate
Management in Latin America,” Prepared for the Latin American Reserves Fund.
Corsetti G. and P. Pesenti, (2001), “Welfare and Macroeconomic Interdependence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 421-45
Curdia, V., and M. Woodford, (2009), “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy,"
working paper.
De Paoli, Bianca,( 2009), “Monetary policy and welfare in a small open economy.” Journal
of International Economics 77, 11--22.
Engel, C., (2009), “Currency Misalignments and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Working
paper, U. of Wisconsin.
Gali, J., (2008), Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle, Princeton University
Press.
Garleanu, N., A. Ashcraft and L.H. Pedersen, (2010), “Two Monetary Tools: Interest Rates
and Haircuts,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki,(2009), “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
Business Cycle Analysis,” working paper.
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi, (2011), “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy”, Journal
of Monetary Economics.
Mesquita, M. y M. Toros, (2010), “Brazil and the 2008 panic,” BIS Papers, n°54, pp 113–
20.
	  

53

Montoro, C. and R. Moreno, (2011), “Los requerimientos de encaje como instrumento de
política en América Latina,” Informe Trimestral del BPI, marzo de 2011.
Quispe, Z., and R. Rossini, (2011), “Monetary policy during the global financial crisis of
2007-09: the case of Peru,” BIS Papers chapters, in: Bank for International Settlements
(ed.), The Global Crisis and Financial Intermediation in Emerging Market Economies,
volume 54, pages 299-316 Bank for International Settlements.
Sidaoui, J.. M. Ramos-Francia and G. Cuadra, (2010), “Global liquidity, capital flows and
challenges for policymakers: the Mexican experience,” BIS Papers, n°57.
Svensson, Lars E.O., (1999), “Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 43(3), 607—654.
Svensson, Lars E.O., (2010), “Inflation Targeting,” in: Benjamin M. Friedman & Michael
Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, edition 1, volume 3, chapter 22, pages
1237-1302 Elsevier.
Svensson, Lars E.O., and Michael Woodford, (2005), “Implementing Optimal Policy
through Inflation-Forecast Targeting,” in Bernanke, Ben S., and Michael Woodford (eds.),
The Inflation-Targeting Debate, University of Chicago Press, 19—83.
Woodford, Michael, (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy, Princeton University Press.

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

54

0

	  
30

Source: World Economic Outlook, September 2011

Figure B5
Brazil: SELIC Rate

18

16
350

14
300

12

10
250

8

6

2

0

Source: Central Bank of Brazil

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

55
01/01/12

01/05/11

01/09/10

01/01/10

01/05/09

01/09/08

01/01/08

01/05/07

01/09/06

01/01/06

Source: JP Morgan Chase

01/05/05

01/09/04

01/01/04

0

01/05/03

1

01/09/02

110

01/01/02

3
jul-06
oct-06

abr-12

ene-12

oct-11

jul-11

abr-11

ene-11

oct-10

jul-10

abr-10

ene-10

oct-09

jul-09

abr-09

ene-09

oct-08

jul-08

abr-08

ene-08

oct-07

jul-07

abr-07

ene-07

8

01/05/01

90

01/09/00

4

01/01/00

5

01/05/99

100

01/09/98

6
abr-06

9

01/01/98

120

01/05/97

(yoy % change)
0

01/09/96

1

jul-05

2

100

oct-05

3

200

ene-06

300

01/01/96

400

abr-05

500

01/09/94

700

01/05/95

Figure B3
Brazil:GDP Growth
ene-05

(basis points)

01/01/94

2012f

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

1/3/05
4/3/05
7/3/05
10/3/05
1/3/06
4/3/06
7/3/06
10/3/06
1/3/07
4/3/07
7/3/07
10/3/07
1/3/08
4/3/08
7/3/08
10/3/08
1/3/09
4/3/09
7/3/09
10/3/09
1/3/10
4/3/10
7/3/10
10/3/10
1/3/11
4/3/11
7/3/11
10/3/11
1/3/12
4/3/12

800

01/31/2006
03/31/2006
05/31/2006
07/31/2006
09/30/2006
11/30/2006
01/31/2007
03/31/2007
05/31/2007
07/31/2007
09/30/2007
11/30/2007
01/31/2008
03/31/2008
05/31/2008
07/31/2008
09/30/2008
11/30/2008
01/31/2009
03/31/2009
05/31/2009
07/31/2009
09/30/2009
11/30/2009
01/31/2010
03/31/2010
05/31/2010
07/31/2010
09/30/2010
11/30/2010
01/31/2011
03/31/2011

4/2/12

1/2/12

10/2/11

7/2/11

4/2/11

1/2/11

10/2/10

7/2/10

4/2/10

1/2/10

10/2/09

7/2/09

4/2/09

1/2/09

10/2/08

40

-2
2003

7

7/2/08

20

4/2/08

-1

2002

8

1/2/08

10/2/07

7/2/07

4/2/07

1/2/07

10/2/06

7/2/06

0

4/2/06

1/2/06

Figure B1
Brazil: EMBI+
Figure B2
Brazil: CPI Inflation Rate
(yoy % change)

7

600

5

6

4

Source: Central Bank of Brazil

Figure B4
Brazil: Real Effective Exchange Rate Index
(2010=100)

80

2
70

60

50

Source: Bank of International Settlements

Figure B6
Brazil: Net Foreign Reserves
(Billions US$)

200

150

4
100

50

Source: Central Bank of Brazil

	  

	  
2.0
0.0

0.0
-10.0

-2.0
-20.0

-4.0
-30.0

CPI
Core CPI
Source: Central Bank of Chile
CPI Food

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

56
CPI Energy
mar-09

abr-12

nov-11

nov-09

ago-10

mar-10

oct-09

may-09

dic-08

jul-08

feb-08

sep-07

abr-07

nov-06

jun-06

ene-06

ago-05

jun-11

(yoy % change)

ene-11

Figure CL6
Chile: Food and Energy Prices

jul-09

Source: Central Bank of Chile

sep-09

may-09

10.0

nov-08

20.0

4.0

ene-09

30.0

6.0

jul-08

40.0

8.0

sep-08

10.0

ene-08

Source: Central Bank of Chile

mar-08

50.0
oct-04

Source: Central Bank of Chile

may-08

(yoy % change)

nov-07

Figure CL5
Chile: CPI Inflation

jul-07

12.0
dic-06

mar-12

dic-11

sep-11

jun-11

mar-11

dic-10

sep-10

jun-10

mar-10

dic-09

sep-09

jun-09

mar-09

dic-08

sep-08

jun-08

mar-08

dic-07

sep-07

jun-07

mar-07

(Dec. 2008=100)

sep-07

0
mar-05

0

may-04

1

mar-07

2

may-07

3

jul-03

5

dic-03

6

4

nov-06

Figure CL3
Chile: Trade Partners Growth

ene-07

5

feb-03

6

sep-02

(yoy % change)

jul-06

7
-4

sep-06

20

jun-06

40

sep-06

80

abr-02

100

may-06

8

mar-06

120

jun-01

10

160

nov-01

mar-12

nov-11

jul-11

mar-11

nov-10

jul-10

mar-10

nov-09

jul-09

mar-09

nov-08

jul-08

mar-08

nov-07

jul-07

mar-07

nov-06

jul-06

mar-06

nov-05

jul-05

mar-05

nov-04

jul-04

mar-04

180

mar-06

jul-03
nov-03

140

ene-01

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

mar-03

200

ene-06

abr-12

nov-11

jun-11

ene-11

ago-10

mar-10

oct-09

may-09

dic-08

jul-08

feb-08

sep-07

abr-07

nov-06

jun-06

ene-06

ago-05

mar-05

oct-04

may-04

dic-03

jul-03

feb-03

sep-02

abr-02

nov-01

1998

-1

jun-01

0

ene-01

Figure CL1
Chile: Terms of Trade Index
Figure CL2
Chile: GDP Growth

12

(yoy % change)

6

4

60
2

-2

0

Source: Central Bank of Chile

Figure CL4
Chile: Monetary Policy Rate

9

8

7

4

3

2

1

Source: Central Bank of Chile

	  

Figure CL8
Chile: Nominal Exchange Rate

Figure CL7
Chile: Real Exchange Rate
(1986=100)

750.00

110

700.00
650.00

100

600.00

90

550.00

80

500.00

70

450.00

Figure CL9
Chile: Inflation Expectations

jun-11

abr-12

nov-11

ene-11

oct-09

ago-10

mar-10

jul-08

dic-08

Figure CL10
Chile: International Reserves

(within 23 months)

4.0

may-09

Source: Central Bank of Chile

Source: Central Bank of Chile

4.5

feb-08

sep-07

jun-06

abr-07

nov-06

ene-06

oct-04

ago-05

mar-05

jul-03

dic-03

may-04

feb-03

abr-02

sep-02

Average 1986-2011

jun-01

300.00

nov-01

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2004

2005

2003

350.00
ene-01

Actual Real Exchange Rate

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1994

1995

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

400.00
1986

60

(Pesos per USD)

800.00

120

(millions USD)
45,000

3.5

40,000
35,000

3.0

30,000
25,000

2.5

20,000
15,000

2.0

10,000

Source: Central Bank of Chile

2011

2010

Figure CL12
Chile: Local USD and CLP 90 Day Rates

450

14.00

400

12.00

350
300

10.00

250

8.00

200

6.00

150

4.00

100

02/06/09

02/05/09

02/04/09

02/03/09

02/02/09

02/01/09

02/11/08

02/12/08

02/10/08

02/09/08

02/08/08

02/07/08

02/06/08

02/05/08

02/04/08

02/03/08

External Loans to Banks
Corporate Spread
Sovereign Spread EMBI)
Five-year CDSs in Chile

02/02/08

ene-01
abr-01
jul-01
oct-01
ene-02
abr-02
jul-02
oct-02
ene-03
abr-03
jul-03
oct-03
ene-04
abr-04
jul-04
oct-04
ene-05
abr-05
jul-05
oct-05
ene-06
abr-06
jul-06
oct-06
ene-07
abr-07
jul-07
oct-07
ene-08
abr-08
jul-08
oct-08

0.00

02/01/08

2.00

50

Libor + Spread on-shore (US$)
Source: Central Bank of Chile

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

2009

Source: Central Bank of Chile

Figure CL11
Chile: Chilean Debt Spread

0

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2000

0

2001

may-12

ene-12

sep-11

may-11

ene-11

sep-10

ene-10

may-10

sep-09

ene-09

may-09

sep-08

may-08

ene-08

sep-07

ene-07

may-07

sep-06

may-06

sep-05

ene-06

may-05

sep-04

ene-05

may-04

ene-04

sep-03

ene-03

may-03

5,000

1.5

57

Deposits Traded on the Stock Market
(CLP)

Source: Central Bank of Chile

	  

Figure CL13
Chile: Real Growth of Loans

Figure CL14
Chile: Monetary Policy Rate and the
Forward Curve

(yoy % change)

Consumer

Housing

Foreign Trade (US$)

September 2008 Report

January 2009 Report

May 2009 Report

*+,#22&

-./#22&

'()#22&

!"!#22&

*+,#2$&

-./#2$&

'()#2$&

!"!#2$&

*+,#$1&

MPR

Source: Central Bank of Chile

Source: Central Bank of Chile

Figure CL15B
Chile: Expectations for the MPR and
Unconventional Monetary Policy

Figure CL15A
Chile: Expectations for the MPR and
Unconventional Monetary Policy
(percent)

(percent)

9.00
8.00

9.00

7.00

8.00

6.00

7.00

5.00

6.00

3.00

3.00

2.00

2.00

1.00

1.00

0.00
ene-07
mar-07
may-07
jul-07
sep-07
nov-07
ene-08
mar-08
may-08
jul-08
sep-08
nov-08
ene-09
mar-09
may-09
jul-09
sep-09
nov-09
ene-10
mar-10
may-10
jul-10
sep-10
nov-10
ene-11
mar-11
may-11
jul-11
sep-11
nov-11

4.00

MPR

Before July Meeting

September

December

ene-07
mar-07
may-07
jul-07
sep-07
nov-07
ene-08
mar-08
may-08
jul-08
sep-08
nov-08
ene-09
mar-09
may-09
jul-09
sep-09
nov-09
ene-10
mar-10
may-10
jul-10
sep-10
nov-10
ene-11
mar-11
may-11
jul-11
sep-11
nov-11

4.00

5.00

0.00

-./#$1&

'()#$1&

!"!#$1&

-40

*+,#$0&

abr-10

ene-10

jul-09

oct-09

abr-09

ene-09

jul-08

oct-08

abr-08

jul-07

oct-07

ene-08

abr-07

ene-07

jul-06

oct-06

abr-06

ene-06

jul-05

Commercial

oct-05

abr-05

jul-04

oct-04

ene-05

abr-04

ene-04

-30

-./#$0&

-20

'()#$0&

-10

0

!"!#$0&

0

5

*+,#$%&

10

10

-./#$%&

20

10.00
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00

'()#$%&

30

15

-5

(percent)

40

20

!"!#$%&

25

MPR

Before July Meeting

September

December

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

58

Figure C2
Colombia: EMBI+

Figure C1
Colombia: GDP Growth

(basis points)

(GDP at 2005 Prices, Annual Growth)
800

8

700

7

600

6

500

5

400

4

300

3

200

2

12/18/2008

10/06/2008

07/25/2008

05/14/2008

03/04/2008

12/19/2007

10/05/2007

07/26/2007

05/15/2007

03/05/2007

12/19/2006

10/06/2006

07/27/2006

05/18/2006

03/09/2006

12/29/2005

10/20/2005

08/09/2005

05/27/2005

03/17/2005

10/19/2004

01/03/2005

08/06/2004

05/26/2004

03/16/2004

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2001

2002

0

0

01/02/2004

100

1

Source: JP Morgan Chase

Source: Central Bank of Colombia and National Administrative Department of Statistics

Figure C3
Colombia: Investment Growth

Figure C4
Colombia: Financial Account and FDI

(annual % change)

(% of GDP)

25.0

6.00

20.0

5.00
4.00

15.0

3.00

10.0

2.00

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

-5.0

Financial Account

2010p

2009p

2008p

Net FDI Flows
Source: Central Bank of Colombia

Source: Central Bank of Colombia

Figure C5
Colombia: Credit of Financial System to
Private Sector

Figure C6
Colombia: CPI Inflation
(yoy % change)

(yoy % change)

9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00

Source: Central Bank of Colombia

abr-11

ene-11

oct-10

jul-10

abr-10

ene-10

oct-09

jul-09

abr-09

ene-09

oct-08

jul-08

abr-08

ene-08

oct-07

jul-07

abr-07

ene-07

oct-06

jul-06

abr-06

ene-06

0.00

abr-11

ene-11

jul-10

oct-10

abr-10

ene-10

jul-09

oct-09

abr-09

oct-08

ene-09

jul-08

abr-08

oct-07

ene-08

jul-07

abr-07

ene-07

jul-06

oct-06

abr-06

1.00
ene-06

40.00
35.00
30.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
5.00
0.00
-5.00

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2001

0.00
0.0

2002

1.00

5.0

Source: National Administrative Department of Statistics

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

59

	  
0.00
100.0

-500.00
80.0

Source: Central Bank of Colombia

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

60
jul-08

jul-09

abr-11

ene-11

oct-10

jul-10

abr-10

ene-10

oct-09

Source: Central Bank of Colombia

abr-09

ene-09

500.00

oct-08

1000.00

abr-08

1500.00

ene-08

Figure C9
Colombia: Foreign Exchange Intervention

jul-07

(US$ Millions)
0.00

oct-07

1200

abr-07

1400

ene-07

1600

jul-06

12.00

oct-06

2000

1/2/06
3/2/06
5/2/06
7/2/06
9/2/06
11/2/06
1/2/07
3/2/07
5/2/07
7/2/07
9/2/07
11/2/07
1/2/08
3/2/08
5/2/08
7/2/08
9/2/08
11/2/08
1/2/09
3/2/09
5/2/09
7/2/09
9/2/09
11/2/09
1/2/10
3/2/10
5/2/10
7/2/10
9/2/10
11/2/10
1/2/11
3/2/11
5/2/11

2400

abr-06

2800

ene-06

abr-11

ene-11

oct-10

jul-10

abr-10

ene-10

oct-09

jul-09

abr-09

ene-09

oct-08

jul-08

abr-08

ene-08

oct-07

jul-07

abr-07

ene-07

oct-06

jul-06

abr-06

ene-06

1000

ene-07
mar-07
may-07
jul-07
sep-07
nov-07
ene-08
mar-08
may-08
jul-08
sep-08
nov-08
ene-09
mar-09
may-09
jul-09
sep-09
nov-09
ene-10
mar-10
may-10
jul-10
sep-10
nov-10
ene-11
mar-11
may-11
jul-11
sep-11

Figure C7
Colombia: Exchange Rate
Figure C8
Colombia: Central Bank Policy Rate

2600
10.00

2200
8.00

1800
6.00

4.00

2.00

Source: Central Bank of Colombia

Figure C10
Colombia: Terms of Trade

2000.00
200.0

180.0

160.0

140.0

120.0

Source: Central Bank of Colombia

	  

0.00

	  
-10.0
2011.4

2011.3

2011.2

2011.1

2010.4

2010.3

2010.2

2010.1

2009.4

2009.3

2009.2

2009.1

2008.4

2008.3

2008.2

2008.1

2007.4

2007.3

2007.2

2007.1

2006.4

2006.3

2006.2

2006.1

-10.0

Source: Central Bank of Mexico

Figure M3
Mexico: Monetary Policy Rate

9.00

8.00
7.0

7.00
6.0

6.00
5.0

5.00
4.0

4.00
3.0

3.00
2.0

2.00
1.0

1.00
0.0

Source: Central Bank of Mexico

Figure M5
Mexico: Annual Headline Inflation Expectations

Source: Central Bank of Mexico

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

61
Headline
Core

2011.4

2011.3

2011.2

2011.1

2010.4

2010.3

2010.2

2010.1

2009.4

2009.3

2009.2

2009.1

-6.0

2008.4

-8.0

2008.3

-4.0

-6.0

2008.2

-4.0

2008.1

-2.0

2007.4

2.0

2007.3

0.0

2007.2

(yoy % change)

2007.1

4.0

4.0

2006.4

6.0

2006.3

6.0

2006.2

8.0

2006.1

2.0

2006.01
2006.03
2006.05
2006.07
2006.09
2006.11
2007.01
2007.03
2007.05
2007.07
2007.09
2007.11
2008.01
2008.03
2008.05
2008.07
2008.09
2008.11
2009.01
2009.03
2009.05
2009.07
2009.09
2009.11
2010.01
2010.03
2010.05
2010.07
2010.09
2010.11
2011.01
2011.03
2011.05
2011.07
2011.09
2011.11
2012.01

1/2/07
3/2/07
5/2/07
7/2/07
9/2/07
11/2/07
1/2/08
3/2/08
5/2/08
7/2/08
9/2/08
11/2/08
1/2/09
3/2/09
5/2/09
7/2/09
9/2/09
11/2/09
1/2/10
3/2/10
5/2/10
7/2/10
9/2/10
11/2/10
1/2/11
3/2/11
5/2/11
7/2/11
9/2/11
11/2/11
1/2/12
3/2/12

Figure M1
Mexico: GDP Growth
Figure M2
Mexico: USA GDP Growth

(annualized quarter on quarter growth rate)

-2.0

0.0

-8.0

Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis

Figure M4
Mexico: Inflation Rate
(yoy % change)

Source: Central Bank of Mexico

Figure M6
Mexico: Interest Rates

Source: Central Bank of Mexico

	  

Figure M7
Mexico: Nominal Exchange Rate

Figure M8
Mexico: Exports Growth

(pesos per USD)

16

30.00

14

20.00

13

10.00

12

0.00

11

-10.00

10

Source: Central Bank of Mexico

2011.3

2011.2

2011.1

2010.4

2010.3

2010.2

2010.1

2009.4

2009.3

2009.2

2009.1

2008.4

2008.3

2008.2

2008.1

2007.4

2007.3

2007.2

-30.00

2007.1

-20.00
1/2/07
3/2/07
5/2/07
7/2/07
9/2/07
11/2/07
1/2/08
3/2/08
5/2/08
7/2/08
9/2/08
11/2/08
1/2/09
3/2/09
5/2/09
7/2/09
9/2/09
11/2/09
1/2/10
3/2/10
5/2/10
7/2/10
9/2/10
11/2/10
1/2/11
3/2/11
5/2/11
7/2/11
9/2/11
11/2/11
1/2/12
3/2/12

9

(yoy % change)

40.00

15

Source: Central Bank of Mexico

Figure M9
Mexico: International Reserves
(millions USD)
160,000
140,000
120,000
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2004

2005

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1995

0

1996

20,000

Source: Central Bank of Mexico

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

62

16.00
14.00
12.00
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
0.00
-2.00
-4.00

	  
CPI Inflation
GDP Growth
abr-11

ene-11

oct-10

jul-10

abr-10

ene-10

oct-09

jul-09

abr-09

ene-09

oct-08

jul-08

30.00

25.00

10.00

5.00

0.00

(annual percentage change)
0.00

Figure P3
Peru: Bank Credit to Private Sector

40.00

(yoy % change)
3.60

35.00
3.40

20.00
3.00

15.00
2.80

2.20

Source: Central Bank of Peru

Figure P5
Peru: CPI Inflation and GDP Growth

0.00

Source: Central Bank of Peru

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

63

jul-06

Source: Central Bank of Peru

abr-11

ene-11

oct-10

jul-10

abr-10

ene-10

oct-09

jul-09

abr-09

ene-09

oct-08

jul-08

abr-08

(1994=100)

ene-08

600.00

oct-07

jul-07

abr-07

ene-07

oct-06

90.00

abr-06

120.00

ene-06

130.00

ene-06
mar-06
may-06
jul-06
sep-06
nov-06
ene-07
mar-07
may-07
jul-07
sep-07
nov-07
ene-08
mar-08
may-08
jul-08
sep-08
nov-08
ene-09
mar-09
may-09
jul-09
sep-09
nov-09
ene-10
mar-10
may-10
jul-10
sep-10
nov-10
ene-11

abr-11

ene-11

oct-10

jul-10

abr-10

ene-10

oct-09

jul-09

abr-09

ene-09

oct-08

jul-08

abr-08

ene-08

oct-07

jul-07

abr-07

ene-07

oct-06

jul-06

abr-06

Figure P1
Peru: Terms of Trade

ene-06
mar-06
may-06
jul-06
sep-06
nov-06
ene-07
mar-07
may-07
jul-07
sep-07
nov-07
ene-08
mar-08
may-08
jul-08
sep-08
nov-08
ene-09
mar-09
may-09
jul-09
sep-09
nov-09
ene-10
mar-10
may-10
jul-10
sep-10
nov-10
ene-11
mar-11
may-11

abr-11

ene-11

oct-10

jul-10

abr-10

ene-10

oct-09

jul-09

abr-09

ene-09

oct-08

jul-08

abr-08

ene-08

oct-07

jul-07

abr-07

ene-07

oct-06

jul-06

ene-06

150.00

abr-08

ene-08

oct-07

jul-07

abr-07

ene-07

oct-06

jul-06

abr-06

ene-06

-5.00

abr-06

80.00

ene-06

160.00

Figure P2
Peru: EMBIG

140.00
500.00

(basis points)

400.00

110.00
300.00

100.00
200.00

100.00

Source: JP Morgan Chase

Figure P4
Peru: Nominal Exchange Rate
(sol per USD)

3.20

2.60

2.40

Source: Central Bank of Peru

Figure P6
Peru: Monetary Policy Rate

7.00

6.00

5.00

4.00

3.00

2.00

1.00

Source: Central Bank of Peru

	  

Figure P8
Peru: Net Foreign Reserves

Figure P7
Peru: Central Bank Dollar Purchases

(US$ Million)

(US$ Million)
50,000

4,000

45,000

3,000

40,000

2,000

35,000
30,000

1,000

25,000

0

20,000

-1,000

15,000

Source: Central Bank of Peru

Marginal

Average Required MN

Source: Central Bank of Peru

Figure P11
Peru: Financial Account and Short-Term
Capital

Marginal

abr-11

ene-11

jul-10

oct-10

abr-10

oct-11

jul-11

abr-11

ene-11

oct-10

jul-10

abr-10

ene-10

oct-09

jul-09

abr-09

ene-09

oct-08

jul-08

abr-08

ene-08

oct-07

jul-07

jul-11

oct-11

abr-11

oct-10

ene-11

jul-10

abr-10

ene-10

oct-09

jul-09

abr-09

ene-09

oct-08

jul-08

abr-08

ene-08

oct-07

jul-07

abr-07

ene-07

oct-06

jul-06

abr-06

5.00

abr-07

10.00

ene-07

15.00

oct-06

20.00

jul-06

25.00

abr-06

(percentage points)
60.00
55.00
50.00
45.00
40.00
35.00
30.00
25.00
20.00

ene-06

(percentage points)

ene-06

ene-10

Figure P10
Peru: Reserve Requirements in Foreign
Currency

30.00

Average Required MN

jul-09

Source: Central Bank of Peru

Figure P9
Peru: Reserve Requirements in Domestic
Currency

0.00

oct-09

abr-09

ene-09

jul-08

oct-08

abr-08

ene-08

jul-07

oct-07

abr-07

ene-07

jul-06

oct-06

abr-06

abr-11

ene-11

jul-10

oct-10

abr-10

ene-10

jul-09

oct-09

abr-09

ene-09

jul-08

oct-08

abr-08

ene-08

jul-07

oct-07

abr-07

ene-07

oct-06

abr-06

jul-06

0

ene-06

5,000

-3,000

ene-06

10,000
-2,000

Source: Central Bank of Peru

Figure P12
Peru:Spread of the Prime 90 Day Lending
Rate and the Central Bank Policy Rate

(Million USD)

(basis points)
140

8000

120

6000

100

4000

80

2000

60
0

40

-2000

Financial Account

Short-Term Capital

Source: Central Bank of Peru

dic-09

nov-09

oct-09

sep-09

jul-09

ago-09

jun-09

may-09

abr-09

mar-09

feb-09

ene-09

dic-08

nov-08

oct-08

sep-08

jul-08

ago-08

jun-08

may-08

abr-08

mar-08

feb-08

ene-08

0

2011.1

2010.4

2010.3

2010.2

2010.1

2009.4

2009.3

2009.2

2009.1

2008.4

2008.3

2008.2

2008.1

2007.4

2007.3

2007.2

2007.1

2006.4

2006.3

2006.2

20

2006.1

-4000

Source: Central Bank of Peru

Figure P13
Peru: Production and Aggregate Demand
(yoy % change)
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0

-10.0

ene-06
mar-06
may-06
jul-06
sep-06
nov-06
ene-07
mar-07
may-07
jul-07
sep-07
nov-07
ene-08
mar-08
may-08
jul-08
sep-08
nov-08
ene-09
mar-09
may-09
jul-09
sep-09
nov-09
ene-10
mar-10
may-10
jul-10
sep-10
nov-10
ene-11

-5.0

GDP

Aggregate Demand
Source: Central Bank of Peru

	  
	  

	  

64

	  

Figure U2
Uruguay: Real Exchange Rate Index

Figure U1
Uruguay: GDP Growth

(2000=100)

10.00
8.00

160.00

6.00

150.00

4.00

140.00

2.00

130.00

0.00

120.00

-2.00

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

80.00

2001

90.00
2000

-8.00
-10.00

1999

100.00

1998

-6.00

ene-00
jun-00
nov-00
abr-01
sep-01
feb-02
jul-02
dic-02
may-03
oct-03
mar-04
ago-04
ene-05
jun-05
nov-05
abr-06
sep-06
feb-07
jul-07
dic-07
may-08
oct-08
mar-09
ago-09
ene-10
jun-10
nov-10
abr-11
sep-11

110.00

-4.00

Source: Central Bank of Uruguay

Source: Central Bank of Uruguay

Figure U3
Uruguay: Inflation Rate

Figure U4
Inflation Rate and Inflation Target

(yoy % change)
11.00
10.00
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00

oct-10

jul-10

abr-10

oct-09

ene-10

jul-09

abr-09

oct-08

ene-09

jul-08

abr-08

ene-08

oct-07

jul-07

abr-07

ene-07

jul-06

oct-06

abr-06

ene-06

jul-05

oct-05

abr-05

ene-05

jul-04

oct-04

abr-04

2.00

ene-04

3.00

Source: National Statistics Institute, Uruguay

Source: Central Bank of Uruguay

Figure U5
Uruguay: Nominal Exchange Rate

Figure U6
Uruguay: International Reserves

(Pesos per USD)

(US$ Million)

35.00

12,000

30.00

10,000
8,000

25.00

6,000

20.00

4,000
15.00

Source: Central Bank of Uruguay

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

jun-11

0

nov-11

ene-11

ago-10

mar-10

oct-09

may-09

jul-08

dic-08

feb-08

abr-07

sep-07

nov-06

jun-06

ene-06

ago-05

mar-05

oct-04

may-04

jul-03

dic-03

feb-03

sep-02

abr-02

nov-01

jun-01

ene-01

2,000
10.00

Source: Central Bank of Uruguay

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

65

Figure U7
Uruguay: Inflation Expectations

Figure U8
Uruguay: Monetary Policy Rate

12.00

(18 Months Horizon)
10.00

7.5
7.0

8.00

6.5
6.00

6.0

4.00

5.5
5.0

9/5/11

11/5/11

7/5/11

5/5/11

3/5/11

1/5/11

9/5/10

11/5/10

7/5/10

5/5/10

3/5/10

1/5/10

9/5/09

11/5/09

7/5/09

5/5/09

3/5/09

1/5/09

9/5/08

7/5/08

5/5/08

3/5/08

1/5/08

11/5/08

Source: Central Bank of Uruguay

9/5/07

0.00

11/5/07

2.00
sep-06
nov-06
ene-07
mar-07
may-07
jul-07
sep-07
nov-07
ene-08
mar-08
may-08
jul-08
sep-08
nov-08
ene-09
mar-09
may-09
jul-09
sep-09
nov-09
ene-10
mar-10
may-10
jul-10
sep-10
nov-10
ene-11
mar-11
may-11
jul-11
sep-11
nov-11

4.5

Source: Central Bank of Uruguay

Figure U9
Uruguay: Sovereign Spread
(basis points)
800.00
700.00
600.00
500.00
400.00
300.00
200.00

0.00

ene-06
mar-06
may-06
jul-06
sep-06
nov-06
ene-07
mar-07
may-07
jul-07
sep-07
nov-07
ene-08
mar-08
may-08
jul-08
sep-08
nov-08
ene-09
mar-09
may-09
jul-09
sep-09
nov-09
ene-10
mar-10
may-10
jul-10
sep-10
nov-10

100.00

Source: JP Morgan Chase

	  

	  

Table CL1
Chile: Dollar Swaps Operations
Date
30 Sept. 08
07 Oct. 08
14 Oct. 08
21 Oct. 08
28 Oct. 08
04 Nov. 08
11 Nov. 08
18 Nov. 08
25 Nov. 08
02 Dec. 08
09 Dec. 08
16 Dec. 08

Maturity
(days)
28
28
91
63
91
63
91
63
91
182
182
182

Amount Offered
(US$ million)
500
500
500
500
500
500
500
500
500
500
500
500

Amount
Purchased (US$
million)
388
30
200
150
67
227
15
100
200
160
0
0

	  

Source: Central Bank of Chile

	  
	  

	  

Weighted Spread
Premium
(percent)
3.49
3.06
1.07
1.04
1.10
1.09
1.06
1.06
1.20
1.06
-

66

Table CL2
Chile: Dollar Deposit Auctions by the Treasury
Date
12 Nov. 08
19 Nov. 08

Maturity
(days)

Amount Auctioned
(US$ million)

91
119

Amount Sold
(US$ million)

350
368

Sale Interest Rate
(*) (percent)

332
368

3.27
3.50

(*) Weighted interest rate of sales (LIBOR+spread)

	  

Source: Central Bank of Chile

	  
	  

Table P1
Peru: Selected Balance of Payments Items (% of GDP)
Current Account Balance
Goods and Services
Exports
(FOB)
Imports
(FOB)
Financial Account
Private
Sector
Public
Sector
Short-Term Capital

2004
0.0
4.3

2005
1.4
6.7

2006
3.1
9.7

2007
1.4
7.9

2008
-4.2
2

2009
0.2
4.7

2010
-1.5
4.4

18.4

21.9

25.8

26.1

24.4

21.2

23.1

-14.1

-15.2

-16.1

-18.2

-22.4

-16.5

-18.7

3.1

0.2

0.4

7.8

6.8

1.2

8.4

1.3

2.3

2.3

8.2

7.5

2.1

8.7

1.4
0.3

-1.8
-0.3

-0.8
-1.2

-2.3
1.9

-1.1
0.4

0.8
-1.7

-0.7
0.4

	  
Source: Central Bank of Peru

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

67

