                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE MOVER'S ADVANTAGE:
                   SCIENTIFIC PERFORMANCE OF MOBILE ACADEMICS

                                            Chiara Franzoni
                                           Giuseppe Scellato
                                             Paula Stephan

                                         Working Paper 18577
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18577


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2012




The authors acknowledge support from Regione Piemonte for the GlobSci project and from the IPE
Program, National Bureau of Economic Research. Stephan acknowledges support from the European
Commission (FP7) Project "An Observatorium for Science in Society Based in Social Models - SISOB"
Contract no. FP7 266588 and Collegio Carlo Alberto Project "Researcher Mobility and Scientific Performance."
The authors wish to thank Massimo G. Colombo and Paola Garrone for helpful comments. Alessandro
Fornari, Antonio De Marco and Ali Mohammadi provided valuable research assistantship. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Chiara Franzoni, Giuseppe Scellato, and Paula Stephan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Mover's Advantage: Scientific Performance of Mobile Academics
Chiara Franzoni, Giuseppe Scellato, and Paula Stephan
NBER Working Paper No. 18577
November 2012
JEL No. F22,J24,J61,O30

                                             ABSTRACT

We investigate performance differentials associated with mobility for research active scientists residing
in a broad spectrum of countries and working in a broad spectrum of fields using data from the GlobSci
survey. We distinguish between two categories of mobile scientists: (1) those studying or working
in a country other than that of origin and (2) those who have returned to their native country after a
spell of study or work abroad. We compare the performance of these mobile scientists to natives who
have never experienced a spell of mobility and are studying or working in their country of origin.
We find evidence that mobile scientists perform better than those who have not experienced mobility.
Among the mobile, we find some evidence that those who return perform better than the foreign born
save in the United States, suggesting that positive selection is not at work in determining who remains
outside the country. This is supported by the finding that for most countries the performance of returnees
is no different than that of compatriots who remain abroad after controlling for other effects.


Chiara Franzoni                                     Paula Stephan
Department of Industrial                            Department of Economics
  Engineering & Management                          Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Politecnico di Milano                               Georgia State University
20133 Milan                                         Box 3992
Italy                                               Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
chiara.franzoni@polimi.it                           and Università di Torino
                                                    and also NBER
Giuseppe Scellato                                   pstephan@gsu.edu
Department of Production Systems
and Business Economics
Politecnico di Torino
10129 Turin, Italy

and Bureau of Research in Innovation Complexity and Knowledge at Collegio Carlo Albe
giuseppe.scellato@polito.it
    1. Introduction

The circulation of the highly skilled workforce is a global phenomenon, especially characteristic of
exceptionally talented individuals for whom productivity differentials –and respective differentials in
wages--are higher (Gibson & McKenzie, 2012). Moreover, immigrant workers, especially high-skilled
ones, have a higher propensity for mobility than natives, both because they are less tied to the latest
location but also because they respond more rapidly to new windows of opportunities in a different
location (Kerr, 2009a; Kerr, 2009b). It is thus not surprising that national science and innovation
systems compete not only to attract the best and brightest, but also to retain national talent and to
attract back those who have left to study or work abroad (Hunter, Oswald, & Charlton, 2009).

Empirical evidence on the correlation of mobility and performance in science, however, is inconclusive
and often limited to the foreign-born in the US. Levin and Stephan (1999), for example, show that
authors of exceptional contributions are disproportionately distributed among the foreign born and
foreign educated in the United States, but they do not investigate more broadly representative samples
nor do they investigate foreign-born differentials in countries other than the United States. Weinberg
(2011) studies highly-cited scientists and finds that, although developing countries produce a
considerable number of exceptional scientists, they are disproportionately located in high-income
countries. Hunter, Oswald and Charlton (2009) study 138 highly-cited physicists. They show that
migrants to the US perform similarly to native-US physicists; their performance is also no different
from those who stay. Kahn and MacGarvie (2011) compare the performance of individuals who
received Fulbright scholarships for study in the US to a control group and find no substantial
difference in productivity in the top half of the Impact Factor distribution for those from richer
countries. Finally, Borjas and Doran (2012) find evidence of displacement of US mathematicians after
the wave of immigration of Russian mathematicians following the collapse of the Soviet Union and
show that US mathematicians, particularly working in areas of research that overlapped with those of
the Russian émigrés, experienced a decrease in productivity and a lower probability of producing
exceptional contributions.

In sum, evidence concerning productivity differentials between immigrants and non-immigrants usually
focuses on the high-end of the performance distribution and findings often diverge. Studies are usually
limited to comparing immigrants with non-immigrants. Only the Kahn and MacGarvie paper
investigates productivity differences between those who return and those who do not. Moreover, the



                                                     3
foreign born are usually compared to natives, without making the distinction between natives who have
experienced mobility and returned vs. natives who have never experienced professional mobility.

Here we make use of a new large dataset on the mobility of 15421 academics (Franzoni, Scellato, &
Stephan, 2012). We investigate the correlation of mobility to performance within a broad spectrum of
destination countries, of which 14 (Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK and the US) are developed countries with varying
levels of scientific and research excellence, and two (India and Brazil) are fast-growing economies. The
richness of the data allow us to control for a large number of characteristics such as age, gender, and
job position, as well as self-assessed characteristics of the sample paper. Our sample spans the four
scientific fields of biology, chemistry, earth and environment and materials and is for research-active
scientists publishing a survey article in one of the four quartiles of the Impact Factor distribution of
journals for each of the four fields.

Information about country of origin and mobility is obtained through a webmail survey fielded in the
16 countries and available in seven languages in 2011. We assess performance by looking at two
different measures related to the survey article: the Impact Factor (IF) of the journal in which it was
published and Total Cites (TC) received in the first two years after publication.

Following the format and focus of the work of Hunter and colleagues (2009), our research attempts to
answer questions such as the following (with answers provided in parentheses).

        Do foreign-born scientists perform at a higher level than scientists who have never experienced
        mobility? (Yes)

        Do returnees, i.e. nationals who have studied and/or worked abroad and subsequently returned
        home, perform at a higher level than home-grown nationals who have not been abroad? (Yes)

        Do returnees perform at a higher level than foreign born scientists working in the country?
        (The answer depends upon measure of performance).

        Do scientists who return after a period of mobility to their country of origin perform at a lower
        level than those who remain outside the country of origin? (No, although exceptions do exist).

        Do these patterns hold for the U.S? (Not always).

Given the cross-sectional nature of data, we are not able to infer causality; that is, we cannot tell
whether our results imply that a better scientific base attracts and retains the best and brightest


                                                      4
internationally, or whether scientists perform better after they are exposed to a stronger scientific base,
or both. But the results suggest that mobility is a plus for destination countries and that promoting
international experiences can have positive returns for a country. Before presenting the results in
section 5, we turn first to a discussion of the mobility of scientists in section 2, then present reasons as
to why a relationship may exist between mobility and performance in section 3 and follow that with a
discussion of the GlobSci survey and data in section 4.


    2. The mobility of scientists

Scientists are a highly mobile class of skilled workers. Many scientists move for the prospect of better
working opportunities and larger compensation to their skills (Hunter, Oswald, & Charlton, 2009). But
scientists are not only motivated by salary. Scientists are known to respond to incentives in the form of
recognition, intellectual curiosity and the freedom to perform research (Stephan & Levin, 1992;
Sauermann & Roach, 2010). Selection in science is based in part on going to countries where one has
the opportunity to be productive in terms of the resources and support for research. Many Argentinean
scientists, for example, left the country after the financial crisis of 2002, when the devaluation of the
currency made it impossible for them to even afford to attend international conferences (Dalton, 2008).
Areas of expertise in science are also highly specialized, or require dedicated laboratories and special
equipment that exists in very few settings (Stephan P. , 2012). Science is also more often than not a
team effort. Mobility of scientists often occurs in order to begin or continue working with a network of
scientists or pre-existing collaborators (Harvey, 2008). Because of either the specialties or the talents of
others, a scientist may perform at a higher level in one setting rather than in another and this can
influence migration decision (Gangiuli, 2012).

Among other reasons given for moving is the pursuit of an international lifestyle (Richardson &
McKenna, 2003). Although family ties are known to be less important in driving the mobility of skilled
as opposed to unskilled workers (Beine, Docquier , & Ozden, 2011) within the population of scientists
family ties play a role in motivating return (Franzoni, Scellato, & Stephan, 2012). Migration waves have
also been driven by political or social reasons. Consider, for example, the migration of German and
Austrian scientists of Jewish origin in the first half of the last Century (Waldinger, 2010) or at the
massive immigration of Soviet mathematicians to the US after 1992 (Borjas & Doran, 2012; Gangiuli,
2012).

Demand also plays a large role in migration decisions. In many countries academic job markets are
strongly regulated, recruiting and promotion systems change only rarely and by acts of law (Franzoni,



                                                      5
Scellato, & Stephan, 2011). Some destination countries are also more or less willing to accept inward
migration. For example, immigration policies are extremely restrictive in Japan for virtually any type of
migrant. By way of contrast, several countries have policies for attracting high-skilled migrants that
include easier visa procedures, fiscal benefits and special recruiting packages. Canada, for example, has
an immigration system that assigns permits based on a point system. Skilled workers have a special visa
program (the Federal Skilled Workers Visa), under which a PhD entitles the applicant to 25 points out
of a total of 100, making it extremely likely that a visa will be granted. A similar system exists in
Australia, where a PhD degree currently entitles the recipient to 20 points.

Other countries are less focused on attracting immigrants and more focused on convincing nationals
who have migrated abroad to return to the motherland. India is discussing the creation of foreign-
based contact points to encourage the recruitment of Indian scientists working abroad. Spain has an
especially strong and large return policy for academics called “Ramón y Cajal”. Between 2001 to 2010
the program supported 2500 postdoc positions for Spanish researchers who had worked abroad for at
least two years (Adjunar, 2012). In a country of the size of Spain these numbers amount to
approximately 4% of the entire population of academics.


    3. Performance of the mobile scientists

In a context of large differentials in inward and outward migration, a question of considerable
importance is whether mobile scientists are disproportionately distributed among the most talented.
The standard theory of migration is based on Roy’s selection model that posits workers make migration
decisions based on the salary premium they would receive if they move, and on the cost of relocation
(Roy, 1951). Training decisions, too, are sustained by the prospect of a skill-enhancement premium
(Sjaastad, 1962), causing international students flows. With premium salaries that vary by level of skills
and positive costs of relocation, provided skills are portable across countries (a condition likely satisfied
in the academic workforce) sorting in out-migration will occur (Borjas, 1994; Grogger & Hanson, 2011).

When the source and destination country have dissimilar levels of earnings for a certain level of skill
(small correlation of earning/skill level), high-skill people will migrate from the low to the high
remuneration country. For example, wealthier countries, which offer the highest salary premium, would
attract a greater proportion of highly talented individuals from lower-paying countries (Gibson &
McKenzie, 2012). When the source and destination country have similar levels of return to skills, which
may occur in some cases of mobility between wealthy countries, positive skill-selection will still occur
toward those destination countries with a greater dispersion of return to skill (i.e. inequality ensures less



                                                      6
redistribution, hence relatively higher earnings to the higher-skilled). Conversely, negative skill-selection
will occur toward destination countries that have less dispersion of return to skills (i.e. less inequality or
more redistribution, means relatively higher earnings to the lower-skilled) (Grogger & Hanson, 2011).
Return migration is seen as further accentuating the initial selection. Thus, if the best were those to
leave in the first place, returnees will be the worst of the best, or conversely would be the best of the
worst, in case the out-migrating were adversely selected in the first place.

Amid large salary differentials across countries, positive selection should result in observing a
correlation of migration and performance, with the best-performing being disproportionately
distributed among the internationally-mobile. It is less clear if a correlation should exist between
performance and return and which direction it should go.

There are other reasons in addition to selection as to why mobility may be associated with performance.
For example, there are private and collective gains in the form of spillovers from brain circulation
(Saxenian, 2005). Knowledge that is highly tacit or otherwise difficult to circulate travels fasters when
scientists are geographically mobile. Mobility of people facilitates mobility of knowledge and more
knowledge from distant sources is associated with greater idea generation and creative attainments
(Hargadon & Sutton, 1997; Fleming, 2001). It is possible that the advantages from richer knowledge
sets accrue primarily to migrants who sit in positions of arbitrage. Physical mobility is also helpful in
establishing effective networks. In a prior paper, we show that immigrants have a higher propensity to
establish international links, collaborate with coauthors in a larger number of countries and perform at
a higher level than international teams comprised of non-mobile scientists (Scellato, Franzoni, &
Stephan, 2012).

But an academic environment that exposes scientists to richer knowledge sets may benefit the non-
mobile host community. Likewise, it may benefit the native communities from which the mobile
scientists have out-migrated. For example, long-distance collaborations between Indians abroad and
their native communities in the motherland have been found to promote knowledge transfer from the
host country to the country of origin (Agrawal, Kapur, McHale, & Oettl, 2011). They have also been
found to enhance formal collaboration networks (Gangiuli, 2012), functioning as a balancing force that
tends to level-off the performance of movers and stayers.




                                                      7
    4. Sample and data


    4.1       The GlobSci survey

We surveyed active researchers in the four scientific disciplines of biology, chemistry, earth and
environmental sciences, and materials science during the period February-June 2011. In order to
construct the sample, we selected all journals classified by ISI as belonging to one of the four
disciplinary fields and sorted them by Impact Factor (IF) for all subfields in each of the four
disciplines.1 We then randomly picked a selection of four journals from each quartile of the Impact
Factor distribution in each subfield of the four disciplines, thus obtaining four samples of journals by
field stratified by Impact Factor. In aggregate, this process identified approximately 30% of all journals
published in the four fields.

Starting from these four lists of journals, we then downloaded the full record of all scientific articles
published therein in 2009. From the affiliation information of the articles, we retrieved the email
address of the corresponding authors.2 In case of multiple corresponding authors for a single article, we
picked the first name in the list. We randomly selected one record in the case of corresponding authors
appearing repeatedly in the corresponding author list.

In order to build country panels, we coded these records, based on the final digits of the domain of the
email address (e.g. “.au” for Australia; “.be” for Belgium, etc.). We identified US authors by those
having “.edu” in the address, thereby restricting the US sample to academic researchers.

We prepared 16 country panels. Surveyed countries are: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark,
France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom,
United States. This procedure produced a sample of 47,304 unique email addresses of scientists
divided in 16 country panels (Table 1). Country panel sizes vary considerably, reflecting by construction
the size of the country research-active population. The largest panel was the US, with 14059
observations; the smallest was Denmark with 513.




1IF was taken from the latest available release of the Journal Citation Report of Thomson-Web of Science®.
2The four fields were chosen in part because 95 percent or more of all articles in these disciplines contain an email address
for the corresponding author. More specifically, in 2009 the estimated number of records that did not report email address
for corresponding author was 0.9% in biology, 3.6% in chemistry, 2.9% in earth and environmental sciences and 4.5% in
materials science.




                                                              8
China was initially included in the survey. However, a low response rate of less than 5 percent for a
test sample of Chinese addresses suggested that respondents were either not receiving the invitation or
had problems responding to the invitation. We thus decided not to survey researchers based in China.

Panelists were invited to answer by email. Invitations were sent, one country at a time, during the
spring and early summer of 2011 and each panelist was invited a maximum of three times. The survey
was initially developed in English and then translated into six other languages: French, German, Italian,
Japanese, Portuguese and Spanish. The online questionnaire was developed through the platform
Qualtrics® that supports multiple languages. Each country survey and the respective invitation email
was administered in its primary language (two languages in the case of Canada). The platform
automatically deployed the language in which the recipient had set her browser, and let the respondent
switch from one language to another at any point while filling-out the questionnaire.

Table 1 reports a summary of the 19183 answers by country. Country responses reflect both the size of
the underlying research-active population of scientists as well as variations in response rates across
countries. The largest number of responses is for the US (5165 answers) and the smallest is Denmark
(227). The overall response rate is 40.6 percent; the high is 69.0 percent for Italy, the low is 30.3
percent for Germany; 11 countries have a response rate of between 35.0 percent and 45.0 percent.
Answers are further divided into complete answers and partial (usable) answers (answers from
respondents who began the survey, but dropped-out before reaching the last question). The total
dropout rate was 5 percent. The response rate, conditional on the respondent completing the survey, is
35.6 percent. Reported response rates do not take into account undelivered invitations due to such
things as incorrect email address, retirement or death and consequently underestimate the response
rate.3

                                                               [Table 1 about here]


      4.2         Sample

For the purpose of this analysis, we selected the 15672 respondents who were working at universities,
medical schools and government research agencies and residing in one of the 16 core countries at the
time the survey was administered4. From these, we further drop 56 observations because the country of
residency at 18 years of age was not known, 32 observations because foreign international experience

3 Walsh, Cohen, and Cho (2007) find in a sample of US scientists that undelivered emails accounted for approximately 3.2 percent. Roach & Sauermann (2010) find
that undelivered emails accounted for 6.3 percent in a sample of junior US scientists.
4 Government research agencies were not sampled in the US.




                                                                               9
was not known or incomplete. We dropped an additional 163 observations of people who stated that
they were in a country different from that of origin at the time the survey was administered but in a
different question stated that they had no international experience. These answers could either be from
people on temporary leave at the time the survey was administered or from people who gave
inconsistent replies. The final sample is thus composed of 15421 observations, unevenly split among
the 16 countries.

Recall that during panel construction we randomly drew an equal proportion of source journals from
each quartile of Impact Factor of the subfield category of the journals. Our panelists were therefore
drawn from authors of articles in all levels of journal Impact Factor in equal proportions, short of any
differences that might exist in the average size of the journals belonging to each group. In other words,
the random pick of journals should mean that authors had equal probability of being included in our
panel had they published an article in a journal with a very good, medium-high, medium-low or low
Impact Factor. Similarly, if they published in more than one quartile, the probability that they would be
chosen in one or another quartile would be random and in general not correlated to their prior
international experience.

Random pick means that panelists would be a fair representation of the population, short of a random
noise. Concerning the degree to which the sample of respondents is representative of the panel and
consequently of the underlying populations, we perform a number of tests. These are reported in
Section A1 of the Appendix and show, at worst, very modest evidence of bias. Moreover, to the extent
that bias exists, the final data set may slightly over-represent corresponding authors of papers appearing
in higher Impact Factor journals.

The international coverage of our survey has the advantage of providing information not only on the
share of the foreign-born currently in a country, but also on the share of “native” scientists who
currently live abroad in one of the other 15 core countries. Country of origin of the respondent was
determined by asking in which country the person was living at the age of 18. We prefer this definition
to country of birth, because we are interested in mobility decisions occurring for reasons of work or
study of the respondents. Relocation events occurring before the age of 18 likely reflect parental
decisions rather than choices of the respondent. Although we do not take country of birth as a
reference, for simplicity, in the following description respondents residing in the same country as they
did at age 18 are referred to as “natives;” those residing in a different country than where they lived at
age 18 are referred to as “foreign born.” Of the 15421 respondents, 13718 (89%) indicated an origin in
one of the 16 core countries; the origin of the remaining 1703 was a non-core country.



                                                    10
Our survey is important because it is at present the largest and most successful effort to collect
comparable data on the mobility of the academic workforce in a large number of countries. While
micro-level data are available for migrants to the OECD countries, they are not specific to the
academic workforce (Docquier & Rapoport, 2012). For the academic workforce, the sources of data
until now have been very limited. Among these, three studies are worth noting. The first is a survey of
Career of Doctorate Holders (known as CDH), conducted in seven countries by the OECD in
collaboration with Eurostat and the UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS) (Auriol, 2007). The second
(Ateş, Holländer, Koltcheva, Krstić, & Parada, 2010) is a pilot study of Eurostat in all domains of
science and humanities, called “The Eurodoc Survey I of doctoral candidates” conducted in 2008-2009
in twelve European countries (Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Finland, France, Germany, the Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain and Sweden). The third is a pilot study of EU-US mobility designed
to be used in combination with the Eurostat project (IdeaConsult, 2010). Unfortunately, low response
rates in the latter two studies (considerably below 10%) make these data unreliable for research
purposes.




    5. Performance of the internationally mobile

Based on the answers to the GlobSci survey, we partition the academic workforce of each of 16
countries into three statuses based on international background:

    1)      NATIVE NOT-MOBILE: natives of a country who declared no prior experience of work
            or study abroad at the time the survey was administered
    2)      RETURNEE: natives of a country who declared a prior experience of work or study abroad
            and were residing in country of origin at the time the survey was administered
    3)      FOREIGN BORN: immigrant scientists whose country of origin differs from the country
            in which they were working or studying at the time the survey was administered.

Status number one corresponds to non-mobile academics, trained in their country of origin, who have
never taken a position outside their country. Categories two and three correspond to the
internationally-mobile academics. These individuals share at least one experience of study or work away
from their country of origin. The two groups differ, however, with respect to their current location.
Individuals in group two have subsequently returned home; individuals in group three are either still



                                                    11
mobile or have permanently resettled away from their country of origin. Groups one and two
combined represent the share of domestic scientists within the academic workforce of a core country.

Four types of international experience qualify for the status of internationally mobile: First, having an
experience of non-PhD study outside the origin country (such as a BA, MA, laurea or equivalent);
second, having either received a PhD degree or currently being enrolled in a PhD program (or
doctorate education or equivalent) outside the country of origin; third, having taken a postdoc
appointment or currently holding a postdoc position outside the country of origin; and fourth, having
taken a job or currently holding a job outside the country of origin. For reasons of methodological
conservativeness, stays of less than one year are not classified as an international experience.5

Here we compare the performance of the foreign born, returnees and native non-mobile researchers.
Figure 1 shows the mean citation values for the survey article by field for the three groups. Figure 2
shows the mean IF. We see that regardless of field, mean citations of the foreign born are higher than
those of native non-mobile researchers and also higher than returnees, although the differential is not
usually as great and not statistically significant. In terms of IF, the sample paper for the foreign born
outperforms that of native non-mobile and usually outperforms that of returnees.

Figure 1 Mean total citations by STATUS and by subject




                                                                                        +Weighted by probability.




5
  Visiting periods of at least one year, such as PhD sandwich, which are quite common across EU member countries, and
sabbaticals were coded and controlled for separately.
Figure 2 Mean Impact Factor by STATUS and by subject




                                                                                    +Weighted by probability.




Although these first results are suggestive, they control for no other characteristics that are related to
performance. Thus, we resort to multivariate analyses to control for potentially confounding factors.

Our model for investigating the performance of the foreign-born and returnees compared to native
non-mobile scientists takes the following general specification:

                                          i =Xi + Ai+ Ii+ i
where:

i is a performance indicator (either IF or TC)

Xi is a vector of individual characteristics such as age (entered in a quadratic form), gender, trainee
status, location (country were currently working);
Ai is a vector of article characteristics that likely affect the rate of citation or visibility for reasons such
as number of authors, international collaboration, interdisciplinary nature of the research or the article
being in an emerging research topic6;

Ii is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the scientists has a prior international mobility
experience (i.e. is either foreign-born or a returnee, depending on the model) or zero if the scientist is a
native of the country with no prior international mobility.

 is a coefficient that captures the rate at which the international experience enhances performance
relative to non-mobile scientists (in some models we will have split variables for international mobility
and distinct s);

are vectors of coefficient estimates and i is the error term.

We also initially controlled for prior visiting periods abroad, but the coefficient was not significant in
any of the estimates and was omitted in the final estimations presented here.

Summary statistics for all variables used in the paper are provided in Table 4.

                                                   [Table 4 about here]

The results of the estimates of the general model are reported in Table 5. The left panel of the table
shows results of the OLS estimate of the model in which the dependent variable of performance is the
IF. The right panel shows results of the Negative Binomial estimate of the model in which the
dependent variable of performance is the measure of TC. The performances of mobile individuals –
both returnees and foreign born-- are estimated against the baseline of the performance of domestic
scientists who were never mobile. All models control for field and country. All models were also
estimated using probability weights. Results are consistent with those shown in Table 5 and are
reported in the Appendix. In both cases, we computed heteroschedasticity-robust standard errors. The
robustness of the estimates is discussed in section 6.

Regardless of which performance indicator is chosen, the estimates are largely consistent with the
univariate analyses, pointing to positive performance differentials of scholars with either type of
mobility experience. Moreover, in both instances, returnees have a performance advantage over those

6
  The latter three controls were included as dummy variables based on self-reported characteristics of the article.
Characteristics were rated on a 1-5 scale and the variables were set to 1 if the rating was grater or equal to 4: zero if lower
than 4.




                                                               14
who are foreign born; the difference is significant (at the 1 percent level) in the case of the Impact
Factor measure of performance. This suggests that positive selection is not at work in determining who
remains outside the country. This is supported by the finding, reported in the Appendix, that for most
countries the performance of returnees is no different than that of compatriots who remain abroad
after controlling for other effects. Exceptions, however, exist, as noted there. In particular, we find
that returnees to India, Brazil, and Italy perform at a lower level compared to their fellow natives who
have remained abroad.

In a second specification (Model 2, Table 5), we control separately for natives who did not study or
hold working positions abroad, but nonetheless had been abroad for visiting periods of at least 12
months (e.g. sabbaticals). We find the correlation of visiting periods and IF to be negative and
significant at the 5% confidence level and virtually non-existent and not significant in terms of TCs.

                                                    [Table 5 about here]


5.1        Performance of the foreign born

We continue our investigation, by focusing on the performance of the foreign born. We exclude the
potentially confounding effect of having returnees in the baseline and run the estimates on 10719
observations.

Table 6 reports the results of two sets of estimates. The left panel has as the dependent variable the IF
and the right panel has TCs as the dependent variable. As before, we treat IF estimations with standard
OLS and TCs with negative binomial.

On average the superior performance of the foreign born residing in a country compared to natives of
the same country who did not experience mobility is confirmed. Note that the estimates are net of
location effects, with the baseline being the country where the current job is located. They are also net
of controlling for the H-index of the country of origin, included here to capture average differentials in
the quality of basic and secondary education that the scientist received (Model 1). The results indicate
that, holding all else equal, the average foreign-born scientist outperforms a homegrown scientist by
about 0.84 in IF (left panel) and by as much as 2.29 TCs (right panel).7



7
    The TC effect is calculated for changes in the conditional mean E(yi|Xi) of the dependent variable yi when the j-th
                                                                           |
independent variable xij changes from 0 to 1, based on the formula                       .




                                                               15
When we re-estimate the model using only the US observations (3772), the foreign-born performance
premium is confirmed.8

                                                [Table 6 about here]

Some of the foreign-born entered the country during graduate or PhD studies. Others entered after
having completed their tertiary education to take a postdoc or job position. Those who entered during
higher education should in principle be more homogeneous to the non-mobile natives, having shared
to a greater extent the same academic environment beginning with the training years. To account for
this potential source of variation, we split the foreign born based on the career stage at time of entry to
the current country. The positive and significant effect holds, regardless of the stage of entry (Model 2),
suggesting that foreign born outperform natives even when they were educated in the same country of
the non-mobile natives. The performance premium varies by the stage of entry, ranging between a plus
0.66 in IF and plus 1.86 TCs for the average foreign born who entered during training to a plus 0.91 of
IF score and 2.57 TCs for the average foreign born who entered after training. This effect holds
invariant even after controlling for individuals who visited more than one country for postdoc training
and job experience (results omitted for brevity).

In sum, foreign-born scientists on average show superior performance than natives who were never
mobile. Moreover, the performance premium exists even after controlling for country of origin and is
stronger for people who entered after training than for those who entered during training, although
positive in both cases.


5.2      Performance of returnees

We move on to consider how the performance of returnees compares to that of fellow natives who
have not been mobile. As stated above, the standard selection model postulates that returnees would be
the worst of the best who migrated if initial outward migration was composed of positively-selected
scholars (Borjas & Bratsberg, 1996).9 We also noted that mobility might be associated with greater skills



8 Omitted for brevity, but available upon request from the authors.
9
  In the Appendix we show that we find no compelling evidence of negative selection regarding return, when comparing
natives with an experience of international mobility who have subsequently returned to natives who have remained abroad.
In the simple mean-comparisons we see that returnees to India, Brazil and Italy perform at a lower level compared to their
fellow natives who have remained abroad. However, this correlation does not hold for other countries. We find no
significant difference between returnees and those who remained abroad after we control for the effect of current country
and other potentially confounding factors when countries are pooled (see Appendix A-2).




                                                            16
that the scientist acquired while training or working in a richer environment (Sjaastad, 1962) as well as
with a broader and better network established while abroad (Scellato, Franzoni, & Stephan, 2012).

We exclude from the model the foreign born and include in the model only the 11891 natives of the
sixteen countries who are currently based in their country of origin. Table 7 reports the results of step-
wise estimates for IF (left panel) and TCs (right panel).

The estimates of Model (1) confirm that, on average, returnees outperform natives with no prior
experience of international mobility. The difference is sizable: holding all other things equal, returnees
have on average a 0.63 higher IF than natives with no prior mobility and 1.69 higher TCs.

We noticed earlier in the univariate tests (Table 3) that the US exhibited a different pattern than the
other countries, with no apparent difference in the average performance between returnees and non-
mobile natives. When we run Model (1) for only the 2597 US observations, we find that this result
holds for the IF measure of performance. However, we find that on average US returnees perform at a
significantly higher level of TC than natives.10

In Model (2) we split the returnees into two groups: those who had a prior international experience in a
country with a stronger science base than their country of origin and those who had a prior
international experience in a country with a weaker science base than their country of origin. To
measure movement we use the country ranking based on the country H-Index11. In case of multiple
moves, we choose the highest ranked among the destination countries. As expected, the great majority
(72.4%) of returnees was mobile towards countries with a better H-Index. However, both upward and
downward mobility are associated with a positive performance differential. Based on the estimates of
Model (2), returnees from a country with a stronger science base produce papers with a 0.81 larger IF.
Mobility downwards is associated with a 0.26 larger IF. The two coefficients are statistically different
from one another (Prob. F=0.000). Differentials in TCs (1.8 more citations for upward mobility and 1.6
for downward) are also found but are not statistically different from one another (Prob. Chi2=0.487).
Note that in all models we control for the incidence of internationally-coauthored papers. In sum, the
results suggest that mobility of either kind is positively associated with performance.

                                               [Table 7 about here]


10The estimates are omitted in the interest of brevity but are available upon request from the authors.
11
  H-Index is the number of papers that received as a minimum an equal number of citations. We use H-Index by country
and by subject category, computed for all Scopus publications during the interval 1996-2010 by the Scimago Journal and
Country Rank. Retrieved from http://www.scimagojr.com on April 18, 2012.




                                                          17
We move on to investigate whether the observed superior performance of returnees is associated with
any international experience, or if it is exclusively the experience of work or education abroad that
correlates to a performance differential. The literature on the mobility of skilled-human capital
highlights that workers tend to move abroad in anticipation of a salary premium exceeding the cost of
mobility. If salary is a function of personal skill-levels, movers are positively selected from their country
of origin. In our case this implies that those who move to take job positions are positively selected
among the top achievers in their country of origin. To the extent that PhD study is supported with
financial assistance, we should also observe a similar positive selection. We know, however, that the
amount of financial support available varies by country and largely dependent on government budgets
(Bound, Turner, & Walsh, 2009), and quite inelastic to actual demand in a given year. As a result, we
expect the positive selection effect to be less evident for those who leave for a PhD than for those who
leave for work. In the extreme case, i.e. for bachelor and master degrees, where it is typically the
student who pays to receive an education, we would expect the selection effect to be virtually
nonexistent.

We examine these effects in Model (3) of Table 7, where dummy variables have been included which
take the value of one depending upon whether the returnee had a mobility experience for pre-doctoral
studies (MA_BA), doctoral studies (phd), postdoctoral study (post-doc) or job positions (job). Results
indicate quite clearly that pre-doctoral education (Bachelor & Master or PhD) abroad is not associated
with superior performance after returning. The same is true for the natives who went abroad to take a
PhD or take a job. The superior performance effect holds only for returnees who went abroad to take a
postdoc position. Although this result is not conclusive, it suggests ex-ante selection effect in explaining
the differentials in performance. This conclusion is consistent with the findings in Model (4). Here, we
have substituted the dummy-variables for the different types of experience abroad with variables that
take a value of zero if the person did not move and take the value of the H-index of the country where
the respondent experienced mobility. This model is meant to control for differentials in the strength of
the science base of the destination country. Experience of a postdoc and job here are grouped into a
single variable (work_quality) because we do not have the information on destination country of postdoc
separately from that of job. In sum, after controlling for the relative strength of the country where the
mobility experience occurred, it is only mobility for reasons of work (and we infer for reasons of a
postdoc) that is associated with superior performance differentials of the returnees, compared with the
non-mobile natives.

In sum, our data are consistent with the existence of long-term differentials in the performance of the
natives with prior mobility experiences from the performance of natives without international



                                                     18
experience, although this is not the case in the United States. In general, the performance edge accrues
to those who did a postdoc abroad. While the effect is consistent with a selection effect, it may also be
due to the networks that returnees build while abroad and are able to maintain upon their return.


    6. Robustness checks

As highlighted in the data section, the surveys were administered separately in the 16 countries.
Consistently, the rate of response varies by country. Thus, when the data are pooled together to
estimate the models, response rate differentials result in over-weighting the answers from scientists in
countries whose response rate is above the average (Australia, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Italy, Spain)
and under-weighting the answers from scientists in countries whose response rate is below the average
(Belgium, Germany, India, Japan, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, US). To neutralize this
potential source of bias, all models were re-estimated by including probability weights. All results hold;
see the Appendix.

Information on age and gender were asked at the end of the questionnaire. As a result, information on
these variables is less complete than information on past mobility. Collectively, there are 988 responses
for which the information of age or gender is missing, largely because the respondents dropped out
before completing the survey. Given that gender and age are typically important control variables
when exploring scholarly performance and have thus been included in our estimates, the missing items
result in dropping observation when we run the multivariate estimates. Although we have shown in
Section A1 of the Appendix that the evidence of potential biases caused by dropouts is very limited,
nonetheless, the units dropped because of incomplete information in the control variables could
potentially bias the estimates. In order to check the robustness of our estimates to these dropped
observations, we imputed the age and gender of the respondent and re-estimate the models with the
imputed values, using the multiple imputation method (Rubin, 1987) with 5 imputations for each
variable with missing instances. The imputation models include both variables of observation (country,
and foreign experience of higher education, PhD, postdoc, job and experience of visiting abroad) and
auxiliary variables from our dataset (job position/tenured-untenured, affiliation type, existence of
secondary affiliations, field of research). They also include probability weights. The imputation model
generates imputed variables for age and gender in all but 6 cases. The variable of squared-age is
produced as a passive imputation of age. Overall the imputation procedure yields a sample of 15415
from a possible 15421 observations. Model estimates that take into account observations with imputed
values for gender, age and age-square are presented in the Appendix. The main findings remain after
including these observations.


                                                    19
    7. Discussion and conclusion

We find compelling and consistent evidence that mobile individuals perform at a higher level than non-
mobile individuals, using several definitions of mobility and two measures of performance. These
results are consistent with mobility being positively correlated with selection. They are, however, also
consistent with treatment effects in the sense that mobility can enhance networks and lead individuals
to work in environments that enhance their performance. The cross section nature of our data does
not permit us to differentiate between the two types of explanations.

Our results suggest that on average foreign-born have a performance premium over natives who were
not mobile of about 0.84 as measured by the Impact Factor of the survey article and 2.29 as measured
by the total citations that the survey article received. The positive foreign-born premium holds for both
those who were trained away from the host country but immigrate for a job as well as for those who
were trained in the same country of the non-mobile natives.

We also find that domestic scientists who studied or worked abroad and subsequently return to work
and live in their country of origin (the returnees) perform at a higher level than natives who were not
mobile. Returnees have on average 0.63 higher IF than natives with no prior mobility and 1.69 higher
TCs. The empirical results also suggest that not all mobility experiences are equal. To be more specific,
the mobility experience that is systematically associated with a performance premium is that of a
postdoc; other types of mobility experience are uncorrelated with the performance of returnees. An
exception is the US, where returnees perform in general at the same level as natives who were not
mobile. Experience of visiting alone is not a substitute for other types of mobility and is never
associated with a performance premium.

When returnees are compared to fellow nationals who remained abroad, we find little evidence that
they perform less well. Exceptions are returnees to India, Brazil and Italy. Regardless of country, we do,
however, find evidence of decay in the number of citations received after one returns. The decay is
modest and amounts to receiving approximately one fewer citations in the two years between
publication and measurement for scientists who have been back in their native country for ten years.


References



Adjunar, I. (2012). La movilidad internacional de los investigadores y sus redes científicas de colaboración: dos
       dinámicas entrelazadas. Un estudio desde la Economía del Conocimiento. PhD Thesis. Madrid:
       Universidad Rey Juan Carlos.


                                                            20
Agrawal, A., Kapur, D., McHale, J., & Oettl, A. (2011). Brain drain or brain bank? The impact of skilled
      emigration on poor-country innovation. Journal of Urban Economics, 69, 43-55.

Ateş, G., Holländer, K., Koltcheva, N., Krstić, S., & Parada, F. (2010). The First Eurodoc Survey on
        Doctoral Candidates in Twelve European Countries. The European Council of Doctoral Candidates
        and Junior Researchers. Brussels: Eurodoc.
Auriol, L. (2007). Labor Market Characteristics and International Mobility of Doctorate Holders: Results for Seven
        Countries. OECD, STI Working Paper. Paris: OECD.
Beine, M., Docquier , F., & Ozden, C. (2011). Diasporas. Journal of Development Economics, 95, 30–41.
Borjas, G. J. (1994). The Economics of Immigration. Journal of Economic Literature, 32(4), 1667-1717.
Borjas, G. J., & Bratsberg, B. (1996). Who Leaves? The Outmigration of the Foreign-Born. The Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 78(1), 165-176.
Borjas, G. J., & Doran, K. B. (2012). The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Productivity of American
        Mathematicians. Cambridge: NBER.
Bound, J., Turner, S., & Walsh, P. (2009). INTERNATIONALIZATION OF U.S. DOCTORATE
       EDUCATION. NBER. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Dalton, R. (2008). Argentina: The come back. Nature, 456, 41-442.
Docquier, F., & Rapoport, H. (2012). Globalization, Brain Drain,and Development. Journal of Economic
      Literature, 681–730.
Fleming, L. (2001). Recombinant Uncertainty in Technological Search. Management Science, 47(1), 117–
       132.
Franzoni, C., Scellato, G., & Stephan, P. (2011). Changing Incentives to Publish. Science, 333(6043), 702-
      703.
Franzoni, C., Scellato, G., & Stephan, P. (2012). Foreign Born Scientists: Mobility Patterns for Sixteen Countries.
      Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Gangiuli, I. (2012). Location and Scientific Productivity: Evidence from the Soviet “Brain Drain”. Boston, MA:
       working paper.
Gibson, j., & McKenzie, D. (2012). Eight Questions about Brain Drain. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
      25(3), 107–28.
Gibson, J., & McKenzie, D. (2012, May). The Economic Consequences of 'Brain Drain' of the Best
      and Brightest: Microeconomic Evidence from Five Countries. The Economic Journal, 122, 339–
      375.
Grogger, J., & Hanson, G. H. (2011). Income maximization and the selection and sorting of
      international migrants. Journal of Development Economics, 95, 42–57.
Hargadon, A., & Sutton, R. (1997). Technology Brokering and Innovation in a Product Development
      Firm. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(4), 716-749
Harvey, W. S. (2008). Brain Circulation? British and Indian scientists in Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
       Asian Population Studies, 4(3), 293-309.



                                                        21
Hunter, R. S., Oswald , A. J., & Charlton, B. G. (2009). The Elite Brain Drain. The Economic Journal, 119,
       F231–F251.
IdeaConsult. (2010). Study on mobility patterns and career paths of EU researchers. FINAL TECHNICAL
      REPORT 3: Extra-EU mobility pilot study. Brussels: MORE.
Kahn, S., & MacGarvie, M. J. (2010). How Important is U.S. Location for Research in Science? mimeo.
Overpeck, J. T., Meehl, G. A., Bony, S., & Easterling, D. R. (2011, February 11). Climate Data
      Challenges in the 21st Century. Science, 331(6018), 700-702.
Richardson, J., & McKenna, S. (2003). International Experience and Academic Career. What Do
       Academics Have to say? Personnel Review, 32(6), 774-795.
Roach, M., & Sauermann, H. (2010). A taste for science? PhD scientists’ academic orientation and self-
       selection into research careers in industry. Research Policy, 422–434.
Roy, A. D. (1951, June). Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings. Oxford Economics Papers, 3,
       135-146.
Rubin, D. B. (1987). Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. New York: Wiley.
Sauermann, H., & Roach, M. (2010). A Taste for Science? PhD Scientists’ Academic Orientation and
      Self-Selection into Research Careers in Industry. Research Policy, 39(3), 422-434.
Saxenian, A. (2005). From Brain Drain to Brain Circulation: Transnational Communities and Regional
       Upgrading in India and China. Studies in Comparative International Development , 40(2), 35-61.
Scellato, G., Franzoni, C., & Stephan, P. (2012). Mobile Scientists and International Networks:
        Evidence From Globsci. Paper presented at the Fall APPAM Research Conference, November
        8, Baltimore.
Sjaastad, L. A. (1962). The Costs and Returns of Human Migration. Journal of Political Economy, 70(5),
        80-93.
Stephan , P. E., & Levin, S. G. (1992). Striking the mother lode in science : the importance of age, place, and time.
       Oxford University Press.
Stephan, P. (2012). How Economics Shapes Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Waldinger, F. (2010). Peer Effects in Science: Evidence from the Dismissal of Scientists in Nazi
       Germany. Review of Economic Studies, 79(2), 838-861.
Walsh, J. P., Cohen, W. M., & Cho, C. (2007). Where excludability matters: Material versus intellectual
       property in academic biomedical research. Research Policy, 1184–1203.
Weinberg, B. A. (2011). Developing science: Scientific performance and brain drains in the developing
      world. Journal of Development Economics, 95, 95-104.




                                                          22
TABLES
Table 1 Response rate by country12
                                                                                      TOTAL             COMPLETE
                                     TOTAL         OF WHICH         OF WHICH
                      PANELS                                                         RESPONSE           RESPONSE
                                    ANSWERS        COMPLETE         DROPOUT
                                                                                       RATE               RATE
Australia               1,571           676              610              66            43.0%              38.8%
Belgium                  706            302              244              58            42.8%              34.6%
Brazil                  1,537           762              692              70            49.6%              45.0%
Canada                  2,455          1,020             897             123            41.5%              36.5%
Denmark                  513            227              208              19            44.2%              40.5%
France                  3,839          1,618            1,367            251            42.1%              35.6%
Germany                 4,380          1,326            1,147            179            30.3%              26.2%
India                   1,380           627              484             143            45.4%              35.1%
Italy                   2,779          1,917            1,759            158            69.0%              63.3%
Japan                   5,250          1,860            1,678            182            35.4%              32.0%
Netherlands             1,036           391              345              46            37.7%              33.3%
Spain                   2,303          1,228            1,080            148            53.3%              46.9%
Sweden                   882            353              301              52            40.0%              34.1%
Switzerland              919            356              320              36            38.7%              34.8%
UK                      3,695          1,355            1,183            172            36.7%              32.0%
U.S.                   14,059          5,165            4,512            653            36.7%              32.1%
Total                  47,304          19,183          16,827           2,356           40.6%              35.6%




12
     Respondents were both academics and non-academics. In this paper we analyze the 15421 answers from academics.




                                                           23
Table 2 Status of the academic workforce by country and by field
                                                        NATIVES NOT    RETURNEES     FOREIGN-
                                                          MOBILE                       BORN
                                                        obs.    %      obs.    %     obs.    %
Italy (1664)                                            1171   70.0     451   27.2     42    2.7
Japan (1495)                                             838   56.1     589   39.4     68    4.5
USA (4107)                                              2212   54.0     385    9.4   1510   36.6
Brazil (657)                                             323   49.1     296   45.1     38    5.8
Belgium (226)                                            111   49.1      78   34.6     37   16.3
Netherlands (289)                                        133   46.1      80   27.6     76   26.3
Denmark (181)                                             77   42.6      71   39.4     33   18.1
Germany (1017)                                           419   41.6     370   36.6    228   21.8
India (452)                                              182   40.1     267   59.1      3    0.8
UK (1065)                                                412   38.9     312   29.5    341   31.6
France (1242)                                            462   37.2     564   45.5    216   17.4
Spain (1112)                                             408   37.0     634   56.7     70    6.4
Sweden (271)                                              85   31.4      87   32.1     99   36.5
Australia (550)                                          140   25.3     172   31.2    238   43.5
Canada (810)                                             183   22.6     258   31.8    369   45.6
Switzerland (283)                                         33   11.7      88   31.3    162   57.0
BIOLOGY (4757)+                                         2177   45.4    1475   30.1   1105   24.5
CHEMISTRY (5124)+                                       2228   42.7    1919   36.7    977   20.6
EARTH & ENVIRON. (3119)+                                1662   52.5     635   19.9    822   27.5
MATERIALS (2421)+                                       1122   45.6     673   27.0    626   27.5
AVERAGE (15421)+                                        7189   46.0    4702   29.7   3530   24.3

+Weighted by probability. Sample size in parenthesis.




                                                                  24
Table 3 Mean performance by STATUS of the corresponding author
Observations: 15421 academic scientists in 16 countries
*.10≤**≤.05***≤0.01
Table 4 Summary of variables and description
Variable               Obs. Mean St.Dev. Min Max Description
impact factor (IF)     15421 3.790 3.323  0 31.253 Impact Factor of survey article
total citations (TC)   15414 9.105 14.041 0  659 Total Cites to survey article after 2-years from publication
                                                                    Natives of a country who declared no prior experience of work
NATIVE_NOT_MOB. 15421 0.466              0.499     0          1     or study abroad at the time the survey was administered
                                                                    Natives of a country with experience of work or study abroad
RETURNEE               15421 0.305       0.460     0          1     who were residing in country of origin at the time the survey was
                                                                    administered
                                                                    Immigrant scientists whose country of origin differs from the
FOREIGN_A~18           15421 0.229       0.420     0          1     country in which they were working or studying at the time the
                                                                    survey was administered.
                                                                    Natives of a country who declared no prior experience of work
visiting_only          15421 0.995       0.299     0          1     or study abroad, but declared a visiting period of at least 12
                                                                    months at the time the survey was administered
                                                                    Dummy=1 if the scientist was a returnee from a country with a
lowerH_country         15417 0.550       0.498     0          1     higher H-Index than that of origin; 0 otherwise
                                                                    Dummy=1 if the scientist was a returnee from a country with a
higherH_country        15417 0.277       0.447     0          1     lower H-Index than that of origin; 0 otherwise
                                                                    Dummy=1 if scientist reported international experience of study
BA_MA                  15421 0.074       0.262     0          1     at bachelor, master or equivalent level.
                                                                    Dummy=1 if scientist reported international experience of PhD
phd                    15421 0.172       0.377     0          1     level.
                                                                    Dummy=1 if scientist reported international experience of
post                   15421 0.440       0.496     0          1     postdoc.
job                    15421 0.286       0.452     0          1     Dummy=1 if scientist reported international experience of work.
                                                                    Interaction variable= BA_MA*H-Index of country where
MA_quality             15299 0.045       0.195     0     1.229      mobility occurred
                                                                    Interaction variable= phd *H-Index of country where mobility
phd_quality            15404 0.140       0.339     0     1.229      occurred
                                                                    Interaction variable=H-Index of country where mobility
work_quality           15133 0.444       0.513     0     1.229      occurred if post=1 or job=1; 0 otherwise
                                                                    Dummy=1 if the scientist was a foreign born who entered for
entered_work           10719 0.195       0.396     0          1     postdoc or job
                                                                    Dummy=1 if the scientist was a foreign born who entered for
entered_edu            10719 0.133       0.340     0          1     BA, MA, PhD
hindex_origin/1000     10717 0.629       0.355   0.008 1.229        H-Index of origin country/1000
                                                                    2011-year when returned to origin country after international
years_since_returned   6529    5.668     5.073     0         11     mobility for study or work (first time returned was used if
                                                                    returned was reported more than once)
                                                                    Dummy=1 if scientists reported having returned, out-migrated
back_forth             6529    0.081     0.272     0          1     and returned one or multiple times
AGE                    14611 48.114 10.840        25         88     2012-year of birth

SQ_AGE                 14611 2432.5 1104.6        625        7744   Square of AGE

female                 14541 0.237       0.426     0          1     Dummy=1 if gender is female; 0 if male
                                                                    Dummy=1 if respondent was a student at the time the survey
still_training         15421 0.025       0.157     0          1     was administered
                                                                    Dummy=1 if respondent agreed or strongly agreed to statement
emerging               15421 0.395       0.489     0          1     “this paper was in an emerging (new) area of research”; 0
                                                                    otherwise
                                                                    Dummy=1 if respondent agreed or strongly agreed to statement
interdisc              15421 0.512       0.500     0          1     “this paper was in an interdisciplinary area of research”; 0
                                                                    otherwise
                                                                    Dummy=1 if respondent indicated the survey paper included
inter_coop~d           15421 0.246       0.431     0          1     coauthors “in other institutions and different countries of
                                                                    affiliation”
n_author               15421 4.930       2.806     1         54     Number of authors of survey paper
                                                                    Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Australia      15421 0.036       0.185     0          1     Australia
                                                                    Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Belgium        15421 0.015       0.120     0          1     Belgium
                                                                    Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Brazil         15421 0.043       0.202     0          1     Brazil
                                                                    Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Canada         15421 0.053       0.223     0          1     Canada
                                                                    Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Denmark        15421 0.012       0.108     0          1     Denmark




                                                        26
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_France      15421 0.081   0.272   0        1   France
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Germany     15421 0.066   0.248   0        1   Germany
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_India       15421 0.029   0.169   0        1   India
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Italy       15421 0.108   0.310   0        1   Italy
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Japan       15421 0.097   0.296   0        1   Japan
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Netherlands 15421 0.019   0.136   0        1   Netherlands
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Spain       15421 0.072   0.259   0        1   Spain
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Sweden      15421 0.018   0.131   0        1   Sweden
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_Switzerland 15421 0.018   0.134   0        1   Switzerland
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_UK          15421 0.069   0.254   0        1   UK
                                                       Dummy=1 if scientist reported country of current job location is
COUNTRY_USA         15421 0.266   0.442   0        1   US
                                                       Dummy=1 if focal article was in journal classified by ISI in
FIELD_biology       15421 0.308   0.462   0        1   Biology
                                                       Dummy=1 if focal article was in journal classified by ISI in
FIELD_chemistry     15421 0.332   0.471   0        1   Chemistry
                                                       Dummy=1 if focal article was in journal classified by ISI in Earth
FIELD_earth&env     15421 0.202   0.402   0        1   or Environmental sciences
                                                       Dummy=1 if focal article was in journal classified by ISI in
FIELD_materials     15421 0.157   0.364   0        1   Materials science




                                              27
Table 5 Performance of the internationally mobile

Robust OLS                        -v1-         -v2-      Robust Neg.Bin.                   -v1-          -v2-
RETURNEE                      0.5700***    0.5308***     RETURNEE                      0.2023***     0.2062***
                                (0.058)       (0.061)                                    (0.025)       (0.027)
FOREIGN_AT_18                 0.2591***     0.2285***    FOREIGN_AT_18                 0.1560***     0.1590***
                                (0.077)       (0.079)                                    (0.027)       (0.028)
visiting_only                               -0.1712**    visiting_only                                  0.0171
                                              (0.070)                                                  (0.035)
AGE                      0.0564***          0.0560***    AGE                       -0.0020             -0.0019
                           (0.017)            (0.017)                              (0.008)             (0.008)
SQ_AGE                  -0.0007***         -0.0007***    SQ_AGE                    -0.0001             -0.0001
                            0.000              0.000                                0.000               0.000
female                  -0.2752***         -0.2789***    female                  -0.1026***          -0.1024***
                           (0.060)            (0.060)                              (0.023)             (0.023)
emerging                0.8769***           0.8786***    emerging                0.3298***           0.3298***
                           (0.057)            (0.057)                              (0.021)             (0.021)
interdisc                  0.0267             0.0258     interdisc                  0.0218              0.0219
                           (0.051)            (0.051)                              (0.021)             (0.021)
inter_cooperated           0.0790             0.0851     inter_cooperated         0.0582**            0.0577**
                           (0.062)            (0.063)                              (0.023)             (0.023)
still_training          -0.4150***         -0.4228***    still_training          -0.1762***          -0.1753***
                           (0.128)            (0.128)                              (0.064)             (0.064)
n_author                0.2227***           0.2225***    n_author                0.0725***           0.0725***
                           (0.015)            (0.014)                              (0.004)             (0.004)
field dummies                yes                yes      field dummies                yes                 yes
current country dummies      yes                yes      current country dummies      yes                 yes
Constant                   0.1283             0.1734     Constant                -0.1893***          1.9571***
                           (0.461)            (0.461)                              (0.017)             (0.304)
                                                         Ln_alpha                -0.1893***          -0.1893***
                                                                                   (0.017)             (0.017)

Dep. Variable                    IF             IF       Dep. Variable                    TC            TC
Observations                   14,433         14,433     Observations                    14,428        14,428
R-squared                      0.1676         0.1679
Adj. R-squared                 0.1660         0.1662
F stat                         81.452         78.662

*.10≤**≤.05***≤0.01 (Heteroschedasticity-robust st. errors in parenthesis). Baseline: NATIVES_NOT _MOBILE




                                                       28
Table 6 Performance of the FOREIGN BORN


Robust OLS                        -v1-         -v2-      Robust Neg.Bin.                   -v1-           -v2-
FOREIGN_AT_18                 0.8438***                  FOREIGN_AT_18                 0.2706***
                                (0.096)                                                  (0.036)
entered_work                                0.9124***    entered_work                                 0.2911***
                                              (0.105)                                                   (0.038)
entered_edu                                 0.6579***    entered_edu                                  0.2131***
                                              (0.124)                                                   (0.047)
hindex_origin           1.2132***          1.1395***     hindex_origin           0.2217***           0.1990***
                           (0.150)            (0.154)                              (0.052)              (0.054)
AGE                      0.0825***          0.0825***    AGE                        0.0050               0.0051
                           (0.019)            (0.019)                              (0.010)              (0.010)
SQ_AGE                  -0.0010***         -0.0010***    SQ_AGE                    -0.0001              -0.0001
                           (0.000)            (0.000)                              (0.000)              (0.000)
female                  -0.2355***         -0.2338***    female                  -0.0940***          -0.0939***
                           (0.072)            (0.072)                              (0.026)              (0.026)
emerging                0.8510***           0.8507***    emerging                0.3266***           0.3252***
                           (0.067)            (0.067)                              (0.025)              (0.025)
interdisc                  0.0860             0.0885     interdisc                  0.0367               0.0373
                           (0.061)            (0.061)                              (0.024)              (0.024)
inter_cooperated          -0.0103            -0.0139     inter_cooperated         0.0546**             0.0538*
                           (0.073)            (0.073)                              (0.028)              (0.028)
still_training            -0.2093            -0.1800     still_training           -0.1226*             -0.1145*
                           (0.135)            (0.136)                              (0.066)              (0.066)
n_author                0.2487***           0.2487***    n_author                0.0805***           0.0806***
                           (0.017)            (0.017)                              (0.004)              (0.004)
field dummies                yes                yes      field dummies                yes                  yes
current country dummies      yes                yes      current country dummies      yes                  yes
Constant                 -1.3543**          -1.3160**    Constant                1.4202***           1.4328***
                           (0.540)            (0.540)                              (0.261)              (0.261)
                                                         Ln_alpha                -0.1881***          -0.1886***
                                                                                   (0.020)              (0.020)
Dep. Variable                     IF            IF       Dep. Variable                TC                   TC
Observations                    10,046        10,046     Observations               10,043               10,043
R-squared                       0.1867        0.1871
Adj. R-sq                       0.1844        0.1847
F stat                         56.6162       54.7404

*.10≤**≤.05***≤0.01 (Heteroschedasticity-robust st. errors in parenthesis). Baseline: NATIVE_NOT_MOBILE




                                                       29
Table 7 Performance of RETURNEES
Robust OLS                  -v1-        -v2-       -v3-       -v4-    Robust Neg. Bin.            -v1-        -v2-       -v3-        -v4-
RETURNEE                  0.636***                                    RETURNEE                   0.212***
                           (0.057)                                                               (0.026)
lowerH_country                       0.270***                         lowerH_country                        0.194***
                                       (0.096)                                                               (0.043)
higherH_country                      0.808***                         higherH_country                       0.227***
                                       (0.065)                                                               (0.028)
BA_MA                                            -0.171               BA_MA                                              0.162
                                                 (0.149)                                                                (0.124)
phd                                              0.1531               phd                                               0.0891
                                                 (0.122)                                                                (0.064)
post                                             0.742***             post                                             0.209***
                                                  (0.064)                                                               (0.026)
job                                              -0.1161              job                                               -0.051
                                                 (0.100)                                                                (0.035)
MA_quality                                                  -0.236    MA_quality                                                    0.243
                                                            (0.213)                                                                (0.178)
phd_quality                                                 0.279*    phd_quality                                                   0.125
                                                            (0.167)                                                                (0.082)
work_quality                                                0.752*** work_quality                                                 0.180***
                                                             (0.065)                                                                (0.025)
AGE                       0.048*** 0.045**       0.045**    0.047** AGE                          -0.005      -0.005     -0.005     -0.004
                           (0.019) (0.019)       (0.019)    (0.019)                              (0.009)     (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.009)
SQ_AGE                -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** SQ_AGE                             -0.000      -0.000     -0.000     -0.000
                        (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)                                          (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
female                -0.335*** -0.330*** -0.328***-0.324*** female                             -0.099***-0.098*** -0.097*** -0.094***
                        (0.063) (0.063) (0.063) (0.063)                                          (0.026) (0.026) (0.026) (0.026)
emerging                  0.937*** 0.932*** 0.936*** 0.932*** emerging                           0.339*** 0.338*** 0.339*** 0.339***
                           (0.063) (0.063) (0.063) (0.063)                                       (0.024) (0.024) (0.024) (0.024)
interdisc                  0.0147     0.0139     0.0232     0.0213    interdisc                   0.019       0.020      0.022      0.016
                           (0.056)    (0.056)    (0.056)    (0.056)                              (0.023)     (0.023)    (0.023)    (0.023)
inter_cooperated          0.150**     0.151**    0.161**    0.170** inter_cooperated             0.101*** 0.101*** 0.105*** 0.108***
                          (0.070)     (0.070)    (0.070)    (0.071)                              (0.027) (0.027) (0.027) (0.027)
still_training             -0.195     -0.179     -0.167     -0.181    still_training             -0.1125 -0.1113        -0.1112    -0.1179
                           (0.140)    (0.140)    (0.140)    (0.141)                              (0.075) (0.075)        (0.075)    (0.076)
n_author                  0.189*** 0.189*** 0.189*** 0.189*** n_author                           0.066*** 0.066*** 0.066*** 0.067***
                           (0.016) (0.016) (0.016) (0.016)                                       (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)
field dummies               yes         yes        yes        yes     field dummies                yes        yes        yes         yes
current country dummies     yes         yes        yes        yes     current country dummies      yes        yes         yes        yes
Constant                    0.571      0.610      0.645      0.613    Constant                  2.100*** 2.100*** 2.114*** 2.111***
                           (0.509)    (0.509)    (0.509)    (0.514)                               (0.348) (0.347) (0.329) (0.328)
                                                                      Ln_alpha                  -0.206*** -0.207*** -0.206*** -0.204***
                                                                                                 (0.020) (0.020) (0.020) (0.020)
Dependent variable           IF         IF         IF         IF      Dependent variable           TC         TC         TC          TC
Observations               11,227     11,227     11,227      11,072   Observations               11,223      11,223     11,223     11,068
R-squared                  0.1691     0.1714     0.1709      0.1725
Adj. R-sq                  0.1671     0.1693     0.1686      0.1703
F stat                     67.685     65.636     61.495      62.022
*.10≤**≤.05***≤0.01 (Heteroschedasticity-robust st. errors in parenthesis). Baseline: NATIVES-NOT MOBILE



                                                                      30
APPENDIX
The appendix is composed of four sections:
A.1 Representativeness of sample
A.2 Who returns. Selection of returnees
A.3 Estimates weighted by probability of response
A.4 Imputation of missing control variables


         A.1 Representativeness of sample
We performed three different checks concerning potential differences in scientific impact, as assessed
by the journal impact factor of source articles. A final check is performed on a self-reported assessment
of article representativeness.
Table A- 1 Two-groups comparisons of Impact Factor in 16 countries by 4 subject categories.
T-Tests. Hypothesized difference (respondents – non-respondents)=0
COUNTRY                              DIFFERENCE (RESPONDENTS - NON-RESPONDENTS)
                          Biology             Chemistry        Earth & Environment      Materials Science

                      mean      st.err.      mean     st.err       mean     st.err       mean      st.err
Australia             0.036      0.357      -0.350    0.211       -0.090    0.127        0.316     0.341
Belgium              -0.611      0.563       0.357    0.429        0.089    0.265        0.745     0.531
Brazil                0.224      0.115       0.092    0.103       -0.290    0.198        0.381    0.188*
Canada                0.535      0.320       0.287    0.182       -0.180    0.116       -0.118     0.280
Denmark               0.465      0.640      -0.213    0.357       -0.439    0.261        0.286     0.681
France                0.024      0.268       0.164    0.136       -0.085    0.107        0.065     0.149
Germany               0.185      0.320       0.135    0.180        0.172    0.108       -0.059     0.197
India                -0.196      0.186       0.060    0.133        0.073    0.180       -0.066     0.124
Italy                 0.674     0.270*       0.080    0.142       -0.026    0.114       -0.067     0.217
Japan                -0.387      0.250      -0.045    0.122        0.229    0.120        0.040     0.125
Netherlands           0.366      0.369       0.009    0.402        0.185    0.194       -0.773     0.540
Spain                 0.493      0.254       0.099    0.134        0.043    0.127       -0.433    0.188*
Sweden               -0.415      0.544       0.632    0.434       -0.035    0.233        0.107     0.486
Switzerland           0.452      0.662      -0.372    0.390        0.131    0.181        0.380     0.589
UK                    0.589     0.283*       0.164    0.184        0.065    0.110        0.188     0.250
USA                   1.111     0.187*       0.584   0.094*       -0.043    0.058        0.319    0.161*
OVERALL+              0.705     0.088*       0.315   0.046*        0.041    0.032        0.209    0.062*
+Weighted   by probability. *p<0.5

First, we asses potential bias due to unit-non response by comparing the Impact Factor of respondents
in each of four subject categories and each of 16 countries, against those of non-respondents (Table A-
1). Results indicate modest potential biases in the samples from Brazil (Materials science) Italy (Biology),




                                                     31
Spain (Materials Science) and US (Biology, Chemistry and Materials Science)13. Except for Spain, biases
are in the direction of over-representing authors with higher-impact papers.
Second, we compare the impact factor of early respondents against those of late respondents. Late
respondents are characterized as those who completed the questionnaire during the third (final) round,
as opposed to those who completed the questionnaire during the first and second rounds (Table A- 2).
This screening is useful to assess the potential existence of biases due to item non-response, but can
also be helpful to assess the severity of bias for unit-non-response, if we expect that late-respondents
would be more similar to non-respondents (or to those who would have responded if we had solicited
the questionnaire one more round). T-test comparisons highlight modest biases concerning the Japan
sample in Biology, and the Sweden and US samples in Earth & Environmental sciences, where authors
of higher-impact contributions were disproportionately distributed among late respondents14.


Table A- 2 Two-groups comparisons of Impact Factor in 16 countries by 4 subject categories.
T-Tests. Hypothesized difference (early respondents – late respondents)=0


COUNTRY                                               DIFFERENCE IMPACT FACTOR (EARLY - LATE)
                                   Biology                           Chemistry                   Earth & Environment          Materials Science
                            mean            st.err                mean           st.err              mean            st.err    mean      st.err
Australia                   0.368          0.720                 -0.206          0.429              -0.009          0.390     -0.754     0.692
Belgium                     0.912          1.457                  1.385          0.982               0.612          0.469     -1.007     0.734
Brazil                     -0.427          0.240                  0.316          0.218               0.093          0.402     -0.098     0.153
Canada                     -0.986          0.585                 -0.438          0.363               0.031          0.269      0.098     0.664
Denmark                     1.820          1.524                 -0.260          0.794               0.557          0.581      0.340     1.395
France                      0.439          0.575                  0.028          0.304              -0.137          0.264     -0.666     0.363
Germany                    -0.576          0.721                 -0.318          0.433               0.065          0.290      0.208     0.587
India                      -0.238          0.413                 -0.057          0.276              -0.049          0.391      0.338     0.288
Italy                      -0.055          0.400                  0.248          0.243              -0.426          0.233     -0.036     0.419
Japan                      -2.060          0.856*                -0.212          0.365              -0.285          0.371      0.260     0.377
Netherlands                 0.307          0.663                 -1.503          0.980              -0.667          0.406      0.607     1.081
Spain                      -1.431          0.473                 -0.072          0.314               0.338          0.311      0.139     0.418
Sweden                     -0.600          1.278                  1.803          0.960              -1.525          0.727*    -0.703     1.232
Switzerland                -1.597          1.331                  1.026          0.929               0.647          0.455      1.435     1.428
UK                          0.099          0.612                  0.334          0.473               0.374          0.244      0.374     0.474
USA                        -0.167          0.369                 -0.089          0.190              -0.257          0.123*     0.445     0.327
OVERALL+                   -0.414          0.120                 -0.080          0.102              -0.145          0.075      0.061     0.133
+Weighted      by probability. *p<0.5



Third, we compare respondents who took the entire questionnaire against respondents who dropped-
out before completing the survey (Table A- 3). This check is meant to assess potential biases due to
item-non-response, for example caused by the fact that certain incomplete observations (like country of

13 Note that only that Bonferroni-adjusted p-value would indicate significant differences and only for the US sample.
14 Note that no difference would be significant if Bonferroni-adjusted p-values were used.




                                                                                32
origin) made the response not-usable for our purposes. Moderate biases are highlighted for Belgium
(biology), Germany and India (Chemistry), Japan and US (Earth & Environment), where authors of
higher-impact papers were comparatively more likely to complete the questionnaire15.


Table A- 3 Two-group comparisons of Impact Factor in 16 countries by 4 subject categories.
T-Tests. Hypothesized difference (complete respondents – dropped-out respondents)=0


COUNTRY                                      DIFFERENCE IMPACT FACTOR (COMPLETE - DROPPED-OUT)
                                      Biology                            Chemistry                   Earth & Environment                   Materials Science
                              mean             st.err              mean             st.err               mean            st.err                mean       st.err
Australia                    -0.926           0.934               -0.213            0.421               -0.245          0.428                  0.693      0.732
Belgium                      -3.043           1.025*               0.878            0.959               -0.044          0.404                  1.085      0.846
Brazil                        0.026           0.274               -0.157            0.283               -0.630          0.623                  0.214      0.356
Canada                        0.036           0.712               -0.167            0.404               -0.294          0.273                 -0.152      0.633
Denmark                      -2.309           1.549               -0.656            0.962                0.355          0.939                  1.492      1.487
France                       -0.128           0.574                0.354            0.251               -0.015          0.235                  0.178      0.298
Germany                      -0.384           0.709                0.904           0.407*                0.323          0.271                 -0.338      0.482
India                         0.539           0.335                0.519           0.209*               -0.261          0.271                  0.046      0.206
Italy                         0.263           0.528                0.068            0.271                0.081          0.268                 -0.124      0.433
Japan                         1.090           0.711               -0.246            0.301                0.630          0.307*                 0.040      0.335
Netherlands                   1.154           0.794                1.715            1.215                0.431          0.426                 -1.746      1.270
Spain                         0.930           0.524                0.388            0.266                0.136          0.243                  0.023      0.439
Sweden                        0.808           1.313               -0.267            0.924               -0.565          0.478                 -0.002      0.782
Switzerland                  -0.434           1.581                0.876            1.104                0.086          0.408                  1.013      1.788
UK                            0.120           0.629               -0.101            0.457               -0.263          0.252                  0.531      0.533
USA                           0.663           0.438                0.322            0.221                0.302          0.132*                -0.069      0.333
OVERALL+                      0.324           0.203                0.373           0.095*                0.117          0.072                  0.081      0.131
+Weighted        by probability. *p<0.5

In sum, the controls performed on the set of information known ex-ante point to moderate evidence
of bias. If biases exist, they seem to be more likely in the direction of slightly over-sampling
correspondent authors of higher quality papers. A consistent picture is given by the last screening we
performed, which, unlike the previous ones, is based on a self-reported assessment of
representativeness. In particular, we asked the respondents the degree to which the selected paper
represented their average production16.




Figure A- 1 shows the histogram of the distribution of the answers. The distribution is overall well-
behaved, with a slight right-skewness (mean 3.20; median 3.0).

15   Note that Bonferroni-adjusted p-values would only indicate as significant the differences between samples in the Belgian sample in Biology.

16
   The question was formulated as asking the respondent to report on a 1-5 scale the agreement to the following statement: “This particular paper of yours is of a
higher quality, with respect to my other papers”.




                                                                                   33
Figure A- 1 Self-reported assessment of the representativeness of sample article (1-5 scale)




                                               34
        A.2 Selection of returnees


In addition to looking at the performance of returnees, it is interesting to examine evidence concerning
selection effects in return migration. In other words, do academics who were mobile from a country
and later decide to return exhibit comparable performance to their compatriots who have been mobile
and remain abroad?

The standard selection models for return migration suggest that the direction of the initial selection, be
it positive or negative, will be further strengthened by return migration (Borjas & Bratsberg, 1996). In
other words, if migrants are positively selected, as our data suggest, those who return will be the worst
of the best, those who remain are the best of the best. Thus, the foreign born remaining abroad would
be survivors of a second selection process where only the brightest receive sufficiently good enough
offers to convince them to stay and returnees would be those who did not receive such offers.

However, if the scientist is not or not primarily motivated by earnings in her decision to return, but, for
example, motivated by family or personal reasons, the correlation may not be in the direction predicted.
It turns out that in our data family or personal reasons is the most frequent factor given by respondents
as being important or extremely important for returning to the origin country (64.3%). The second
most frequently selected reason is quality of life (35.7%). A group of career and research-related factors
follow. Least important among reasons given for returning are the pursuit of better working conditions
and visa-related issues.

To shed light on the migration process, we compare the performance of individuals from the same
origin country who were internationally mobile and subsequently returned to the performance of fellow
natives who were mobile and remained abroad at the time the survey was administered. In this case, we
restrict the sample by origin country and include only scientists who came from the 16 countries we
have directly sampled and who had been mobile. There are 6529 observations in our sample that meet
these criteria.

Average IF, TCs and Rank-normalized Impact Factors (RNIF) by country of origin and current
residence in country of origin (returnees) vs. abroad are summarized in Table A-5. (The RNIF allows
for comparing performance across discipline. It computes the journal rank in its field, based on the
journal Impact Factor and normalized by the size of the subject category (Pudovkin and Garfield, 2004).




                                                    35
Table A- 4 Selection effect of RETURNEES
Observations: 6529 domestic scientists with international experience (Returnees and currently away
from country of origin)
*.10≤**≤.05***≤0.01
The figures show that, in the majority of countries, mobile natives who have subsequently returned
exhibit comparable performance to mobile natives who have remained abroad. Brazil, India and Italy
are exceptions to the rule. In these countries, returnees on average do not perform as well as their
fellow natives who have remained abroad. Belgium displays a similar pattern, but the difference is only
significant at 90% confidence level. Results for these three countries are compatible with the world just
described of positive selection among the stayers and, consequently, of adverse selection of those who
return home. However, this result may also arise without adverse selection if, for example, the mobile
scientist returns to a poorer research environment that constraints her subsequent capability to produce
high-level research. This hypothesis is plausible considering that the three countries are among the
lowest in our sample for percent of GDP spent on higher education.

To further investigate selection effects, we run a multivariate analysis (Table A-6). In addition to
standard controls, in case the person returned, we add in two interaction variables (Model 2) that
capture the years passed since the person returned, and those who have moved back and forth more
than once during the ensuing years. The dummy variable tracking returnees takes a negative sign, but
the standard error is too large to lead to statistically meaningful results. However, the coefficient of the
control for the years passed since the person returned is negative and significant in the TC model,
indicating that the longer a returnee has been back in her country of origin, the less likely she is to be
cited, compared to her countrymen who remained abroad. The effect is moderate in magnitude: for
each additional year spent in the home country after returning the average scientist receives 0.10 fewer
citations. In other words, ten years after returning, scientists who are back in their country of origin
receive about one fewer citations than fellow natives who have remained abroad. No such effect is
found when we look at the Impact Factor.

In sum, we find no compelling evidence that returnees are on average adversely selected among the
internationally mobile scientists. This may reflect that individuals report returning for family or life style
reasons, not because of job-related issues. The lack of a performance differential also suggests that the
premium associated with international experience survives return, despite the fact that many of the
returnees work in a supposedly less favorable environment.




                                                     37
Table A- 5 Selection of the returnees

Robust OLS                         -v1--v2-                   Robust Neg. Bin.                    -v1-             -v2-
RETURNEE                         -0.1442
                                     -0.1400                  RETURNEE                          -0.0184          0.0667
                                 (0.120)
                                     (0.139)                                                    (0.041)          (0.056)
years_since_ret                      -0.0001                  years_since_ret                                  -0.0109**
                                     (0.011)                                                                     (0.005)
back_forth                            0.0150                  back_forth                                         0.0255
                                     (0.162)                                                                     (0.063)
hindex_origin            0.4681**   0.4672**                  hindex_origin                     0.1591*         0.1524*
                           (0.209)   (0.209)                                                    (0.083)          (0.082)
AGE                         0.0365    0.0365                  AGE                               -0.0048          0.0015
                           (0.030)   (0.031)                                                    (0.012)          (0.012)
SQ_AGE                    -0.0005*  -0.0005*                  SQ_AGE                            -0.0001          -0.0001
                           (0.000)   (0.000)                                                    (0.000)          (0.000)
female                  -0.3231*** -0.3229***                 female                          -0.1552***      -0.1521***
                           (0.103)   (0.103)                                                    (0.035)          (0.035)
emerging                0.8894*** 0.8894***                   emerging                        0.3129***       0.3140***
                           (0.092)   (0.093)                                                    (0.032)          (0.032)
interdisc                  -0.0711   -0.0708                  interdisc                         0.0031           0.0014
                           (0.084)   (0.084)                                                    (0.032)          (0.031)
inter_cooperated            0.1596    0.1593                  inter_cooperated                   0.0344          0.0334
                           (0.099)   (0.099)                                                    (0.033)          (0.033)
still_training           -0.8110** -0.8104**                  still_training                   -0.3728*         -0.3627*
                           (0.410)   (0.410)                                                    (0.192)          (0.188)
n_author                0.2171*** 0.2172***                   n_author                        0.0624***       0.0631***
                           (0.023)   (0.023)                                                    (0.006)          (0.006)
field dummies                 yes       yes                   field dummies                                         yes
current country dummies       yes       yes                   current country dummies                               yes
Constant                    1.1240    1.1233                  Constant                 2.4084***              2.2072***
                           (0.808)   (0.821)                                             (0.490)                 (0.447)
                                                              Ln_alpha                -0.1989***              -0.1996***
                                                                                         (0.026)                 (0.026)
Dependent variable                  IF             IF         Dependent variable           TC                      TC
Observations                      6,082          6,082        Observations                6,079                   6,079
R-squared                         0.1504         0.1504
Adj. R-sq                         0.1465         0.1462
F stat                           34.1324        31.8652
*.10≤**≤.05***≤0.01 (Heteroschedasticity-robust st. errors in parenthesis). Baseline: mobile natives currently abroad




                                                           38
        A.3 Estimates weighted by probability of responding


Table A- 6 Performance of the internationally-mobile (probability weighted)

OLS                     -v1-       -v2-                Neg. Bin.                       -v1-          -v2-
RETURNEE                 0.5769*** 0.5342***           RETURNEE                     0.2061***   0.2103***
                           -0.063     -0.067                                          -0.026       -0.027
FOREIGN_AT_18            0.2527*** 0.2192***           FOREIGN_AT_18                0.1504***   0.1537***
                           -0.079     -0.082                                          -0.028       -0.028
visiting_only                       -0.1956**          visiting_only                               0.0193
                                      -0.077                                                       -0.037
AGE                      0.0579*** 0.0577***           AGE                       -0.0011           -0.001
                           -0.018     -0.018                                      -0.008           -0.008
SQ_AGE                  -0.0007*** -0.0007***          SQ_AGE                    -0.0001          -0.0001
                            0.000      0.000                                      0.000             0.000
female                  -0.2790*** -0.2827***          female                  -0.1019***       -0.1016***
                           -0.066     -0.066                                      -0.023           -0.023
emerging                 0.9164*** 0.9178***           emerging                0.3361***        0.3361***
                           -0.061     -0.061                                      -0.022           -0.022
interdisc                  0.0266     0.0257           interdisc                  0.0194           0.0195
                           -0.055     -0.055                                      -0.021           -0.021
inter_cooperated           0.0411     0.0479           inter_cooperated         0.0479**         0.0473**
                           -0.068     -0.068                                      -0.024           -0.024
still_training          -0.4172*** -0.4253***          still_training          -0.1947***       -0.1939***
                           -0.134     -0.134                                      -0.065           -0.065
n_author                 0.2317*** 0.2316***           n_author                0.0760***        0.0760***
                           -0.016     -0.016                                      -0.004           -0.004
field dummies                yes        yes            field dummies                yes               yes
current country dummies      yes        yes            current country dummies      yes               yes
Constant                   0.0384     0.0842           Constant                1.9328***        1.9272***
                           -0.486     -0.486                                     (0.306)          (0.307)
                                                       Ln_alpha                -0.1780***       -0.1780***
                                                                                 (0.017)          (0.017)

Dependent variable              IF            IF       Dependent variable             TC          TC
Observations                  14,433        14,433     Observations                  14,428      14,429
R-squared                     0.1658        0.1658

*.10≤**≤.05***≤0.01 (Standard errors in parentheses). Baseline: NATIVE_NOT_MOBILE




                                                     39
Table A- 7 Performance of FOREIGN-BORN (probability weighted)

OLS                              -v1-         -v2-      Neg. Bin.                         -v1-       -v2-
FOREIGN                      0.8704***                                                0.2676***
                               (0.099)                                                  (0.036)
entered_work                                0.9326***   entered_work                              0.2858***
                                              (0.108)                                                (0.039)
entered_edu                                 0.6976***   entered_edu                                0.2162***
                                              (0.130)                                                (0.048)
hindex_origin           1.2436***          1.1743***    hindex_origin           0.2239***         0.2037***
                           (0.153)            (0.158)                             (0.052)            (0.054)
AGE                      0.0817***          0.0815***   AGE                        0.0056            0.0056
                           (0.020)            (0.020)                             (0.010)            (0.010)
SQ_AGE                  -0.0010***         -0.0010***   SQ_AGE                    -0.0001           -0.0001
                           (0.000)            (0.000)                             (0.000)            (0.000)
female                  -0.2350***         -0.2332***   female                  -0.0900***        -0.0897***
                           (0.079)            (0.079)                             (0.027)            (0.027)
emerging                0.8872***           0.8865***   emerging                0.3319***         0.3304***
                           (0.072)            (0.072)                             (0.026)            (0.026)
interdisc                  0.0917             0.0941    interdisc                  0.0365            0.0372
                           (0.065)            (0.065)                             (0.025)            (0.025)
inter_cooperated          -0.0485            -0.0519    inter_cooperated           0.0457            0.0450
                           (0.079)            (0.079)                             (0.029)            (0.029)
still_training            -0.2190            -0.1918    still_training           -0.1464**         -0.1393**
                           (0.142)            (0.142)                             (0.067)            (0.066)
n_author                0.2588***           0.2588***   n_author                0.0831***         0.0832***
                           (0.018)            (0.018)                             (0.005)            (0.005)
field dummies                yes                yes     field dummies                yes               yes
current country dummies      yes                yes     current country dummies      yes               yes
Constant                 -1.4030**          -1.3602**   Constant                1.4018***         1.4151***
                           (0.568)            (0.568)                             (0.263)            (0.263)
                                                        Ln_alpha                -0.1810***        -0.1814***
                                                                                  (0.020)            (0.020)

Dep. Variable                    IF            IF       Dep. Variable                   TC          TC
Observations                   10,046        10,046     Observations                   10,043      10,043
R-squared                      0.1840        0.1843
*≤.10;**≤.05;***≤.01. (Standard errors in parentheses). Baseline: NATIVE-NOT-MOBILE




                                                      40
Table A- 8 Performance of RETURNEES (probability-weighted)

OLS                          -v1-       -v2-       -v3-       -v4-        Neg. Bin.                    -v1-       -v2-       -v3-       -v4-
RETURNEE                   0.648***                                       RETURNEE                   0.208***
                            (0.062)                                                                   (0.029)
lowerH_country                        0.271***                            lowerH_country                        0.196***
                                       (0.101)                                                                   (0.044)
higherH_country                       0.845***                            higherH_country                       0.234***
                                       (0.072)                                                                   (0.030)
BA_MA                                            -0.176                   BA_MA                                             0.136
                                                 (0.162)                                                                   (0.121)
phd                                               0.168                   phd                                               0.091
                                                 (0.139)                                                                   (0.073)
post                                             0.760***                 post                                             0.215***
                                                  (0.070)                                                                   (0.027)
job                                              -0.140                   job                                              -0.050
                                                 (0.106)                                                                   (0.037)
MA_quality                                                  -0.259        MA_quality                                                   0.205
                                                            (0.228)                                                                   (0.174)
phd_quality                                                  0.298        phd_quality                                                  0.129
                                                            (0.190)                                                                   (0.096)
work_quality                                                0.768*** work_quality                                                     0.186***
                                                             (0.071)                                                                   (0.026)
AGE                        0.050**    0.047**    0.047**    0.048**       AGE                          0.005     -0.003    -0.003     -0.003
                           (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.020)                                   (0.010)    (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009)
SQ_AGE                    -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001***         SQ_AGE                      -0.000     -0.000    -0.000     -0.000
                            (0.000) (0.000)     (0.000)   (0.000)                                     (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)
female                    -0.356*** -0.352*** -0.347*** -0.345*** female                            -0.096*** -0.096*** -0.095*** -0.092***
                            (0.070) (0.070)     (0.070)  (0.071)                                     (0.027)   (0.027)   (0.027)   (0.027)
emerging                   0.989*** 0.985*** 0.988***       0.983*** emerging                        0.365***   0.347***   0.348***   0.347***
                            (0.068) (0.068)   (0.068)        (0.069)                                  (0.027)    (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.025)
interdisc                  0.0091     0.0082     0.0173     0.0165        interdisc                  0.0594**    0.0165    0.0185     0.0122
                           (0.061)    (0.061)    (0.061)    (0.061)                                   (0.025)    (0.024)   (0.024)    (0.024)
inter_cooperated           0.1103     0.1130     0.1212     0.1292*       inter_cooperated           0.224***   0.090***   0.093*** 0.0970***
                           (0.077)    (0.077)    (0.077)    (0.078)                                   (0.031)    (0.028)    (0.028)   (0.028)
still_training             -0.1916    -0.1746    -0.1645    -0.1798       still_training             -0.0898    -0.1249    -0.1247    -0.1335*
                           (0.147)    (0.147)    (0.147)    (0.148)                                  (0.088)    (0.076)    (0.077)     (0.078)
n_author                   0.198*** 0.197*** 0.197***       0.197*** n_author                                   0.070***   0.070***   0.071***
                            (0.018) (0.018)   (0.018)        (0.018)                                             (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)
field dummies                yes        yes        yes        yes         field dummies                yes        yes        yes        yes
current country dummies      yes        yes        yes        yes         current country dummies      yes        yes        yes        yes
Constant                   0.4523     0.4943     0.5420     0.5243        Constant                   2.051***   2.045***   2.073***   2.089***
                           (0.541)    (0.540)    (0.541)    (0.546)                                   (0.356)    (0.352)    (0.340)    (0.338)
                                                                          Ln_alpha                  -0.147***   -0.192*** -0.192*** -0.190***
                                                                                                      (0.021)    (0.020)    (0.020)   (0.020)
Dependent variable           IF         IF         IF         IF          Dependent variable           TC         TC         TC         TC
Observations                11,227    11,227     11,227     11,072        Observations              11,223       11,223    11,223     11,068
R-squared                   0.166      0.169      0.168      0.170
*≤.10;**≤.05;***≤.01. Baseline: NATIVE-NOT-MOBILE




                                                                     41
      A.4 Imputation of missing control variables


Table A- 9 Imputation estimates
Table A- 10 Performance of the internationally-mobile (weighted, with imputations)

OLS                                                  Neg.Bin.
RETURNEE                    0.5815***     0.5393*** RETURNEE                        0.2072***    0.2108***
                              (0.063)        (0.066)                                  (0.026)      (0.027)
FOREIGN_AT_18               0.2521***      0.2191*** FOREIGN_AT_18                  0.1472***    0.1501***
                              (0.078)        (0.081)                                  (0.027)      (0.028)
visiting_only                              -0.1923** visiting_only                                 0.0165
                                             (0.076)                                               (0.037)
AGE                     0.0581***          0.0578*** AGE                              -0.0035      -0.0035
                          (0.017)            (0.017)                                   (0.008)     (0.008)
SQ_AGE                  -0.0007***        -0.0007*** SQ_AGE                           -0.0001      -0.0001
                          (0.000)            (0.000)                                   (0.000)     (0.000)
female                  -0.2771***        -0.2808*** female                         -0.0999***   -0.0997***
                          (0.066)            (0.066)                                   (0.023)     (0.023)
emerging                0.9072***         0.9085*** emerging                        0.3314***    0.3315***
                          (0.060)            (0.061)                                   (0.022)     (0.022)
interdisc                 0.0297             0.0288 interdisc                          0.0203       0.0204
                          (0.055)            (0.055)                                   (0.021)     (0.021)
inter_cooperated          0.0362             0.0426 inter_cooperated                 0.0477**     0.0473**
                          (0.067)            (0.067)                                   (0.024)     (0.024)
still_training          -0.3985***        -0.4063*** still_training                 -0.1934***   -0.1926***
                          (0.135)            (0.135)                                   (0.065)     (0.065)
n_author                0.2345***         0.2343*** n_author                        0.0773***    0.0773***
                          (0.016)            (0.016)                                   (0.004)     (0.004)
field dummies               yes                yes   field dummies                       yes          yes
current country dummies     yes                yes   current country dummies             yes          yes
Constant                  0.0176             0.0624 Constant                         1.9842***   1.9795***
                          (0.480)            (0.480)                                   (0.305)     (0.306)
                                                     Ln_alpha                       -0.1785***   -0.1785***
                                                                                       -0.017      (0.017)

Dep. Variable                   IF            IF       Dep. Variable                  TC           TC
Observations                  14,611        14,611     Observations                  14,605       14,605
F stat                         77.62

*.10≤**≤.05***≤0.01 (Standard errors in parenthesis). Baseline: NATIVE_NOT_MOBILE




                                                     43
Table A- 11 Performance of the Foreign-born (weighted, with imputations)

OLS                              -v1-          -v2-      Neg.Bin.                         -v1-       -v2-
FOREIGN_AT_18                0.8805***                   FOREIGN_AT_18                0.2687***
                               (0.098)                                                  (0.036)
entered_work                                0.9444***    entered_work                             0.2875***
                                              (0.107)                                                (0.039)
entered_edu                                 0.7047***    entered_edu                               0.2163***
                                              (0.128)                                                (0.048)
hindex_origin           1.2634***          1.1935***    hindex_origin           0.2334***         0.2129***
                           (0.151)            (0.156)                             (0.052)            (0.054)
AGE                      0.0794***          0.0791***   AGE                        0.0026            0.0025
                           (0.020)            (0.020)                             (0.010)            (0.010)
SQ_AGE                  -0.0009***         -0.0009***   SQ_AGE                    -0.0001           -0.0001
                           (0.000)            (0.000)                             (0.000)            (0.000)
female                  -0.2322***         -0.2305***   female                  -0.0907***        -0.0904***
                           (0.079)            (0.079)                             (0.027)            (0.027)
emerging                0.8848***           0.8842***   emerging                0.3307***         0.3293***
                           (0.071)            (0.071)                             (0.025)            (0.025)
interdisc                  0.0919             0.0947    interdisc                  0.0370            0.0377
                           (0.065)            (0.065)                             (0.025)            (0.025)
inter_cooperated          -0.0577            -0.0612    inter_cooperated           0.0415            0.0407
                           (0.078)            (0.078)                             (0.028)            (0.028)
still_training            -0.2021            -0.1743    still_training           -0.1460**         -0.1385**
                           (0.142)            (0.143)                             (0.066)            (0.066)
n_author                0.2601***           0.2601***   n_author                0.0837***         0.0838***
                           (0.018)            (0.018)                             (0.005)            (0.004)
field dummies                yes                yes     field dummies                yes               yes
current country dummies      yes                yes     current country dummies      yes               yes
Constant                 -1.3674**          -1.3221**   Constant                1.4714***         1.4860***
                           (0.559)            (0.559)                             (0.258)            (0.258)
                                                        Ln_alpha                -0.1833***        -0.1837***
                                                                                  (0.020)            (0.020)
Dep. Variable                    IF            IF       Dep. Variable                TC                TC
Observations                   10174         10174      Observations               10170              10170

*≤.10;**≤.05;***≤.01. (Standard errors in parenthesis). Baseline: NATIVE-NOT-MOBILE




                                                      44
Table A- 12 Performance of RETURNEES (weighted, with imputations)

Robust OLS                -v1-       -v2-       -v3-       -v4-        Robust Neg. Bin.          -v1-       -v2-       -v3-       -v4-
RETURNEE                0.652***                                       RETURNEE                0.218***
                         (0.062)                                                                (0.027)
lowerH_country                     0.263***                            lowerH_country                     0.190***
                                    (0.100)                                                                (0.044)
higherH_country                    0.857***                            higherH_country                    0.237***
                                    (0.072)                                                                (0.030)
BA_MA                                         -0.094                   BA_MA                                          0.167
                                              (0.177)                                                                (0.118)
phd                                            0.132                   phd                                            0.095
                                              (0.139)                                                                (0.073)
post                                          0.754***                 post                                          0.207***
                                               (0.070)                                                                (0.027)
job                                           -0.1422                  job                                           -0.048
                                              (0.106)                                                                (0.037)
MA_quality                                               -0.045        MA_quality                                               0.282*
                                                         (0.289)                                                                (0.166)
phd_quality                                               0.235        phd_quality                                               0.127
                                                         (0.190)                                                                (0.094)
work_quality                                             0.763*** work_quality                                                  0.181***
                                                          (0.071)                                                                (0.026)
AGE                     0.052***   0.048**    0.049**    0.051*** AGE                           -0.004    -0.005     -0.004     -0.004
                         (0.019)   (0.019)    (0.019)     (0.020)                               (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.009)
SQ_AGE                  -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** SQ_AGE                          -0.000    -0.000     -0.000     -0.000
                         (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)                                  (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
female                  -0.357*** -0.352*** -0.349*** -0.345*** female                         -0.096*** -0.095*** -0.094*** -0.091***
                         (0.070)   (0.070)   (0.070)   (0.070)                                  (0.027)   (0.027)   (0.027)   (0.027)
emerging                0.978***   0.974***   0.977***   0.971*** emerging                     0.344***   0.343***   0.344***   0.344***
                         (0.068)    (0.068)    (0.068)    (0.068)                               (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.025)
interdisc                 0.013     0.012      0.021      0.020        interdisc                 0.017     0.018      0.020      0.014
                         (0.060)   (0.060)    (0.060)    (0.061)                                (0.024)   (0.024)    (0.024)    (0.024)
inter_cooperated          0.112     0.114      0.125     0.133*        inter_cooperated        0.092***   0.092***   0.096***   0.099***
                         (0.077)   (0.076)    (0.077)    (0.077)                                (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.028)
still_training           -0.194    -0.177     -0.170     -0.185        still_training           -0.133*   -0.132*    -0.134*    -0.142*
                         (0.147)   (0.146)    (0.146)    (0.147)                                (0.076)   (0.076)    (0.076)    (0.077)
n_author                0.201***   0.200***   0.201***   0.200*** n_author                     0.072***   0.072***   0.072***   0.072***
                         (0.018)    (0.018)    (0.018)    (0.018)                               (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)
field dummies             yes        yes        yes        yes         field dummies             yes        yes        yes        yes
Curr. country dummies     yes        yes        yes        yes         Curr. country dummies     yes        yes        yes        yes
Constant                  0.394     0.437      0.473      0.454        Constant                2.062***   2.062***   2.082***   2.093***
                         (0.534)   (0.533)    (0.535)    (0.539)                                (0.352)    (0.350)    (0.337)    (0.334)
                                                                       Ln_alpha                -0.192*** -0.193*** -0.191*** -0.190***
                                                                                                (0.020)   (0.020)   (0.020)   (0.020)
Dependent variable         IF        IF         IF         IF          Dependent variable        TC         TC         TC         TC
Observations             11359      11359      11359      11203        Observations             11354      11354      11354      11198
*≤.10;**≤.05;***≤.01. (Standard errors in parenthesis). Baseline: NATIVE-NOT-MOBILE




                                                                  45
