                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  GENDER, COMPETITIVENESS AND CAREER CHOICES

                                           Thomas Buser
                                           Muriel Niederle
                                          Hessel Oosterbeek

                                        Working Paper 18576
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18576


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2012




We thank the staff of the four schools that allowed us to collect the data from their pupils that we use
in this paper. Nadine Ketel and Boris van Leeuwen provided excellent research assistance. Niederle
thanks the NSF for financial support. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the University
of Amsterdam through the Speerpunt Behavioural Economics. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Thomas Buser, Muriel Niederle, and Hessel Oosterbeek. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gender, Competitiveness and Career Choices
Thomas Buser, Muriel Niederle, and Hessel Oosterbeek
NBER Working Paper No. 18576
November 2012
JEL No. C9,I20,J16,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

Gender differences in competitiveness are often discussed as a potential explanation for gender differences
in education and labor market outcomes. We correlate an incentivized measure of competitiveness
with an important career choice of secondary school students in the Netherlands. At the age of 15,
these students have to pick one out of four study profiles, which vary in how prestigious they are. While
boys and girls have very similar levels of academic ability, boys are substantially more likely than
girls to choose more prestigious profiles. We find that competitiveness is as important a predictor of
profile choice as gender. More importantly, up to 23 percent of the gender difference in profile choice
can be attributed to gender differences in competitiveness. This lends support to the extrapolation of
laboratory findings on competitiveness to labor market settings.


Thomas Buser                                         Hessel Oosterbeek
Amsterdam School of Economics                        Amsterdam School of Economics
University of Amsterdam                              University of Amsterdam
Roetersstraat 11                                     Roetersstraat 11
Room 3.51, Building E                                Room 3.60, Building E
1018 WB Amsterdam                                    1018 WB Amsterdam
The Netherlands                                      The Netherlands
t.buser@uva.nl                                       h.oosterbeek@uva.nl

Muriel Niederle
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
niederle@stanford.edu
                   Gender, Competitiveness and Career Choices⇤
                       Thomas Buser                                         Muriel Niederle
            University of Amsterdam and TIER                        Stanford University and NBER
                                              Hessel Oosterbeek
                                     University of Amsterdam and TIER

                                                November 19, 2012



                                                       Abstract

       Gender diﬀerences in competitiveness are often discussed as a potential explanation for gender
       diﬀerences in education and labor market outcomes. We correlate an incentivized measure of
       competitiveness with an important career choice of secondary school students in the Nether-
       lands. At the age of 15, these students have to pick one out of four study profiles, which vary
       in how prestigious they are. While boys and girls have very similar levels of academic ability,
       boys are substantially more likely than girls to choose more prestigious profiles. We find that
       competitiveness is as important a predictor of profile choice as gender. More importantly, up to
       23 percent of the gender diﬀerence in profile choice can be attributed to gender diﬀerences in
       competitiveness. This lends support to the extrapolation of laboratory findings on competitive-
       ness to labor market settings.

       JEL-codes: C9, I20, J24, J16
       Keywords: field and laboratory experiments, economics of education, competitiveness


1    Introduction

Gender diﬀerences in education and labor market outcomes, though greatly reduced, have remained
ubiquitous. To understand gender diﬀerences in these outcomes, psychological attributes are com-
monly discussed as potential explanations. While the last decade saw a flurry of laboratory research
documenting gender diﬀerences in psychological attributes, there has been no satisfactory direct
evidence linking them to education and labor market outcomes.1 To address this gap, this paper
   ⇤
     We thank the staﬀ of the four schools that allowed us to collect the data from their pupils that we use in this paper.
Nadine Ketel and Boris van Leeuwen provided excellent research assistance. Niederle thanks the NSF for financial
support. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the University of Amsterdam through the Speerpunt
Behavioural Economics.
   1
     Bertrand (2011) summarizes this literature and concludes: “While the laboratory evidence shows in many cases
large gender diﬀerences (say, in attitudes towards risk, or attitudes toward competition), most of the existing attempts
to measure the impact of these factors on actual outcomes fail to find large eﬀects. This is undoubtedly a reflection
of a rather new research agenda, as well as of the diﬃculty in finding databases that combine good measures of


                                                            1
examines how education is associated with a measure of competitiveness, which is an attribute for
which large gender diﬀerences in the laboratory have been widely documented (see Croson and
Gneezy, 2009 and Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011). Through in-class experiments we collected data
on the competitiveness of high school students which we merged with information about their subse-
quent education choices. With this data we demonstrate that competitiveness significantly correlates
with educational choices and explains an economically and statistically significant part of the gender
gap in those choices.
    Gender diﬀerences in educational choices, particularly regarding intensity in math and science
subjects, remain significant. While in the U.S. girls take on average as many advanced math and
science classes as boys and perform on average at similar levels (Goldin et al., 2006), this is not
the case in many other OECD countries.2 Even in the U.S., girls are underrepresented among
extremely high achieving math students (Ellison and Swanson, 2010), and women are significantly
less likely than men to graduate from college with a major in science, technology, engineering or
mathematics.3 The reason to be concerned about gender diﬀerences in math and sciences compared
to, say, literature, is that the choices of math and science classes are most predictive of college
attendance and completion (Goldin et al., 2006). Furthermore, performance in mathematics has
consistently been found to serve as a predictor for future earnings. For example, Paglin and Rufolo
(1990) report that a large fraction of the gender gap in average starting salaries for college graduates
is between, rather than within, college majors (for additional evidence and discussion see Grogger
and Eide, 1995; Brown and Corcoran, 1997; Weinberger, 1999; Weinberger, 2001; Murnane et al.,
2000; Altonji and Blank, 1999).4
    Next to discrimination (Goldin and Rouse, 2000) and diﬀerences in preferences that could be
driven by stereotypes, a standard explanation for gender diﬀerences in math is diﬀerences in ability.5
However, Ellison and Swanson (2010) provide compelling evidence that the gender imbalance in the
U.S. among high achieving math students is not driven solely by diﬀerences in mathematical ability.
They show that in mathematics, high-achieving boys come from a variety of backgrounds as would
be expected from an allocation of talent that shows some randomness, while high-achieving girls are
almost exclusively drawn from a small set of super-elite schools. Furthermore, research investigating
career choices of women and men suggests that among equally gifted students, males are much more
psychological attributes with real outcomes. More direct demonstrations of field relevance will be crucial for these
new perspectives to have a lasting impact on how labor economists approach their study of gender gaps” (p.1583).
   2
     We will show that in the Netherlands boys are significantly more likely to take math classes in
high school than girls.         In France, where like in the Netherlands high school children decide on
which sets of classes to enroll in, girls are less likely to choose the math and science heavy options
(http://www.insee.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?ref_id=eduop709&reg_id=19). The same is true for Denmark (Schroter
Joensen and Skyt Nielsen, 2011), Switzerland (http://www.ibe.uzh.ch/publikationen/SGH2003_d.pdf) and Germany
(Roeder and Gruehn, 1997).
   3
     http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2009/2009161.pdf.
   4
     In a study on the gender gap in earnings among MBA’s from Chicago Booth, Bertrand et al. (2011) conclude that
one of three factors that account for the large gender gap in earnings a decade after MBA completion is diﬀerences in
training prior to MBA graduation, with, most notably, women taking many fewer finance courses than men.
   5
     For the potential importance of stereotypes on preferences of females over mathematics see Nosek et al. (2002),
Kiefer and Sekaquaptewa (2007) and Ceci et al. (2009). For evidence of the presence of such stereotypes already in
elementary school see Cvencek et al. (2011).


                                                         2
likely to choose a math heavy college major (see LeFevre et al., 1992; Weinberger, 2005).
    Another potential source for the observed gender diﬀerences in education and labor market
outcomes are gender diﬀerences in psychological attributes as documented by experiments. This
line of reasoning has only recently been advanced in line with the recognition of the importance of
non-cognitive skills for educational and labor market outcomes (Cunha and Heckman, 2007; Segal,
2012; Borghans et al., 2008). One large and robust gender diﬀerence in experiments is that women
are found to be less competitive than men (see Gneezy et al., 2003 and, for an overview on gender
diﬀerences, Croson and Gneezy, 2009). In the first paper on gender diﬀerences in the willingness to
compete, Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) assess choices of college students who perform equally well
in a simple arithmetic task. They find that while 73 percent of men choose a competitive tournament
payment scheme instead of a non-competitive piece-rate compensation, only 35 percent of women
do so. Subsequent research has confirmed this gender diﬀerence in the willingness to compete (see
Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011).
    It seems plausible that competitiveness is important for educational choices and labor market
outcomes. People who shy away from competitive environments may self-select into diﬀerent, poten-
tially lower paid, careers (Kleinjans, 2009). The fact that women shy away from competition more
than men may also account for the fact that few qualified women reach the top (see Bertrand and
Hallock, 2001) and for the acceleration of the gender wage gap in the upper tail (see Albrecht et al.,
2003; Arulampalam et al., 2007). Furthermore, competitiveness could be an especially important
trait for certain fields such as sciences and mathematics which are viewed as competitive. One reason
may be that it is easier to rank answers in math tests than in verbal tests.6 Furthermore, if more
boys select math heavy courses and majors, this increases the number of potential male competitors.
Experiments have shown that for women both the performance in (Gneezy et al., 2003) as well as
the selection into competitive environments (Niederle et al., 2012; Balafoutas and Sutter, 2012) is
sensitive to the gender composition of the group.7 There is also evidence of low tolerance for com-
petition among women who drop out of math intensive college majors and engineering.8 However,
most of this evidence is fairly casual and may suﬀer from the problem of reverse causality. Women
who hold low-profile jobs may not encounter many competitive situations and potentially become
less inclined towards competitions, or may simply start to describe themselves as less competitive
given the job they hold. Similarly, women who drop out of science and engineering may search for
explanations such as the negative aspect of the competitive environment.
    To assess the eﬀect of competitiveness on educational choices, we therefore aim to measure com-
petitiveness before students have diﬀerent and potentially influential experiences resulting from their
   6
     Indeed, laboratory research has shown that gender diﬀerences in competitiveness are sometimes (e.g. Kamas and
Preston, 2010) but not always (e,g, Wozniak et al., 2010; see Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011 for an overview) attenuated
when assessed in verbal tasks.
   7
     Huguet and Regner (2007) show that girls underperform in mixed-sex groups (but not in all female groups) in a
test they were led to believe measures mathematical ability.
   8
     The report “Women’s Experiences in College Engineering” (Goodman Research Group, 2002) reports that women
do not drop their math intensive studies because of ability, but rather low self-confidence. These women also mention
negative aspects of their climate such as competition and discouraging faculty and peers (see also Felder et al., 1995,
for a study on engineering).


                                                          3
choices. We run our study in the Netherlands where, at the end of the third year of secondary school,
students in the pre-university track choose between four study profiles which strongly correlate with
their choices of major in tertiary education. The four profiles are clearly ranked in terms of their
math intensity and academic prestige as follows: science, health, social sciences and humanities.
Girls, despite being slightly better academically than boys, are less likely to enroll in the most
prestigious math-heavy science profile and more likely to enroll in the least prestigious humanities
profile.
    We administered an experiment in four schools in and around Amsterdam just before students
chose their study profiles. Since we are concerned with the choice of prestigious profiles typically fa-
vored by males, we measure the competitiveness of students in a stereotypical male task. Specifically,
we use the most common measure of competitiveness by Niederle and Vesterlund (2007), which has
proven to be robust across many settings and subject pools (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011). Niederle
and Vesterlund (2007) show that gender diﬀerences in competitiveness can be partially attributed
to gender diﬀerences in confidence, while gender diﬀerences in risk attitudes play only a minor role.
Both confidence and risk attitudes could also play an important role when students decide whether
to choose a more prestigious study profile. We therefore also administer incentivized measures of
students’ confidence and their risk attitudes. The schools provided us with the subsequent profile
choices of students as well as with their grades. Finally, we assess the students’ perceptions of their
mathematical ability, as grades may not be the most accurate predictor of ability.
    Students in our sample exhibit the expected significant gender gap in prestigiousness (or math
intensity) of their chosen study profiles, controlling for both objective and subjective academic
performance. Confirming the results from the literature on college students, boys in our sample are
more than twice as likely than girls to enter the tournament. The first finding is that competitiveness
correlates positively with the prestige of chosen study profiles. Being competitive bridges around
20 percent of the distance between choosing the lowest and the highest ranked profile, which is
comparable to the eﬀect of being male. Our main result is that competitiveness accounts for 23
percent of the gender gap in the prestige of chosen study profiles. When we control for grades and
perceived mathematical ability, this percentage equals 18. When we subsequently also control for
confidence and risk attitudes, inclusion of competitiveness closes the gender gap in the prestige of
chosen profiles by a significant 15 percent.
    Prior to our findings, the external relevance of the concept of competitiveness had not yet
been addressed in a satisfactory manner.9 Our results show that the competitiveness measure
commonly used in laboratory experiments helps uncover a trait which accounts for a statistically
   9
     There has, however, been a growing literature on the external validity of lab results on gender diﬀerences, most
notably competitiveness. Typically, such field evidence aims to either find or create environments that resemble
the experimental design, albeit with other subject pools. While the field evidence has focused on showing that the
gender gap in performance increases with rising competitive pressure, the scant early studies on choices of competitive
environments find evidence consistent with women shying away from competition (see e.g. Flory et al., 2010, and for
an overview Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011). While it is reassuring that both the intensive and extensive margin of
gender diﬀerences in competitiveness can be found in additional specific groups beyond school and college students,
such evidence does not directly inform us whether gender diﬀerences in competitiveness can account for an economically
significant portion of observed gender diﬀerences in educational choices and labor market outcomes.


                                                          4
and economically significant portion of the gender diﬀerence in educational choices. As such our
paper not only shows the external relevance of competitiveness but also validates the specific measure
of competitiveness provided by Niederle and Vesterlund (2007).
      The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data collection.
Section 3 provides details and results concerning the education choice we analyze in this paper, and
its context in the Dutch education system. Section 4 describes and analyzes the experimental data.
Section 5 presents the main results. Section 6 summarizes and discusses the results and concludes.


2     Study design

2.1    Data Collection

The students participating in this study are drawn from the population of Dutch secondary school
students who are enrolled in the pre-university track. Halfway through the six years of secondary
school, at the end of grade 9, students in the pre-university track have to choose one out of four study
profiles: the science-oriented profile Nature & Technology (NT), the health-oriented profile Nature
& Health (NH), the social science-oriented profile Economics & Society (ES) and the humanities-
oriented profile Culture & Society (CS).
      We invited secondary schools in and around Amsterdam to participate in a research project
investigating the determinants of study profile choices. We demanded one class hour (45 or 50
minutes) of all grade 9 classes in the pre-university track. The invitation letter stated that students
would participate in an in-class experiment and be paid depending on their choices. It also mentioned
that after the experiment a short questionnaire would be administered. For detailed instructions see
the online appendix.
      Four schools cooperated, one in the city of Amsterdam and three in cities close to Amsterdam.
In each school, we captured all students in the 3rd year of the pre-university track for a total of
397 students in 16 classes. Because the schools are geographically dispersed, we do not worry that
students received information about the experiment from students in other schools. For any given
school, experiments in diﬀerent classes were administered on the same day, often at the same time.
The data collection in the schools took place in March, April and May of 2011.
      After the end of the school year, the schools provided us with the students’ final grades and
the definite profile choices. For 35 students we do not have such a definite profile choice.10 For
20 of these students, we can use information about their expected profile choice obtained through
the short questionnaire.11 We drop the remaining 15 students for whom we have neither a definite
choice nor a clear choice from the questionnaire. We have to drop an additional 4 students from the
analysis because they showed up late to class and missed part of the experiment, 2 students because
their questionnaires were incomplete and they therefore lack key control variables, and 14 students
  10
     Some students may have to retake the year, and in some schools those are included in the final profile choice, in
others not.
  11
     For the students for whom we have both the definite profile choice and the intention stated in the questionnaire,
the questionnaire answer accurately predicts the final choice in 93 percent of the cases.



                                                          5
because we did not obtain their grades. This leaves us with a sample of 362 subjects.

2.2     Variables

Competitiveness. We use a classroom experiment to obtain an individual measure of competitive-
ness. The design closely follows Niederle and Vesterlund (2007). Participants perform a real task,
first under a noncompetitive piece rate scheme and then under a competitive tournament scheme.
Participants then choose which of the two payment schemes to apply to their third and final perfor-
mance. This allows us to determine the extent to which the choice of compensation scheme depends
on performance.
      The task of the experiment is to add up sets of four two-digit numbers for three minutes. The
performance in each round corresponds to the number of correctly solved problems. In each round
participants received envelopes that contained a sheet of 26 problems. After having read out the
instructions that were on top of the envelopes and answering questions (if any), the experimenter gave
the signal that subjects could open the envelopes and start the addition problems. Participants were
not allowed to use calculators but could use scratch paper. At the end of three minutes subjects had
to drop the pen and stand up. In each round there were three versions of the 26 addition problems
to prevent copying from neighbors.12
      Participants were informed that they would perform in three rounds, one of which was randomly
chosen for payment at the end of the experiment through the roll of a die in front of the class.
Participants received details on each round only immediately before performing in the task. Partic-
ipants did not receive any information about their own performance or the performance of others.
They were paid a week later through sealed envelopes, at which time they could make inferences
about their relative performance. Participants earned on average €5.55, with a minimum of zero
and a maximum of €25 (this includes the payment from incentivized questions to elicit confidence
and risk attitudes; see below). There was no participation fee.
      Participants first performed the task under a noncompetitive piece rate of 25 Euro-cents per
correctly solved problem. In round two they performed in tournaments of four, where the three
competitors were randomly selected by computer among students from the same class after the
end of the experiment. The person with the largest number of correctly solved problems would be
paid €1 per correct problem and the others received no payment. In case of a tie, the winner was
randomly determined.
      In the third round, participants chose which of the two payment schemes they would prefer.
Students were informed that in case round three was selected for payment, the earnings were com-
puted as follows. A participant who chose the piece rate received 25 cents per correct problem. A
participant who selected the tournament would win if his or her new round 3 performance exceeded
the performance of the other three group members in the previous round 2 tournament. Therefore,
just like in Niederle and Vesterlund (2007), the choice was an individual decision as a subject could
 12
      Since including controls for the specific test does not change any result, we omit them for brevity.




                                                            6
not aﬀect the payoﬀs of any other participant.13

Confidence. To measure confidence we asked participants for their beliefs about their relative per-
formance after completing Round 3. Specifically, we asked students about their relative performance
in the Round 2 tournament compared to the other three group members, from 1 (best) to 4 (worst)
of their group of four. If their guess was correct, they received €1.14

Risk attitudes. We elicit risk attitudes by using two measures. First, following Eckel and Grossman
(2002), subjects picked one option among a sure payoﬀ of €2 and four 50/50 lotteries in Euros with
increasing riskiness and expected payoﬀs: 3 or 1.5; 4 or 1; 5 or 0.5; 6 or 0. The outcome of the
lottery was determined by a dice roll at the end of the experiment. Second, we asked subjects “How
do you see yourself: Are you generally a person who is fully prepared to take risks or do you try
to avoid taking risks?” The answer is on a scale from 0 (“unwilling to take risks”) to 10 (“fully
prepared to take risk”). This second risk measure, being a survey question, is cheap, but potentially
less reliable. However, Dohmen et al. (2011), using representative survey data from Germany, find
that this simple question predicts both choices in a lottery task and risky behavior across a number
of contexts including holding stocks, being self-employed, participating in sports, and smoking.
Lonnqvist et al. (2010) find the question to be much more stable over time than lottery measures
for risk attitudes.

Ability. We use information about students’ grades at the end of 9th grade provided by the schools
to construct three objective ability measures. The first is GPA, the second the grade for mathematics.
In the Dutch school system, grades are expressed on a scale from 1(worst) to 10(best), where 6 is
the first passing grade. The third measure is the relative math grade in the student’s class. We gave
the best students in class a rank of 1. The rank of each student is equal to 1 plus the number of
students with a strictly better grade. We then normalize the measure by dividing by the number of
students in the class.15
       Since grades need not be a good predictor of mathematical ability, we collected subjective ability
measures in the questionnaire that was administered after the in-class experiment. We asked students
to rank themselves on mathematical talent compared to other students in their year (and school) on
a scale from 1 (the best 25%) to 4 (the worst 25%).16 We also asked students how diﬃcult they find
  13
      There are several advantages to having participants compete in round 3 against the previous round 2 tournament
performance. First, the performance of a subject who chose the tournament is evaluated against the performance of
other subjects in a tournament. Second, the choice of compensation scheme of a subject should not depend on the
choices of other players. Third, the participant provides no externality to another subject, hence motives such as
altruism, or fear of interfering with someone else’s payoﬀ play no role.
   14
      When two subjects have the same number of correctly solved additions they receive the same rank. For example,
if two subjects are tied for first place, they are both ranked first and receive €1 if their guessed rank is equal to 1.
The next best subject is ranked third.
   15
      To compute the relative mathematics rank in class, we include all 397 students in our sample, including the 35
students we had to drop for the final results.
   16
      This was phrased as three yes/no questions: “Do you think your mathematics ability is in the top 25% of your
year?”, “...top 50% of your year?”, “...top 75% of your year?”. A student who answered all 3 questions with a no was



                                                           7
it to pass their math class on a scale from 0 (very easy) to 10 (very hard). While these questions may
yield a better assessment of mathematical ability, they could in addition be a measure of confidence,
which in turn could influence study profile choices. Indeed, it has been found that conditional on
academic performance, boys are more confident in their relative ability than girls (Eccles, 1998),
a diﬀerence that seems greatest among gifted children (Preckel et al., 2008). This may in part be
driven by gender stereotypes that boys are better at math than girls and by the fact that the fraction
of male teachers is larger in courses that are math intensive.17
      We present the results from the study in three stages. First, we describe the environment and
study profile decisions of students. We document significant gender diﬀerences in the prestige (and
math intensity) of the profile choices which are not explained by diﬀerences in ability. Second,
we present the data on the experimentally measured attributes: competitiveness, confidence and
risk aversion. We show significant gender diﬀerences in competitiveness, that is selection into the
tournament conditional on performance. We assess the extent to which these diﬀerences can be
attributed to gender diﬀerences in confidence and risk attitudes. Finally, in the main result section
we examine whether competitiveness correlates with profile choice. We then assess to what extent
gender diﬀerences in competitiveness can account for gender diﬀerences in the prestige of chosen
profiles.


3     The Education Choice

3.1    Study Profiles

The students participating in this study are drawn from the population of Dutch secondary school
students who are enrolled in the pre-university track. In the Dutch school system tracking first takes
place when students go from primary school - grades 1 to 6 - to secondary school, normally at age
12. There are three tracks: around 20 percent of students graduate from the six-year pre-university
track, 25 percent from the five-year general track and 55 percent from the four-year vocational
track. Who enrolls in which track is to a large extent determined by the score on a nation-wide
achievement test administered at the end of primary school. Girls are somewhat more likely to go
to the pre-university track, making up 54 percent of the students (Statistics Netherlands).
      Halfway through the six years of secondary school, at the end of grade 9, students in the pre-
university track have to choose one out of four study profiles:

      • the science-oriented profile Nature & Technology (NT)

      • the health-oriented profile Nature & Health (NH)
automatically assumed to be in the bottom 25%. We had 44 students who answered no to all questions. A student
who answers yes to one of the questions also should answer yes to the next (if one is in the top 25%, one is also in the
top 50%). 67 students, however, switched back to no. For these students, we count the first yes as their true answer.
  17
     Dee (2007) and Carrell et al. (2010) show that having a female teacher increases the math and science performance
of female students, where the eﬀect is particularly large at the upper tail. However, teachers in math are less likely to
be female than those in other subjects. Using the 1999-2000 Schools and Staﬃng Survey (SASS), Dee (2007) estimates
that in 12th grade 44 and 52 percent of science and math teachers are female, compared to 71 percent in reading.
Bettinger and Long (2005) provide evidence for college instruction.


                                                           8
    • the social science-oriented profile Economics & Society (ES)

    • the humanities-oriented profile Culture & Society (CS)

Each student can select any profile, though low grades in specific subjects may lead to teachers
recommending other profiles.
    For each study profile, Table 1 shows the subjects oﬀered and the number of teaching hours
assigned to these subjects in the last three years of secondary school. Mathematics is the only
subject taught at diﬀerent levels in each track, where D is the most advanced math course followed
by B, A and C. The order of math and science diﬃculty is therefore NT>NH>ES>CS. Panel A of
Table 2 shows the strong correlation between the study profile in secondary school and the choice
of major in tertiary education. Most NT graduates study a subject in science and engineering, NH
graduates often opt for health-related subjects, ES graduates often choose a major in economics and
business or in law, and most CS graduates choose a subject in the humanities, social sciences or
law.18
    Generally, NT is viewed as the most challenging and prestigious study profile, followed by NH
and ES, and CS as the least demanding and prestigious study profile. This is related to the diﬃculty
and amount of mathematics and science in the curriculum. In other countries in which students can
choose study profiles in school, the prestigiousness of the profiles is also often highly correlated with
their math intensity (see for example Pautler, 1981 for France).
    The prestigiousness of study profiles is related to the likelihood of going to university, see panel
B of Table 2. The prestige of study profiles is also related to the academic performance of students
selecting the various profiles. The top panel of Table 3 shows mean values of measures of students’
ability by study profile. This information is based on the students in our sample. According to all
five of our ability measures, the students who choose NT have higher ability than the students who
choose NH, who in turn have higher ability measures than the students who choose ES. Students
who choose CS score lowest on four of the five measures.
    This ordering of profiles by prestige is also reflected in the opinions of the students from our
study. In a short questionnaire we asked the students to rank the four study profiles by asking
“Which profile do the best students pick?”. The bottom panel of Table 3 shows that their responses
concur with the general opinion. A majority of over 70 percent of students believes NT is chosen
by the best students. A majority of students ranks the NH study profile second and ES third.
More than 80 percent of students rank CS as the profile most chosen by the weakest students. The
rankings of boys and girls are very similar. We also asked students to rank the four study profiles
in terms of future earnings. The picture that emerges is very similar.19
   18
      Some studies actually restrict entry to certain profiles or courses within profiles. For example, medical schools
require NT or NH; to study Math, having taken at least Math B in high school is required.
   19
      The exact question was “With which profile do you think you would earn most in ten year’s time? Rank the
profiles from 1 to 4 where 1 means that you would earn most if you chose that profile and 4 that you would earn least
if you chose that profile.” This question was only asked to students in two of the four schools and the percentages are
therefore based on 181 observations. 50 percent think that NT gives the best salary prospects, 27 percent think NH,
20 percent ES and 2 percent CS.



                                                          9
Table 1. Subjects and teaching hours per study profile

Nature & Technology - NT                                                    Nature & Health - NH
Mathematics B - 600                                                         Mathematics A - 520
Physics - 480                                                               Biology - 480
Chemistry - 440                                                             Chemistry - 440
Nature, life and technology – 440                                           Nature, life and technology – 440
 or IT - 440                                                                 or geography - 440
 or biology - 480                                                            or physics - 480
 or mathematics D - 440
Economics & Society - ES                                                    Culture & Society - CS
Mathematics A - 520                                                         Mathematics A or C - 480
Economics - 480                                                             History - 480
History - 440                                                               Art – 480
Management and organization – 440                                            or philosophy – 480
 or geography – 440                                                          or modern foreign language - 480
 or social studies - 440                                                     or Greek or Latin - 600
 or modern foreign language - 480                                           Geography – 440
                                                                             or social studies - 440
                                                                             or economics - 480
Note: The table lists the subjects per profile and the number of teaching hours per subject during the last three
years of the pre-university track. In addition all students take the following non-profile specific subjects: Dutch (480
hours), English (400), second foreign language, Latin or Greek (480), social studies (120), general natural sciences
(120), culture (160), sports (160). The students spend roughly half their time on profile specific subjects and half on
common subjects. Source: Ministry of Education, Culture and Science.




Table 2. Study profiles by tertiary education choices and gender (percentages)

                                                             NT                NH                ES               CS
A               Undergraduate major
                Humanities                                      9                6                8                30
                Social Sciences                                 2               9                19                34
                Law                                             1                4               20                20
                Economics and Business                         15                8               46                 5
                Science and Engineering                        64               18               2                  0
                Health Care                                     7               48               1                  1
                Other                                           2                7               4                 9
B               Going to university                            81               72               69                60
C               Boys                                           35               21               38                 6
                Girls                                          10               34               32                24
Source: Statistics Netherlands (CBS). The data from panels A and B are from 2006. The data from panel C are from
2009, where we exclude choices of combined profiles.




                                                          10
Table 3. Descriptive statistics about profiles

By chosen profile                      NT                NH                ES                CS           Diﬀerence
GPA (1-10)                             7.12              7.09             6.65              6.61            0.00
Math grades (1-10)                     7.25              6.73             6.20              6.21            0.00
Relative math (0-1)                    0.23              0.35             0.46              0.49            0.00
Math diﬃculty (0-10)                   1.95              3.62             4.90              5.30            0.00
Math quartile (1(best)-4)              1.52              1.98             2.50              2.67            0.00

All: Prestige (% rank)             1.48 (71%)        2.13 (57%)       2.64 (60%)        3.67 (81%)
Boys: Prestige (% rank)            1.43 (75%)        2.24 (57%)       2.59 (56%)        3.68 (82%)
Girls: Prestige (% rank)           1.52 (68%)        2.03 (57%)       2.71 (64%)        3.66 (80%)
Observations                           102               89               128               43
Note: Top rows: Average characteristics of subjects who chose that profile. Grades are out of 10 with higher numbers
being better grades. Math diﬃculty goes from 0 - very easy to 10 - very hard. Math quartile goes from 1 - best 25%
to 4 - worst 25%. The last column reports p-values from Kruskal Wallis tests. Bottom rows: Average ranking of study
profiles, and in parentheses, the fraction of students who rank that profile first (for NT), second, third or fourth for
NH, ES and CS, respectively.


      In the remainder of the paper, we order the profiles from most to least prestigious: NT >NH>ES>CS.
As a robustness check, we use in the online appendix for each student the ranking they gave to their
chosen profile in terms of which profiles the best students choose. That is, if a student ranked, say,
CS as the profile chosen by the best students, followed by ES, NH and NT (so, the reverse order)
and chose profile CS for herself, we categorize that student as choosing the most “own prestigious”
profile (rank 4). If this student chose ES, we would rank her choice as 3 and so on. The main results
of this paper remain qualitatively the same.
      Panel C of Table 2 shows that in the Netherlands, profile choices diﬀer markedly between the
sexes. Boys are more likely to choose more prestigious study profiles. Compared to girls, boys are
more than three times as likely to choose the most prestigious profile, NT, and only a fourth as likely
to choose the least prestigious profile, CS. The fact that girls are disproportionally more likely to
choose CS has prompted a debate with the minister for education even proposing to eliminate the
profile altogether. This idea was ultimately rejected and the profiles remain as they are for now.20

3.2    Academic Data

Before we assess the profile choices of boys and girls in our data, we present summary statistics of
the academic data we received from schools.

Ability. The first three rows of Panel A in Table 4 show that girls have significantly higher GPA than
boys, while there is no significant gender diﬀerence in the absolute or relative grade for mathematics.
The last two rows of Panel A in Table 4 show that there are, however, significant gender diﬀerences
  20
     Source:                   http://nos.nl/artikel/203421-minister-wil-onderwijs-reorganiseren.html               and
http://nos.nl/artikel/268284-raad-niet-minder-profielen-havovwo.html




                                                          11
on the two subjective measures of mathematical ability (math quartile and math diﬃculty), with
girls feeling less able than boys.

Profile choice. We have two sources of information about students’ profile choices. In the ques-
tionnaire we asked students which profile they expected to choose. The schools provided us with
information about their actual choices made several months later. Two of the four schools in our
sample allow students to pick combined profiles. Of the 173 students in those two schools, 64 students
choose the NT/NH combination and 18 the ES/CS combination. In the NT/NH profile, students
take Mathematics B, albeit only at 520 hours. Furthermore, Physics is not required. In the ES/CS
profile, students replace one of the CS-electives with the economics course. As such, the combined
profiles are somewhat in between the pure profiles, though a little closer to NT and ES, respectively.
For the main analysis of this paper we use for the students in combined profiles the chosen profile as
stated in the questionnaire.21 However, since one can argue that the NT/NH profile is closer to NT,
and the ES/CS closer to ES, we reestimate all regressions using this alternative definition of profile
choice in the online appendix. As a further robustness check, in the online appendix, we show results
where we treat NT/NH and ES/CS as separate categories.22 The results remain qualitatively the
same in both specifications.

3.3    Gender Diﬀerences in Prestige of Chosen Profiles

While academically boys and girls are very comparable, girls make significantly diﬀerent profile
choices from boys. The lower part of Table 4 shows profile choices by gender in our sample of 362
students. The pattern is similar to the pattern observed in the national statistics (see Table 2). The
NT profile is much more popular among boys than girls, while the opposite holds for NH. The ES
profile is slightly more popular among boys than girls, and girls are much more likely than boys
to choose the least prestigious profile, CS. Note that in our sample, boys and girls are as likely to
choose one of the science profiles compared to one of the society profiles. This is not the case in
the national statistics, where girls are overall more likely to choose a society profile, while boys are
overall more likely to choose a science profile.23
      To more precisely understand gender diﬀerences in the prestige of the chosen study profiles, we
show in Table 5 ordered probit regressions where we order profiles from most to least prestigious:
NT>NH>ES>CS. In this and all following analyses, we standardize all non-binary control variables
to make the coeﬃcients comparable. Table A.1 in the online appendix provides the mean and
   21
      All of the students who picked ES/CS chose ES or CS in the questionnaire. All of the students who picked NT/NH
chose NT or NH in the questionnaire with the exception of one student who chose CS. We treat this student as a CS
student when using the stated profile to place students that chose a combination profile into “pure” profiles.
   22
      For these two analyses we drop an additional 20 students. These are all the students for whom we have not received
a final profile choice from the schools and used the questionnaire answer instead. The questionnaire, however, did not
allow for combination profiles.
   23
      There are two potential reasons for the disparity in gender diﬀerences in profile choices between our set of four
schools and the national statistics. First, students at schools in and around Amsterdam may diﬀer from the average
Dutch student. Second, the national statistics relate to cohorts that graduated in 2009, while students in our sample
will graduate in 2014. In addition, there seems to be a general trend away from CS.



                                                          12
Table 4. Descriptive statistics by gender

                                        Scale                                    Boys          Girls        p-value
A: Ability
GPA                                     1(lowest) - 10(highest)                   6.80         6.97           0.01
Math grade                              1(lowest) - 10(highest)                   6.67         6.59           0.49
Math relative                           0-1                                       0.38         0.37           0.88
Math quartile (1-4)                     1(best) - 4(worst)                        1.97         2.25           0.03
Math diﬃculty (0-10)                    0(very easy) - 10(very hard)              3.41         4.18           0.01
B: Profile choices
Nature & Technology (NT)                dummy                                     0.40         0.17
Nature & Health (NH)                    dummy                                     0.12         0.36
Economics & Society (ES)                dummy                                     0.39         0.32
Culture & Society (CS)                  dummy                                     0.08         0.15           0.00
Number of observations                                                            177          185
Note: The last column reports p-values from t-tests for continuous variables and from a Fisher’s exact test for
categorical variables.


standard deviations of all our control variables. The first column shows that boys are significantly
more likely than girls to choose a prestigious profile. Being female bridges almost 20 percent of
the distance between the most and the least prestigious profiles (this is shown in the penultimate
row by F/(C3-C1), the female coeﬃcient divided by the distance between the first and the third
ordered probit cutoﬀs). Inclusion of objective ability variables (column (2)) increases the gender gap
to almost 22 percent of the distance between the most and the least prestigious profiles. Note that
the coeﬃcient on female is larger (in absolute value) than on the GPA. An increase of one standard
deviation in GPA corresponds to bridging 11 percent of the gap between the most and the least
prestigious profile.
    When we add students’ perceptions about their mathematics ability in column (3), the gender
gap shrinks but remains large and highly significant. While these subjective variables may already
be viewed as psychological attributes, it may well be that they produce an additional insight into
a students’ real mathematical ability compared to grades only. In any case, there is a significant
gender diﬀerence in study profile choice, with girls choosing less prestigious profiles than boys.24
    Table A.2 in the online appendix shows that the results are very similar when we classify an
NT/NH combined choice as NT, and an ES/CS choice as ES, instead of using the students’ answer
in the questionnaire to attribute combined profile choices to one of the four baseline study profiles.
The results are also robust to treating the combined profiles as their own category, where combined
profiles are ordered between the baseline study profiles, that is, NT>NT/NH>NH>ES>ES/CS>CS.
Finally, using the student-specific ordering and running the same ordered probit specifications, we
find that the gender diﬀerences are, if anything, slightly exacerbated (see the last three columns of
  24
     Alternatively, when we use simple OLS regressions, where CS is modeled as a choice of 1 up to NT as a choice of 4,
the coeﬃcient on female is -0.296 (s.e. 0.105, p<0.01) without any controls. The magnitude of the eﬀect increases to
-0.337 (s.e. 0.101, p< 0.01) when we add the controls from column (2) in Table 5, which is larger than the coeﬃcient
on standardized GPA which is 0.207 (s.e. 0.059, p<0.01). When we add all the controls from column (3) the gender
coeﬃcient is -0.225 (s.e. 0.095, p<0.05), again larger than the coeﬃcient on the GPA of 0.175 (s.e. 0.058, p< 0.01).


                                                          13
Table 5. Gender and profile choice

                               Ordered probit (NT>NH>ES>CS)                 NT vs. Rest              Rest vs. CS
                         (1)             (2)              (3)                   (4)                       (5)
                               ⇤⇤⇤             ⇤⇤⇤              ⇤⇤                    ⇤⇤⇤
Female                -0.342          -0.433           -0.315                -0.207                     -0.061⇤
                       (0.114)         (0.124)         (0.125)                (0.047)                   (0.033)
Math Grade                              0.189           0.001                  0.038                    -0.051⇤
                                       (0.149)         (0.158)                (0.068)                   (0.030)
GPA                                    0.218⇤⇤         0.201⇤⇤                 0.027                    0.035⇤
                                       (0.092)         (0.092)                (0.041)                   (0.018)
Rel. Math Gr.                          -0.152           -0.106                -0.062                    -0.036
                                       (0.126)         (0.128)                (0.063)                   (0.025)
Math Diﬃculty                                          -0.220⇤⇤              -0.110⇤⇤                   -0.021
                                                       (0.087)                (0.046)                   (0.017)
Math Quartile                                          -0.321⇤⇤⇤             -0.154⇤⇤⇤                  -0.029⇤
                                                       (0.072)                (0.038)                   (0.015)
                               ⇤⇤⇤
Cut 1 (C1)            -1.367            1.806           -0.535
Cut 2 (C2)            -0.251⇤⇤⇤        3.038⇤⇤⇤         0.794
Cut 3 (C3)             0.404⇤⇤⇤        3.787⇤⇤⇤         1.610
Female/(C3-C1)        -0.193⇤⇤⇤       -0.219⇤⇤⇤        -0.147⇤⇤⇤
N                       362            362              362                 362                   362
Note: Dependent variable in columns (1) to (3): Profile choice, where NT>NH>ES>CS. Coeﬃcients from ordered
probit regressions. Dependent variable in column (4): dummy variable NT=1. Dependent variable in column (5):
dummy variable “not CS”=1. Marginal eﬀects in columns (4) and (5) from probit regressions. Robust standard errors
in parentheses; *, ** and *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent, respectively. The margins are taken for a
male student and mean values of the other variables.




                                                         14
Table A.2 in the online appendix).
         To provide additional insights on the magnitude of the gender diﬀerence in profile choice, we
run probit regressions on choosing the most prestigious profile, NT, compared to any other profile,
controlling for objective and subjective academic performance. Column (4) in Table 5 shows that
girls are 21 percentage points less likely to choose NT, a significant diﬀerence. When we redo the
exercise for choosing the least prestigious profile, CS, compared to any other profile, the marginal
coeﬃcient shows that female students are 6 percentage points more likely to choose CS than boys,
again a significant diﬀerence (column (5)).


4        Gender Diﬀerences in Competitiveness

In this section we analyze gender diﬀerences in competitiveness as well as confidence and risk aver-
sion.

4.1       Experimental Data

Competitiveness. Panels A and B of Table 6 report mean values of performance in Rounds 1 and
2 and of tournament entry, separately for boys and girls. In Round 1 boys perform significantly
better than girls. In the second round when students’ payment is based on the tournament, there
is no significant diﬀerence in performance. Since students compete only against students in their
own class, we compute for each student the chance to win the tournament in Round 2 given their
performance and that of their classmates.25 The average chance to win the tournament is slightly
but not significantly higher for boys than for girls. Provided the performance in Round 3 is not
lower than that in Round 2, then every student with a chance of winning the tournament of 25
percent and higher has higher expected earnings when choosing to enter the tournament in Round
3. This would result in 38 percent of the boys and 35 percent of the girls entering the tournament,
an insignificant diﬀerence. Actual tournament entry shows a very diﬀerent pattern; we find that 49
percent of boys and less than half as many, 23 percent of girls, enter the tournament. This diﬀerence
is significant (and significantly diﬀerent from optimal entry p=0.01).26

Confidence. Panel C of Table 6 reports that the average guessed rank is 2.14 for boys and 2.56 for
girls, with the two distributions being significantly diﬀerent. We find that 32 percent of the boys and
11 percent of the girls believe that they are the best performers within their group, again a significant
diﬀerence. To assess the accuracy of these beliefs, we compute for each student the optimal guessed
rank, that is, the guess that would have maximized their expected earnings, given the performances
    25
     To compute the chance of winning the tournament for each participant, we include all 397 students in our sample,
including the 35 students we had to drop for the final results. We use simulations and randomly draw one thousand
diﬀerent comparison groups of three from a participants’ own class. If two performances were tied for first place, a
0.5 win was assigned (1/3 in case of three tied performances and 0.25 in case of four).
  26
     In Round 3, subjects who compete solve on average 9.75 correct sums while those who do not compete solve 7.92
(p=0.00). The overall average is 8.57. Neither for the subjects who enter the tournament nor for those who choose
the piece-rate is performance significantly diﬀerent between the genders (p=0.25 and p=0.65, respectively).



                                                         15
Table 6. Descriptive statistics by gender

                                                     Scale                               Boys     Girls    p-value
A: Performance
Performance Round 1 (piece rate)                     number of correct answers            6.60     5.94      0.03
Performance Round 2 (tournament)                     number of correct answers            7.90     7.42      0.15
Chance of winning Round 2 (tournament)               [0,1]                                0.27     0.24      0.24
B: Competitiveness
Actual tournament entry                              dummy                                0.49     0.23      0.00
Optimal tournament entry                             dummy                                0.38     0.35      0.59
C: Confidence
Actual guessed rank                                  1(best) - 4 (worst)                  2.14     2.56      0.00
Optimal guessed rank                                 1(best) - 4 (worst)                  2.39     2.55      0.24
Guesses to be the best                               dummy                                0.32     0.11      0.00
Optimal to guess to be the best                      dummy                                0.25     0.22      0.46
D: Risk Attitudes
Lottery choice                                       1(no risk) - 5(highest risk)         3.46     2.99      0.00
Risk taking                                          1(avoid risk) - 10(seek risk)        6.52     5.96      0.00
Number of observations                                                                    177      185
Note: The last column reports p-values from t-tests for continuous variables and from a Fisher’s exact test for
categorical variables.


of the other students in their class.27 Using the optimal guessed rank, there would be no significant
gender diﬀerence in overall beliefs or the guess to be the best. An ordered probit regression of the
guessed rank on the optimal guessed rank and a female dummy delivers a female coeﬃcient of 0.496
(s.e. 0.117, p = 0.00).28 This confirms that girls, given their relative performance, are significantly
less confident about their relative performance than boys.

Risk attitudes. Panel D in Table 6 shows that boys on average choose a significantly more risky
lottery. On the general risk tolerance question boys also score on average significantly higher. The
correlation between the two risk measures is 0.42 in the whole sample (p<0.01), and 0.45 and 0.34
in the sub-samples of boys and girls, respectively (p<0.01 in both cases).

4.2    Gender Diﬀerences in Competitiveness

To assess gender diﬀerences in competitiveness, Table 7 shows marginal eﬀects from probit regressions
of tournament entry in Round 3. Girls have a 26 percentage point lower probability of entering the
tournament compared to boys, when only controlling for performance in Round 1, the diﬀerence in
performance between Rounds 1 and 2 and the chance of winning in Round 2 (column (1)). This is
  27
     We compute the optimal guessed rank through simulation. We randomly draw a thousand diﬀerent comparison
groups of three from a participants’ own class. We include all 397 students in our sample, including the 35 students
we had to drop for the final results. We counted the number of times a student ranked first, second, third and fourth.
The mode of the ranks is the best guess as it maximizes expected earnings. If two performances were tied for a place,
both guesses were counted as correct.
  28
     The coeﬃcient on the optimal guessed rank is 0.653 (s.e. 0.060, p=0.00).




                                                         16
Table 7. Determinants of tournament entry

                             (1)                  (2)                   (3)               (4)                  (5)
Female                    -0.261⇤⇤⇤            -0.191⇤⇤⇤           -0.166⇤⇤⇤           -0.153⇤⇤⇤            -0.139⇤⇤
                           (0.051)             (0.055)              (0.055)             (0.056)              (0.058)
Tournament                0.054⇤⇤⇤              0.022                  0.020             0.024                0.015
                           (0.020)             (0.021)              (0.021)             (0.021)              (0.021)
T - PR                    -0.028⇤⇤             -0.022⇤              -0.018               -0.018              -0.014
                           (0.013)             (0.013)              (0.014)             (0.014)              (0.014)
Win Prob                    0.231               0.062                  0.041             -0.006               0.080
                           (0.204)             (0.210)              (0.211)             (0.215)              (0.226)
Guessed rank                                   -0.275⇤⇤⇤           -0.276⇤⇤⇤           -0.258⇤⇤⇤            -0.253⇤⇤⇤
                                               (0.041)              (0.041)             (0.041)              (0.041)
Lottery                                                            0.098⇤⇤⇤              0.043                0.048
                                                                    (0.031)             (0.032)              (0.033)
Risk-taking                                                                             0.156⇤⇤⇤            0.167⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                        (0.035)              (0.036)
Math grade                                                                                                   0.165⇤⇤
                                                                                                             (0.075)
GPA                                                                                                          -0.089⇤
                                                                                                             (0.048)
Math Relative                                                                                                 0.027
                                                                                                             (0.066)
Math quartile                                                                                                 0.068
                                                                                                             (0.042)
Math diﬃculty                                                                                                -0.025
                                                                                                             (0.045)
N                        362                362                362                362                362
Dependent variable: Round 3 choice of compensation scheme (1-tournament and 0-piece rate). The table presents
marginal eﬀects of coeﬃcients of a probit regression evaluated at a male student with a 0.25 chance of winning (the
rest of the variables are evaluated at the sample mean). Standard errors of the marginal coeﬃcients are in parentheses;
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01 of the underlying coeﬃcient.


very much in line with Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) and the large resulting literature (see Niederle
and Vesterlund, 2011).
       Adding the guessed rank as a measure of confidence to the probit regression on tournament entry,
column (2) shows that the gender eﬀect drops to 19 percentage points, a still highly significant
diﬀerence.29 Adding the lottery choice variable slightly reduces the gender gap in tournament
entry by an additional 2 percentage points to 17 percentage points (compare columns (2) and (3)).
Adding the questionnaire-based risk measure reduces the gender gap by another 2 percentage points
  29
    Since the task is a mathematics task, we could alternatively use the students’ beliefs about their relative per-
formance in mathematics and their beliefs about their math ability. This, however, reduces the gender gap only by
about 4 percent and a gap of 25 percentage points remains. The coeﬃcient on female is -0.251, (s.e. 0.051, p<0.01),
not very diﬀerent from the -0.261 from column (1). Adding all measures on beliefs about one’s relative performance
and math ability does not reduce the coeﬃcient on female compared to just having the belief on tournament perfor-
mance (guessed rank). Female students are then 19.4 (s.e. 0.055, p<0.01) percentage points less likely to enter the
tournament.



                                                           17
(compare columns (3) and (4)). Finally, when we also include measures of academic performance
and of perceived mathematical ability, the gender gap in tournament entry is once more slightly
reduced, leaving a significant gender gap in tournament entry of 14 percentage points (column (5)).
    In summary, the 15 year old children in our sample follow the standard gender diﬀerences in choice
of competition observed with college students (see Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011). Controlling for
performance, girls are about 26 percentage points less likely to enter the tournament. Boys have
significantly more optimistic views about their relative performance than girls, and these gender
diﬀerences in confidence account for slightly more than a quarter of the gender gap in tournament
entry. Risk attitudes, whether measured by a lottery choice or a simple questionnaire item, while
significantly predicting tournament entry, reduce the gender gap in competitiveness only by a much
smaller amount once we control for confidence.


5   Can Competitiveness Account for Gender Diﬀerences in Prestige of Chosen
    Profiles?

The students in our sample represent a classical situation. Boys and girls agree on which academic
profiles are the most prestigious, where prestigiousness perfectly correlates with math intensity.
They do not diﬀer in math grades, and if anything, girls have a slightly higher GPA than boys.
Despite these facts, girls are significantly less likely to choose the prestigious NT profile, and, in turn,
significantly more likely to choose the least prestigious profile, CS. Gender diﬀerences in study profile
choices remain significant when controlling for academic performance and perceived mathematical
ability. The students in our sample also exhibit the standard gender gap in competitiveness.
    In this section we assess whether competitiveness correlates with the prestigiousness of the study
profile choice and, more importantly, whether gender diﬀerences in competitiveness can help account
for the gender gap in chosen profiles. We also confirm that our results are robust to the inclusion of
diﬀerent sets of ability control variables, as well as controls for confidence and risk attitudes which
we showed to be correlated with tournament entry.
    As a preliminary analysis, Figure 1 shows for each profile the mean competitiveness of boys
and girls who chose that profile. In the figure, competitiveness is measured as the residual from a
regression of tournament entry on performance in Rounds 1 and 2 of the experiment and the chance
of winning the Round 2 tournament. The figure shows that within each sex, students who enter the
NT track are the most competitive students, followed by NH and ES, while those who enter the CS
track are the least competitive ones. The ranking is more pronounced among boys than among girls.
The figure suggests that competitiveness as measured by the short in-class experiment correlates
with study profile choice and as such may help account for the gender diﬀerence in those choices.




                                                    18
Figure 1. Tournament entry by gender and subsequent profile choice (conditional on performance)




   To investigate the impact of competitiveness on gender diﬀerences in profile choice in an intuitive
way, we compare the impact of gender on educational choices for diﬀerent subpopulations split by
gender and tournament entry. If the gender gap in profile choice is unrelated to competitiveness,
the impact of gender on profile choice should, for example, be the same for the subsample made up
of competitive boys (Comp Boys) and non-competitive girls (N-comp Girls) as for the subsample
made up of non-competitive boys and competitive girls.
   This idea is explored in Table 8 which reports coeﬃcients of regressions of profile choice on a
female dummy (and controls for performance in the experiment) for the various subsamples. The top
part reports ordered probit estimations that rank profiles by prestige: NT>NH>ES>CS. The table
shows that the gender gap in profile choice, which is significant for the whole sample, varies strongly
with competitiveness as measured by tournament entry. The gender gap in profile choice increases
with the competitiveness of boys and decreases with the competitiveness of girls. When we consider
competitive boys and non-competitive girls, gender bridges about 36% of the gap between choosing
the most and the least prestigious profile (see column (2) of the upper half of Table 8). When, on the
other hand, we consider non-competitive boys and competitive girls, there is no significant gender
diﬀerence in profile choices. Furthermore, the change in the gender dummy between the group of
competitive boys and non-competitive girls and the other way round is significant at the 1%-level.
   The probit models in the lower part of Table 8 give a more detailed view on this result. We first
assess the probability of choosing the most prestigious NT profile compared to any other study profile.
When we consider only competitive boys and non-competitive girls, girls are 34 percentage points
less likely to choose NT. When instead we consider competitive girls and non-competitive boys, girls
are only 9 percentage points less likely to choose the NT profile, a diﬀerence that is not significant.


                                                  19
Table 8. Gender eﬀects by subsample

                                           (1)                     (2)                    N
                                     Ordered probit         Female/(C3-C1)
(1) Comp B & n-comp. G                   -0.67⇤⇤⇤                -0.36⇤⇤⇤                230
                                          (0.16)
(2) Comp. B & comp. G                    -0.49⇤⇤                 -0.28⇤⇤⇤                129
                                          (0.20)
(3) N-comp. B & n-comp. G                 -0.16                   -0.09                  233
                                          (0.15)
(4) N-comp. B & comp. G                    0.03                    0.02                  132
                                          (0.20)
(5) Whole sample                         -0.35⇤⇤⇤                -0.20⇤⇤⇤                262
                                          (0.12)
P-value (1) vs (4)                         0.00                    0.01


Probit (marginal eﬀects)                   (1)                     (2)                   (3)                 (4)
                                       NT vs Rest                N vs S              Rest vs CS         Best vs Rest
(1) Comp B & n-comp. G                   -0.34⇤⇤⇤                 -0.10                -0.13⇤⇤⇤            -0.31⇤⇤⇤
                                         (0.07)                  (0.07)                (0.04)               (0.07)
                                              ⇤⇤⇤                                              ⇤
(2) Comp. B & comp. G                    -0.30                    -0.00                -0.09               -0.23⇤⇤
                                         (0.08)                  (0.09)                (0.05)               (0.09)
(3) N-comp. B & n-comp. G                -0.17⇤⇤⇤                 0.04                  -0.02              -0.15⇤⇤
                                         (0.06)                  (0.07)                (0.05)               (0.06)
(4) N-comp. B & comp. G                   -0.09                   0.13                  0.01                -0.08
                                         (0.09)                  (0.10)                (0.06)               (0.09)
(5) Whole sample                         -0.24⇤⇤⇤                 -0.00                -0.07⇤⇤             -0.21⇤⇤⇤
                                         (0.05)                  (0.05)                (0.03)               (0.05)
P-value (1) vs (4)                        0.01                    0.04                0.05               0.02
Note: Coeﬃcients are from regressions of profile choice on a female dummy and controls for performance in Rounds 1
and 2 of the experiment and the chance of winning the Round 2 tournament; robust standard errors in parentheses;
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01 ; p-values are bootstrapped. For the ordered probit regression, F/(C3-C1)
represents the relative size of the female coeﬃcient to the distance between the cuts provided by the ordered probit
regression (between on the one hand choosing the least and the second to least prestigious profile and on the other
hand between choosing the second and the most prestigious profile). For probit regressions, the value is 1 for the left
variable (e.g. NT in column (1)) and 0 otherwise. We report marginal eﬀects evaluated at a male student with a 0.25
chance of winning (the rest of the variables are evaluated at the sample mean).




                                                          20
Furthermore, the gender diﬀerence in choices is significantly smaller when we consider competitive
girls and non-competitive boys than when we consider competitive boys and non-competitive girls.
The results are qualitatively similar when we either consider choices between the Nature and the
Society profiles (the top two versus the bottom two in terms of prestige), or when we consider the
option to choose CS, the least prestigious profile, compared to any other profile. Finally, we consider
the student specific ordering of study profiles. Specifically, for each student we ask whether they pick
the profile that they deem to be the one chosen by the best students, or another profile. In all cases
the results are very similar. Gender diﬀerences are reduced when we reduce the competitiveness of
boys and increase the competitiveness of girls.
       These results show that gender diﬀerences in profile choice are strongly related to gender dif-
ference in competitiveness. We now turn to detailed regressions to confirm that the impact of
competitiveness on profile choice is robust when controlling for academic variables.
       Table 9 shows ordered probit regressions on the ranked profile choice. All columns include
controls for performance in Rounds 1 and 2 of the experiment and the chance of winning the
Round 2 tournament. Column (1) shows that being female bridges 19.5 percent of the gap between
choosing the most and the least prestigious profile, controlling for performance in the experimental
task only. In column (2) we add competitiveness which takes a value of 1 for students who entered
the tournament in Round 3 of the experiment and 0 if the student chose the piece rate. The
first result is that the coeﬃcient on competitiveness is significant, with more competitive students
choosing more prestigious profiles. The decision to enter the tournament bridges 19.4 percent of
the gap between choosing the least and the most prestigious profiles. Competitiveness has a larger
impact than the gender of the student, which bridges 15 percent of the gap. In fact, when there is
no other information available, knowing a students’ competitiveness is a slightly better predictor of
study profile choice than knowing their gender.30
       The main finding is that adding competitiveness in column (2) significantly changes the eﬀect
of being female from 0.195 to 0.150, a reduction of 23 percent.31 This shows that gender diﬀerences
in competitiveness which have been uncovered in laboratory experiments can help account for the
gender gap in educational choices, specifically study profile choices.
       Over the following columns of Table 9, we add controls for objective and perceived academic
ability, separately and jointly. The coeﬃcient of tournament entry is robust and stays significant
throughout, with more competitive students selecting more prestigious profiles. The coeﬃcient on
competitiveness is under all specifications comparable to the one on gender, ranging from 75 to
130 percent of the gender coeﬃcient. This confirms the relevance of competitiveness to account for
educational choices.32
  30
     When running the ordered probit on tournament entry only (controlling for performance), Entry/(C3-C1) is 0.237
compared to Female/(C3-C1) in column (1) of Table 9 which is 0.195. Similarly, using OLS to regress ordered profile
choice on a female dummy only yields an R2 of 2.16 percent whereas regressing on the entry dummy yields an R2 of
2.93 percent. Adding entry on top of female raises the R2 from 2.16 percent to 4.01 percent.
  31
     We use bootstrap to calculate the significance of this diﬀerence. This is done by resampling 10,000 times with
replacement, keeping the number of male and female subjects constant. We then count the fraction of diﬀerences
between column (2) and column (1)’s Female/(C3-C1) variable that are negative or zero.
  32
     When running the ordered probit on tournament entry and all the controls (except the female dummy) in column


                                                        21
     Table 9. Profile choice: ordered probit regression

                            (1)            (2)       (3)             (4)       (5)            (6)        (7)             (8)       (9)            (10)      (11)            (12)      (13)            (14)
     Female              -0.350⇤⇤⇤   -0.272⇤⇤     -0.462⇤⇤⇤    -0.406⇤⇤⇤    -0.219⇤      -0.157       -0.343⇤⇤⇤    -0.284⇤⇤     -0.359⇤⇤⇤    -0.308⇤⇤     -0.305⇤⇤      -0.254⇤     -0.319⇤⇤     -0.276⇤⇤
                         (0.116)      (0.120)     (0.127)       (0.131)     (0.119)      (0.126)      (0.129)       (0.134)     (0.130)       (0.133)     (0.131)       (0.134)     (0.131)       (0.133)
     Entry                           0.353⇤⇤⇤                  0.300⇤⇤                  0.295⇤⇤                    0.315⇤⇤                   0.400⇤⇤⇤                  0.331⇤⇤                   0.404⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.130)                   (0.131)                  (0.132)                    (0.134)                   (0.144)                   (0.142)                   (0.152)
     Math grade                                    0.185            0.154                              -0.007       -0.040       -0.002       -0.038       0.012        -0.027       0.016            -0.025
                                                  (0.149)       (0.150)                               (0.158)       (0.157)     (0.158)       (0.157)     (0.159)       (0.157)     (0.159)       (0.157)
     GPA                                          0.227⇤⇤      0.252⇤⇤⇤                               0.213⇤⇤      0.239⇤⇤⇤     0.212⇤⇤      0.243⇤⇤⇤     0.201⇤⇤      0.223⇤⇤      0.201⇤⇤       0.228⇤⇤
                                                  (0.092)       (0.092)                               (0.091)       (0.091)     (0.092)       (0.091)     (0.092)       (0.092)     (0.093)       (0.092)
     Math relative                                 -0.156       -0.156                                 -0.115       -0.116       -0.119       -0.125       -0.098       -0.097       -0.102           -0.106
                                                  (0.128)       (0.128)                               (0.131)       (0.131)     (0.131)       (0.130)     (0.133)       (0.132)     (0.132)       (0.131)
     Math diﬃculty                                                          -0.333⇤⇤⇤   -0.321⇤⇤⇤     -0.209⇤⇤     -0.203⇤⇤     -0.211⇤⇤     -0.207⇤⇤     -0.220⇤⇤     -0.220⇤⇤     -0.220⇤⇤     -0.222⇤⇤
                                                                            (0.078)      (0.078)      (0.087)       (0.086)     (0.088)       (0.088)     (0.089)       (0.088)     (0.090)       (0.090)
     Math quartile                                                          -0.356⇤⇤⇤   -0.361⇤⇤⇤     -0.329⇤⇤⇤    -0.335⇤⇤⇤    -0.334⇤⇤⇤    -0.350⇤⇤⇤    -0.335⇤⇤⇤    -0.341⇤⇤⇤    -0.340⇤⇤⇤    -0.355⇤⇤⇤
                                                                            (0.076)      (0.077)      (0.074)       (0.075)     (0.075)       (0.076)     (0.075)       (0.075)     (0.075)       (0.076)




22
     Guessed rank                                                                                                                0.054            0.132                              0.053            0.121
                                                                                                                                (0.078)       (0.084)                               (0.081)       (0.086)
     Risk                                                                                                                                                  -0.057       -0.100       -0.048           -0.090
                                                                                                                                                          (0.068)       (0.069)     (0.068)       (0.069)
     Lottery                                                                                                                                              0.146⇤⇤       0.137⇤      0.145⇤⇤       0.133⇤
                                                                                                                                                          (0.072)       (0.072)     (0.072)       (0.072)
     Cut 1               -1.048⇤⇤⇤   -1.003⇤⇤⇤     1.943⇤       2.065⇤      -2.535⇤⇤⇤   -2.488⇤⇤⇤      -0.337       -0.220       -0.165           0.240    -0.190       -0.312       0.022            0.149
     Cut 2                0.080           0.138   3.190⇤⇤⇤     3.323⇤⇤⇤     -1.229⇤⇤⇤   -1.172⇤⇤⇤      1.007            1.137    1.179            1.599    1.167            1.057    1.379            1.520
     Cut 3               0.747⇤⇤⇤    0.812⇤⇤⇤     3.953⇤⇤⇤     4.091⇤⇤⇤     -0.425⇤      -0.362        1.837            1.974    2.010        2.441⇤       2.001            1.899    2.214⇤       2.366⇤
     Female/(C3-C1)      -0.195⇤⇤⇤   -0.150⇤⇤     -0.230⇤⇤⇤    -0.200⇤⇤⇤    -0.104⇤⇤         -0.074   -0.158⇤⇤⇤    -0.130⇤⇤     -0.165⇤⇤⇤    -0.140⇤⇤     -0.139⇤⇤     -0.115⇤⇤     -0.146⇤⇤⇤    -0.124⇤⇤
     Diﬀ.                         23.1%                     12.9%                    29.0%                      17.8%                     15.3%                     17.4%                     14.7%
     Bootstrap p-value            0.003                     0.013                    0.014                      0.012                     0.006                     0.014                     0.012
     Observations         362        362        362         362      362    362         362         362        362          362       362       362         362        362
     Note: Coeﬃcients are from ordered probit regressions, where NT>NH>ES>CS. All specifications include controls for performance in Rounds 1 and 2 of the experiment and the
     chance of winning the Round 2 tournament. Robust standard errors in parentheses; p-values for F/(C3-C1) and Diﬀ. are bootstrapped; * p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01.
     The impact of confidence (comparing columns (7) and (9)) and risk attitudes (comparing columns (7) and (11)) on the gender gap (Female/(C3-C1)) and the associated p-values
     are -4.4% (p=0.74) and 12% (p=0.06), respectively.
Figure 2. Tournament entry by gender and subsequent profile choice (conditional on performance,
confidence and risk attitudes)




    Pairwise comparisons between Columns (3) and (4), (5) and (6), and (7) and (8) confirm that
competitiveness explains a substantial part of the gender gap in profile choice; 13 percent when
controlling for academic performance (columns (3) and (4)), 29 percent when controlling for believed
mathematical ability (columns (5) and (6)) and 18 percent when controlling for both subjective and
objective academic performance (columns (7) and (8)). These changes in the gender coeﬃcient
upon inclusion of our competitiveness measure are significant for all specifications. This confirms
that competitiveness can account for a substantial part of the gender gap in profile choice even after
controlling for academic performance and perceived mathematical ability.
    The online appendix shows that the results remain qualitatively and quantitatively similar when
we use other specifications for combined profile choices, or when we use for each student their own
specific ordering of prestigiousness of profiles.
    We have previously shown that tournament entry is partially explained by confidence and risk
attitudes. These attributes could also conceivably be correlated with profile choice. In what follows,
we assess the impact of competitiveness on profile choice and its impact on gender diﬀerences when
accounting for confidence and risk attitudes. For a preliminary analysis, Figure 2 shows for each
profile the mean competitiveness of boys and girls who chose that profile. But here, competitiveness
is measured as the residual from a regression of tournament entry not only on the measures of
performance in the experiment, but also the guessed rank and the risk measures. The ranking of
(7) of Table 9, Entry/(C3-C1) is 0.248 compared to Female/(C3-C1) in column (7) which is 0.158. Adding a female
dummy to an OLS regression with all the controls used in Column (7) increases the R2 by 1.25 percentage points
while adding entry raises it by 1.43 percentage points (adding entry on top of female raises the R2 by a further 0.94
percentage points).




                                                         23
profiles in terms of competitiveness stays intact which indicates that the impact of competitiveness
on the profile choice is not due to the impact of risk attitudes and confidence.
    In columns (9) to (14) of Table 9 we add controls for confidence and risk attitudes to ordered
probit regressions on profile choice ranked by prestigiousness. The main result is that the coeﬃcient
of tournament entry and its eﬀect on the gender gap in profile choice remains robust and stays
significant throughout. To evaluate the impact of competitiveness, note that the coeﬃcient on entry
is between 111 and 146 percent of the coeﬃcient on gender. Pairwise comparisons between columns
(9) and (10), (11) and (12), and (13) and (14) confirm that competitiveness explains a substantial
part of the gender gap in profile choice, when controlling for either confidence, risk attitudes, or both.
Column (8) shows that competitiveness reduces the gender gap in prestigiousness of profile choice by
18 percent when controlling for actual and perceived academic ability. When we control in addition
for both confidence and risk aversion measures, competitiveness still reduces the gender gap by 15
percent (column (13) versus column (14)). When we add all three behavioral measures, the gender
gap in profile choice is reduced by 22 percent (column (7) versus (14)). Using only competitiveness
resulted in a reduction of the gender gap that is 82 percent of the size of the eﬀect of all psychological
attributes. Risk aversion and confidence jointly reduce the gender gap by 35 percent of the eﬀect of
all psychological attributes (column (7) versus column (13)). These results imply that the reduction
in the gender gap when controlling for competitiveness is not due to an impact of confidence or risk
attitudes. The result holds when we consider other specifications of combination profiles or use the
students’ own ranking of prestigiousness of profiles (see online appendix).33
    Finally, we can consider the eﬀect of confidence and risk measures on profile choice and its gender
gap separately. Column (9) shows that confidence (as measured by the guessed rank in the Round
2 tournament, while we keep controls for the performance in Rounds 1 and 2) has no significant
influence on the prestige of the chosen profile. Comparing columns (7) and (9) reveals that the
inclusion of the confidence measure has also no impact on the gender gap in choices (which in fact
increases slightly). These conclusions are mirrored when we control in addition for competitiveness
(see columns (8) and (10)). The results are robust to other specifications of profiles.
    Column (11) of Table 9 shows that risk attitudes correlate with the prestige of the chosen profile.
Students who opted for a more risky lottery enroll in more prestigious study profiles. Comparing
columns (7) and (11) shows that adding risk attitudes reduces the gender gap by around 12% (this
reduction is significant at the 10 percent level). The eﬀects of competitiveness and risk attitudes
on the gender gap in profile choice are almost orthogonal; adding only competitiveness reduces the
gender gap by 17.8 percent (compare columns (7) and (8)); adding only risk attitudes reduces the
gender gap by 12 percent (compare columns (7) and (11)); adding competitiveness and risk attitudes
together reduces the gender gap by 27.2 percent (compare columns (7) and (12)). The eﬀect of risk
  33
     When we classify combination profiles as the more prestigious profile in the combination, competitiveness alone
generates a reduction in the gender gap in study profile choices that is 66 percent of the overall size of the reduction
generated by all three psychological attributes. The corresponding number is 75 percent and 100 percent when
we either classify combination profiles as separate choices or when we use for each student their own ranking of
prestigiousness, respectively. This confirms that the impact of competitiveness is quite distinct from that of confidence
or risk attitudes.


                                                           24
attitudes on the gender gap in study profile choices is somewhat weaker (and not always significant)
in our alternative specifications where it ranges from 6 to 10 percent (see online appendix).34


6    Discussion and Conclusion

This study examines whether experimentally measured gender diﬀerences in competitiveness can
account for gender diﬀerences in career choices. We analyze the first important career choice of
young people in the Netherlands, for which we observe substantial gender diﬀerences. At the end of
9th grade, students in the pre-university track choose between four study profiles which are ranked
according to diﬃculty, prestige and math intensity in the following order: a science profile (NT),
a health profile (NH), a social science profile (ES) and a humanities profile (CS). In our sample of
all such students from four schools in and around Amsterdam, 40 percent of the boys (in our data)
choose the challenging NT profile, while only 17 percent of the girls do so, and while 15 percent of
the girls choose CS, the least prestigious profile, only 8 percent of the boys do so. Ordered probit
regressions confirm that girls are significantly less likely to select a prestigious study profile, despite
the fact that girls are as good at math as boys, and actually have a higher GPA.
    We assess the competitiveness of students through a classroom experiment several months before
they make their profile choice and while they still share the same classroom experience in school.
We use the Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) design, where students, after performing in a simple
addition task under a piece rate and a tournament scheme, can select the payment scheme for their
final round. We find significant gender diﬀerences in competitiveness (defined as tournament entry
after controlling for performance in the experiment). We therefore confirm that the findings on
gender diﬀerences in competitiveness in college students replicate with fifteen year olds (see also
Sutter and Rützler, 2010; Zhang, 2012a).
    We find that competitiveness varies strongly and significantly across study profiles, with students
that are more competitive selecting more prestigious profiles. Ordered probit regressions confirm
that competitiveness predicts the prestigiousness of the chosen profile. To evaluate the size of the
eﬀect note that competitiveness is comparable to (and varying between 75 to 146 percent of) the
eﬀect of gender on profile choices. The main result is that our simple measure of competitiveness
can account for 18 percent of the gender gap in profile choice after we control for objective and
subjective academic performance. When we also include controls for confidence and risk attitudes
we still find that inclusion of competitiveness reduces the gender gap in profile choices by 15 percent.
These results are a direct demonstration of the external relevance of laboratory findings on gender
diﬀerences in competitiveness for educational career choices. More such demonstrations should follow
so that labor economists take laboratory findings on gender diﬀerences in psychological attributes
into account in their study of gender gaps (cf. Bertrand, 2011).
    We interpret tournament entry, controlling for performance in the experiment, as a measure of
competitiveness. There might, however, be a concern that tournament entry is mostly an additional
  34
     We present binary OLS regressions of all results in the online appendix (i.e. for the binary decisions of NT vs.
the rest, nature vs. society, rest vs. CS and self-rated best vs. rest).


                                                         25
measure of other traits that influence study profile choice, such as the students’ believed or actual
mathematical ability, or the students’ preference for math. We address each of these concerns.
    In terms of tournament entry being an additional measure for the believed ability in math,
note that in Table 9, when we add entry to ordered probit regressions on study profile choice, the
eﬀects of perceived math ability are not substantially altered. Furthermore, one would imagine
that the guessed rank in the experimental task is a better additional predictor of the students’
perceived math ability than the decision to enter the tournament. However, the believed ability in
the experimental task (Guessed rank) is not correlated with the study profile choice, despite being
significantly correlated with the decision to enter the tournament. This suggests that the eﬀect of
the decision to enter the tournament on study profile choice is not due to the entry decision being
a measure of subjective mathematical ability.
    To assess whether the decision to enter the tournament is mostly an additional measure of actual
math ability, note first that all regressions control for performance in the experiment. Also, when we
add entry to ordered probit regressions on study profile choice, the eﬀects of actual math ability are
not substantially altered. Furthermore, conditional on subjective mathematical ability the absolute
and relative math grades do not significantly predict study profile choice (see column (7) in Table
9: absolute and relative math grades are not jointly significant (p=0.37)). The coeﬃcient on tour-
nament entry, however, is both significant and much larger than the coeﬃcient on the standardized
math grade. Furthermore, note that if anything, the coeﬃcient on GPA slightly increases rather
than decreases when we add the entry decision in Table 9.35 Finally, one might expect the actual
performance in the experiment to be a better predictor of math ability than the decision to enter
the tournament. However, when we add the performance in the experiment as a control, the gender
gap in the prestigiousness of study profiles slightly increases rather than decreases, and so does the
impact of GPA on study profile choice.36
    Finally, the decision to enter the tournament could be a measure of the students’ preference
or tolerance for math. One possible mechanism for this correlation could be that a preference for
math translates to more optimistic beliefs on relative performance in math tasks which in turn
aﬀect the decision to enter the tournament. We have, however, already established that beliefs on
relative performance in the experiment had no predictive power for profile choice. A second possible
mechanism is that a preference for math translates into a preference or tolerance for feedback on
relative performance or a relative payment scheme. While we have no direct evidence addressing this
concern in the present paper, the results of Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) suggest that this is not
the case. Specifically, they constructed a second choice environment where subjects could receive
information about their relative performance and be payed depending on their relative performance
   35
      To be precise, in column (3) we find that a one standard deviation increase in GPA bridges 11.29 percent of the
gap between choosing the least and the most prestigious profile (GPA/(Cut3-Cut1)). In column (4), when we add
entry, the eﬀect of the GPA is 12.44 percent. Similar results hold for comparing the impact of an increase in the GPA
between columns (7) and (8), columns (9) and (10), columns (11) and (12) and columns (13) and (14).
   36
      To see that the gender gap in profile choice increases when we add the performance in the experiment as controls
to ordered probit regressions on study profile choice, compare column (1) from Table 5 to column (1) from Table 9,
likewise for columns (2) and (3) from Table 5 and columns (3) and (7) from Table 9, respectively.



                                                         26
without having to compete. Their paper found no gender diﬀerences in choices of such a relative
payment scheme over a piece rate payment.37 Overall, we are therefore confident that the choice
to enter a tournament is a measure of competitiveness rather than of actual or perceived math
performance, or a preference for math.
    This paper is part of a small but growing literature that aims to predict economic outcomes
outside of the laboratory with laboratory measures, see e.g. Karlan (2005), Ashraf et al. (2006),
Meier and Sprenger (2010), Dohmen et al. (2011), Dohmen and Falk (2011), Zhang (2012a). This is
a promising and important approach to show the external validity of traits measured in the lab, but
more importantly to show their economic significance, that is, confirm their external relevance. One
main challenge in this line of research is to beware of reverse causality. This would, for example,
have been a significant concern had we measured competitiveness after students made their choices
and when they all have diﬀerent classroom experiences. This is why we administer the experiment
while students still share the same experiences, several months before they make their education
choice.
    The paper most closely related to ours, and the only other one on competitiveness, is Zhang
(2012a). She conducts a standard Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) competitiveness experiment with
middle schoolers from Ninglang county in China and observes their decision to take a very compet-
itive entry exam for high school. Using a structural approach, she finds that students more inclined
to compete are more likely to take the entry exam, controlling for the test score on a previous exam.
The results indicate no large gender diﬀerence in either take up rates of the entry exam, or, perhaps
more surprisingly, in tournament entry. The latter is in contrast to other studies that found gender
diﬀerences in competitiveness among children (Sutter and Rützler, 2010), or Zhang (2012b) who
finds gender diﬀerences for ethnic minorities among high school children from the same area.
    By validating the importance of competitiveness, our paper opens up new research questions. For
example, how does competitiveness predict the performance of students in various study profiles?
One could imagine that competitive students fare better in terms of grades than their less competitive
peers. On the other hand, competitiveness may lead students to “overreach” and enter study profiles
that are too diﬃcult for them. We saw that especially some boys aim for the most mathematically
heavy NT track while scoring high on competitiveness but not so much on the math grade.
    Future research will determine whether our result can be replicated in other environments and
with diﬀerent or larger subject pools. In our environment, prestige and math intensity are very
correlated and it remains to be determined whether our results hold when this is not the case.
Given our results, a perhaps more important question is what competitiveness exactly measures,
and how it is correlated with other traits which may be more familiar but could be hard to capture.
   37
      Specifically, after performing in a piece rate, then a tournament and then a treatment where subjects chose
between those two payment schemes (as in our own experiment), subjects encountered the following choice in the
fourth and last round. In case this round was chosen for payment, they were paid according to their round 1 piece rate
performance but had to decide how to be paid: either via a piece rate or via a tournament, where the person with the
highest round 1 piece rate performance wins. The choice of tournament in this “submit the piece rate” round (which
is identical to the round 3 tournament entry choice except for the need to perform and compete) showed no gender
diﬀerence once the task 1 piece rate performance and beliefs on the relative piece rate performance were controlled
for.


                                                         27
For example, how does competitiveness diﬀer from traits like ambition or challenge seeking? Which
psychological traits correlate with competitiveness? Finally, an important open question is whether
we can manipulate the competitiveness of students and whether this would aﬀect their educational
choices.38


References

Albrecht, James, Anders Björklund, and Susan Vroman, “Is There a Glass Ceiling in Swe-
  den?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2003, 21, 145–177.

Altonji, Joseph G. and Rebecca Blank, “Race and Gender in the Labor Market,” in Orley C.
  Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3C, Amsterdam: Elsevier
  Science Publishers B.V., 1999, pp. 3144–3259.

Arulampalam, Wiji, Alison L. Booth, and Mark L. Bryan, “Is There a Glass Ceiling over
  Europe? Exploring the Gender Pay Gap Across the Wage Distribution,” Industrial and Labor
  Relations Review, 2007, 60, 163–186.

Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin, “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence From
  a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006,
  121 (2), 635–672.

Balafoutas, Loukas and Matthias Sutter, “Aﬃrmative Action Policies Promote Women and
  Do Not Harm Eﬃciency in the Laboratory,” Science, 2012, 335 (6068), 579–582.

Bertrand, Marianne, “New Perspectives on Gender,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds.,
  Handbooks in Economics Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4, part B of Handbook of Labor
  Economics, Elsevier, 2011, pp. 1543 – 1590.

   and Kevin F. Hallock, “The Gender Gap in Top Corporate Jobs,” Industrial and Labor Rela-
  tions Review, 2001, 55 (1), 3–21.

  , Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young Profes-
  sionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  2011, forthcoming.

Bettinger, Eric P. and Bridget Terry Long, “Do Faculty Serve as Role Models? The Impact of
  Instructor Gender on Female Students,” The American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (2), 152–157.
  38
     Furthermore, it is still far from clear to which extent gender diﬀerences in competitiveness are determined by
nature and by nurture. Buser (2012) and Wozniak et al. (2010) find that for women the likelihood of entering the
tournament varies over the menstrual cycle and Hoﬀman and Gneezy (2010) find that it is correlated with handedness.
On the other hand, Gneezy et al. (2009) find that the gender gap in competitiveness varies between a patriarchal and
a matrilineal society and Cardenas et al. (2012) find that gender diﬀerences in competitiveness vary across countries
and may be correlated with gender stereotypes.




                                                         28
Borghans, Lex, Angela Lee Duckworth, James J. Heckman, and Bas ter Weel, “The
  Economics and Psychology of Personality Traits,” Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (4),
  972–1059.

Brown, Charles and Mary Corcoran, “Sex-Based Diﬀerences in School Content and the Male-
  Female Wage Gap,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1997, 15 (3), pp. 431–465.

Buser, Thomas, “The Impact of the Menstrual Cycle and Hormonal Contraceptives on Competi-
  tiveness,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2012, 83 (1), 1–10.

Cardenas, Juan Camilo, Anna Dreber, Emma von Essen, and Eva Ranehill, “Gender
  Diﬀerences in Competitiveness and Risk Taking: Comparing Children in Colombia and Sweden,”
  Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2012, 83 (1), 11–23.

Carrell, Scott E., Marianne E. Page, and James E. West, “Sex and Science: How Professor
  Gender Perpetuates the Gender Gap,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (3), 1101–
  1144.

Ceci, Stephen J., Wendy M. Williams, and Susan M. Barnett, “Women’s Underrepresen-
  tation in Science: Sociocultural and Biological Considerations.,” Psychological Bulletin, 2009, 135
  (2), 218–261.

Croson, Rachel and Uri Gneezy, “Gender Diﬀerences in Preferences,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, 2009, 47 (2), 448–74.

Cunha, Flavio and James Heckman, “The Technology of Skill Formation,” American Economic
  Review, 2007, 97 (2), 31–47.

Cvencek, Dario, Andrew N. Meltzoﬀ, and Anthony G. Greenwald, “Math-Gender Stereo-
  types in Elementary School Children,” Child Development, 2011, 82 (3), 766–779.

Dee, Thomas S., “Teachers and the Gender Gaps in Student Achievement,” Journal of Human
  Resources, 2007, XLII (3), 528–554.

Dohmen, Thomas and Armin Falk, “Performance Pay and Multidimensional Sorting: Produc-
  tivity, Preferences, and Gender,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (2), 556–590.

  ,   , David Huﬀman, Uwe Sunde, Jurgen Schupp, and Gert G. Wagner, “Individual Risk
  Attitudes: Measurement, Determinants, and Behavioral Consequences,” Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 2011, 9 (3), 522–550.

Eccles, Jacquelynne, “Perceived Control and the Development of Academic Motivation: Com-
  mentary,” Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 1998, 63 (2-3), 221–231.

Eckel, Catherine C. and Philip J. Grossman, “Sex Diﬀerences and Statistical Stereotyping in
  Attitudes toward Financial Risk.,” Evolution and Human Behavior, 2002, 23 (4), 281–95.

                                                 29
Ellison, Glenn and Ashley Swanson, “The Gender Gap in Secondary School Mathematics at
  High Achievement Levels: Evidence from the American Mathematics Competitions,” The Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (2), 109–128.

Felder, Richard, Gary Felder, Merdith Mauney, Charles Hamrin, and Jacquelin Dietz,
  “A Longitudinal Study of Engineering Student Performance and Retention. III. Gender Diﬀerences
  in Student Performance and Attitudes,” Journal of Engineering Education, 1995, 84 (2), 151–163.

Flory, Jeﬀrey A., Andreas Leibbrandt, and John A. List, “Do Competitive Work Places Deter
  Female Workers? A Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment on Gender Diﬀerences in Job-Entry
  Decisions,” Technical Report, NBER Working Paper No. w16546 2010.

Gneezy, Uri, Kenneth L. Leonard, and John A. List, “Gender Diﬀerences in Competition:
  Evidence From a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1637–1664.

  , Muriel Niederle, and Aldo Rustichini, “Performance In Competitive Environments: Gender
  Diﬀerences,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (3), 1049–1074.

Goldin, Claudia and Cecilia Rouse, “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of ’Blind’ Audi-
  tions on Female Musicians,” American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (4), 715–741.

  , Lawrence F. Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko, “The Homecoming of American College Women:
  The Reversal of the College Gender Gap,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (4),
  133–156.

Grogger, Jeﬀ and Eric Eide, “Changes in College Skills and the Rise in the College Wage
  Premium,” The Journal of Human Resources, 1995, 30 (2), 280–310.

Group, Inc Goodman Research, “Final Report of The Women’s Experience in College Engineer-
  ing Project,” Technical Report, http://www.grginc.com/WECE_FINAL_REPORT.pdf 2002.

Hoﬀman, Moshe and Uri Gneezy, “Left Handed Women are More Competitive than Right
  Handed Men: On the Biological Basis of Gender Diﬀerences in Competitiveness,” unpublished
  manuscript, 2010.

Huguet, Pascal and Isabelle Regner, “Stereotype Threat among School Girls in Quasi-Ordinary
  Classroom Circumstances,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 2007, 99 (3), 545–560.

Kamas, Linda and Anne Preston, “Are Women Really Less Competitive Than Men?,” unpub-
  lished manuscript, Santa Clara University 2010.

Karlan, Dean, “Using Experimental Economics to Measure Social Capital and Predict Financial
  Decisions,” The American Economic Review, 2005, 95, 1688–1699.

Kiefer, Amy K. and Denise Sekaquaptewa, “Implicit Stereotypes, Gender Identification, and
  Math-Related Outcomes: a Prospective Study of Female College Students.,” Psychological Science,
  2007, 18 (1), 13–18.

                                               30
Kleinjans, Kristin J., “Do Gender Diﬀerences in Preferences for Competition Matter for Occupa-
  tional Expectations?,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 2009, 30, 701–710.

LeFevre, Jo-Anne, Alison G. Kulak, and Stephanie L. Heymans, “Factors Influencing the Se-
  lection of University Majors Varying in Mathematical Content,” Canadian Journal of Behavioural
  Science, 1992, 24 (3), 276–289.

Lonnqvist, Jan-Erik, Markku Verkasalo, Gari Walkowitz, and Philipp C. Wichardt,
  “Measuring Individual Risk Attitudes in the Lab: Task or Ask? An Empirical Comparison,”
  Technical Report, DIW Berlin 2010.

Meier, Stephan and Charles Sprenger, “Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card Borrow-
  ing,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (1), 193–210.

Murnane, Richard J., John B. Willett, Yves Duhaldeborde, and John H. Tyler, “How
  Important are the Cognitive Skills of Teenagers in Predicting Subsequent Earnings?,” Journal of
  Policy Analysis and Management, 2000, 19 (4), 547–568.

Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund, “Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do Men
  Compete Too Much?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (3), 1067–1101.

  and      , “Gender and Competition,” Annual Review of Economics, 2011, 3 (1), 601–630.

  , Carmit Segal, and Lise Vesterlund, “How Costly is Diversity? Aﬃrmative Action in Light
  of Gender Diﬀerences in Competitiveness,” 2012.

Nosek, Brian A., Mahzarin R. Banaji, and Anthony G. Greenwald, “Math = Male, Me
  = Female, therefore Math 6= Me,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2002, 83 (1),
  44–59.

Paglin, Morton and Anthony M. Rufolo, “Heterogeneous Human Capital, Occupational Choice,
  and Male-Female Earnings Diﬀerences,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1990, 8 (1), 123–144.

Pautler, Emmanuelle, “The Links between Secondary and Higher Education in France,” European
  Journal of Education, 1981, 16 (2), pp. 185–195.

Preckel, Franzis, Thomas Goetz, Reinhard Pekrun, and Michael Kleine, “Gender Diﬀer-
  ences in Gifted and Average-Ability Students,” Gifted Child Quarterly, 2008, 52 (2), 146–159.

Roeder, Peter M. and Sabine Gruehn, “Geschlecht und Kurswahlverhalten,” Zeitschrift für
  Pädagogik, 1997, 43 (6), 877–894.

Schroter Joensen, Juanna and Helena Skyt Nielsen, “Math and Gender: What if Girls do
  Math?,” unpublished, Stockholm School of Economics 2011.

Segal, Carmit, “Working When No One is Watching: Motivation, Test Scores, and Economic
  Success,” Management Science, 2012, forthcoming.

                                               31
Sutter, Matthias and Daniela Rützler, “Gender Diﬀerences in Competition Emerge Early in
  Life,” June 2010. IZA DP No. 5015.

Weinberger, Catherine J., “Mathematical College Majors and the Gender Gap in Wages,” In-
  dustrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 1999, 38 (3), 407–413.

  , “Is Teaching More Girls More Math the Key to Higher Wages?,” in Mary C. King, ed., Squaring
  Up: Policy Strategies to Raise Women’s Incomes in the United States, University of Michigan
  Press, 2001, chapter 11.

  , “Is the Science and Engineering Workforce Drawn from the Far Upper Tail of the Math Ability
  Distribution?,” unpublished manuscript, 2005.

Wozniak, David, William T. Harbaugh, and Ulrich Mayr, “Choices About Competition: Dif-
  ferences by Gender and Hormonal Fluctuations, and the Role of Relative Performance Feedback,”
  unpublished manuscript, 2010.

Zhang, Y. Jane, “Can Experimental Economics Explain Competitive Behavior Outside the Lab?,”
  2012.

  , “The Communist Experiment in China: Narrowing the Gender Gap in Competitive Inclination,”
  2012.




                                                  32
Appendix: Tables

Table A.1. Means and standard deviations of control variables

                                            Mean                Standard-dev.
Math grade                                  6.63                    1.07
GPA                                         6.89                    0.62
Math relative                               0.37                    0.26
Math diﬃculty                               3.80                    2.80
Math quartile                               2.12                    0.96
Guessed rank                                2.35                    0.94
Risk                                        6.23                    1.90
Lottery                                     3.22                    1.32
Table A.2. Gender and profile choice (alternative specifications)

                        (1)             (2)               (3)         (4)            (5)              (6)              (7)               (8)               (9)
                         NT/NH as NT and ES/CS and ES                 NT/NH and ES/CS as separate profiles                      Students’ own ranking
Female               -0.275⇤⇤        -0.318⇤⇤           -0.210     -0.433⇤⇤⇤      -0.479⇤⇤⇤        -0.369⇤⇤⇤        -0.414⇤⇤⇤        -0.525⇤⇤⇤          -0.449⇤⇤⇤
                      (0.121)         (0.127)          (0.130)     (0.115)        (0.120)          (0.122)          (0.117)           (0.126)           (0.128)
Math Grade                            0.174             0.001                      0.031            -0.151                             -0.174           -0.322⇤⇤
                                      (0.162)          (0.171)                    (0.144)          (0.151)                            (0.134)           (0.140)
GPA                                  0.248⇤⇤           0.244⇤⇤                    0.193⇤⇤          0.183⇤⇤                            0.234⇤⇤⇤          0.220⇤⇤
                                      (0.102)          (0.101)                    (0.095)          (0.093)                            (0.088)           (0.087)
Rel. Math Gr.                         -0.121            -0.072                    -0.242⇤⇤          -0.193                           -0.341⇤⇤⇤          -0.316⇤⇤
                                      (0.131)          (0.132)                    (0.123)          (0.124)                            (0.124)           (0.125)
Math Diﬃculty                                          -0.173⇤                                     -0.197⇤⇤                                             -0.204⇤⇤
                                                       (0.089)                                     (0.085)                                              (0.089)
Math Quartile                                          -0.340⇤⇤⇤                                   -0.346⇤⇤⇤                                            -0.145⇤
                                                       (0.079)                                     (0.075)                                              (0.075)
Cut 1                -1.475⇤⇤⇤        2.057             -0.015     -1.571⇤⇤⇤       0.319            -1.932          -1.505⇤⇤⇤          -0.640           -2.269⇤
Cut 2                -0.281⇤⇤⇤       3.341⇤⇤            1.366      -1.299⇤⇤⇤       0.600            -1.636          -0.578⇤⇤⇤          0.349             -1.250
                                           ⇤⇤⇤                              ⇤⇤⇤
Cut 3                 0.098          3.770              1.835      -0.372          1.603            -0.543          0.251⇤⇤⇤           1.241             -0.329
Cut 4                                                               0.006         2.026⇤            -0.082
Cut 5                                                              0.568⇤⇤⇤       2.635⇤⇤           0.576
F/(Cmax-C1)           -0.175⇤⇤       -0.186⇤⇤⇤          -0.113⇤    -0.202⇤⇤⇤      -0.207⇤⇤⇤        -0.147⇤⇤⇤        -0.236⇤⇤⇤         -0.279⇤⇤⇤         -0.231⇤⇤⇤
Observations            342             342              342         342            342              342              354             354            354
Note: Dependent variable: Profile choice; coeﬃcients are from ordered probit regressions; robust standard errors in parentheses; p-values for F/(Cmax-C1) are
bootstrapped; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table A.3. Profile choice: ordered probit regression (NT/NH as NT and ES/CS as ES)

                       (1)             (2)       (3)             (4)       (5)             (6)        (7)             (8)       (9)            (10)      (11)            (12)       (13)            (14)
Female              -0.279⇤⇤      -0.210      -0.341⇤⇤⇤    -0.288⇤⇤      -0.126       -0.075       -0.232⇤       -0.182      -0.234⇤       -0.193       -0.214       -0.164        -0.212           -0.174
                    (0.123)       (0.128)     (0.131)       (0.135)     (0.128)       (0.134)      (0.134)       (0.139)     (0.134)       (0.138)     (0.136)       (0.139)      (0.136)       (0.139)
Entry                            0.316⇤⇤                   0.284⇤⇤                    0.252⇤                    0.280⇤⇤                   0.326⇤⇤                   0.335⇤⇤                     0.371⇤⇤
                                  (0.137)                   (0.137)                   (0.140)                    (0.142)                   (0.155)                   (0.154)                    (0.166)
Math grade                                     0.177            0.151                               0.005        -0.020       0.005        -0.017       0.017        -0.020        0.017            -0.017
                                              (0.163)       (0.164)                                (0.172)       (0.172)     (0.173)       (0.172)     (0.173)       (0.172)      (0.173)       (0.171)
GPA                                           0.264⇤⇤⇤     0.286⇤⇤⇤                                0.262⇤⇤⇤     0.283⇤⇤⇤     0.262⇤⇤⇤     0.284⇤⇤⇤     0.248⇤⇤      0.269⇤⇤⇤      0.248⇤⇤      0.270⇤⇤⇤
                                              (0.103)       (0.101)                                (0.101)       (0.101)     (0.101)       (0.101)     (0.102)       (0.101)      (0.102)       (0.101)
Math relative                                  -0.113       -0.113                                  -0.070       -0.071       -0.070       -0.077       -0.048       -0.050        -0.048           -0.055
                                              (0.135)       (0.135)                                (0.136)       (0.136)     (0.136)       (0.136)     (0.137)       (0.136)      (0.137)       (0.136)
Math diﬃculty                                                           -0.272⇤⇤⇤    -0.264⇤⇤⇤     -0.160⇤       -0.156⇤     -0.160⇤       -0.156⇤     -0.175⇤       -0.176⇤      -0.175⇤       -0.176⇤
                                                                        (0.080)       (0.080)      (0.088)       (0.088)     (0.089)       (0.089)     (0.091)       (0.090)      (0.091)       (0.091)
Math quartile                                                           -0.372⇤⇤⇤    -0.372⇤⇤⇤     -0.349⇤⇤⇤    -0.351⇤⇤⇤    -0.350⇤⇤⇤    -0.359⇤⇤⇤    -0.354⇤⇤⇤    -0.357⇤⇤⇤     -0.353⇤⇤⇤    -0.364⇤⇤⇤
                                                                        (0.083)       (0.084)      (0.082)       (0.082)     (0.082)       (0.084)     (0.081)       (0.082)      (0.082)       (0.083)
Guessed rank                                                                                                                  0.007            0.072                               -0.005           0.060
                                                                                                                             (0.084)       (0.092)                                (0.088)       (0.095)
Risk                                                                                                                                                    -0.096       -0.140⇤       -0.096       -0.136⇤
                                                                                                                                                       (0.073)       (0.076)      (0.073)       (0.076)
Lottery                                                                                                                                                 0.114            0.104     0.114            0.103
                                                                                                                                                       (0.075)       (0.075)      (0.075)       (0.076)
Cut 1               -1.249⇤⇤⇤    -1.202⇤⇤⇤     2.334⇤       2.458⇤      -2.547⇤⇤⇤    -2.497⇤⇤⇤      0.350            0.472    0.370            0.717    0.246            0.131     0.225            0.348
Cut 2                -0.041           0.021   3.636⇤⇤⇤     3.773⇤⇤⇤     -1.182⇤⇤⇤    -1.121⇤⇤⇤      1.749            1.885    1.770            2.131    1.651            1.551     1.631            1.769
Cut 3                0.346        0.411⇤      4.076⇤⇤⇤     4.215⇤⇤⇤     -0.723⇤⇤⇤    -0.662⇤⇤       2.227        2.365⇤       2.248        2.612⇤       2.133            2.036     2.112            2.254
Female/(C3-C1)      -0.175⇤⇤      -0.130⇤     -0.196⇤⇤⇤    -0.164⇤⇤      -0.069           -0.041   -0.124⇤⇤      -0.102⇤     -0.125⇤⇤      -0.102⇤      -0.113⇤          -0.086    -0.113⇤          -0.091
Diﬀ.                          25.4%                    16.4%                      40.8%                      22.5%                     18.5%                     23.4%                      19.1%
Bootstrap p-value             0.011                     0.018                     0.038                      0.025                     0.022                     0.017                      0.023
Observations         342        342        342         342     342    342          342         342        342          342       342       342         342        342
Note: Coeﬃcients are from ordered probit regressions, where NT>NH>ES>CS. All specifications include controls for performance in Rounds 1 and 2 of the experiment and the
chance of winning the Round 2 tournament. Robust standard errors in parentheses; p-values for F/(C3-C1) and Diﬀ. are bootstrapped; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
The impact of confidence (comparing columns (7) and (9)) and risk attitudes (comparing columns (7) and (11)) on the gender gap (Female/(C3-C1)) and the associated p-values
are 1% (increasing) (p=0.53) and 7% (p=0.24), respectively.
Table A.4. Profile choice: ordered probit regression (NT/NH and ES/CS as separate profile)

                       (1)             (2)       (3)             (4)       (5)            (6)       (7)             (8)       (9)            (10)      (11)            (12)      (13)            (14)
Female              -0.441⇤⇤⇤    -0.373⇤⇤⇤    -0.502⇤⇤⇤    -0.450⇤⇤⇤    -0.305⇤⇤     -0.254⇤⇤    -0.392⇤⇤⇤    -0.341⇤⇤⇤    -0.400⇤⇤⇤    -0.359⇤⇤⇤    -0.358⇤⇤⇤    -0.312⇤⇤     -0.364⇤⇤⇤    -0.327⇤⇤
                    (0.117)       (0.121)     (0.123)       (0.126)     (0.119)       (0.125)    (0.124)       (0.129)     (0.125)       (0.129)     (0.125)       (0.129)     (0.126)       (0.128)
Entry                            0.317⇤⇤                   0.278⇤⇤                   0.252⇤⇤                  0.277⇤⇤                   0.338⇤⇤                   0.315⇤⇤                    0.366⇤⇤
                                  (0.127)                   (0.127)                   (0.128)                  (0.131)                   (0.141)                   (0.140)                   (0.150)
Math grade                                     0.025        -0.006                                -0.158       -0.187       -0.155       -0.185       -0.137       -0.175       -0.135           -0.172
                                              (0.145)       (0.145)                              (0.152)       (0.152)     (0.152)       (0.151)     (0.151)       (0.150)     (0.151)       (0.149)
GPA                                           0.206⇤⇤      0.227⇤⇤                               0.197⇤⇤      0.218⇤⇤      0.197⇤⇤      0.220⇤⇤       0.182⇤      0.201⇤⇤       0.182⇤       0.203⇤⇤
                                              (0.095)       (0.094)                              (0.093)       (0.093)     (0.094)       (0.093)     (0.094)       (0.094)     (0.094)       (0.094)
Math relative                                 -0.240⇤       -0.243⇤                               -0.198       -0.202       -0.200       -0.210⇤      -0.171       -0.174       -0.173           -0.182
                                              (0.126)       (0.126)                              (0.127)       (0.127)     (0.126)       (0.126)     (0.128)       (0.127)     (0.128)       (0.127)
Math diﬃculty                                                           -0.257⇤⇤⇤    -0.248⇤⇤⇤   -0.184⇤⇤     -0.180⇤⇤     -0.185⇤⇤     -0.181⇤⇤     -0.201⇤⇤     -0.202⇤⇤     -0.201⇤⇤     -0.203⇤⇤
                                                                        (0.075)       (0.075)    (0.084)       (0.083)     (0.084)       (0.084)     (0.086)       (0.085)     (0.087)       (0.086)
Math quartile                                                           -0.372⇤⇤⇤    -0.373⇤⇤⇤   -0.354⇤⇤⇤    -0.357⇤⇤⇤    -0.357⇤⇤⇤    -0.367⇤⇤⇤    -0.360⇤⇤⇤    -0.363⇤⇤⇤    -0.362⇤⇤⇤    -0.372⇤⇤⇤
                                                                        (0.078)       (0.079)    (0.077)       (0.078)     (0.077)       (0.079)     (0.077)       (0.078)     (0.078)       (0.078)
Guessed rank                                                                                                                0.029            0.096                              0.021            0.085
                                                                                                                           (0.077)       (0.082)                               (0.081)       (0.086)
Risk                                                                                                                                                  -0.094       -0.135⇤      -0.091       -0.130⇤
                                                                                                                                                     (0.067)       (0.069)     (0.067)       (0.069)
Lottery                                                                                                                                              0.155⇤⇤      0.148⇤⇤      0.155⇤⇤       0.146⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                                     (0.072)       (0.071)     (0.072)       (0.071)
Cut 1               -1.332⇤⇤⇤    -1.290⇤⇤⇤     0.540            0.617   -2.631⇤⇤⇤    -2.587⇤⇤⇤    -1.647       -1.569       -1.552       -1.233       -1.624       -1.762       -1.541           -1.446
Cut 2               -1.059⇤⇤⇤    -1.012⇤⇤⇤     0.821            0.903   -2.340⇤⇤⇤    -2.291⇤⇤⇤    -1.349       -1.266       -1.254       -0.930       -1.321       -1.454       -1.238           -1.139
Cut 3                -0.118       -0.059       1.840⇤       1.933⇤      -1.263⇤⇤⇤    -1.204⇤⇤⇤    -0.242       -0.147       -0.148           0.190    -0.198       -0.317       -0.115           -0.001
Cut 4                0.268            0.330   2.273⇤⇤      2.366⇤⇤      -0.807⇤⇤⇤    -0.747⇤⇤⇤    0.228            0.324    0.323            0.663    0.275            0.159    0.358            0.476
Cut 5               0.841⇤⇤⇤     0.906⇤⇤⇤     2.893⇤⇤⇤     2.988⇤⇤⇤      -0.147       -0.086      0.897            0.995    0.993            1.336    0.948            0.835    1.032            1.153
Female/(C5-C1)      -0.203⇤⇤⇤    -0.170⇤⇤⇤    -0.213⇤⇤⇤    -0.190⇤⇤⇤    -0.123⇤⇤⇤    -0.102⇤⇤    -0.154⇤⇤⇤    -0.133⇤⇤⇤    -0.157⇤⇤⇤    -0.140⇤⇤⇤    -0.139⇤⇤⇤    -0.120⇤⇤⇤    -0.141⇤⇤⇤    -0.126⇤⇤⇤
Diﬀ.                          16.2%                    11.0%                      17.2%                    13.5%                     11.2%                     13.7%                     11.0%
Bootstrap p-value             0.007                     0.015                     0.026                    0.018                     0.011                     0.014                     0.016
Observations         342       342         342         342     342    342    342      342          342        342         342        342       342        342
Note: Coeﬃcients are from ordered probit regressions, where NT>NT/NH>NH>ES>ES/CS>CS. All specifications include controls for performance in Rounds 1 and 2 of the
experiment and the chance of winning the Round 2 tournament. Robust standard errors in parentheses; p-values for F/(C3-C1) and Diﬀ. are bootstrapped; * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. The impact of confidence (comparing columns (7) and (9)) and risk attitudes (comparing columns (7) and (11)) on the gender gap (Female/(C3-C1))
and the associated p-values are 2% (increasing) (p=0.64) and 10% (p=0.08), respectively.
Table A.5. Profile choice: ordered probit regression (students’ own ranking)

                       (1)            (2)       (3)             (4)       (5)            (6)       (7)            (8)       (9)            (10)      (11)            (12)      (13)            (14)
Female              -0.384⇤⇤⇤   -0.316⇤⇤     -0.503⇤⇤⇤    -0.447⇤⇤⇤    -0.299⇤⇤     -0.243⇤     -0.423⇤⇤⇤    -0.366⇤⇤⇤   -0.420⇤⇤⇤    -0.377⇤⇤⇤    -0.399⇤⇤⇤    -0.357⇤⇤⇤    -0.402⇤⇤⇤    -0.369⇤⇤⇤
                    (0.118)      (0.124)     (0.128)       (0.133)     (0.120)      (0.126)     (0.130)       (0.134)    (0.132)       (0.135)     (0.132)       (0.135)     (0.134)       (0.136)
Entry                           0.300⇤⇤                   0.280⇤⇤                   0.252⇤                   0.288⇤⇤                  0.324⇤⇤                    0.253⇤                       0.288⇤
                                 (0.136)                   (0.139)                  (0.136)                   (0.139)                  (0.148)                   (0.147)                   (0.155)
Math grade                                    -0.220       -0.249⇤                              -0.374⇤⇤⇤    -0.404⇤⇤⇤   -0.374⇤⇤⇤    -0.404⇤⇤⇤    -0.369⇤⇤⇤    -0.396⇤⇤⇤    -0.369⇤⇤⇤    -0.397⇤⇤⇤
                                             (0.137)       (0.137)                              (0.142)       (0.142)    (0.142)       (0.142)     (0.142)       (0.142)     (0.142)       (0.142)
GPA                                          0.225⇤⇤      0.247⇤⇤⇤                              0.213⇤⇤      0.235⇤⇤⇤    0.213⇤⇤      0.236⇤⇤⇤     0.220⇤⇤      0.234⇤⇤⇤     0.220⇤⇤      0.237⇤⇤⇤
                                             (0.088)       (0.087)                              (0.087)       (0.087)    (0.087)       (0.087)     (0.088)       (0.088)     (0.088)       (0.088)
Math relative                                -0.372⇤⇤⇤    -0.372⇤⇤⇤                             -0.351⇤⇤⇤    -0.351⇤⇤⇤   -0.350⇤⇤⇤    -0.356⇤⇤⇤    -0.355⇤⇤⇤    -0.351⇤⇤⇤    -0.356⇤⇤⇤    -0.357⇤⇤⇤
                                             (0.126)       (0.126)                              (0.127)       (0.128)    (0.127)       (0.127)     (0.127)       (0.127)     (0.127)       (0.127)
Math diﬃculty                                                          -0.233⇤⇤⇤   -0.222⇤⇤⇤    -0.186⇤⇤     -0.180⇤⇤    -0.186⇤⇤     -0.181⇤⇤     -0.178⇤⇤     -0.178⇤⇤     -0.178⇤⇤     -0.179⇤⇤
                                                                       (0.077)      (0.077)     (0.091)       (0.089)    (0.091)       (0.090)     (0.089)       (0.089)     (0.089)       (0.089)
Math quartile                                                          -0.188⇤⇤    -0.193⇤⇤⇤    -0.172⇤⇤     -0.179⇤⇤    -0.171⇤⇤     -0.185⇤⇤     -0.174⇤⇤     -0.179⇤⇤     -0.175⇤⇤     -0.186⇤⇤
                                                                       (0.074)      (0.074)     (0.075)       (0.075)    (0.076)       (0.076)     (0.075)       (0.075)     (0.075)       (0.076)
Guessed rank                                                                                                              -0.009           0.055                              0.010            0.059
                                                                                                                         (0.081)       (0.087)                               (0.082)       (0.087)
Risk                                                                                                                                                0.057            0.024    0.059            0.029
                                                                                                                                                   (0.067)       (0.068)     (0.067)       (0.068)
Lottery                                                                                                                                             0.048            0.039    0.048            0.038
                                                                                                                                                   (0.065)       (0.066)     (0.065)       (0.066)
Cut 1               -0.841⇤⇤⇤   -0.796⇤⇤⇤     -0.472       -0.370      -1.675⇤⇤⇤   -1.627⇤⇤⇤    -2.122⇤       -2.024     -2.148⇤       -1.841       -1.733       -1.821       -1.693           -1.609
Cut 2                0.105           0.156    0.530            0.639   -0.671⇤⇤⇤   -0.618⇤⇤      -1.087       -0.982      -1.113       -0.797       -0.694       -0.778       -0.654           -0.564
Cut 3               0.951⇤⇤⇤    1.009⇤⇤⇤      1.434            1.550    0.238           0.296    -0.154       -0.041      -0.180           0.144    0.242            0.163    0.282            0.377
Female/(C3-C1)      -0.215⇤⇤⇤   -0.175⇤⇤⇤    -0.264⇤⇤⇤    -0.233⇤⇤⇤    -0.157⇤⇤⇤   -0.127⇤⇤     -0.215⇤⇤⇤    -0.185⇤⇤⇤   -0.214⇤⇤⇤    -0.190⇤⇤⇤    -0.202⇤⇤⇤    -0.180⇤⇤⇤    -0.204⇤⇤⇤    -0.186⇤⇤⇤
Diﬀ.                         18.4%                     11.6%                    19.1%                     14.1%                    11.1%                     11.0%                     8.9%
Bootstrap p-value            0.014                     0.022                    0.031                     0.020                    0.016                     0.045                     0.037
Observations         354       354         354        354         354         354        354         354       354       354        354        354       354        354
Note: Coeﬃcients are from ordered probit regressions. All specifications include controls for performance in Rounds 1 and 2 of the experiment and the chance of winning the
Round 2 tournament. Robust standard errors in parentheses; p-values for F/(C3-C1) and Diﬀ. are bootstrapped; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. The impact of confidence
(comparing columns (7) and (9)) and risk attitudes (comparing columns (7) and (11)) on the gender gap (Female/(C3-C1)) and the associated p-values are 0% (p=0.46) and
6% (p=0.13), respectively.
Table A.6. Binary regression: NT vs rest

                       (1)           (2)       (3)            (4)        (5)             (6)       (7)             (8)        (9)             (10)      (11)             (12)      (13)             (14)
Female              -0.235⇤⇤⇤   -0.207⇤⇤⇤   -0.239⇤⇤⇤   -0.223⇤⇤⇤     -0.177⇤⇤⇤   -0.158⇤⇤⇤     -0.195⇤⇤⇤    -0.180⇤⇤⇤     -0.203⇤⇤⇤    -0.188⇤⇤⇤     -0.191⇤⇤⇤    -0.177⇤⇤⇤     -0.198⇤⇤⇤    -0.185⇤⇤⇤
                    (0.046)      (0.047)    (0.045)      (0.046)      (0.042)      (0.044)      (0.043)       (0.044)      (0.043)       (0.044)      (0.044)       (0.045)      (0.044)           (0.045)
Entry                            0.120⇤⇤                     0.076                     0.084⇤                     0.074                      0.105⇤                     0.084                  0.111⇤⇤
                                 (0.054)                 (0.051)                   (0.050)                    (0.049)                    (0.054)                    (0.052)                        (0.055)
Math grade                                  0.099⇤⇤      0.091⇤⇤                                 0.043            0.035     0.045            0.035     0.045            0.036     0.047            0.036
                                            (0.046)      (0.046)                                (0.046)       (0.045)      (0.046)       (0.045)      (0.046)       (0.045)      (0.046)           (0.045)
GPA                                          0.036           0.046                               0.024            0.034     0.023            0.035     0.021            0.029     0.020            0.032
                                            (0.048)      (0.048)                                (0.046)       (0.047)      (0.047)       (0.047)      (0.047)       (0.047)      (0.047)           (0.048)
Math relative                                -0.165          -0.165                              -0.100           -0.101    -0.108           -0.114    -0.091           -0.088    -0.100           -0.102
                                            (0.167)      (0.167)                                (0.159)       (0.159)      (0.158)       (0.158)      (0.159)       (0.159)      (0.159)           (0.158)
Math diﬃculty                                                         -0.041⇤⇤⇤   -0.040⇤⇤⇤     -0.025⇤⇤      -0.025⇤⇤     -0.026⇤⇤      -0.025⇤⇤     -0.026⇤⇤      -0.026⇤⇤     -0.026⇤⇤      -0.026⇤⇤
                                                                      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)           (0.011)
Math quartile                                                         -0.102⇤⇤⇤   -0.102⇤⇤⇤     -0.090⇤⇤⇤    -0.091⇤⇤⇤     -0.093⇤⇤⇤    -0.096⇤⇤⇤     -0.090⇤⇤⇤    -0.091⇤⇤⇤     -0.093⇤⇤⇤    -0.096⇤⇤⇤
                                                                      (0.027)      (0.027)      (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.027)           (0.026)
Guessed rank                                                                                                                0.026            0.049⇤                               0.026            0.047
                                                                                                                           (0.027)       (0.029)                                 (0.028)           (0.030)
Risk                                                                                                                                                   -0.005           -0.011    -0.003           -0.010
                                                                                                                                                      (0.012)       (0.013)      (0.013)           (0.013)
Lottery                                                                                                                                                0.013            0.011     0.013            0.010
                                                                                                                                                      (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.018)           (0.018)
Bootstrap p-value             0.01                    0.07                      0.05                       0.07                       0.03                       0.05                       0.03
Diﬀ.                         12.0%                    6.5%                     10.6%                      7.7%                       7.3%                       7.4%                       6.7%
Observations         362      362         362         362         362        362         362       362       362        362       362        362       362        362
Note: Coeﬃcients are from OLS regressions. All specifications include controls for performance in Rounds 1 and 2 of the experiment and the chance of winning the Round 2
tournament. Robust standard errors in parentheses; p-values for Diﬀ. are bootstrapped; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table A.7. Binary regression: Nature vs Society

                      (1)            (2)      (3)             (4)       (5)             (6)       (7)             (8)        (9)             (10)      (11)             (12)      (13)             (14)
Female              -0.001          0.027   -0.032       -0.015       0.073           0.090⇤    0.025            0.041     0.019            0.035     0.030            0.049     0.027             0.043
                    (0.053)       (0.054)   (0.050)      (0.051)     (0.048)      (0.050)      (0.049)       (0.050)      (0.050)       (0.050)      (0.049)       (0.050)      (0.050)           (0.050)
Entry                             0.119⇤                     0.084                    0.076                      0.083                      0.109⇤                     0.110⇤                     0.130⇤⇤
                                  (0.061)                (0.055)                  (0.054)                    (0.054)                    (0.057)                    (0.057)                        (0.060)
Math grade                                   0.082           0.073                              0.014            0.005     0.015            0.005     0.018            0.006     0.018             0.006
                                            (0.054)      (0.054)                               (0.053)       (0.053)      (0.053)       (0.053)      (0.053)       (0.053)      (0.053)           (0.053)
GPA                                         0.176⇤⇤⇤     0.186⇤⇤⇤                              0.160⇤⇤⇤      0.171⇤⇤⇤     0.159⇤⇤⇤      0.172⇤⇤⇤     0.149⇤⇤⇤      0.160⇤⇤⇤     0.149⇤⇤⇤      0.162⇤⇤⇤
                                            (0.055)      (0.055)                               (0.051)       (0.050)      (0.051)       (0.051)      (0.052)       (0.051)      (0.052)           (0.051)
Math relative                               -0.122       -0.122                                 -0.040           -0.040    -0.045           -0.052    -0.012           -0.008    -0.016           -0.019
                                            (0.198)      (0.197)                               (0.188)       (0.186)      (0.187)       (0.185)      (0.190)       (0.188)      (0.190)           (0.187)
Math diﬃculty                                                        -0.044⇤⇤⇤    -0.042⇤⇤⇤    -0.026⇤⇤      -0.025⇤⇤     -0.026⇤⇤      -0.025⇤⇤     -0.028⇤⇤      -0.028⇤⇤     -0.028⇤⇤      -0.028⇤⇤
                                                                     (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.012)       (0.011)      (0.012)           (0.012)
Math quartile                                                        -0.153⇤⇤⇤    -0.153⇤⇤⇤    -0.137⇤⇤⇤     -0.138⇤⇤⇤    -0.139⇤⇤⇤     -0.142⇤⇤⇤    -0.138⇤⇤⇤     -0.139⇤⇤⇤    -0.139⇤⇤⇤     -0.142⇤⇤⇤
                                                                     (0.031)      (0.031)      (0.030)       (0.030)      (0.030)       (0.030)      (0.029)       (0.030)      (0.030)           (0.030)
Guessed rank                                                                                                               0.018            0.041                                0.011             0.035
                                                                                                                          (0.031)       (0.032)                                 (0.032)           (0.033)
Risk                                                                                                                                                 -0.022⇤       -0.030⇤⇤      -0.021       -0.028⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                                     (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.013)           (0.013)
Lottery                                                                                                                                               0.029            0.026     0.029             0.026
                                                                                                                                                     (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.020)           (0.020)
Bootstrap p-value            0.02                     0.06                     0.08                       0.06                       0.03                       0.03                       0.02
Diﬀ.                          -                      52.8%                    23.3%                      68.1%                      79.0%                      61.1%                      57.1%
Observations        362      362       362        362          362        362         362        362       362        362        362        362        362        362
Note: Coeﬃcients are from OLS regressions. All specifications include controls for performance in Rounds 1 and 2 of the experiment and the chance of winning the Round 2
tournament. Robust standard errors in parentheses; p-values for Diﬀ. are bootstrapped; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table A.8. Binary regression: CS vs rest

                      (1)             (2)      (3)               (4)      (5)             (6)      (7)             (8)      (9)             (10)      (11)             (12)      (13)            (14)
Female              0.067⇤           0.049   0.088⇤⇤           0.073⇤    0.044           0.030   0.068⇤           0.053   0.067⇤           0.055     0.051            0.041     0.052            0.044
                    (0.035)      (0.037)     (0.037)       (0.039)      (0.035)      (0.037)     (0.038)      (0.039)     (0.038)      (0.039)      (0.038)       (0.038)      (0.038)          (0.038)
Entry                           -0.075⇤⇤                   -0.075⇤⇤                  -0.063⇤                 -0.075⇤⇤                 -0.085⇤⇤                        -0.058                    -0.068⇤
                                 (0.035)                   (0.036)                   (0.035)                  (0.036)                  (0.039)                    (0.037)                       (0.041)
Math grade                                    0.049            0.057                             0.074⇤       0.082⇤⇤     0.074⇤       0.082⇤⇤      0.068⇤            0.074⇤   0.067⇤           0.074⇤
                                             (0.037)       (0.037)                               (0.038)      (0.038)     (0.038)      (0.038)      (0.038)       (0.038)      (0.038)          (0.038)
GPA                                          -0.088⇤⇤      -0.098⇤⇤                              -0.083⇤     -0.092⇤⇤     -0.083⇤     -0.093⇤⇤      -0.080⇤       -0.086⇤⇤     -0.080⇤      -0.087⇤⇤
                                             (0.044)       (0.044)                               (0.043)      (0.043)     (0.044)      (0.043)      (0.043)       (0.043)      (0.043)          (0.043)
Math relative                                0.252⇤            0.252⇤                             0.223           0.223    0.222           0.227     0.209            0.206     0.210            0.211
                                             (0.139)       (0.138)                               (0.141)      (0.139)     (0.141)      (0.140)      (0.141)       (0.140)      (0.142)          (0.141)
Math diﬃculty                                                           0.012⇤           0.011    0.010           0.009    0.010           0.009     0.010            0.010     0.010            0.010
                                                                        (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.009)          (0.009)
Math quartile                                                           0.051⇤⇤      0.052⇤⇤     0.048⇤⇤      0.049⇤⇤     0.048⇤⇤      0.051⇤⇤      0.049⇤⇤       0.049⇤⇤      0.049⇤⇤          0.051⇤⇤
                                                                        (0.023)      (0.023)     (0.024)      (0.023)     (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.023)       (0.023)      (0.024)          (0.023)
Guessed rank                                                                                                               0.002           -0.016                               -0.003          -0.016
                                                                                                                          (0.025)      (0.027)                                 (0.026)          (0.027)
Risk                                                                                                                                                 -0.002           0.002     -0.003           0.001
                                                                                                                                                    (0.010)       (0.011)      (0.010)          (0.011)
Lottery                                                                                                                                             -0.035⇤⇤      -0.034⇤⇤     -0.035⇤⇤     -0.033⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                                    (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.015)          (0.015)
Bootstrap p-value             0.02                      0.02                      0.03                     0.02                     0.02                       0.06                      0.06
Diﬀ.                         26.5%                    17.4%                      32.0%                    22.4%                    17.8%                      19.4%                     15.6%
Observations         362      362         362         362         362        362        362       362       362        362        362        362        362        362
Note: Coeﬃcients are from OLS regressions. All specifications include controls for performance in Rounds 1 and 2 of the experiment and the chance of winning the Round 2
tournament. Robust standard errors in parentheses; p-values for Diﬀ. are bootstrapped; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table A.9. Binary regression: Self-ranked best vs rest

                       (1)           (2)       (3)             (4)        (5)             (6)       (7)             (8)        (9)             (10)      (11)             (12)      (13)             (14)
Female              -0.202⇤⇤⇤   -0.171⇤⇤⇤   -0.221⇤⇤⇤    -0.197⇤⇤⇤     -0.165⇤⇤⇤    -0.142⇤⇤⇤    -0.190⇤⇤⇤    -0.168⇤⇤⇤     -0.186⇤⇤⇤    -0.170⇤⇤⇤     -0.179⇤⇤⇤    -0.162⇤⇤⇤     -0.177⇤⇤⇤    -0.164⇤⇤⇤
                    (0.048)      (0.050)    (0.048)       (0.050)      (0.046)      (0.048)      (0.048)       (0.049)      (0.049)       (0.050)      (0.049)       (0.050)      (0.050)           (0.050)
Entry                            0.131⇤⇤                  0.115⇤⇤                       0.105⇤                 0.112⇤⇤                    0.119⇤⇤                        0.104⇤                     0.110⇤
                                 (0.056)                  (0.056)                   (0.055)                    (0.055)                    (0.059)                    (0.058)                        (0.061)
Math grade                                   -0.037           -0.049                              -0.082       -0.094⇤       -0.083       -0.094⇤       -0.079       -0.090⇤       -0.079           -0.090⇤
                                            (0.050)       (0.049)                                (0.051)       (0.050)      (0.051)       (0.050)      (0.050)       (0.050)      (0.050)           (0.050)
GPA                                          0.068            0.083                               0.060            0.074     0.061            0.075     0.060            0.071     0.060            0.072
                                            (0.054)       (0.054)                                (0.053)       (0.053)      (0.053)       (0.053)      (0.054)       (0.054)      (0.054)           (0.054)
Math relative                               -0.436⇤⇤      -0.436⇤⇤                               -0.387⇤⇤      -0.387⇤⇤     -0.383⇤⇤      -0.390⇤⇤     -0.382⇤⇤      -0.378⇤⇤     -0.379⇤⇤      -0.382⇤⇤
                                            (0.181)       (0.180)                                (0.179)       (0.178)      (0.180)       (0.178)      (0.179)       (0.179)      (0.179)           (0.179)
Math diﬃculty                                                          -0.036⇤⇤⇤    -0.034⇤⇤⇤    -0.030⇤⇤⇤    -0.029⇤⇤⇤     -0.030⇤⇤⇤    -0.029⇤⇤⇤     -0.029⇤⇤     -0.029⇤⇤⇤     -0.029⇤⇤     -0.030⇤⇤⇤
                                                                       (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)           (0.011)
Math quartile                                                           -0.039          -0.039    -0.032           -0.034    -0.031           -0.035    -0.033           -0.034    -0.032           -0.035
                                                                       (0.028)      (0.028)      (0.028)       (0.028)      (0.028)       (0.028)      (0.028)       (0.028)      (0.029)           (0.029)
Guessed rank                                                                                                                 -0.014           0.012                                -0.009           0.011
                                                                                                                            (0.031)       (0.033)                                 (0.032)           (0.034)
Risk                                                                                                                                                    0.006            -0.001    0.005            -0.001
                                                                                                                                                       (0.014)       (0.014)      (0.014)           (0.014)
Lottery                                                                                                                                                 0.020            0.017     0.020            0.017
                                                                                                                                                       (0.019)       (0.019)      (0.019)           (0.019)
Bootstrap p-value             0.01                     0.02                      0.03                       0.02                       0.02                       0.04                       0.04
Diﬀ.                         15.2%                    10.6%                      14.2%                     11.9%                      9.0%                       9.7%                       7.4%
Observations         362      362         362         362         362        362         362       362       362        362       362        362       362        362
Note: Coeﬃcients are from OLS regressions. All specifications include controls for performance in Rounds 1 and 2 of the experiment and the chance of winning the Round 2
tournament. Robust standard errors in parentheses; p-values for Diﬀ. are bootstrapped; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Appendix: Instructions and Questionnaire



WELCOME

In the experiment today you will be asked to complete three different tasks. None of these will take
more than 3 minutes. At the end of the experiment, we will randomly select one of the tasks and pay
you based on your performance in that task. Once you have completed the three tasks we determine
which task counts for payment by rolling a die. The method we use to determine your earnings
varies across tasks. Before each task we will describe in detail how your payment is determined.


Task 1 – Piece Rate

For Task 1 you will be asked to calculate the sum of four randomly chosen two-digit numbers. You
will be given 3 minutes to calculate the correct sum of a series of these problems. You cannot use a
calculator to determine these sums, however you are welcome to make use of the provided scratch
paper.

Example:
    23          81           15           47

If Task 1 is the one randomly selected for payment, then you get 25 cents per problem you solve
correctly in the 3 minutes. Your payment does not decrease if you provide an incorrect answer to a
problem. We refer to this payment as the piece rate payment.
The problem sheets are in the envelopes in front of you. We will tell you when you can open the
envelopes and start working. You will then have exactly 3 minutes. At the end of the three minutes
we will say “Time’s up”. You then have to immediately stop writing and stand up. If you don’t stand
up or keep writing, you will not get paid.
Please do not talk with one another for the duration of the experiment. If you have any questions,
please raise your hand.

ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?
Task 2 - Tournament

As in Task 1 you will be given 3 minutes to calculate the correct sum of a series of four 2-digit
numbers. However for this task your payment depends on your performance relative to that of a
group of other participants. Each group consists of four people, the three other members of your
group are randomly selected members of your class. You will not know who is in your group.
If Task 2 is the one randomly selected for payment, the individual in the group who correctly solves
the largest number of problems will receive €1 per correct problem. The other participants receive
no payment. We refer to this as the tournament payment. You will not be informed of how you did
in the tournament until later. If there are ties the winner will be randomly determined.
Please do not talk with one another. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.

ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?
Task 3 – Choice

As in the previous two tasks you will be given 3 minutes to calculate the correct sum of a series of
four 2-digit numbers. However you will now get to choose how you want to be payed: piece rate or
tournament.
If Task 3 is the one randomly selected for payment, then your earnings for this task are determined
as follows. If you choose the piece rate you receive 25 cents per problem you solve correctly. If you
choose the tournament your performance will be compared to the performance of the other three
participants of your group in Task 2. Task 2 is the one you just completed. If you correctly solve
more problems than they did in Task 2, then you receive four times the payment from the piece rate,
which is €1 per correct problem. You will receive no earnings for this task if you choose the
tournament and do not solve more problems correctly now, than the others in your group did in Task
2.
You will not be informed of how you did in the tournament until later. If there are ties the winner
will be randomly determined.

Please do not talk with one another. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.

Please indicate below which payment scheme you choose: piece rate or tournament.

ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?

Make your choice:




      Piece rate


     Tournament



Name:         ____________________________________
                                                           Version 1


Name:     ____________________________________




Round 1                                          Answer:

  67       87        29        24


  75       59        32        32


  59       24        95        11


  19       10        29        74


  80       12        70        56


  31       17        21        23


  38       91        26        92


  21       88        99        46


  96       99        76        86


  74       56        94        37


  71       33        34        28


  23       68        84        66


  35       60        97        15
                    Version 1




19   25   40   30


23   24   41   52


28   94   87   92


83   73   23   85


17   33   49   79


43   50   34   15


44   60   90   90


47   97   57   62


29   35   77   36


42   65   60   45


54   12   80   10


89   88   67   84


89   49   98   99


64   52   20   27


21   55   58   13


68   83   64   13
Name: ____________________________________

Birth date:___________________________________

School:____________________________________

Gender:____________________________________



This question is about your performance in Task 2 (the tournament task). What do you think
was your rank within the group in terms of sums solved correctly. Please choose a number
from 1 (meaning that you were the best in your group of four) to 4 (meaning that you were
the 4th in your group of four). If your guess is correct, you receive €1.

1        2        3         4



__________________________________________________________________________




In this part, you can earn money with your choices. You will have to choose between
lotteries. Each lottery gives you a high amount of money with a 50% probability and a lower
amount with a 50% probability. The roll of a die will then determine whether you get the high
or the low payoff. We will roll the die in front of your eyes at the end of the experiment.

Please pick one of the following five options:

                      €3.50 with a       €4 with a 50%   €5 with a 50%      €6 with a 50%
                      50% chance         chance          chance             chance
€ 2 for certain
                      €1.50 with a       €1 with a 50%   €0.50 with a       €0 with a 50%
                      50% chance         chance          50% chance         chance




How do you see yourself: Are you generally a person who is fully prepared to take risks or do
you try to avoid taking risks?
Please tick a box on the scale, where the value 0 means: ‘unwilling to take risks’ and the
value 10 means: ‘fully prepared to take risk’.

                                                                                       1
0        1        2         3        4       5       6       7        8       9
                                                                                       0



_________________________________________________________________________
Which track do you think you will pick this summer?

    ES


    NT


    NH


    CS

__________________________________________________________________________

Do you plan to study at a university in the future?

    Yes

    No

__________________________________________________________________________

If yes, which topic will you most likely pick?



__________________________________________________________________________

How difficult do you think it would be for you to pass mathematics track B. Please answer on
a scale from 0 to 10 where 0 means very easy and 10 means very difficult

                                                                                       1
0         1       2        3         4           5    6     7        8        9
                                                                                       0
_________________________________________________________________________

We would like to know from you which track you think the smartest students in your class will
pick. Please order the order the four tracks from 1 to 4 whereby you assign 1 to the track
which you think the smartest students will choose and 4 to the track the least smart students
will choose.

    ES

    NT


    NH


    CS

__________________________________________________________________________
With which profile do you think you would earn most in ten year's time? Rank the profiles
from 1 to 4 where 1 means that you would earn most if you chose that profile and 4 that you
would earn least if you chose that profile

    ES


    NT


    NH


    CS

__________________________________________________________________________

What was your Cito score?



__________________________________________________________________________

Do you think your mathematics ability is:

... in the top 25% of your school?           Yes            No


...in the top 50% of your school?            Yes            No


....in the top 75% of your school?           Yes            No



__________________________________________________________________________


Do you agree or disagree with the following propositions:
1 Agree strongly
2 Agree
3 Neither agree nor disagree
4 Disagree
5 Disagree strongly

Boys are better at maths than girls

1        2        3       4           5



Girls are better at languages than boys

1        2        3       4           5
Boys are better at sciences than girls

1        2        3         4        5



A pre-school child is likely to suffer if his or her mother works

1        2        3         4        5



A working mother can establish just as warm and secure a relationship with her children as a
mother who does not work

1        2        3         4        5



In general, fathers are as well suited to look after their children as mothers

1        2        3         4        5



Both the husband and wife should contribute to household income

1        2        3         4        5



Having a job is the best way for a woman to be an independent person

1        2        3         4        5
