                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    EFFICIENT BAILOUTS?

                                           Javier Bianchi

                                       Working Paper 18587
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18587


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2012




I am grateful to Ufuk Akcigit, Manuel Amador, Luigi Bocola, Maya Eden, Marty Eichenbaum, the
editor, Huberto Ennis, Juan C. Hatchondo, Andreas Horstein, Todd Keister, Anton Korinek, Frederic
Malherbe, Enrique Mendoza, Andy Powell, Vincenzo Quadrini, Thomas Sargent, John Shea, Ali Shourideh,
Carlos Vegh, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh and three anonymous referees for helpful comments. I also
thank seminar participants at 2013 AEA Meetings, Bank of Italy, Central Bank of Uruguay, Dallas
Fed Conference on “Financial frictions and Monetary Policy in an Open Economy,” Di Tella “XIV
Workshop in International Economics and Finance,” Harvard, HKUST “International Workshop on
Macroeconomics,” NYU, Stanford, Columbia, Minneapolis Fed, NBER Impulse and Propagation
Mechanisms Summer Institute, NBER Fall Meetings, New York Fed, Richmond Fed, Society of Economic
Dynamics (SED), Universidad de Montevideo, University of Maryland, University of Montreal, University
of Pennsylvania, and World Bank for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Javier Bianchi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Efficient Bailouts?
Javier Bianchi
NBER Working Paper No. 18587
December 2012, Revised February 2016
JEL No. E2,E20,E3,E32,E44,E6,F40

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop a quantitative equilibrium model of financial crises to assess the interaction between ex-post
interventions in credit markets and the buildup of risk ex ante. During a systemic crisis, bailouts relax
balance sheet constraints and mitigate the severity of the recession. Ex ante, the anticipation of such
bailouts leads to an increase in risk-taking, making the economy more vulnerable to a financial crisis.
We find that moral hazard effects are limited if bailouts are systemic and broad-based. If bailouts are
idiosyncratic and targeted, however, this makes the economy significantly more exposed to financial
crises.


Javier Bianchi
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-139
and NBER
javieribianchi@gmail.com
1       Introduction
In the aftermath of the 2008-2009 financial crisis, a heated debate on the desirability of bailouts
has taken center stage in discussions of financial regulatory reform. Many argue that bailouts are
often necessary to prevent a complete meltdown of the financial sector, which would otherwise
bring an extraordinary contraction in output and employment. An alternative view argues that
bailouts are costly for taxpayers and create incentives to take on even more risk ex ante, thereby
sowing the seeds for future crises. Consistent with this second view, the Dodd-Frank Act has in-
troduced stricter limits on the government’s ability to conduct bailouts, for example, by restricting
emergency lending programs to those of “broad-based eligibility.”1,2
    How does the expectation of bailouts affect the stability of the financial sector and the real
economy? Should public funds be used to bail out the financial sector? If desirable, how should
bailouts be designed and how important are policies to prevent excessive risk-taking?
    To address these questions, we develop a quantitative equilibrium in which credit frictions gen-
erate scope for bailouts during a financial crisis, but where the anticipation of bailouts generates
more risk-taking before the crisis actually hits. We study the optimal intervention in this frame-
work and evaluate its macroeconomic and welfare effects. Our main result is that bailouts have an
important stabilizing role despite moral hazard effects, provided that these bailouts are conducted
during a systemic crisis and are broad-based rather than targeted to particular institutions.
    Our model features a continuum of identical firms that face two frictions in its capacity to
finance investment. First, debt contracts are not enforceable, giving rise to a collateral constraint
that limits the amount that firms can borrow. Second, an equity constraint imposes a minimum
dividend payment that firms must make each period. In the stochastic steady state of the model,
firms are able to finance the desired level of investment during normal economic conditions. How-
ever, when leverage is sufficiently high and an adverse financial shock hits the economy, firms
are forced to cut down on investment, leading to a protracted recession. Anticipating that such
episodes are costly, firms behave in a precautionary manner during normal times, balancing the de-
sire to increase borrowing and investment today with the risk of becoming financially constrained
in the future.
    These credit crunches are socially inefficient, and this inefficiency creates a scope for bailouts.
A transfer from households to firms would raise their net-worth and allow them to invest more,
which in turn would benefit the households by raising future wages and dividends along the
economic recovery. Moreover, we show that the competitive equilibrium is constrained-inefficient.
    1
      Prior to passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act authorized the Federal Reserve
to make emergency loans to “any individual, partnership, or corporation in unusual and exigent circumstances.”
Title XI of Dodd-Frank contains an amendment that restricts emergency lending programs to those of “broad-based
eligibility.”
    2
      Related discussions on bailouts have taken place in earlier emerging markets crises (McKinnon and Pill, 1996,
Stiglitz, 2002, and Meltzer, 2000).



                                                         1
Even if the planner is not able to transfer resources from households to firms to directly alleviate
the equity constraint, a pecuniary externality calls for policy intervention during a credit crunch.
When firms hire workers, they do not internalize that by doing so they raise wages paid by other
firms, which in turn drags down their profits and their ability to invest when equity constraints
are binding. As a result, a social planner that is constrained by the same frictions as the private
economy demand less labor, leading to higher investment and a stronger recovery from a credit
crunch.
    We study the optimal decisions of a government that provides debt relief to firms; that is, the
government pays a fraction of firms’ debt, financed by payroll taxes on firms. We label this policy
“systemic bailouts” or equivalently “broad-based bailouts,” because they are contingent on the
realization of an aggregate (systemic) event and they apply to all institutions rather than being
targeted to a few firms. Debt relief distorts ex-ante borrowing incentives: an individual firm has
an incentive to borrow more because the transfer it will receive in the future is increasing in their
individual debt whereas the taxes it will pay in the future (to finance the bailouts) do not depend
on its choices.
    If the government has access to debt taxes, the government uses both bailouts to stabilize firms’
net-worth ex post and taxes on debt to offset the incentives to overborrow ex ante. Moreover,
the government problem is time consistent. On the other hand, if the government does not have
prudential policies, a classic time inconsistency problem in bailout policies arises. Ex post, bailouts
relax balance sheet constraints, thereby speeding up the recovery from a credit crunch. Ex ante,
however, the anticipation of such bailouts induces overborrowing, which makes the economy more
vulnerable to a financial crisis. The desirability of bailouts depend on the balance between the
ex-post benefits and the ex-ante costs.
    In the quantitative investigation, we use data for the US economy as a reference, matching
unconditional moments for leverage, volatility of investment, and the frequency of financial crises.
We find that conditional on a crisis, optimal bailouts are on average 5 percentage points of GDP.
Moreover, the multiplier effects of bailouts are large: a bailout of one percentage point of GDP
in a crisis comparable to the Great Recession can lead to cumulative output gains of about 1.5
percentage points. Moreover, the multiplier effects are state-dependent as the effectiveness depends
on the severity of the crisis. Bailouts also result in financial constraints becoming frequently more
binding, and as a result the unconditional differences in the severity of financial crises ends up
being similar with and without bailouts.
    A central quantitative result is that the moral hazard effects depend critically on the way
bailouts are implemented. If government bailouts are broad-based, the lack of prudential policies
makes little difference for borrowing decisions as well as for the incidence and severity of financial
crises. This occurs despite optimal bailouts being large and having substantial effects on the
economy. Instead, bailouts that depend entirely on idiosyncratic firm decisions, what we label
“idiosyncratic bailouts,” lead to significantly more overborrowing and make crises more severe.

                                                  2
For example, during crises, the investment collapse that occurs with the idiosyncratic bailout
policy is about 20 percentage points larger than with the systemic bailout policy.
    The key reason why systemic bailout policies generate little moral hazard is because these
bailouts are contingent on a systemic crisis and not on individual firm decisions. That is, if an
individual firm becomes financial constrained, it is not granted a bailout unless the rest of the
economy is also financially constrained. Because the probability of a financial crisis is exogenous
to the individual firm and is a small probability event in our calibration due to the precautionary
savings effect, the anticipation of bailouts do not modify much borrowing decisions. In contrast,
with the idiosyncratic bailout policy, the firm directly internalizes how borrowing decisions affect
debt relief policies and significantly raises leverage to take advantage of bailouts.
    We emphasize that the welfare gains from systemic bailouts occur not only ex post but also
ex ante. That is, even if systemic bailouts generate more risk-taking, this is to a large extent an
optimal response to the insurance provided by the government. In contrast, the welfare losses that
result from the anticipation of idiosyncratic bailouts can be large.
    Related Literature — This paper draws on the extensive literature on the macroeconomic
effects of financial frictions, shaped by the work of Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997). In particular, our model shares with Jermann and Quadrini (2012) the emphasis
on financial shocks and equity financing decisions, and with Mendoza (2010) the emphasis on
nonlinear dynamics beyond the steady state. However, these papers do not address normative
issues.
    This paper is also related to a growing quantitative literature that studies the effects of credit
policy during a credit crunch.3 For reasons of tractability, most of this literature focuses on policy
measures in response to unanticipated crises or on log-linear dynamics around the deterministic
steady state, and does not address risk considerations and the moral hazard effects of credit
policy. Instead, a distinctive feature of this paper is the consideration of how expectations of
future bailouts affect risk-taking ex ante. This is crucial to assessing the dynamic implications of
credit intervention on financial stability and social welfare.
    This paper also builds on the theoretical literature that analyzes the effects of bailouts on
risk-taking incentives and financial stability.4 In particular, Farhi and Tirole (2012) show that
bailouts generate incentives to correlate risks, resulting in excessive financial fragility, and draw
implications for ex-ante regulation to rule out bailouts in equilibrium. Our paper emphasizes the
idea that bailouts can be welfare improving not only ex post but also ex ante. In this respect, it
   3
     See for example Gertler and Karadi (2011), Del Negro, Eggertsson, Ferrero, and Kiyotaki (2010), In’t Veld,
Kollmann, Ratto, and Roeger (2013) for models of credit policy. See Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011), Bigio (2010),
Midrigin and Philippon (2011), and Shourideh and Zetlin-Jones (2012) for other recent examples of models of credit
crunches.
   4
     Examples include Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2001), Schneider and Tornell (2004), Farhi and Tirole
(2012), Chari and Kehoe (2013), Diamond and Rajan (2009), Keister (2012), Keister and Narasiman (2011), Nosal
and Ordonez (2012), Pastén (2011), and Stavrakeva (2015). For empirical evidence on the anticipation of bailouts
in the US financial crisis see Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011).


                                                        3
is more closely related to Keister (2012). He studies a Diamond-Dybvig economy and shows that
commitment to a no-bailout policy induces banks to remain too liquid from a social point of view
and may increase the vulnerability to a bank-run. Our main contribution to this literature is to
provide a quantitative framework to assess the effects that bailouts have over financial stability.
    In recent work, Gertler, Kiyotaki, and Queralto (2012) develop a model in which banks have
access to debt and equity financing and investigate the moral hazard effects of credit policy. They
restrict attention to macro dynamics around a “risk-adjusted steady state” in which financial
constraints are always binding. In contrast, we study full equilibrium dynamics in a stochastic
steady state in which binding financial constraints only bind occasionally. We also complement
their work by characterizing and solving for the optimal bailout policy and prudential policy to
avoid excessive risk-taking.
    This paper is also related to a growing literature on how macroprudential policy can be used
to reduce the level of financial fragility.5 In particular, Jeanne and Korinek (2011) study a stylized
three-period model with a fire-sale externality and show that there is scope for both ex-ante and
ex-post policy intervention.6 The inefficiency in this literature relates to the effects of an inter-
temporal reallocation of wealth of leveraged borrowers on prices affecting borrowing constraints.
In contrast, the basic scope for ex post policy here arises because of the effects of intratemporal
reallocations of wealth between households and firms on future production capacity. In particular,
we point to a pecuniary externality involving the effects of wages on firms’ equity constraints.
Finally, the role for prudential policy in our setup is due purely to the need to offset moral hazard
effects of bailouts.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the analytical framework;
Section 3 analyzes the optimal intervention; Sections 4 and 5 present the quantitative analysis;
Section 6 discusses the conclusions; the appendix contains the proofs and additional details.


2       Model
The model economy is populated by firms and workers, who are also the firms’ shareholders.
Firms issue bonds in world capital markets at an exogenous interest rate and face both borrowing
constraints and equity constraints in their capacity to finance investment. We begin by describing
the decisions made by different agents in the economy, and then we discuss the general equilibrium.
    5
     See for example Lorenzoni (2008), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001), Bianchi (2011), Benigno, Chen, Otrok,
Rebucci, and Young (2012), Bianchi and Mendoza (2010), and Jeanne and Korinek (2010).
   6
     In a dynamic model of entry and exit in the export sector, Caballero and Lorenzoni (2014) obtain similar
results involving both ex-ante and ex-post policies targeting the real exchange rate. Jeanne and Korinek (2011),
and Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young (2012) also present conditions under which ex-post policies alone
can achieve first-best outcomes.




                                                       4
2.1    Households
There is a continuum of identical households of measure one that maximize
                                           ∞
                                           Ø
                                       E         β t u(ct − G(nt )),                              (1)
                                           t=0


where ct is consumption, nt is labor supply, β is the discount factor. The utility function u(·)
                                                                        1+ 1
has the constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) form and G(n) = n1+ 1ǫ governs the disutility of
                                                                          ǫ
labor, where ǫ is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. The composite of the utility function has
the Greenwood-Hercowitz-Huffman (GHH) form, eliminating wealth effects on labor supply. The
advantage of these preferences is that they deliver realistic responses of employment during a
credit crunch without introducing frictions in labor markets that would complicate the analysis.
     Households do not have access to bond markets, and they are the firms’ shareholders. At the
beginning of the period, they hold st shares of firms that pay dt dividends and have a market price
pt , collect wages wt and use funds to buy consumption and purchase firms’ shares. Their budget
constraint is
                                  st+1 pt + ct ≤ wt nt + st (dt + pt ),                         (2)

   The first-order conditions for nt and st+1 are

                            nt ::          wt = G′ (nt )                                          (3)

                           st+1 ::    pt u′ (t) = βEt u′ (t + 1)(dt+1 + pt+1 ),                   (4)

 where u′ (t) ≡ u′ (ct − G(nt )).
   Iterating forward on (4) and imposing a no-bubble condition yields the result that in equilib-
rium, the price of shares must be equal to
                                                   ∞
                                                   Ø
                                       pt = E t          mt,t+j dt+j ,
                                                   j=1


where mt,t+j ≡ (β j u′ (ct+j − G(nt+j )))/(u′ (ct − G(nt ))) represents the j- period-ahead stochastic
discount factor, and mt+1 will represent the one-period-ahead stochastic discount factor.


2.2    Corporate Entities
There is a continuum of identical firms of measure one that operate a production function F (z, k, h) =
zk α h1−α that combines capital, k, and labor, h, to produce a final good. Productivity, zt , follows
a first-order Markov process.
    Firms start the period with kt units of capital, and bt units of debt, pay dividends, dt , issue
one-period non-state contingent debt, bt+1 , and invest in physical capital, it . Accordingly, their

                                                      5
budget constraint is

                                                                              bt+1
                                 bt + dt + it ≤ F (zt , kt , ht ) − wt nt +        ,                          (5)
                                                                               Rt
where wt is the wage rate, and Rt is the gross interest rate. Implicit in the budget constraint is the
fact that firms cannot issue new shares (we normalize the total number of shares to 1). However,
they can adjust retained earnings by cutting dividend payments and servicing debt subject to the
constraints that will be described below.
    Firms have the following capital accumulation technology:

                                     kt+1 = kt (1 − δ) + it − ψ(kt , kt+1 ),                                  (6)

where δ is the depreciation rate and ψ(kt , kt+1 ) is a convex cost of adjusting the stock of capital.
Adjustment costs are introduced to improve the quantitative performance of the model in terms
of the volatility of investment. Moreover, they also play an important role in making crises more
costly, as the sharp disinvestment that occurs during crises takes some real resources.
    We assume that the gross interest rate is determined exogenously in international markets.
This assumption deserves some comments. On the one hand, the empirical evidence provides
exhaustive evidence that foreign credit plays a key role in credit booms and bust in both developed
and emerging markets (see, e.g., Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009, and Mendoza and Terrones, 2008).
For example, Mendoza and Quadrini (2009) document that about one-half of the surge in net
credit in the US economy since the mid-1980s was financed by foreign capital inflows. In addition,
Warnock and Warnock (2009) show that foreign purchases of US bonds have an economically
large and statistically significant impact on interest rates. Furthermore, Justiniano, Primiceri,
and Tambalotti (2014) argue that supply shocks driven by foreign borrowing are important in
accounting for the dynamics of housing prices, interest rates, and credit in the US economy. On
the other hand, a limitation from our quantitative analysis that will use the US economy as the
main reference is that our model would not feature a feedback from deleveraging to low interest
rates, as was observed in the US financial crisis. Still, to accommodate the observed positive
comovement between interest rates and borrowing, we will assume a positive correlation between
interest rates and financial shocks that will deliver endogenously that deleveraging episodes are
accompanied by low interest rates.7
    In addition to issuing intertemporal bonds, bt , firms raise funds with an intraperiod loan to
finance working capital at a zero interest rate. As in Jermann and Quadrini (2012), working
capital is required to cover the cash flow mismatch between the payments made to shareholders,
   7
    An alternative way to address these issues would be to consider a two-country model where each economy would
naturally affect the world interest rate and would also be affected by external factors. Besides the computational
challenges of this approach, the normative analysis becomes theoretically more complicated by the presence of
redistribution effects among agents in the two countries.



                                                        6
workers, and bondholders at the beginning of the period and the realization of revenues F (z, k, h)
at the end of the period. Firms’ total borrowing capacity is limited by a fraction κt of the capital
stock:8
                                   bt+1
                                        + θF (zt , kt , ht ) ≤ κt kt+1 .                         (7)
                                    Rt
The parameter κt is stochastic and represents a financial shock that alters exogenously the borrow-
ing capacity of firms. As shown by Jermann and Quadrini (2012), this shock provides important
improvements in the quantitative performance of DSGE models.9 A possible interpretation of
such shocks relates to disruptions in financial intermediaries, which become more constrained in
their ability to lend or become more concerned with the riskiness of the corporate sector, as in
Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014). In the model simulations, we will show that when firms
carry significant amounts of debt, a negative financial shock will trigger a binding credit constraint
and produce a credit crunch with features that are similar to those in the data.
    Besides the borrowing constraint, firms in our model face an equity constraint, which will play
a crucial role in our analysis. Without any constraints on equity financing, the shadow value of
external funds would be equal to one in our model: resources would have the same value across
firms and households. In addition, firms would be able to finance the desired level of investment by
raising equity and the model would fail to reproduce the evolution of real and financial variables
in the data. Furthermore, there is vast empirical evidence that documents the prevalence of equity
frictions (see, e.g., Leary and Michaely, 2011 for a study of empirical determinants of the costs of
issuing equity and Shleifer and Vishny, 1997 for a survey).
    Ideally, we would prefer to model financial costs of raising equity endogenously, resorting to
corporate finance theories about why it is costly to issue equity.10 Since our goal is to build a
model that is sufficiently simple for theoretical analysis, yet quantitatively rich enough to take to
the data, we do not pursue this approach. Specifically, we assume that firms need to satisfy a
lower bound on dividend payments given by

                                                         ¯
                                                    dt ≥ d.                                                   (8)

A special case is d¯ = 0, which restricts dividends to be non-negative and is a widely used limited
liability constraint. The case with d¯ > 0 captures the fact that there are benefits associated with
   8
     Jermann and Quadrini (2012) derive this constraint endogenously from an imperfect enforceability problem.
We implicitly assume that the liquidation value of capital is set at book value rather than market value, thereby
turning off a fire-sale externality mechanism (see e.g. Bianchi and Mendoza, 2010). We make this assumption
purposefully to focus on the inefficiency that arises from reallocation of funds between households and firms (see
also Jeanne and Korinek (2011) and Stavrakeva (2015) for an analysis of bailouts with fire-sale externalities)
   9
     Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2015) also attribute a primary role to fluctuations in the cost of
working capital during the Great Recession.
  10
     A leading motivation for frictions on equity financing is private information about investment opportunities.
For example, in Myers and Majluf (1984), good firms may find it optimal not to issue equity when they are pooled
with those of lower quality.



                                                        7
dividend payments besides the purely pecuniary benefits for shareholders. The idea of the benefits
from dividend smoothing goes back to Lintner (1956), and a large corporate-finance literature has
followed investigating agency problems and information asymmetries that can rationalize this
behavior. In addition, Brav, Graham, Harvey, and Michaely (2005) found that firms are willing to
raise external capital or forego positive NPV investments to avoid cutting dividends. We take the
d¯ as a primitive of the environment, which has the limitation that we abstract from how shocks or
policies might affect the nature of the equity constraint, but allows us to streamline the analysis
and build a parsimonious model for a quantitative analysis.11
    Firms’ objective is to maximize shareholder value at each point in time. That is, their problem
                                                  ∞
                                                  q
is to maximize st (pt + dt ) or, equivalently, Et   mt,t+j dt+j , iterating forward on (4). Below we
                                                           j=0
analyze the firm optimization problem in recursive form.


2.3     Recursive Problem and Optimality Conditions
The aggregate state vector of the economy is given by X = {K, B, s}, where s = {κ, z, R} is the
vector of shocks. Let V (k, b, X) denote the cum-dividend market value of the firm that starts with
k units of capital and b bonds when the aggregate state is X.12 The optimization problem for
firms can be written recursively as

                     V (k, b, X) = max   d + Em′ (X, X ′ )V (k ′ , b′ , X ′ ),                                (9)
                                      d,h,k ,b
                                     ′ ′


                                 s.t.
                                                                                              b′
                                 b + d + k ′ + ψ(k, k ′ ) ≤ (1 − δ)k + F (z, k, h) − wn +        ,      (λ)
                                                                                              R
                                 b′
                                    + θF (z, k, h) ≤ κk ′ ,                                             (µ)
                                 R
                                     ¯
                                 d ≥ d.                                                                 (η)
  11
     Philippon and Skreta (2012) is an interesting study that investigates how bailout policies should be designed
in a stylized model of crises resolution, when there are equity frictions due to private information.
  12
     Notice that if initial debt is high enough, firms would face an empty budget set. The maximum level of debt
that firms can service is given by
                                                                  A                       3 ′     42 B
                                                               b′                      φ    k − k
              bmax (k, X) = max           F (z, k, h) − w(X)h + − d¯ + k − k(1 − δ) +
                                                                        ′
                                                                                                    k
                                b′ ,k′ ,h                      R                       2      k
                              s.t.
                              b′ + θF (z, k, h) ≤ κk ′ .

In equilibrium, this implies that firms will choose (k, b) ∈ Θ(X) where

                              Θ(X) = {(b, k) ∈ R × R+ : b ≤ bmax (k, {k, b, s} ∀s)}.




                                                            8
Let us denote the Lagrange multipliers on the budget constraint, borrowing constraint, and equity
constraint as λt , µt , and ηt . The optimality condition with respect to dividends indicates that the
value of one more unit of funds exceeds one when the equity constraint binds:

                                                λt = 1 + ηt

The optimality condition for labor demand equates the marginal benefits from higher production
to the marginal cost, which includes the wage and the tightening effect on the working capital
constraint
                                                            wt
                                     Fh (zt , kt , ht ) =                                 (10)
                                                          1 − θµ
                                                               λt
                                                                 t



There are also two Euler intertemporal conditions that relate the marginal benefit from distributing
one unit of dividends today with the marginal benefit of investing in the available assets and
distributing the resulting dividends in the next period. The Euler equations for bonds are capital
are respectively

 bt+1 ::    1 + ηt = Rt Et mt+1 (1 + ηt+1 ) + µt ,                                                    (11)
                                          I                                                            J
 kt+1 ::    (1 + ηt )(1 + ψ2,t ) = Et mt+1 [1 − δ + Fk (t + 1) − ψ1,t+2 ] (1 + ηt+1 ) − µt+1 θFk (t + 1)


                                                                                        + κt µt .     (12)

and complementary slackness conditions are given by

                            µt (κt kt+1 − bt+1 − θF (zt , kt , ht )) = 0, µt ≥ 0,                     (13)

                                     ¯ = 0, ηt ≥ 0.
                            ηt (dt − d)                                                               (14)

 In the absence of financial constraints on borrowing and dividend payments, the firm would
be indifferent at the margin between equity and debt financing. Notice that when the equity
constraint binds, however, there is a positive wedge between the benefits from investing in bonds
or capital and the marginal cost of cutting dividends today to finance the increase in capital and
bonds. Moreover, the expectation of a binding equity constraint tomorrow leads to higher benefits
from asset accumulation. When the collateral constraint binds, there is a positive wedge between
the marginal benefit of borrowing one more unit and distributing it as dividends in the current
period and the marginal cost of cutting dividends in the next period to repay the debt increase.
    In section 4, we will provide a numerical characterization of the region of the state space when
these two constraints bind and will show that the two constraints will often bind at the same time.
Intuitively, both constraints impose a limit on a firm’s funding ability. A binding equity constraint


                                                     9
forces higher levels of borrowing for given investment choices. Similarly, a tighter constraint on
borrowing puts pressure on the firms to finance with equity and reduce dividend payments up to
the limit.
    The two Euler equations (11) and (12) can be combined to deliver the excess return on capital
relative to bonds that we denote by Rep         K
                                       t ≡ Et Rt+1 − Rt :

                                                                         K
                                       µ(1 − κ) + COV(mt+1 (1 + ηt+1 ), Rt+1 )
                               Rep
                                t =                                            .                                (15)
                                                 Et mt+1 (1 + ηt+1 )

This expression indicates that excess returns can be decomposed into a liquidity premium that
is proportional to the Lagrange multiplier on the borrowing constraint and a risk premium that
relates the covariance of returns with the stochastic discount factor. Unlike the standard formula
for the risk premium, however, this formula incorporates the Lagrange multiplier on the equity
constraint, in addition to the marginal utility of consumption component, which implies that the
value from future asset payments includes not only the marginal utility gains from consuming
those payments but also the gains from relaxing the equity constraint. This expression will be
useful as we show below how the realization of bailouts as well as the anticipation of bailouts affect
investment and financial decisions.13


2.4     Competitive Equilibrium
The competitive equilibrium for a small open economy that borrows from abroad at an exogenous
interest rate can be constructed in the usual form. Market clearing in the labor market requires

                                                     ht = nt .                                                  (16)

Market clearing in equity markets requires

                                                      st = 1.                                                   (17)

Combining these two market clearing conditions with the households’ budget constraint (2) and
the firms’ budget constraint (5), we obtain the resource constraint for the economy:

                                                                                         bt+1
                      bt + ct + kt+1 + ψ(kt , kt+1 ) = (1 − δ)kt + F (zt , kt , ht ) +        .                 (18)
                                                                                          Rt

The recursive competitive equilibrium can be defined as follows:
Definition 1. A recursive competitive equilibrium is given by firms’ equity value V (k, b, X) and
        î                                             ï
          ˆ b, X), ĥ(k, b, X)k̂(k, b, X), b̂(k, b, X) ; households’s policies {ŝ(s, X), ĉ(s, X), n̂(s, X)};
policies d(k,
  13
    Bocola (2014) uses a similar decomposition to disentangle the risk channel and the liquidity channel of sovereign
default risk in an estimated nonlinear macro model of banks in the vein of Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010).

                                                         10
a stochastic discount factor m(X, X ′ ); prices {w(X), p(X)}; and a law of motion of aggregate vari-
ables X ′ = Γ(X), such that: (i) households solve their optimization problem; (ii) firms’ policies
and firms’ equity value solve (45a); (iii) markets clear in the equity market (ŝ(1, X) = 1) and
the labor market (ĥ(K, B, X) = n̂(1, X)); (iv) the stochastic discount factor for firms is given by
the household’s marginal rate of substitution m(X, X ′ ) = βu′ (ĉ(1, X) − G(n̂(1, X)))/(u′ (ĉ(1, X ′ ) −
G(n̂(1, X ′ ))); and (v) the law of motion Γ(·) is consistent with individual policy functions and
stochastic processes for κ, R, and z.

    In a deterministic steady state with βR < 1, the collateral constraint is always binding.14
Away from the deterministic steady state, the collateral constraint is only occasionally binding,
as precautionary savings effects lead firms to accumulate less debt. On the other hand, the equity
constraint would typically not be binding in steady state. To see this, notice that if one sets
steady state level of debt to zero and assuming θ = 0, one obtains using the fact that F is
constant returns to scale, dss = αF (z ss , k ss , hss ) − k ss δ.15 For typical values of α, δ and capital-
output ratio, the return on capital is enough to finance investment. Considering the stochastic
steady state, however, the equity constraint will bind with positive probability as states where the
firm pays down significant amounts of debt or increase heavily investment may lead firms to hit
the lower bound on dividend payments.


3      Normative Analysis
In this section, we first show that the competitive equilibrium is constrained-inefficient. Then, we
study various bailout policies financed with payroll taxes and assess the role of prudential policies.


3.1       Constrained Efficiency
Let us start the normative analysis by characterizing constrained efficiency in this economy. For
simplicity, let us assume there is no working capital constraint, i.e., θ = 0. (This does not affect
the theoretical results but makes notation more intensive; the appendix derives all results with
θ > 0.) We will show that there is a pecuniary externality that involves how the market wage
affects firms’ profits and the tightness of the equity constraint.
    We consider a benevolent social planner that chooses labor allocations on behalf of firms and
lets all remaining markets clear competitively. Formally, the planner maximizes expected lifetime
  14
      In the absence of a borrowing constraint, u′ (ct )(1 + ηt ) would grow at rate (1)/(βR). In addition, absent an
equity constraint, the economy would converge to a steady state with a constant capital-output ratio equal to
      α
(β −1 −1+δ) and consumption would converge to zero. If βR = 1, the steady state for capital is still pinned down by
      α
(β −1 −1+δ) , but consumption is constant and the steady state value of debt depends on initial conditions.
   15
      The value of d¯ that makes the equity constraint binding at steady state in the general case can be computed
                                                    1                   21/(α−1)               1 ss ss α             21/( 1ǫ −1)
using the following expressions: k ss /hss = 1/β−1+δ−(1−βR)κ  zα                      , h ss
                                                                                             =  z(k /h ) (1−θ(1−βR))
                                                                                                         χ                       , dss =
                                                   !    "
F (z ss , k ss , hss ) − G′ (hss )hss + δk ss + bss 1−R
                                                      R   , bss /R + θF (z ss , k ss , hss ) = κk ss .

                                                                  11
utility subject to feasibility (18), and implementability constraints given by households’ first-order
conditions (3) and (4), firms’ first-order condition with respect to bonds (11) and capital (12),
complementary slackness conditions (13-14), labor market clearing (16), and stock market clearing
(17).
    As we show in Appendix B, implementability constraints (4) and (11-14) are slack, and hence
the problem can be reduced according to the following proposition.

Proposition 1. The constrained-efficient allocations solve
                                               ∞
                                               Ø
                            max            E         β t u(ct − G(ht ))                                                        (SP)
                   {kt+1 ,bt+1 ,ht ,ct }
                                               t=0

                               s.t.
                                                                                                        bt+1
                bt + ct = (1 − δ)kt − kt+1 − ψ(kt , kt+1 ) + F (zt , kt , ht ) +                                               (SPa)
                                                                                                         Rt
                                                                bt+1
                d¯ ≤ F (zt , kt , ht ) + (1 − δ)kt − G′ (h)ht +      − bt − kt+1 − ψ(kt , kt+1 )                               (SPb)
                                                                 Rt
                 bt+1
                      + θF (zt , kt , ht ) ≤ κt kt+1 .                                                                         (SPc)
                  Rt

    Notice that the marginal disutility of labor appears in the equity constraint, which has been
substituted by wages. Unlike firms that are atomistic, the planner internalizes how changes in
labor demand affect wages, which in turn affect the tightness of the equity constraint. This is the
key pecuniary externality that justifies policy intervention.16
    The first-order condition with respect to h illustrates how the constrained-efficient allocations
differ from the competitive equilibrium:

                                                                                                         ηt
                        Fh (zt , kt , ht )                =               G′ (ht )              +              G′′ (ht )ht      (20)
                        ü       ûú         ý                              ü ûú ý                    u′ (t)+ ηt
              Private marginal benefit from ↑ ht              Private marginal cost from ↑ ht       ü          ûú          ý
                                                                                                        Externality Term


The left-hand side of (20) represents the benefits from increasing employment, which are given
by the marginal product of labor. The right-hand side of (20) represents the costs from raising
employment, which is composed of two terms. The first term is given by the disutility of labor.
The second term constitutes the key pecuniary externality: raising one unit of employment raises
wages by G′′ (h) and reduces profits by G′′ (h)h, thereby making the equity constraint tighter, which
                           ηt
has a shadow value of u′ (t)+η t
                                 expressed in consumption goods. Private firms do not internalize
these effects, and as a result they over-demand labor. As we will show below, this externality in
  16
     In an earlier version, we showed that if the planner has access to costly transfers between households and firms
but does not control the allocation of labor, a related pecuniary externality emerges, leading to over-accumulation
of capital: higher aggregate level of capital reduces profits and makes the equity constraint more binding. Moreover,
with costless transfers, the government can undo the effects of the equity constraint, and there would not be any
need for imposing a distortion on labor.


                                                                      12
                         F                G

                          ∆ Firms                                                                    Supply of Labor
                         Surplus in                              Competitive Equilibrium             (G′ (h) = w)
                         Monopsonistic
                         Economy                                                B
                             A
                                        ∆ Firms Surplus in                                             E
                        D               Constrained-Efficient Equilibrium
                                                                                                               Fh (k, h)
                                                                                     C

                                                              Constrained-Efficient Equilibrium
                                                                                          ηt
                                                                       Fh (k, h) −               G′′ (ht )ht
                                                                                     u′ (t) + ηt
                         I                H
                                                 Monopsonistic Economy

                                                 Demand for Labor in
                                                 Monopsonistic Economy

                                                                Employment



                                 Figure 1: Illustration of Constrained Inefficiency


turn generates too little investment in equilibrium relative to the constrained-efficient allocations,
and as a result this slows down the recovery from a financial crisis.
   It is also useful to contrast the optimality condition (20) in the constrained-efficient equilibrium
with the one that would characterize an economy with a firm that is a monopsonist in the labor
market. In this case, the firm also internalizes how labor demand affects wages, but it does so to
maximize private benefit, leading to the following condition:

                             Fh (kt , ht )                =                 G′ (ht )                       +         G′′ (ht )ht    (21)
                             ü     ûú       ý                               ü ûú ý                                   ü     ûú   ý
               Private marginal benefit from ↑ ht             Private marginal cost from ↑ ht                   Market power term


By noting that the market power term is larger than the externality term, since (ηt )/(u′ (t)+ηt ) < 1,
it follows that the economy with a monopsonist leads to too little employment relative to the
constrained-efficient allocations. Intuitively, the planner finds it optimal to create a labor wedge
to reduce wages and prop up profits, but it does so to maximize welfare and hence does not
constrain labor demand as much as the monopsonist who seeks to maximize private profits.
    Figure 1 provides a graphical illustration of the inefficiency in a partial equilibrium setup. The
Harberger triangle represented by the BCE area denotes the second-order welfare loss of restricting
employment below the competitive equilibrium. The shaded ABCD area represents the increase
in profits that firms obtain in the constrained-efficient allocations, which results in a more relaxed
equity constraint that leads to higher investment and higher future employment. Notice that
the ABCD area is lower than the FGHI area that denotes the increase in firms’ profits in the
monopsonist economy.


                                                                    13
    Key to generating the pecuniary externality is the presence of the equity constraint and the
fact that profits are decreasing in wages. The equity constraint generates an undercapitalization of
firms in the decentralized equilibrium. When the equity constraint binds, funds are more valuable
within the firms than within households. Households would not be willing to unilaterally transfer
funds to firms because they only perceive the cost from doing so—or, relatedly, they are not
willing to take a paycut or work for free. Instead, a social planner recognizes that the shift in
labor allocations turns prices in favor of the firm, relaxes equity constraints across the corporate
sector, and in turn benefits the household through higher dividends and higher wages in the future.
    We would like to note that while this pecuniary externality is derived in a context with a
Walrasian labor market, the key forces are likely to be present in various other settings. As long
as labor supply is not perfectly elastic, wages vary with aggregate labor, and this affects the
balance sheet of the firm through payroll.17 For example, with search frictions, the outside value
for an unemployed agent would depend on the aggregate demand for labor (i.e., the vacancies post
by firms), and hence the same externality would be operating on the decision to post vacancies.
Intuitively, if firms post fewer vacancies, this would lower wages, raise the firm surplus, and relax
their equity constraints. Furthermore, long-term labor contracts might mitigate but not eliminate
the wage adjustment in response to aggregate labor demand. Empirically, there is abundant
evidence using disaggregated data that wages are procyclical (Bils, 1985), even when focusing
on those that are already employed (Solon, Barsky, and Parker, 1994). Recent work by Schoefer
(2015) also presents micro-evidence of the effect of wages on firms’ investment and hiring decisions,
which is at the core of the mechanism of this paper.
    Before concluding this section, we note that Appendix B.5 shows that the same theoretical
result generalizes to the case in which firms can issue equity at a cost.


3.2     Optimal Policy
Motivated by the previous section that showed that the competitive equilibrium is constrained-
inefficient, we consider a Ramsey planner that chooses a set of tax instruments to achieve the best
competitive equilibrium.
    We assume that the government does not have access to lump sum taxes/transfers across firms
and households. To capture bailout policies, we endow the government with a “debt relief policy”
whereby the government pays a non-negative fraction γtSB < 1 of individual private debts, and
finances it with a linear payroll tax τth on all firms.18 We use the superscript SB to indicate
that the debt relief is a systemic bailout policy (i.e., γtSB is a function only of aggregate states).
  17
     On the other hand, if demand is perfectly inelastic or if after-tax wages are sticky, then the planner can achieve
a first-order gain without the second-order welfare loss that arises because of the labor wedge introduced.
  18
     The debt relief is natural in the context of our model given that highly leveraged firms underinvest when hit
by adverse shocks that make financial constraints binding. Some form of debt relief is widely used by governments
during crises.



                                                          14
Alternatively, one can also refer to these bailouts as broad-based because by construction the
bailout is not targeted to any individual firm.
     In the baseline policy experiment, we endow the government with a prudential tax on borrowing
  b
(τt ) that is rebated lump sum to firms (Tt ), but we also study the case in which the government
does not have access to the prudential tax. In addition, we will contrast the results with debt
relief policies that are a function of individual firms’ leverage.
     With these policies, firms’ budget constraints become

                                                                                     bt+1
                (1 − γtSB )bt + dt + it ≤ F (zt , kt , ht ) − wt nt (1 + τth ) +          (1 − τtb ) + Tt ,       (22)
                                                                                      Rt

The first-order condition with respect to bt+1 and nt yields
                                               è                                 é
                    1 + ηt = Rt (1 + τtb )Et mt+1 (1 + ηt+1 )(1 − γt+1
                                                                   SB
                                                                       ) + µt Rt (1 + τtb )                       (23)

                                            Fn (kt , nt ) = wt (1 + τt h ).                                       (24)
                                                                                             SB
Note that from (23), the private cost of borrowing at time t is reduced by a factor of (1 − γt+1 ) in
a state t + 1 in which the government provides debt relief. Notice that as of time t, the bailout is
uncertain as it depends on the shock realized at t + 1, in addition to firms’ aggregate choices.
    The household budget constraint remains unchanged, as again we assumed that the government
cannot extract resources from households and transfer them to firms.
    The government balances the budget constraint period by period:19

                                                                          bt+1
                                         γtSB bt + Tt = wt nt τth + τtb                                           (25)
                                                                           Rt

Given these policies, we can now formally define the regulated competitive equilibrium and the
Ramsey problem.

Definition 2. A regulated competitive equilibrium is a sequence of prices {wt , pt }, allocations
{kt+1 , bt+1 , ht , ct , nt }∞                               SB   h    b
                             t=0 , and government policies {γt , τt , τt , Tt } such that (i) household optimiza-
tion conditions (2),(3),(4), and firm optimization conditions (5),(6),(10),(13),(14),(22),(23) are
satisfied; (ii) markets clear (16),(17); and (iii) the government budget constraint is satisfied (25).

Definition 3. The Ramsey problem is to maximize (1) over regulated competitive equilibrium.

     According to Proposition 2, the Ramsey outcome leads to the same allocations as the constrained-
efficient allocations.
  19
     Allowing the government to borrow would create a different scope for intervention as the government would
“lend” its borrowing capacity to the firms, as in Holmström and Tirole (1998) and Woodford (1990). This scope
for public liquidity would arise in states where the collateral constraint is binding, but the key novel externality we
highlight through the equity constraint would remain unchanged. To keep the focus on this externality, we force
the government to follow a balanced budget.

                                                          15
Proposition 2. The outcome of the Ramsey problem when the government chooses the 4-tuple
(γtSB , τth , τtb , Tt ) solves Problem (SP).

    Central to this equivalence result is the fact that by choosing a sequence of taxes on debt,
the planner can control borrowing decisions and offset incentives to take excessive risk due to
the debt relief policy.20 In addition, the proposition indicates that capital accumulation is not
distorted in the sense that private and social incentives are aligned.21 Since the problem of the
constrained-efficient planner (SP) is time consistent, the Ramsey problem is also time consistent.
    Given proposition 2, the effectiveness of policy depends on the strength of the pecuniary
externality uncovered in equation (20). To gauge the empirical importance of this externality,
proposition 3 presents a simple characterization of the size of the bailout
                                                                                            γtSB bt
Proposition 3. The bailout perceived by firms as a fraction of output (i.e.,                   Y
                                                                                                    )   is given by
                                                                 A        B
                                              bt   Labor share          η̂
                                       γtSB      =                          ,                                     (26)
                                              Yt        ǫ            η̂ + 1
               η
where η̂ ≡   u′ (c)
                      represents the shadow value from relaxing the equity constraint in real units.

    Interestingly, the bailout depends on the product of two parameters of the model that are
fairly well measured in the data, that is, the labor share and the elasticity of labor supply, in
addition to the shadow cost of equity, which is an endogenous object in the model. The bailout
is decreasing in the labor share because, the higher the labor share, the bigger the effects of
reduction in wages on profits. The bailout is decreasing on the elasticity of labor supply because
the higher the elasticity, the bigger the distortion in employment necessary to achieve an increase
in firms’ profits. In particular, labor supply were perfectly inelastic, the equity constraint could
be completely relaxed at no cost. Finally, the bigger the shadow cost of equity, the bigger the
benefits from bailouts.
    Based on a “sufficient statistic” approach, one can readily compute a back-of-the-envelope-
calculation that immediately suggests that the externality can be large. For example, setting
the labor share equal to the elasticity of labor supply, and for a small value of η̂, we arrive at
γtSB Ybtt ∼ η̂. Using a conservative value for the shadow cost of equity of 5% yields an approximate
bailout of 5 percent of output. Of course, in our structural model, the shadow cost of equity is
endogenous and depends on firms’s production and leverage decisions, which in turn depends on
bailout expectations.
  20
     Similar results on how prudential policies can achieve the commitment solution are present in Farhi and Tirole
(2012), Chari and Kehoe (2013) and Jeanne and Korinek (2011).
  21
     As shown in an earlier version of this paper, if the planner did not have access to a tax on labor, and instead
had access to a lump sum tax on households subject to an iceberg cost, the capital accumulation would become
distorted relative to the constrained-efficient allocations generating a source of time-inconsistency. Because of the
pecuniary externality described above, firms would invest too much on capital since they do not internalize that
higher capital stock drives wages up and tightens the equity constraint when it binds.


                                                         16
    No Prudential Policies— Next, we analyze the case in which the planner is not endowed with
prudential taxes on debt to investigate moral hazard effects. In this case, the trade-off that arises
in the design of the optimal policy in the model is that debt relief relaxes the equity constraint ex
post, but ex ante it generates overborrowing.
                                                                                   î       ï∞
    Formally, the Ramsey problem consists of choosing a pair of sequences γtSB , τth             that
                                                                                            t=0
delivers the best competitive equilibrium. As we show in Appendix B.3, the optimality condition
with respect to debt relief, γtSB , yields

                                                     ξt−1 Rt−1 mt (1 + ηt )
                      γtSB ::         ηtp ≤ ζt +                                        with equality if γtSB > 0               (27)
                                                               bt

where ηtp denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the equity constraint in the Ramsey problem, ζt
constitutes the Lagrange multiplier in the government budget constraint and ξt constitutes the
Lagrange multiplier on the bond Euler equation, as defined in Appendix B. This optimality con-
dition implies that at the optimum, the planner equates the benefits from relaxing the equity
constraint by providing debt relief ηtp to the marginal utility of public funds (ζt ) and the cost from
overborrowing given by the second term on the right-hand side of (27).22
    The lack of prudential policy generates a time-inconsistency problem for the planner. A com-
mitment to relatively small bailouts, so as to limit the overborrowing distortion ex ante, turns
out to be not credible ex post. In a Markov perfect equilibrium—see Appendix B for details—the
optimality condition for debt relief would be

                                                           γtSB ::           ηtp = ζt                                           (28)

When the planner chooses sequentially without commitment, it does not internalize how current
debt relief affects previous borrowing decisions and hence simply equates the current benefits
of relaxing the equity constraint ηtp to the marginal cost of public funds ζt . As a result, under
discretion, the government has incentives to do larger bailouts.
    As it turns out, in the quantitative analysis we will show that the moral hazard effects from the
systemic bailout policy turn out to be almost negligible, that is, borrowing decisions hardly change
at all. It also follows that the time-inconsistency problem is not very severe.23 It is important to
highlight that this result occurs despite the fact that in the simulations, bailouts are 4 percentage
points of GDP in an average crisis, as we will show below. The intuition for this result is that firms
  22                                                                                                                ηt
       One can also derive the optimality condition with respect to employment Fh (t) = G′ (ht ) +                         ′′
                                                                                                                u′ (t)+ηt G (ht )ht   +
ξt−1 Rt−1 Et mt (1+ηt )(FL (t+1)−G′ (ht+1 )−ht+1 (Fhh (t+1)−G′′ (ht+1 ))
                                u′ (t)+ηt                                ,
                                                                which again illustrates the higher marginal cost from
taxing labor and providing debt relief to firms compared to condition (20) due to the overborrowing effect caused
by debt relief.
   23
      Technically, the fact that prudential policies matter little imply that the dynamic implementability constraint
(equation (11)) does not strongly bind in the sense that imposing this constraint have little effects on welfare and
allocations. Hence, it does not matter much whether the government chooses at time 0 all policies with commitment
or whether it optimizes sequentially without commitment taking as given future policies.


                                                                      17
do not receive a bailout unless there is a systemic crisis, which is endogenously a small probability
event due to the precautionary savings effect. As a result, the presence of future bailouts does not
significantly change their financial decisions.24
    To shed light on this result, we will contrast the systemic bailout policy with an “idiosyncratic
bailout policy.” The difference between these two classes of bailouts is that in the former, bailouts
are non-targeted, that is, they are a function only of aggregate states, while the latter the bailout
is targeted, that is, they are only a function of individual states. Formally, with the idiosyncratic
bailout policy, the debt relief received by a firm with states (bt , kt ) is γtIB (bt , kt , st )bt .25
    The optimality condition with respect to bt+1 carries an additional term relative to (23), the
corresponding condition to the systemic bailout policy:
                                                        1                               2
                                                           IB
                      1 + ηt = Rt Et mt+1 (1 + ηt+1 ) 1 − γt+1 − γbIB (t + 1)bt+1 + µt .                          (29)

The term γb (t + 1) captures that when firms borrow more, they internalize that the debt relief
would be higher (since naturally γb (t + 1) > 0 in the numerical analysis), and hence they perceive
the cost of borrowing to be lower.
    To make the comparison as clean as possible, we will show that if we feed the sequence of debt
relief policies obtained in Proposition 2, but not the sequence of debt taxes, for both economies,
we will find stark differences between the two. That is, let γ SB (Bt , Kt ) be the debt relief policy
obtained in Proposition 2, we solve the competitive equilibrium feeding in γ IB = γ SB in the
idiosyncratic bailout case. As we will show below, the systemic bailout policy delivers allocations
that are extremely close to the constrained-efficient allocations while the idiosyncratic bailout
policy leads to significantly more overborrowing and vulnerability to frequent crises.26
    Various implementations: We close the model section with a discussion on implementation.
As is often the case in Ramsey problems, Ramsey outcomes have multiple implementations. For
example, the state-contingent tax on debt can be replaced with a combination of state contingent
  24
      Because bailouts are still endogenous to the aggregate firm decisions, systemic bailouts are a force that pushes
borrowing decisions toward becoming strategic complements as analyzed by Farhi and Tirole (2012). That is, if
other firms borrow more, this increases the expected bailout for a single firm. However, the usual force that makes
risk averse agents be more cautious when the economy is more risky prevails in our setup, and firms do not tend to
borrow more when other firms borrow more. In our model, this occurs through the firms’ stochastic discount factor.
If the price of risk increases, this tilts firms’ maximization problem towards reducing debt rather than increasing
debt.
   25
      Although there is no idiosyncratic risk in the model and all firms make the same choices in equilibrium, we
still label this bailout policy “idiosyncratic”, since the key is that the bailout depends on individual variables, and
this has effects on equilibrium outcomes. Also despite firms being atomistic, this policy can be seen as capturing
a form of “too big to fail” policy, since firms internalize how their actions affect bailouts.
   26
      To be clear, this bailout policy that we feed in exogenously is theoretically not time consistent and is also not
optimal ex post, but for the case of systemic bailout policy, the allocations are almost identical to the fully optimal
ones (i.e., when the planner has prudential policy). Indeed, when computing the Markov perfect equilibrium in
the systemic bailout policy case, the bailout policies are almost identical to the bailout policies of the Ramsey
planner that has access to prudential policy. Hence, for simplicity we show the result feeding in the debt relief
policy obtained in 2.



                                                          18
taxes on dividends (or, equivalently, a restriction on dividend payments beyond d)    ¯ and taxes on
capital. Specifically, whenever the tax on debt is strictly positive, a tax on dividends raised today
relative to tomorrow is equivalent to a tax on debt. In addition, a tax on capital is needed to
correct the distortion on the capital accumulation decision induced by the tax on dividends.
    In practice, central banks implement a variety of policies with the aim of facilitating the
corporate sector’s access to credit. For example, under the Commercial Paper Funding Facility
(CPFF), the Federal Reserve expanded eligible collateral to include commercial paper, directly
targeting the corporate sector, as in our model. Other policies included in the Troubled Asset
Relief Program (TARP) involved equity injections to financial intermediaries. To simplify the
analysis, we do not model financial intermediaries and consider only direct bailouts to firms. It is
possible, however, to map our setup to a model in which financial intermediaries face the financial
frictions that firms face in our model and lend to firms subject to no agency frictions. The crucial
factor of our analysis is that this intervention relaxes balance sheets across the economy and
mitigates the fall in credit and investment that occurs during crises.


4     Quantitative Analysis
4.1    Numerical Solution
The model is solved using a version of the policy function iteration algorithm modified to handle
the two financial constraints. Our procedure computes the value of all policy functions over a
discrete grid B × K × z × κ × R. These functions are not restricted to follow a specific parametric
function; for values outside the grid, we use bilinear interpolation. Using an iterative procedure, we
compute the policy functions satisfying the competitive equilibrium conditions at all grid points.
This procedure allows us to deal with the well-known complications of non-linearities that arise
in incomplete markets. In particular, occasionally binding financial constraints create kinks in
the policy functions, which leads to a different behavior of the model depending on how close is
the economy to the constraints and to a stationary distribution for state variables that are not
confined to a narrow region of the state space.


4.2    Calibration
We calibrate the model to a quarterly frequency using data from the US economy. To focus on
the post-financial globalization period, our reference period is 1984:Q1-2014:Q4.
   Functional Forms—The utility function and the adjustment cost of capital take the following




                                                 19
form:
                                                                 3               1
                                                                                     41−σ
                                                                              1+
                                                                     c−   χ n1+ 1ǫ          −1
                                                                                ǫ
                                              u(c − G(n)) =                                      ,
                                                                      1−σ
                                                                  A          B2
                                                                φk kt+1 − kt
                                                ψ(kt , kt+1 ) =                 kt .
                                                                2      kt

    Stochastic Processes—The shocks follow a first-order Markov process. We approximate the
productivity, financial, and interest rate shocks with 3 states each, which gives a vector of 8 × 1
realizations and an 8 × 8 transition matrix P(s′ |s). We assume that interest rates and financial
shocks follow a joint Markov process independent from TFP. We make this assumption since (i)
the cyclical correlation between interest rates and TFP is statistically not different from zero, and
(ii) we want to capture that episodes in which financial constraints are relatively tight lead to
excess savings and downward pressure on interest rates.
    To determine the 4 × 4 transition matrix P ((R′ , κ′ )|(R, κ)), we adopt the following 16 re-
strictions, including the restrictions that probabilities of transitioning from each state add up to
one.
    First, there are 2 restrictions on π that derive from the process for R that we can obtain
directly from the data. Assuming a log AR(1) process for the gross interest rate ln(Rt ) =
(1 − ρR )R̄ + ρR ln(Rt−1 ) + ςt with ςt ∼ N (0, σς ), and adopting a “simple persistent rule”, this
implies: (i) the values for the transition probability matrix are π(RL |RH ) = π(RH |RL ) = (1 −
                                                                                          σς
ρR )0.5 + ρR and (ii) the values for the interest rate shock are RL = R̄ − √1−ρ              R
                                                                                               , R = R̄ +
√ σς . Let us denote by π ∞ (RL , κL ), π ∞ (RH , κL ), π ∞ (RL , κH ), π ∞ (RH , κH ) the probability of
  1−ρR
(RL , κL ), (RH , κL ), (RL , κH ), (RH , κH ) under the stationary distribution. The conditional proba-
bilities for the interest rate are given by
                            A                                  B
    1
            L   L
                    2                π ∞ (RL , κL )
  π R |R                =                                     (π((RL , κL )|(RL , κL )) + π((RL , κH )|(RL , κL )))
                            π ∞ (RL , κL ) + π ∞ (RL , κH )
                          A                                 B
                                    π ∞ (RL , κH )            1
                                                                     L    L      L    H           L    H      L    H
                                                                                                                       2
                        +                                       π((R   , κ  )|(R   , κ  )) + π((R   , κ  )|(R   , κ  ))  ,
                            π ∞ (RL , κL ) + π ∞ (RL , κH )
                                A                                  B
        1               2                π ∞ (RH , κL )           1                                                         2
    π RH |RH                =                                       π((R H
                                                                            , κ L
                                                                                  )|R H
                                                                                        , κL
                                                                                             ) + π(R H
                                                                                                        , κH
                                                                                                             |(R H
                                                                                                                    , κL
                                                                                                                         ))
                                π ∞ (RL , κL ) + π ∞ (RL , κH )
                              A                                 B
                                        π ∞ (RL , κH )            1
                                                                        H     L     H     H         H     H     H     H
                                                                                                                          2
                            +                                       π(R   , κ   )|R   , κ   ) + π(R   , κ   |(R   , κ   )   )
                                π ∞ (RL , κL ) + π ∞ (RL , κH )
Using the ex-post real interest rate on US Treasury bills, we obtain R̄ = 0.025, ρR = 0.9, σς = 0.6%.
   Second, we impose 2 analogous restrictions for π, now based on the transition matrix for κ.
However, because κ is not directly observable in the data, we calibrate the transition matrix for κ



                                                                     20
to match certain moments from the data, to be described below. These two restrictions on π are
                            A                                  B
       1
           L   L
                   2                 π ∞ (RL , κL )            è
                                                                      L     L      L    L           H     L      L    L
                                                                                                                           é
    π κ |κ             =                                         π((R   , κ   )|(R   , κ  )) + π((R    , κ  )|(R   , κ  ))
                           π ∞ (RL , κL )) + π ∞ (RH , κL )
                         A                                 B
                                   π ∞ (RH , κL )            è
                                                                    L     L      H     L           H     L      H     L
                                                                                                                          é
                       +                                       π((R   , κ   )|(R   , κ   )) + π((R   , κ   )|(R   , κ   ))  ,
                           π ∞ (RL , κL ) + π ∞ (RH , κL )
                            A                                  B
       1       2                    π ∞ (RL , κH )           è                                                          2
  π κH |κH             =                                       π((R L
                                                                      , κ H
                                                                            )|(R L
                                                                                   , κH
                                                                                         ) + π((R H
                                                                                                    , κ H
                                                                                                          )|(R L
                                                                                                                 , κ H
                                                                                                                       )   ]
                           π ∞ (RL , κH ) + π ∞ (RH , κH )
                         A                                 B
                                   π ∞ (RH , κH )            è
                                                                    L    H      H      H           H     H      L     H
                                                                                                                          2
                       +                                       π((R   , κ  )|(R    , κ   )) + π((R    , κ  )|(R    , κ   )   ].
                           π ∞ (RL , κH ) + π ∞ (RH , κH )
The fact that tight financial regimes are associated with low interest rates, as occurred during the
Great Recession, suggests a positive correlation between R and κ. Accordingly, conditional on
RL (κL ) realization tomorrow, we set the probability of transitioning to κL (RL ) to be higher than
the probability of transitioning to a period with κH (RH ). Specifically, we set
                        1                      2      1                     2
                   π (κL |RH )|(Ri , κj ) = π (κL |RL )|(Ri , κj ) ικ                 ∀i, j = L, H                     (P5-P8)
                        1                     2       1                     2
                   π (RL |κH )|(Ri , κj ) = π (RL |κL )|(Ri , κj ) ιR                 ∀i, j = L, H                    (P9-P12)

where ιR , ικ ≥ 0 are constant parameters that determine the degree of correlation between κ and
R. Independence of κ and R would imply ιR = ικ = 1, whereas perfect positive correlation would
imply ι = 0. We set ικ = 0.01, ιR = 0.5 to deliver a high but not perfect positive correlation
between these two shocks. In this way, conditional on a tight financial regime tomorrow, it is 99
percent more likely that R = RL than R = RH , and conditional on RL tomorrow it is 50 percent
more likely that κ = κL than κ = κH .27 With these values and given the rest of the parameters
of the Markov process, the correlation between these two shocks is 0.4.
                                                              q      ′   ′
    These 12 equations, together with the 4 restrictions that π(Ri , κj )|(Ri κj ) = 1 ∀i, j, i′ , j ′ =
L, H, complete the 16 restrictions needed to specify P. The two parameters that remain to be set
to determine the entire system are π(κH |κH ) and π(κL |κL ). Based on evidence reported by Borio
(2014) that the leverage cycle lasts for 20 years on average, we set the sum of the duration of κL
and κH to 20 years, that is, (1)/(1 − (π(κL |κL )) + (1)/ (1 − π(κL |κH )) = 20. To establish the
values of π(κL |κL ) and π(κH |κH ), we will calibrate the model to match the frequency of crises in
the data. Appendix D contains the values of the transition matrix.28
    To calibrate the process for productivity, we use Fernald (2012)’s capacity utilization adjusted
measure of TFP. Estimating a log AR(1) process for TFP ln(zt ) = (1 − ρz )z̄ + ρz ln(zt−1 ) + εt with
  27
     We have experimented with several values of ικ , ιR ranging from independence to perfect correlation. The
results are very similar across these specifications because the variability of the risk-free rate in the data is not
large when compared with movements in credit.
  28
     It is possible that along the calibration, the system delivers negative values for some of the probabilities, in
which case we set them to zero and scale each row of the transition matrix so that they add up to one.


                                                                   21
εt ∼ N (0, σε ), we obtain σε = 0.085, ρ = 0.69. We use a symmetric simple persistent rule so that
             σς                  σς
z L = z̄ − √1−ρ R
                  , z H = z̄ + √1−ρ R
                                      and Π(z L |z H ) = Π(z H |z L ) = (1 − ρz )0.5 + ρz . By independence
of TFP and the joint Markov process for (R, κ), we obtain the Markov transition matrix for s as
P = Π ⊗ P.
    Parameter Values— Parameter values are summarized in Table 1. We need to assign values to
13 parameters that we classify in two sets. The first subset includes parameters that are chosen
independently of equilibrium conditions or are calibrated using steady state targets, most of which
are typical in the business cycle literature. This subset is given by {α, δ, ǫ, β, θ, χ, z̄}. The capital
share is set to α = 0.36, the depreciation rate is set to δ = 0.025 and the risk aversion σ is set
to 2, which are standard values. The Frisch elasticity of labor supply is an important parameter
for the pecuniary externality because it determines how much the wage falls with reductions in
employment. We set a unitary elasticity ω = 1, which is in the middle range of micro and macro
estimates. In addition, given the rest of the parameters, this delivers a standard deviation of
output of 1.5 percent, which is close to the standard deviation of output in US data.

                                            Table 1: Calibration

                                Value
 Mean interest rate             R − 1 = 0.025
 Depreciation rate              δ = 0.025
 Share of capital               α = 0.36
 Working capital                θ = 0.13
 Labor disutility coefficient   χ = 0.64
 Productivity parameter         z̄ = 0.43
 Risk aversion                  σ=2
 Frisch elasticity parameter    ω = 1.0

 Parameters set by simulation   Value               Target

 Discount factor                β = 0.985           Mean Capital-Output = 10
 Adjustment cost                φk = 15             SD of investment = 4 times SD of GDP
 Financial shock
                                κL = 0.47           Average leverage = 46 percent
                                κH = 0.52           Non-binding collateral constraint
                                π(κL |κH ) = 0.01   3 financial crises every 100 years
 Dividend threshold             d¯ = 0.068          Equalize prob. binding constraints




   The value of θ is calibrated to be consistent with an empirical estimate of working capital fi-
nancing of 13.3 percentage points of GDP, obtained in Bianchi and Mendoza (2015). We normalize
the labor disutility coefficient χ and the average value of productivity z̄ so that employment and
output are approximately equal to one in the average simulations, which is achieved by setting

                                                       22
z̄ = (1)/(k̄(1 − α)) and χ = ((1 − α)z̄ k̄α), where k̄ is the average value of capital.
                                 î                           ï
                                                ¯ π(κL |κH ) . The value of κH is set high enough so
    There are seven remaining κH , κL , φk , β, d,
that the collateral constraint never binds when κ takes this value in the stationary distribution,
which is guaranteed with κH = 0.54. The six remaining parameters are set to jointly match a set
of six long-run moments for the no-bailout-policy economy. These moments are: (1) an average
capital-output ratio of 10; (2) a standard deviation of investment that is 4 times the standard
deviation of GDP; (3) an average leverage ratio of 46 percent; (4) three credit crunches occurring
every 100 years; (5) a probability of a binding dividend constraint equal to the probability of
a binding collateral constraint. While all these parameters affect all the target moments, each
parameter has a more significant impact on one particular moment, as we explain below.
    The discount factor is set to match a capital-output ratio of 10, which yields β = 0.985. Given
the values for δ and α, this value of β would imply a value of 9 for the capital-output ratio at an
unconstrained deterministic steady state, but due to precautionary savings, the mean simulated
value is about 10 percent higher. The adjustment cost on capital is calibrated to match the the
standard deviation of investment relative to output for the reference period, which is equal to 4.
This yields φk = 15. The value of κL is set to target an average leverage of 46 percent, which yields
κL = 0.47. The choice of a leverage ratio of 46 percent corresponds to the ratio of credit market
instruments to assets in our reference period (see Table B102 in the Flow of Funds database).
    We calibrate the probability of an adverse financial shock π(κL |κH ) to target the frequency
of financial crises. We define a financial crisis as an episode in which the fall credit exceeds two
standard deviations. Consistent with the empirical literature (e.g. Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009), we
target a crisis incidence of 3 every 100 years. This yields π(κL |κH ) = 0.01 and implies a duration
of κH of 14 years. Moreover, given the duration of the financial cycle of 20 years, this implies a
duration of the κL regime of 6 years. This is also consistent with the fact that the duration of
credit expansions tend to be longer than that of credit contractions (Borio, 2014).
    We set the dividend threshold d, ¯ so that the borrowing constraint and the equity constraint
bind with the same probability in the long run. We follow this route because it is difficult to pin
down from the data whether constraints on equity financing or on borrowing are more pervasive.
This yields d¯ = 0.068 and probabilities of binding constraints equal to 2 percent. As discussed
above, a value of d¯ > 0 is consistent with much empirical literature that shows that there are
non-pecuniary benefits from paying dividends, and that this holds even for financially distressed
firms (e.g., Cohen and Yagil, 2009, Bond and Meghir (1994)). With this value of d,      ¯ the equity
constraint is not binding at the steady state.29
  29
    The value that would make the equity constraint binding at the steady state would be equal to 0.17 (see
footnote 15). In addition, capital and debt at the steady state would be 8.0 and 4.0, respectively, 10 and 17 percent
below the mean values in the simulations.




                                                         23
5       Results of the Quantitative Analysis
5.1     Firms’ Decisions
Before analyzing the macroeconomic and welfare effects of bailouts, we inspect the mechanisms of
the model by analyzing firms’ behavior across the entire state space (K, B, s). In particular, we
start by analyzing in what regions of the state space financial constraints are binding, which, as
we showed in Section 3, plays a key role in the normative analysis.

5.1.1    When are financial constraints binding?




                      Figure 2: Illustration of Financial Constraints Regions

    Figure 2 provides a simple characterization of when the financial constraints are binding in
the capital-bond space {K, B} for given exogenous shocks in the competitive equilibrium without
government intervention. For each combination of feasible {K, B}, there are 4 possible regions: (i)
no constraint bind, (ii) only the equity constraint binds, (ii) only the borrowing constraint binds,
(iv) both the equity and borrowing constraints binds. For a given level of capital, if debt is low
enough, neither the equity constraint nor the collateral constraint binds. This is the ‘Unconstrained
Region’. Starting at a value of K < K̃, as the initial level of debt increases, the equity constraint
becomes binding. That is, firms first exhaust their equity constraint before turning to more debt.
Graphically, the region of (K, B) such that the equity constraint binds is labeled with vertical blue

                                                 24
lines. As debt is increased further, the collateral constraint also becomes binding. This constitutes
the purple region in Figure 2. Further increases in debt render the budget set of firms empty, as
their revenue is not enough to service the debt. This state does not occur with positive probability
in the model given that firms will not expose themselves to this outcome.
    Notice that for levels of K < K̃, the equity constraint starts binding before the borrowing
constraint becomes binding as we increase the level of debt, and this reverses for values of K > K̃.
A higher level of capital implies that the value of the firm is higher and shareholders demand
higher dividend payments, and hence the firm relies relatively less on equity than debt. The red
region indicates the combination of {K, B} such that the borrowing constraint binds, but not the
equity constraint.
    Shocks to productivity, interest rate and credit alter these regions. The pecking order we
described, in which firms first exhaust the equity financing and then borrowing financing generally
remains, but the thresholds at which the constraints become binding vary. A lower interest rate
increases the binding borrowing region, as a lower interest rate makes borrowing more attractive,
together with the fact that optimal investment increases. In addition, a lower interest rate reduces
the equity binding region via two effects. For a given level of borrowing, a lower interest rate raises
the price of the bonds issued by firms and also increases the demand for dividend payments by
shareholders. These shifts in the binding constraints regions would reduce the values of K̃ and B̃
in the context of Figure 2. TFP shocks have mixed effects on the binding regions. By raising the
demand for investment, higher TFP tends to make both constraints more binding. At the same
time, higher TFP also leads to higher profits, thereby reducing the need for external financing.

5.1.2    Policy Functions and Laws of Motion

We now analyze the equilibrium policy functions for debt and capital for the economy without
intervention and compare it with the economy with the optimal bailout policy, that is, the bailout
policy that implements the constrained-efficient allocations. (The role of prudential policies is pre-
sented in Section 5.4 where we study the economies with systemic bailout policy and idiosyncratic
bailout policy).
    Figure 3 shows the laws of motion for debt (panels a and b) and capital (panels c and d) in the
economy as a function of the current level of debt. That is, we look at b̂(k, b, {k, b, s}), k̂(k, b, {k, b, s}).
This plot corresponds to an economy in which the current level of capital is approximately equal
to the mean value, and productivity and interest rate shocks are one standard deviation below the
mean. Since average output is approximately one, all variables can be interpreted as a fraction of
quarterly GDP. The left (right) panel corresponds to a positive (adverse) financial shock. The blue
straight line corresponds to the competitive equilibrium with a no-bailout policy (NB), and the
red broken line corresponds to the optimal bailout policy (OP). Let us first describe the behavior
of the economy without intervention.


                                                     25
             (a) Next Period Debt (κH )                                              (b) Next Period Debt (κL )

5.1                                                                     5.1




 5                                                                       5




4.9                                                                     4.9




4.8                                                                     4.8




4.7                                                                     4.7
      4.7       4.8      4.9       5      5.1                                 4.7       4.8      4.9       5      5.1
                       Current Debt (b)                                                        Current Debt (b)
                                                No Bailout   Optimal Policy



             (c) Next Period Capital (κH )                                           (d) Next Period Capital (κL )

10.9                                                                    10.9




10.7                                                                    10.7




10.5                                                                    10.5
       4.7       4.8     4.9       5      5.1                                  4.7       4.8     4.9       5      5.1
                         Current Debt                                                            Current Debt
                                                No Bailout   Optimal Policy


                                          Figure 3: Policy functions for debt and capital

Note: Policy functions for an initial value of capital equal to the mean in the simulation and R = RL , z =
z L . The left (right) column corresponds to κH (κL ).


    The credit regime generates sharp changes in the policy functions, as can be seen from compar-
ing the left and right panels. For the tight credit regime, the debt policy function is nonmonotonic
on the level of debt. For low values of current debt, the collateral constraint is not binding. In
this region, next period debt, bt+1 , is increasing in the current period debt, bt . For b > 4.85,
the collateral constraint becomes binding, and next period debt is decreasing in the current debt
levels. This shift in the slope occurs because as firms need to sharply cut down on investment (see
panel d), the borrowing capacity shrinks.
    It is also interesting to note that capital accumulation is decreasing in the level of debt, even
when the collateral constraint is not binding. This occurs because a higher level of debt increases
the exposure to a binding future constraint, leading to a reduction in the desire to reduce the
amount of debt and, consequently, a drop in investment. In other words, a larger amount of debt
raises the risk premium and reduces the portfolio allocation to capital, the risky asset (see eq.
(15)).
    Turning our attention to the effects of bailouts on these laws of motion, we can distinguish


                                                                   26
between the ex-post effects (i.e., the effects once the bailout is implemented), and the “ex-ante
effects” (i.e., the effects before the bailout is implemented). In the terms of the ex-post effects, by
providing extra resources to invest in capital, bailouts allow firms to borrow more. The increase
in the ability to borrow is apparent in the downward sloping region in Figure 3, panels (b) and
(d).
    A central aspect of our analysis is how these ex-post responses modify the ex-ante financial
decisions. In the region where the financial constraints are not binding, firms also borrow more
in the competitive equilibrium with bailouts because there is a lower incentive to accumulate
precautionary savings during normal times, since crises become less severe. This effect is markedly
stronger when the economy has a positive financial shock and has a relatively large amount of
debt, so that a future financial crisis is relatively likely. As a result of the increase in borrowing,
financial constraints bind more often.
    The anticipation of bailouts also affects capital accumulation, as bailouts change the risk-return
trade-off between capital and bonds. By relaxing equity constraints, bailouts make the stochastic
discount factor less volatile, reduce the risk premium, and lead to more capital accumulation.
Bailouts also have effects on the return on capital. By reducing the contraction in investment,
bailouts mitigate the fall in the shadow price of capital, leading to more investment. On the
other hand, the contraction in labor arising from the payroll tax to finance the bailout, reduces
the marginal product of capital discouraging investment. Overall, the positive effects on capital
accumulation prevail, as Figure 3 shows.


5.2     Impulse Responses
We now conduct a non-linear impulse response to show how the economy reacts to shocks and
how policy shapes these effects.
    We focus here on a negative financial shock (the impulse responses to the interest rate and
TFP shocks are reported in Appendix A). For this exercise, we set initial values for capital at
its mean value, an initial value of debt so that a switch from κH to κL leads to a bailout that
is one standard deviation above the bailout mean conditional on being positive. Because of the
simple shock structure with two values for each, rather than starting the other two shocks at
the mean values, we consider all possible combinations of shocks and average them according to
the stationary distribution.Starting at those initial values for the shocks, we simulate the shock
process for 10,000 times for 30 periods and feed them into the policy functions to produce 10,000
paths for the endogenous variables.30 We report in Figure 4 the average differences between the
paths that start with κL vis a vis those that start with κH for the NB economy, and for OP we
  30
    Because of the positive correlation between the interest rate and the financial shock, the interest rate is lower
than average after the second period.




                                                         27
           (a) Output              (b) Investment                      (c) Employment                   (d) Consumption
0
                                                              0                                     0
                              0
-2                                                                                               -5
                             -30
                                                              -5                                -10
-4
                             -60                                                                -15

-6                                                        -10                                   -20
           10     20    30           10      20     30                   10           20   30              10           20   30
            (e) Debt                (f) Capital                                                          (h) Bailout
                                                                        (g) Dividends           4
                                                          0.01
0                            0
                                                                   0
-2                                                                                              2
                             -1
                                                          -0.01
-4
                             -2                           -0.02                                 0
           10     20    30           10      20     30                    10          20   30             10            20   30

            (i) Wage               (j) Tobin’s Q                              (k) η                             (l) µ
                                                                                                0.8
 0                            0

 -2                                                       0.3                                   0.6

 -4                                                       0.2                                   0.4
                             -15
 -6
                                                          0.1                                   0.2
 -8
-10                          -30                              0                                     0
            10     20   30           10      20     30                   10           20   30              10           20   30


                                    No Bailout      Optimal Policy


                             Figure 4: Impulse Response to Financial Shocks

Notes: Impulse responses are computed via simulations starting at a mean value of capital and a value of debt
so that the bailout on impact is one standard deviation above the mean bailout conditional on being positive.
All variables are expressed as deviations between the simulated path that starts with with κL relative to the
simulated path for the no-bailout policy economy that starts with κH . With the exception of η, µ, and bailouts
all deviations are in percentage. Bailouts are computed as γtSB bt and expressed in percentage of GDP.


report the difference of the path for κL relative to the path with κH for NB.31
    As Figure 4 shows, employment, output, consumption, and investment all fall on impact when
the economy is hit by a negative financial shock. The bailout reaches 2.9 percentage points of
GDP. Output falls slightly more with the optimal bailout policy as a result of the distortionary
labor tax to finance the bailout, but the recovery is realized much faster. In fact, the output losses
measured as the cumulative sum of the deviations from output are 13 percent in the absence of
bailouts and this losses are reduced to 8.5 percent for the optimal bailout policy. Given a bailout,
γ SB bt , of 2.9 percent, this implies an average multiplier of 1.5.
    On the financial side, both dividends and debt fall. Hence, firms substitute debt for equity, as
documented by Jermann and Quadrini (2012). The debt reduction is smaller for the OP, however,
since bailouts mitigate the fall in capital that serves as collateral and this supports a higher level
of credit. The shadow price of capital (Tobin’s Q) and wages also fall on impact as they follow
    By computing deviations in both cases relative to the NB path for κH , this makes the comparison more
      31

straightforward. Results would be very similar if in both cases we took the difference relative to κH in the same
economy.


                                                         28
the evolution of investment and employment.32
    Note that these impulse responses to financial shocks do not consider the risk-taking effects of
bailouts because the state variables are fixed for both economies. Put differently, once bailouts
are anticipated, the economy may move to states with higher leverage, and hence shocks will be
significantly more amplified. Next, we conduct an experiment that sheds light on these risk-taking
effects and the implications for financial crises.


5.3     Financial Crises
In this section, we conduct an event analysis to study financial crises and show how the anticipation
of bailouts induces more risk-taking and how this affects the severity of financial crises. We
examine what an average crisis looks like in terms of the shocks that lead to these episodes and
the dynamics of endogenous variables around these episodes, as well as how these dynamics are
affected by policy.
    We construct comparable event windows for the two economies with the following procedure.
First, we simulate the no-bailout economy for 100, 000 periods, discarding the first 500 periods as
burn-in, and identify financial crises as episodes in which credit falls by two standard deviations.
Second, we construct event windows around the crisis year, denoted date 0, by computing averages
for each variable across the entire set of crises. We take 40 periods before and 20 periods after
the crisis date (i.e., 10 years before and 5 years after). This procedure produces the NB dynamics
plotted as the continuous blue lines in Figure 5. Third, we take the initial bond position at t − 40
of NB and the sequences of shocks that the NB went through in the entire window, and pass them
through the policy functions of the OP. Finally, we average in each date the resulting paths for
OP to generate dashed red line in Figure 5. The idea of this experiment is that by controlling for
the initial state variables and by the sequence of shocks, we can conduct a clean counterfactual
experiment.33
    As Figure 5 shows, the credit crunch produces a severe and protracted recession as firms’
financial distress propagates to the real economy. In terms of the driving forces (see the three
plots at the bottom of Figure 5), the crisis is triggered by a negative financial while TFP plays a
fairly modest role. In fact, TFP is on average slightly below trend during crises but many crises
in the model do coincide with positive TFP shocks. Interest rates, given the positive correlation
with financial shocks, are also low during the crisis episode.
    During the crisis, the financial shock tightens not only the borrowing constraint but also the
equity constraint as firms seek to reduce equity payouts to mitigate the fall in investment. Output
falls on impact because of the working capital constraint, and persistently due to the collapse in
  32
    Tobin’s Q is computed as 1 + ψ/2(kt+1 /kt )2 .
  33
    A similar event analysis is constructed in Bianchi and Mendoza (2015) for the analysis of macroprudential
policy. See also Mendoza (2010) for a positive analysis of the impact of collateral constraints in sudden stop
economies.


                                                     29
            (a) Output                              (b) Investment                           (c) Employment                            (d) Consumption
0
                                          0                                      0                                             0
-3
                                         -20                                     -5                                        -10
-6
                                         -40
                                                                                -10                                        -20
-9
                                         -60
                                                                                -15
 -40        -20      0        20           -40        -20       0      20         -40          -20            0    20          -40        -20           0   20


                                                                                                                                        (h) Bailout
            (e) Dividends                            (f) Leverage                          (g) Tax on Debt (%)             6

0.01
                                                                                 0.01                                      4

      0                                  0.46
                                                                                0.005                                      2
-0.01
                                         0.45                                          0                                   0
      -40     -20     0       20            -40       -20       0      20              -40      -20           0    20      -40           -20            0   20


             (i) Wage                               (j) Tobin’s Q                                     (k) η                                     (l) µ
  0                                                                                                                        0.75
                                          0
                                                                                 0.5

 -5                                      -10                                                                                0.5

                                                                                0.25
-10                                      -20                                                                               0.25


-15                                                                                 0                                          0
  -40        -20     0        20           -40        -20       0      20           -40         -20           0    20          -40        -20           0   20


                                     (m) R                                    (n) κ                                     (o) TFP
                    1.007                                                                                 0.3
                                                              0.53                                        0.2
                                                                                                          0.1
                    1.005                                                                                     0
                                                               0.5
                                                                                                          -0.1
                                                                                                          -0.2
                    1.003                                     0.47                                        -0.3
                        -40        -20          0      20        -40    -20            0         20          -40    -20            0       20


                                                        No Bailout     Optimal Policy


                                                             Figure 5: Event Analysis

Note: All variables are expressed as a percentage deviation of the mean of the no-bailout economy with the
exception of dividends which are a simple deviation of the mean of the no-bailout economy and η, µ and leverage
which are in levels. Bailouts are computed as γt bt and expressed in percentage of GDP.


investment, which recovers only gradually as adjustment costs prevent a rapid buildup of capital,
even after financial constraints cease to bind. Employment follows a similar pattern: it drops on
impact as the shadow cost of hiring increases and remains below trend even as the low capital
stock reduces the marginal product of labor. After several periods, employment and output remain
significantly below average. The magnitudes of crises in the model are comparable to the data from
the Great Recession, where the falls in output, employment and investment reached respectively




                                                                               30
6, 8 and 28 percent.34 Perhaps, the main anomaly in the model relative to the data is that the
model predicts a strong but very short slump in investment, whereas in the data the contraction
was more protracted.
    The bailout, γtSB bt is on average about 5 percentage points of GDP. A key observation is that,
anticipating future bailouts, OP experiences a much larger increase in leverage at the beginning of
the window. While crises are preceded by increases in leverage, (bt+1 )/(kt+1 ), for both NB and OP,
the increase in larger is much larger in OP. As it turns out, because of this increase in leverage,
OP experiences crises with about the same severity as NB. Hence, the government bailouts help
to stabilize the economy ex post, as shown in the impulse responses in Figure 5, but once agents
anticipate the bailouts, they increase their leverage and become exposed to crises of about the
same intensity.
    It is important to recall that in this case, the government is offsetting the moral hazard effects
with prudential policy, and hence the increase in leverage is efficient. That is, it reflects the fact
that the government is making crises less severe by correcting an externality, and this acts as
better insurance for firms. Shutting down prudential policies would cause an even larger increase
in leverage than what is socially optimal. As we will show below, the moral hazard effects will
depend crucially on whether the bailout is systemic or idiosyncratic.


5.4     Moral Hazard: The Role of Prudential Policies
In this section, we ask how critical are policies to prevent excessive risk-taking? Following the
same procedure to construct the event analysis from Figure 5, we compare NB and OP with the
systemic bailout policy and the idiosyncratic bailout policy. Figure 6 shows the results of this
experiment. To be able to zoom better into the differences across policies, the figures narrows the
window to 10 periods before the crisis and 5 periods after the crisis.
    As Figure 6 shows, there are substantial differences depending on whether the bailout is sys-
temic or idiosyncratic. The economy with the systemic bailout policy differs minimally from the
optimal policy, which is consistent with the fact that the tax on debt in the optimal bailout policy
case is very low, as panel (f) shows. That is, moral hazard effects are very limited when bailouts
are broad-based. On the other hand, the economy with the idiosyncratic bailout policy experiences
a significant increase in leverage relative to the optimal bailout policy and as a result experiences
a larger crash. In particular, output and investment fall respectively about 9 and 20 percentage
points more.
    Bailouts are also much larger with the idiosyncratic bailout policy, as panel h shows. In the
idiosyncratic bailout case, the bailout reaches 10 percentage points of GDP versus 5 percentage
points for the systemic bailout policy. Despite this larger bailout, financial constraints are strongly
  34
    These magnitudes are computed fitting a log-linear trend from 2001Q1 to 2008Q2, and computing deviations
relative to the projection of the trend, as in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2015), and taking the maximum
annual drop up to 2014.

                                                       31
           (a) Output                                (b) Investment                             (c) Employment                                     (d) Consumption
  0                                          0                                                                                           0
                                                                                       0
 -5                                                                                                                                     -10
                                            -30
                                                                                     -10
-10                                                                                                                                     -20
                                            -60
                                                                                     -20                                                -30
-15
                                            -90
-20                                                                                                                                     -40
          -10      -5      0        5                 -10      -5    0        5                  -10        -5       0          5                   -10     -5        0       5


           (e) Dividends                                (f) Leverage                           (g) Tax on Debt (%)                                   (h) Bailout
                                                                                                                                        10
0.01                                        0.48
                                                                                      0.01
                                            0.47
      0                                                                                                                                  5
                                            0.46                                    0.005
-0.01
                                                                                           0                                             0
           -10     -5      0        5                  -10     -5    0        5                   -10        -5       0         5                   -10     -5        0       5


                (i) Wage                               (j) Tobin’s Q                                       (k) η                                            (l) µ
                                                                                           1
  0                                           0                                                                                               1

-10
                                            -20                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                             0.5
-20
                                            -40
                                                                                           0                                                  0
          -10      -5      0        5                  -10      -5   0         5                  -10         -5          0         5                 -10        -5       0       5
                               No Bailout          Optimal Policy        Systemic Bailouts             Idiosyncratic Bailouts


                                        Figure 6: Event Analysis without Tax on Borrowing

Note: See note to Figure 5


more binding as reflected in higher Lagrange multipliers for the equity and borrowing constraint
(panels k and l). The increased severity in financial crises also leads to twice as high unconditional
standard deviation of output. Overall, the key result is that the fact that firms internalize how their
borrowing decisions affect future bailouts leads them to borrow more compared to the systemic
bailout policy, and this results in higher volatility and more severe crises.35


5.5        Welfare
Next, we compute the welfare gains from policy intervention. We consider the welfare effects of the
three cases analyzed above: (a) optimal bailout policy, (b) systemic bailout, and (c) idiosyncratic
bailout. We compute the percentage increase in consumption across all ω0 that leaves a household
   35
    We note that these results do not rely on issues related to the initial conjecture of the equilibrium in the
numerical algorithm (see Appendix C). For example, when we iterate backwards on the systemic bailout policy
using the allocations of the idiosyncratic bailout policy as initial guess, we arrive at the same systemic bailout
policy equilibrium as if we started from the optimal bailout policy. As we explained above, the difference relative
to the multiplicity results in Farhi and Tirole (2012) with risk-neutral bankers is that here the usual forces that
make risk-averse agents be more cautious when risk goes up offset the forces toward strategic complementarities
introduced by non-targeted bailouts.



                                                                                   32
indifferent between living in an economy with the corresponding government policy and remaining
in a no-bailout policy economy. That is, for every possible initial state, we compute
                            ∞
                            Ø                                                                         ∞
                                                                                                      Ø
                       E0                                                 β t u(c⋆t − G(n⋆t )) = E0         β t u(cN B              NB
                                                                                                                   t (1 + ω0 ) − G(nt )),       (30)
                            t=0                                                                       t=0


where cN B   NB
        t , nt  correspond to the policies in the no-bailout policy economy, and the superscript
⋆
  corresponds to the economy with a specific bailout policy.

                                                                          0.25
                             Percentage Points of Permanent Consumption




                                                                          0.15



                                                                          0.05



                                                                          -0.05



                                                                          -0.15



                                                                          -0.25




                                                                                          3.2                  3.6                   4


                                                                                  Optimal Policy   Systemic Bailouts   Idiosyncratic Bailouts




                                                                                           Figure 7: Welfare gains
Welfare gains, ω0 , for different policies for an initial value of capital 10 percent below the mean, κ = κL ,
R = RL , z = z L

    Figure 7 shows the comparison of the welfare gains for the three economies for different values
of bonds. The welfare gains correspond to a value of capital 10 percent below the mean and shocks
such that κ = κL , z = z L , R = RL . For the optimal policy, welfare gains reach higher values when
the economy starts at a high level of debt since it is in such state that bailouts are implemented
and mitigate the crisis. In addition, this figure shows that the systemic bailout policy delivers
welfare gains that are almost indistinguishable to the optimal policy. This is consistent with the
previous section that showed that the absence of prudential policy does not significantly increase
financial fragility when bailouts are contingent on a systemic financial crisis.
    On the other hand, idiosyncratic bailouts deliver substantial welfare losses for the entire range
of bonds. These welfare losses, however, are non-monotonic on the level of debt. Welfare losses
reach their minimum when the economy has a high value of debt but has not reached a crisis
state. This is because the overborrowing distortion becomes more severe. For even higher levels
of debt, however, welfare losses are reduced. This occurs because in a crisis state, there are short-

                                                                                                       33
run benefits from bailouts, although these benefits are generally lower than the costs from future
distortions in borrowing decisions.


6    Conclusion
This paper developed a quantitative equilibrium model to examine the macroeconomic and welfare
effects of bailouts from both an ex-ante and ex-post perspective. We show that the competitive
equilibrium is constrained-inefficient as a result of a pecuniary externality involving the effects
of wages on equity constraints. Bailouts are desirable ex post because they alleviate the under-
capitalization of firms during a financial crisis, which contributes to accelerating the economic
recovery. Ex ante, however, bailout expectations increases the incentives to take more risk.
    Our central quantitative finding is that bailouts constitute a powerful stabilizing force ex
post, yet generate modest moral hazard effects when appropriately designed. Specifically, if firms
perceive that becoming financially distressed does not activate bailouts unless the overall economy
is also under financial distress, moral hazard effects are significantly mitigated. As a result,
significant gains from bailouts arise both ex ante and ex post. Instead, an idiosyncratic bailout
policy targeted to individual agents causes substantial increases in leverage and makes the economy
more vulnerable to financial crises.
    These results are relevant to ongoing discussions on financial regulatory reform. According to
our analysis, there is a valuable role for government intervention in credit markets when these
interventions occur during a systemic crisis. In fact, prohibiting bailouts can actually increase
financial instability from an ex ante point of view. Bailouts, however, should be broad based
rather than targeted to specific institutions, in line with the special provisions introduced in the
Dodd-Frank Act. To the extent that governments in practice may way want to deviate ex post
from non-targeted bailouts and apply targeted bailouts to systemically important institutions, our
findings suggest that a key focus on financial regulations should be on preventing institutions from
becoming “too big to fail”.
    In an attempt to keep our model simple for a theoretical analysis, yet sufficiently rich for a
quantitative analysis, we have abstracted from several important features. In order to maintain our
focus on how bailouts affect the real economy, we have modeled direct bailouts to the corporate
sector. An interesting extension would be to model how bailouts affect the banking channel.
Moreover, an important refinement of our work would be to consider idiosyncratic risk on firms
in shaping the design of the optimal bailout policy. Finally, it would be desirable to consider how
government bailouts may affect the nature of the financial contracts. These are important issues
that are left for future research.




                                                34
References
Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E. Young (2012): “Optimal Policy
 for Macro-Financial Stability,” Mimeo, University of Virginia.

Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler (1989): “Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations,”
 American Economic Review, 79(1), 14–31.

Bianchi, J. (2011): “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,” American
  Economic Review, 101(7), 3400–3426.

Bianchi, J., and E. G. Mendoza (2010): “Overborrowing, Financial Crises and ’Macropru-
  dential’ Policy,” NBER Working Paper No. 16091.

Bianchi, J., and E. G. Mendoza (2015): “Optimal time-consistent macroprudential policy,”
  NBER Working Paper No. 19704.

Bigio, S. (2010): “Endogenous liquidity and the business cycle,” Forthcoming, American Eco-
  nomic Review.

Bils, M. J. (1985): “Real wages over the business cycle: evidence from panel data,” Journal of
  Political Economy, pp. 666–689.

Bocola, L. (2014): “The Pass-Through of Sovereign Risk,” Forthcoming, Journal of Political
 Economy.

Bond, S., and C. Meghir (1994): “Dynamic investment models and the firm’s financial policy,”
 The Review of Economic Studies, 61(2), 197–222.

Borio, C. (2014): “The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?,” Journal of
 Banking & Finance, 45, 182–198.

Brav, A., J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and R. Michaely (2005): “Payout policy in the
 21st century,” Journal of Financial Economics, 77(3), 483–527.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2001): “Hedging and financial fragility in
 fixed exchange rate regimes,” European Economic Review, 45(7), 1151–1193.

Caballero, R., and A. Krishnamurthy (2001): “International and domestic collateral con-
 straints in a model of emerging market crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(3), 513–548.

Caballero, R. J., and G. Lorenzoni (2014): “Persistent appreciations and overshooting: a
 normative analysis,” IMF Economic Review, 62(1), 1–47.



                                              35
Chari, V. V., and P. J. Kehoe (2013): “Bailouts, time inconsistency, and optimal regulation,”
 NBER Working Paper No. 19192.

Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and M. Trabandt (2015): “Understanding the Great
 Recession,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1), 110–167.

Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014): “Risk Shocks,” American Economic
 Review, 104(1), 27–65.

Cohen, G., and J. Yagil (2009): “Why do financially distressed firms pay dividends?,” Applied
 Economics Letters, 16(12), 1201–1204.

Del Negro, M., G. Eggertsson, A. Ferrero, and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “The great escape?
 A quantitative evaluation of the Fed’s non-standard policies,” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of
 New York.

Diamond, D., and R. Rajan (2009): “Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest Rate
 Policy Douglas,” Forthcoming Journal of Political Economy.

Farhi, E., and J. Tirole (2012): “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch and Systemic
  Bailouts,” American Economic Review, 102, 60–93.

Fernald, J. (2012): “A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity,”
 Mimeo, San Francisco Fed.

Gertler, M., and P. Karadi (2011): “A model of unconventional monetary policy,” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 58(1), 17–34.

Gertler, M., and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “Financial intermediation and credit policy in business
 cycle analysis,” In Friedman B. and Woodford M. Handbook of Monetary Economics. Elsevier.

Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Queralto (2012): “Financial crises, bank risk exposure
 and government financial policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, 17–34.

Guerrieri, V., and G. Lorenzoni (2011): “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings and the
 Liquidity Trap,” NBER Working Paper No. 17583.

Holmström, B., and J. Tirole (1998): “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 106(1), 1–40.

In’t Veld, J., R. Kollmann, M. Ratto, and W. Roeger (2013): “Fiscal policy, banks and
  the financial crisis,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 37(2), 387–403.

Jeanne, O., and A. Korinek (2010): “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian
  Taxation Approach,” NBER Working Paper No. 16377.

                                             36
        (2011): “Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping Up After the Crash,” Mimeo,
  John Hopkins University.

Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini (2012): “Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks,” American
  Economic Review, 102(1), 238–271.

Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2014): “The effects of the saving
  and banking glut on the US economy,” Journal of International Economics, 92, S52–S67.

Keister, T. (2012): “Bailouts and financial fragility,” Forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies.

Keister, T., and V. Narasiman (2011): “Expectations versus fundamentals: does the cause
 of banking panics matter for prudential policy?,” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Kelly, B., H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2011): “Too-Systemic-To-Fail: What
 Option Markets Imply About Sector-wide Government Guarantees,” Forthcoming, American
 Economic Review.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105,
 211–248.

Leary, M. T., and R. Michaely (2011): “Determinants of dividend smoothing: Empirical
  evidence,” Review of Financial Studies, 24(10), 3197–3249.

Lintner, J. (1956): “Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained earnings,
  and taxes,” American Economic Review, pp. 97–113.

Lorenzoni, G. (2008): “Inefficient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies, 75, 809–833.

McKinnon, R. I., and H. Pill (1996): “Credible Liberalizations and International Capital
 Flows: The" Overborrowing Syndrome",” in Financial Deregulation and Integration in East
 Asia, NBER-EASE Volume 5, pp. 7–50. University of Chicago Press.

Meltzer, A. (2000): “The Report of the International Financial Institutions Advisory Commis-
 sion,” Discussion paper, Washington, DC.

Mendoza, E. G. (2010): “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage,” American Economic
 Review, 100(5), 1941–1966.

Mendoza, E. G., and V. Quadrini (2009): “Financial Globalization, Financial Crises and
 Contagion,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(1), 24–39.

Mendoza, E. G., and M. E. Terrones (2008): “An Anatomy Of Credit Booms: Evidence
 From Macro Aggregates And Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper 14049.

                                              37
Midrigin, V., and T. Philippon (2011): “Household Leverage and the Recession,” CEPR
 Discussion Paper No. DP8381.

Myers, S., and N. Majluf (1984): “Corporate Ginancing and Investment Fecisions when Firms
 have Information that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13(2), 187–221.

Nosal, J., and G. Ordonez (2012): “Uncertainty as Commitment,” Mimeo, Columbia Univer-
 sity.

Pastén, E. (2011): “Time-consistent bailout plans,” Mimeo, Central Bank of Chile.

Philippon, T., and V. Skreta (2012): “Optimal Interventions in Markets with Adverse Selec-
 tion,” American Economic Review, 102(1).

Reinhart, C., and K. Rogoff (2009): This time is different: Eight centuries of financial folly.
 Princeton Univ Pr.

Schneider, M., and A. Tornell (2004): “Balance sheet effects, bailout guarantees and finan-
  cial crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 71(3), 883–913.

Schoefer, B. (2015): “The Financial Channel of Wage Rigidity,” Mimeo, Harvard.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny (1997): “A Survey of Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance,
  52(2), 737–783.

Shourideh, A., and A. Zetlin-Jones (2012): “External financing and the role of financial
  frictions over the business cycle: Measurement and theory,” Mimeo, Wharton.

Solon, G., R. Barsky, and J. A. Parker (1994): “Measuring the Cyclicality of Real Wages:
  How Important is Composition Bias?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1), 1–25.

Stavrakeva, V. (2015): “Optimal Bank Regulation and Fiscal Capacity,” Mimeo, LBS.

Stiglitz, J. (2002): Globalization and its discontents. London: Allen Lane.

Warnock, F. E., and V. C. Warnock (2009): “International capital flows and US interest
 rates,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 28(6), 903–919.

Woodford, M. (1990): “Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” American Economic Review, 80(2),
 382–88.




                                              38
A                 Additional Figures

                 (a) Output                    (b) Investment                          (c) Employment                          (d) Consumption
                                                                                                                      0
     0
                                      0                                       0


-0.5                                                                          -1                                      -2
                                     -5

                                                                              -2
 -1                                 -10                                                                               -4
         0           50       100         0          50          100               0               50          100         0                  50         100


                  (e) Debt                       (f) Capital                                   (g) Dividends                               (h) Bailout
         0                            0                                                                                0.1
                                                                              0.002


-0.25                               -0.2                                      0.001                                   0.05


                                                                              -0.000
 -0.5                               -0.4                                                                                   0
             0       50       100          0         50          100                       0        50         100             0               50        100


                 (i) Wage                      (j) Tobin’s Q                                       (k) η                                        (l) µ
                                                                                0.08                                       0.08
0                                    -4

-1                                                                              0.04                                       0.04
                                     0

-2
                                                                                       0                                           0
                                     -2
     0              50        100         0          50          100                       0            50      100                    0            50     100

                                                    No Bailout         Optimal Policy




                                    Figure 8: Impulse Response to a decline in TFP

Note: Impulse responses are computed via simulations starting at mean value of capital and debt for the cor-
responding economy. The initial shocks with the exception of the TFP are initialized at all possible values and
weighted according to the stationary distribution conditional on TFP being low. All variables are expressed as
percentage deviations relative to the mean with the exception of η, µ and debt repurchases, which are simple
deviations. Bailouts are computed as γtSB bt and expressed in percentage of GDP.




                                                                            39
         (a) Output                  (b) Investment                        (c) Employment                     (d) Consumption
                            3
                            0
     0                                                             0
                           -3                                                                          0
-0.1                       -6
                                                                 -0.1                                  -1
-0.2                       -9
-0.3                                                             -0.2                                  -2
          10    20    30                10          20    30                  10        20       30                10           20        30


         (e) Debt                                                          (g) Dividends                          (h) Bailout
2                                             (f) K                                                    4

1
                                 0
0
                           -0.25                                                                       2
-1
                                                                 0.0
-2                          -0.5

                           -0.75                                                                       0
         10    20     30                 10          20   30                  10       20        30                10          20         30


          (i) Wage                    (j) Tobin’s Q                                 (k) η                                    (l) µ
                                                                                                            0.8

     0                       0                                    0.3                                       0.6
                            -1
                                                                  0.2                                       0.4
-0.1                        -2
                                                                  0.1                                       0.2
                            -3
-0.2                                                                   0                                     0
          10    20    30                10           20   30                   10           20    30                    10           20        30
                                             No Bailout   Optimal Policy




                           Figure 9: Effects of an increase in the interest rate

Note: Paths are computed by considering a one-time increase in the interest rate. TFP and κ take the high values
along the path and the economy is started at the mean value of capital and debt for the no-bailout economy.
All variables are expressed as deviations between the simulated path that starts with with RH relative to the
simulated path for the no-bailout policy economy that starts with RL . With the exception of η, µ, and bailouts
all deviations are in percentage. Bailouts are computed as γtSB bt and expressed in percentage of GDP.




                                                               40
B        Theoretical Proofs
B.1         Proof of Proposition 1
Let us first fine first set up the complete problem of the constrained social planner that chooses
labor allocations on behalf of firms and let all markets clear competitively:

Problem 1. The constrained efficient allocations are the solution to the following planner’s prob-
lem36 :
                                              ∞
                                              Ø
                 max                      E         β t u(ct − G(ht ))
    {kt+1 ,bt+1 ,ht ,ct ,ηt ,µt ,pt+1 }
                                              t=0

                                          s.t.
                                                                                                           bt+1
                                          bt + ct = (1 − δ)kt − kt+1 − ψ(kt , kt+1 ) + F (zt , kt , ht ) +
                                                                                                            Rt
                                                                                                        (Resource Constraint)
                                                                                bt+1
                                          d¯ ≤ F (zt , kt , ht ) − G′ (ht )ht +      − b t − it           (Equity Constraint)
                                                                                 Rt
                                           bt+1
                                                + θF (zt , kt , ht ) ≤ κt kt+1                       (Borrowing Constraint)
                                            Rt
                                          1 + ηt = Rt Et mt+1 (1 + ηt+1 ) + µt                                (Bond Euler Eq.)
                                                                              I
                                          (1 + ηt )(1 + ψ2 (t)) = Et mt+1 [1 − δ + Fk (t + 1) − ψ1 (t + 1)] (1 + ηt+1 )
                                                                                                    J
                                                                                   − θFk (t + 1)µt+1 + κt µt

                                                                                                          (Capital Euler Eq.)
                                          pt u′ (t) = βEt u′ (t + 1)(dt+1 + pt+1 )                           (Stocks Euler Eq.)
                                                               bt+1
                                          0 = µt (κt kt+1 −         − θF (zt , kt , ht )), µt ≥ 0                        (CS1)
                                                                Rt
                                                        ¯ ηt ≥ 0
                                          0 = ηt (dt − d),                                                               (CS2)

Lemma 1 (Relaxed Planner Problem). Consider planning problem 1. The last five constraints in
this problem do not bind.

   Proof: The proof is obtained by showing that the solution to the relaxed planning problem
that ignores constraints (Bond Euler Eq.)-(CS2) satisfies these constraints. Deriving first-order
conditions of the relaxed problem yield conditions (Bond Euler Eq.),(Capital Euler Eq.),(CS1)
and (CS2).
   Let the Lagrange Multipliers on the (Resource Constraint), (Equity Constraint) and (Borrow-
ing Constraint) be denoted by β t λpt , β t ηtp , and β t µpt .37 Optimality is characterized by first-order
  36
    it = kt+1 − (1 − δ)kt + ψ(kt , kt+1 ).
  37
    These Lagrange multipliers should not be confused with the Lagrange multipliers from private agents optimiza-
tion problems.

                                                                         41
conditions of the relaxed problem

            ct ::     λpt = u′ (ct − G(ht ))                                                                  (31a)
            ht ::     (λpt   +   ηtp )(Fh (t)   − G′ (ht )) =   ηtp G′′ (ht )ht   +   µpt θFh (t)             (31b)
          bt+1 ::     (λpt + ηtp ) = βRt Et [λpt+1 + ηt+1
                                                      p
                                                          ] + µpt                                             (31c)
          kt+1 ::     (λpt + ηtp )(1 + ψ2 (t)) = βEt [λpt+1 + ηt+1
                                                               p
                                                                   ](1 − δ + Fk (t + 1) − ψ1 (t + 1))
                                                                            − θFk (t + 1)µpt+1 + µpt κt       (31d)

and the following complementary slackness conditions:

                                           µpt (κt kt+1 − bt+1 − θF (zt , kt , ht )) = 0, µpt ≥ 0             (32a)
                                                            bt+1                  ¯ = 0, ηtp ≥ 0
                     ηtp (F (zt , kt , ht ) − G′ (ht )ht +       − bt − it − d)                               (32b)
                                                             Rt
                                                                                                          ′
     Note that pt only appears in (Stocks Euler Eq.). Setting pt such that pt = βEt u (t+1)(d         t+1 +pt+1 )
                                                                                                 u′ (t)
satisfies constraints (Stocks Euler Eq.).
     Pick values for Lagrange multipliers on the equity constraint and collateral constraint as ηt =
ηtp /u′ (t) and µt = µpt /u′ (t). Substituting this and using λpt = u′ (ct −G(ht )) condition (31c) becomes

                             u′ (t)(1 + ηt ) = βRt Et [λpt+1 + ηt+1 u′ (t + 1)] + µt u′ (t)

dividing by u′ (t) in both sides

                                                        Et u′ (t + 1)(1 + ηt+1 )
                                      1 + ηt = βRt                               + µt
                                                                  u′ (t)

using mt+1 = u′ (t + 1)/u′ (t), we have

                                         1 + ηt = βRt Et mt+1 (1 + ηt+1 ) + µt

which is condition (Bond Euler Eq.). Similarly for (31d), we obtain

       u′ (t)(1 + ηt )(1 + ψ2 (t)) = βEt (λpt+1 + ηt+1 u′ (t + 1))(1 − δ + Fk (t + 1) − ψ1 (t + 1))
                                                −θFk (t + 1)µt+1 u′ (t + 1) + µt u′ (t)κt

and rearranging leads to (Capital Euler Eq.).
   Finally, (32a) and (32b) and using ηt = ηtp /u′ (t) and µt = µpt /u′ (t), yields (CS1) and (CS2).
This completes the proof of Lemma 1. Proposition 1 follows directly from this lemma. 




                                                                42
B.2          Proof of Proposition 2
To show the proof, let us first define the complete Ramsey problem:

Problem 2. The Ramsey problem with payroll taxes (τth ), debt relief (γtSB ) and debt tax (τtb )
rebated lump sum (Tt ) consists of solving:
                                                         ∞
                                                         Ø
                     max                           E0          β t u(ct − G(ht ))                                                      (33a)
  {   kt+1 ,bt+1 ,ht ,ct ,γtSB ,τth ,Tt ,τtb   }         t=0

                                        s.t.
                                                                                                                          bt+1
                                                   bt + ct = (1 − δ)kt − kt+1 − ψ(kt , kt+1 ) + F (zt , kt , ht ) +                    (33b)
                                                                                                                           Rt
                                                                                                                     bt+1
                                                   d¯ − Tt ≤ F (zt , kt , ht ) − wt ht (1 + τth ) − bt (1 − γtSB ) +      (1 − τtb ) − it
                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                                                      (33c)
                                                    bt+1
                                                         + θF (zt , kt , ht ) ≤ κt kt+1                                              (33d)
                                                     Rt
                                                   wt = G′ (ht )                                                                      (33e)
                                                   Fh (zt , kt , ht ) = wt (1 + τth )                                                   (33f)
                                                                                 bt+1 b
                                                   γtSB bt + Tt = wt ht τth +         τ                                                (33g)
                                                                                   R t
                                                   1 + ηt = Rt (1 − τtb )Et mt+1 (1 + ηt+1 )(1 − γt+1 ) + µt                           (33h)
                                                                                         I
                                                   (1 + ηt )(1 + ψ2,t ) = Et mt+1 [1 − δ + Fk (t + 1) − ψ1,t+1 ] (1 + ηt+1 )
                                                                                                J
                                                                              − θFk (t + 1)µt+1 + κt µt                                 (33i)

                                                   pt u′ (t) = βEt u′ (t + 1)(dt+1 + pt+1 )                                             (33j)
                                                                                          bt+1
                                                   0 = µt (κt kt+1 − θF (zt , kt , ht ) −      ), µt ≥ 0                               (33k)
                                                                                           Rt
                                                                                                                     bt+1
                                                   0 = ηt (F (zt , kt , ht ) − wt ht (1 + τth ) − bt (1 − γtSB ) +        (1 − τtb ) − it ...
                                                                                                                      R
                                                   ...                                ¯ ηt ≥ 0
                                                                                + T − d),                                                (33l)

    There are several steps to see that this is equivalent to Problem SP. The basic idea behind the
proof is to show that the implementability constraints in Problem (2) are the same as constraints
(SPa),(SPb), and (SPc) in problem (SP).
    First notice that substituting the government budget constraint (33g) and (33e) into (33c)
yields:
                                                                        bt+1
                            d¯ ≤ F (zt , kt , ht ) − wt G′ (ht ) − bt +      − it
                                                                         Rt
which is the implementability condition (SPa).
   Second, equation (33b) and (33d) coincide with the resource constraint and the borrowing

                                                                                    43
constraint of the constrained equilibrium. Third, the last 4 constraints (33i)-(33l) can be shown
to be slack following the same steps as in the proof of Proposition 1. Finally, given {ηt , µt , pt }
                                                                SB
required for (33i)-(33l) to hold, notice that for any level of γt+1 Ó= 1, τtb can be set such that (33h)
holds with equality. 


B.3      Ramsey Policies without Prudential Taxes
Problem 3. The Ramsey problem with payroll taxes (τth ), debt relief (γtSB ) consists of solving:


                                                          ∞
                                                          Ø
                           max                       E0         β t u(ct − G(ht ))                               (34a)
             {   kt+1 ,bt+1 ,ht ,ct ,τth ,γtSB   }        t=0

             s.t.
                                                                                               bt+1
             bt + ct = (1 − δ)kt − kt+1 − ψ(kt , kt+1 ) + F (zt , kt , ht ) +                                    (34b)
                                                                                                Rt
                                                                          bt+1
             d¯ ≤ F (zt , kt , ht ) − wt ht (1 + τth ) − bt (1 − γtSB ) +      − it                              (34c)
                                                                           R
              bt+1
                   + θF (zt , kt , ht ) ≤ κt kt+1                                                                (34d)
               Rt
             wt = G′ (ht )                                                                                       (34e)
             Fh (zt , kt , ht ) = wt (1 + τth )                                                                  (34f)
             γtSB bt = wt ht τth                                                                                 (34g)
                                                                  1            2
                                                  SB
             1 + ηt = Rt Et mt+1 (1 + ηt+1 ) 1 − γt+1 + µt                                                       (34h)
                                                                 I
             (1 + ηt )(1 + ψ2,t ) = Et mt+1 [1 − δ + Fk (t + 1) − ψ1,t+1 ] (1 + ηt+1 )
                                                                           J
                                                 − θFk (t + 1)µt+1 + κt µt                                       (34i)

             pt u′ (t) = βEt u′ (t + 1)(dt+1 + pt+1 )                                                            (34j)
                                                    bt+1
             0 = µt (κt kt+1 − θF (zt , kt , ht ) −      ), µt ≥ 0                                               (34k)
                                                     Rt
                                                                                          bt+1        ¯ ηt ≥ 0
             0 = ηt (F (zt , kt , ht ) − wt ht (1 + τth ) − bt (1 − γtSB ) +                   − it − d),        (34l)
                                                                                           R

After substituting (34g) into equation (34l), the optimality condition with respect to γtSB is

                                                          ξt−1 Rt−1 mt (1 + ηt )
                    γtSB ::          ηtp ≤ ζt +                                      with equality if γtSB > 0    (35)
                                                                    bt

where ηtp is the Lagrange multiplier on the equity constraint (34c), ζt constitutes the Lagrange
multiplier in the government budget constraint (34g) and ξt constitutes the Lagrange multiplier
on the bond Euler equation (34h). This is condition (27) in the text.

                                                                          44
       This problem can be expressed solely in terms of price and allocations by obtaining γtSB bt =
1               2
    Fh (ht )
    G′ (ht )
             − 1  G′ (ht )ht from (34e), (34f), (34c) and substituting (34g) into (34c):

                                     ∞
                                     Ø
               max               E         β t u(ct − G(ht ))                                                      (36a)
         {kt+1 ,bt+1 ,ht ,ct }
                                     t=0

        s.t.
                                                                                             bt+1
        bt + ct = (1 − δ)kt − kt+1 − ψ(kt , kt+1 ) + F (zt , kt , ht ) +
                                                                                              Rt
                                                   bt+1
        d¯ ≤ F (zt , kt , ht ) − G′ (ht )ht − bt +      − it
                                                    R
         bt+1
              + θF (zt , kt , ht ) ≤ κt kt+1
          Rt
                                                               1                   2                 
                                                                    Fh (ht+1 )
                                                                    G′ (ht+1 )
                                                                                 − 1 G′ (ht+1 )ht+1
        1 + ηt = Rt Et mt+1 (1 + ηt+1 ) 1 −                                                           + µt
                                                                                   bt+1
                                                     I                                                         J
        (1 + ηt )(1 + ψ2,t ) = Et mt+1 [1 − δ + Fk (t + 1) − ψ1,t+1 ] (1 + ηt+1 ) − θFk (t + 1)µt+1

                                           + κt µt
                                                bt+1
        0 = µt (κt kt+1 − θF (zt , kt , ht ) −       ), µt ≥ 0
                                                 Rt
                                                       bt+1        ¯ ηt ≥ 0
        0 = ηt (F (zt , kt , ht ) − G′ (ht )ht − bt +       − it − d),
                                                        R
where we have also dispensed equation (34j) which can be shown not be binding, following the
same steps as in Propositions 1 and 2. In contrast with the Ramsey problem with debt taxes,
the bond and capital Euler equations are potentially binding. Notice that while the debt relief
policy does not show up explicitly in the capital Euler equation, capital accumulation still affects
indirectly borrowing choices, and hence the Euler equation for capital cannot be disposed unlike
in Problem (2).
   Discretionary optimal bailout policy— Given future debt relief policy γ SB and implied
future consumption policies C and labor allocations H, the planner solves the following Bellman




                                                                           45
equation at each point in time.

    V(B, K, s) =              max                 u(ct − G(ht ))        + βEV (B ′ , K ′ , s′ )                     (37a)
                     c,h,b′ ,k′ ,τ h ,γ SB ,µ,η

    s.t.
                                        b′
    b + c + i ≤ F (z, k, h) +
                                        R
                                                         b′
    d¯ ≤ F (z, k, h) − G′ (h)h(1 + τ h ) − b(1 − γ SB ) + − i
                                                         R
       ′
     b
         + θF (z, k, h) ≤ κk ′
     R        A            B
                Fh (h)
      SB
    γ b=                − 1 G′ (h)h
                G′ (h)
    u′ (c)(1 + η) = Eu′ (C(B ′ , K ′ , s′ )) − G(H(B ′ , K ′ , s′ ))(1 + η(B ′ , K ′ , s′ ))...
                             ...(1 − γ SB (B ′ , K ′ , s′ ))) + Rµu′ (c)
    u′ (c)(1 + η)(1 + ψ2 ) = Et [u′ (C(B ′ , K ′ , s′ )) − G(H(B ′ , K ′ , s′ ))(1 + η(B ′ , K ′ , s′ ))...
                             ...) [1 − δ + Fk (k ′ , H(B ′ , K ′ , s′ )) − ψ1′ ] ...
                             ...(1 + η(B ′ , K ′ , s′ )) − θµ(B ′ , K ′ , s′ )F (z ′ , k ′ , H(B ′ , K ′ , s′ ))]
                              + κµu′ (c)
           A                                      B
                 ′            b′
    0 = µ κk − θF (z, k, h) −    , µ≥0
                              R
           A                                                                              B
                                                                            b′
                                   ′
    0 = η F (z, k, h) − G (h)h(1 + τ ) − b(1 − γ      h             SB
                                                                         ) + − i − d¯ , η ≥ 0
                                                                            R

Following the same notation for the Lagrange multipliers, the optimality condition with respect
to γtSB is
                                           ηtp = ζt                                        (38)

which is condition (28) in the text. It is easy to see that the constraint γtSB ≥ 0 never binds
because after taking first order condition with respect to h, this yields equation (20), that is, the
same condition from the constrained-efficient allocations.
    A Markov perfect equilibrium requires that the policies {c∗ , h∗ , γ SB∗ , µ∗ , η ∗ } that solve the
Bellman equation (37a) satisfy C(B, K, s) = c∗ (B, K, s), H(B, K, s) = h∗ (B, K, s), γ SB (B, K, s) =
γ SB∗ (B, K, s), µ(B, K, s) = µ∗ (B, K, s), and η(B, K, s) = η ∗ (B, K, s).




                                                                   46
B.4        Proof of Proposition 3
Using the budget constraint of the government and the definition of labor share, dividing by
output, and using the definition of labor share, we have that

                                                γtSB bt  τ h wt ht
                                                        = t                                                      (39)
                                                  Yt         Yt
                                                          = τth Labor Share                                      (40)

In addition, rearrange (24) and use labor market clearing ht = nt to obtain
                                                      A                         B
                                                          Fh (zt , kt , ht )
                                            τth   =                          −1                                  (41)
                                                             G′ (ht )

Using (20), we obtain
                                                    G′′ (ht )ht  ηt
                                            τth   =                                                              (42)
                                                     G (ht ) ηt + u′ (ct )
                                                        ′

                              1
                          h1+ ǫ
Substituting G(h) =       1+ 1ǫ
                                  , we obtain

                                                            1     ηt
                                                   τth =                                                         (43)
                                                            ǫ ηt + u′ (ct )

Plugging in (43) into (40) yields

                                         γtSB bt   Labor Share     ηt
                                                 =                                                               (44)
                                           Yt           ǫ      ηt + u′ (c)
                                                                                              ηt
Dividing equation (44) by u′ (ct ) and conducting the change of variables ηˆt =             u′ (ct )
                                                                                                     ,   we obtain
                                                                         A              B
                                         γtSB bt   Labor Share                   η̂ t
                                                 =
                                           Yt           ǫ                    η̂ t + 1

Finally, with θ = 0 and constant returns to scale, the labor share equals 1 − α, leading to equa-
tion (26).
    


B.5        Constrained Inefficiency with Equity Injections
We allow firms to pay an arbitrarily low dividend, i.e., issue arbitrarily large amounts of equity,
                                                  ¯ 38 Formally, denote the resource cost of paying
while subject to a cost of paying dividends below d.
 38
      At the expense of more notation, we can allow firms to change the amount of shares st with analogous results.




                                                               47
                                             ¯ The problem of the firm becomes
d dividends by Λ(d) and assume Λ(d) = 0 ∀d ≥ d.

                      V (k, b, X) = max   d(1 − Λ(d)) + Em′ (X, X ′ )V (k ′ , b′ , X ′ )                    (45a)
                                      ′ ′d,h,k ,b

                              s.t.
                                                                                                 b′
                                     b + d + k ′ + ψ(k, k ′ ) ≤ (1 − δ)k + F (z, k, h) − wn +               (45b)
                                                                                                 R
                                     b′
                                        + θF (z, k, h) ≤ κk ′                                               (45c)
                                     R
                                     d ≥ d¯                                                                 (45d)

The first-order condition w.r.t. dt is

                                         λt = 1 + ηt − Λ(dt ) − dt Λ′t (dt )                                 (46)

This implies that the modified Bond and Capital Euler equations are

              1 + ηt − Λ(dt ) − dt Λ′t (dt ) = Rt Emt+1 [1 + ηt+1 − Λ(dt+1 ) − dt+1 Λ′t+1 (dt+1 )] + µt (47)
  (1 + ηt − Λ(dt ) − dt Λ′t (dt ))(1 + ψ2,t ) = Et mt+1 [1 − δ + Fk,t+1 − ψ1,t+2 ] (1 + ηt+1 − Λ(dt+1 )
                                                         − dt+1 Λ′t+1 (dt+1 )) + κt µt                       (48)

Following Proposition 1, the planner’s problem is

                    V (k, b, X) = max   u(c − G(h)) + βEV (k ′ , b′ , X ′ )                                 (49a)
                                      d,h,k ,b
                                    ′ ′


                            s.t.
                                                                                         b′
                               c + b + k ′ + ψ(k, k ′ ) ≤ (1 − δ)k + F (z, k, h) +          − Λ(dt )        (49b)
                                                                                         R
                                                                                                       b′
                               d = b + k ′ + ψ(k, k ′ ) + (1 − δ)k + F (z, k, h) − G′ (h)h +                (49c)
                                                                                                       R
                                   b′
                                      + θF (z, k, h) ≤ κk ′                                                 (49d)
                                   R
The optimality condition with respect to h shows that the same externality is at work when firms
have access to costly equity issuances:

                                                     ′     Λ′ (d)G′′ (h)h
                                    Fh (z, k, h) = G (h) +                                                   (50)
                                                            Λ′ (d) − 1




                                                           48
C       Computational Algorithm
Given a set of policies τ h (X), T (X), τ b (X), γ SB (X), the computation of the competitive equi-
librium requires solving for functions {B, K, I, M, C, H, d, w, p, η, µ} that satisfy the following
conditions.


                                            B ′ (X)
        b + C(X) + I(X)+ ≤ F (z, k, H(X)) +                                                                 (51)
                                                R
        w(X) = G′ (H(X))                                                                                    (52)

                                                                              B ′ (X)
      d = F (z, k, H(X)) − w(X)H(X)(1 + τ h (X)) − b(1 − γ(X)) +                      − I(X)                (53)
                                                                                  R
      d ≥ d¯                                                                                                (54)

        B ′ (X) + θF (z, k, H(X)) ≤ κK′ (X)                                                                 (55)
                    A                   B
                        Fh (H(X))
        γ(X)b =                   − 1 G′ (H(X))H(X)                                                         (56)
                        G′ (H(X))

        (1 + η(X))(1 + ψ2,t ) = Et [M(X, X ′ ) [(1 − δ + FK (z ′ , k ′ , H(X ′ ) − ψ1,t+2 )(1 + η(X ′ ))+

        θFk (z ′ , k ′ , H(X ′ ))µ(X ′ )] + µ(X)κ                                                           (57)

        p(X)u′ (t) = βEt u′ (t + 1)(d′ + p(X ′ ))                                                           (58)

        0 = µ(X)(κK′ (X) − θF (z, k, H(X)) − B ′ (X)), µ ≥ 0                                                (59)
                   ¯ η(X) ≥ 0
        0 = η(X)(d−d),                                                                                      (60)

        1 + η(X) = βREM(X, X ′ )(1 + η(X ′ )))(1 − γ SB (X ′ ))) + µ(X).                                    (61)

For an idiosyncratic bailout policy, condition (61) is replaced by.

               1 + η(X) = βREM(X, X ′ )(1 + η(X ′ )))(1 − γ IB (X ′ ) − γbIB (X ′ )b′ ) + µ(X).

and (57) is replaced by

(1 + η(X))(1 + ψ2,t ) = E[M(X, X ′ ) [(1 − δ + FK (z ′ , k ′ , H(X ′ ) − ψ1,t+2 )(1 + η(X ′ )) + γk (X ′ b′ )+

 θFk (z ′ , k ′ , H(X ′ ))µ(X ′ )] + µ(X)κ                                                                  (62)
                î           ′
                                    ï
where X ′ = B ′ (X), K (X), s′ .

    1. Generate a discrete grid for the economy’s bond position Gb = {b1, b2 , ...bM } and capital
       Gk = {k1, k2 , ...kN } and the shock state space Gs = {s1, s2 , ...sN } and choose an interpolation

                                                      49
   scheme for evaluating the functions outside the grid of bonds. We use 90 points in the grid for
   bonds and 40 for capital and interpolate the functions using a piecewise linear approximation.

2. Determine the feasible space for X as follows. First determine the maximum level of debt
   that firms can service given an aggregate state X as follows

                                                                        B′
                      bmax (k, X) = max F (z, k, h) − w(X)h +              −
                                    ′ ′ b ,k ,h                         R
                                                                       A            B2 
                                        b̄ + d¯ + k ′ − k(1 − δ) +
                                                                    φ       k′ − k
                                                                                       k
                                                                    2          k

                                        s.t.

                                        b′ + θF (z, k, h) ≤ κk ′ .

   Second solve for the feasible set Θ

                        Θ(X) = {(b, k) ∈ R × R+ : b ≤ bmax (k, {k, b, s} ∀s)}.

   where w(X) = G′ (H(X)).

    (a) Guess a set Θ(X)
    (b) Compute bmax (k, X)
    (c) Update Θ(X) until convergence

3. Conjecture {Bi , Ki , I, Mi , Ci , Hi , wi , pi , ηi , µi } at time i, ∀b ∈ Gb b ∈ Gk and ∀s ∈ Gs

4. Set j = 1

5. Solve for the values of Bi−j (X)Ii−j (X)Ci−j (X), Ki−j (X), µi−j (X) at time i−j using (51)-(57)
   and Bi−j+1 (X), Ki−j+1 (X), Ci−j+1 (X), Hi−j+1 (X), µi−j+1 (X)∀b ∈ Gb and ∀s ∈ Gs :

    (a) Assume collateral constraint (55) and equity constraint (54) are not binding. Solve for
        Bi−j , Ki−j , Mi−j , Ci−j , Hi−j , di−j B using (51)-(62) and a root finding algorithm. The
        system here can be reduced to two equations and two unknowns.
    (b) Check whether (55) and (54) hold. If both constraint are satisfied, move to next grid
        point.
    (c) Guess that only (54) binds and solve for allocations and prices consistent with this.
    (d) Check whether (55) holds. If it holds, move to next point.
    (e) Guess that only (55) binds and solve for allocations and prices consistent with this.
    (f) Check whether (54) holds. If it holds, move to next point.

                                                  50
         (g) Impose both constraints being binding and solve for allocations and prices consistent
             with this.

   6. Evaluate convergence. If supX ëxi−j (X)−xi−j+1 (X)ë < ǫ for x = B, K, I, M, C, H, d, w, p, η, µ
      we have found the competitive equilibrium. Otherwise, set xi−j (X) = xi−j+1 (X) and
      j ; j + 1 and go to step 4.


D        Transition Matrix
Following the approach described in the calibration, we obtain the following transition matrix P

  t\t + 1        (zL ,rL ,κL )   (zH ,rL ,κL )   (zL ,rH ,κL )   (zH ,rH ,κL )   (zL ,rL ,κH )   (zH ,rL ,κH )   (zL ,rH ,κH )   (zH ,rH ,κH )

 (zL ,rL ,κL )    0.7990          0.1438          0.0003          0.0001          0.0239          0.0043          0.0242          0.0044
 (zH ,rL ,κL )    0.1438          0.7990          0.0001          0.0003          0.0043          0.0239          0.0044          0.0242
 (zL ,rH ,κL )    0.0579          0.0104          0.0040          0.0007          0.3419          0.0615          0.4437          0.0798
 (zH ,rH ,κL )    0.0104          0.0579          0.0007          0.0040          0.0615          0.3419          0.0798          0.4437
 (zL ,rL ,κH )    0.0139          0.0025          0.0000          0.0000          0.6281          0.1130          0.2055          0.0370
 (zH ,rL ,κH )    0.0025          0.0139          0.0000          0.0000          0.1130          0.6281          0.0370          0.2055
 (zL ,rH ,κH )    0.0000          0.0000          0.0000          0.0000          0.1671          0.0301          0.6804          0.1224
 (zH ,rH ,κH )    0.0000          0.0000          0.0000          0.0000          0.0301          0.1671          0.1224          0.6804




                                                                      51
