NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GASOLINE PRICES, FUEL ECONOMY, AND THE ENERGY PARADOX
Hunt Allcott
Nathan Wozny
Working Paper 18583
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18583
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012
We thank Alberto Abadie, Soren Anderson, Josh Angrist, Orley Ashenfelter, David Autor, Lucas Davis,
Henry Farber, Kelly Gallagher, Penny Goldberg, Michael Greenstone, Jerry Hausman, Mark Jacobsen,
James Kahn, Ryan Kellogg, Lutz Kilian, David Laibson, David Lee, Henry Lee, Robin Lee, Lars Lefgren,
Erin Mansur, Erich Muehlegger, Sendhil Mullainathan, Richard Newell, Ariel Pakes, Nancy Rose,
Jesse Rothstein, Stephen Ryan, Jim Sallee, Jorge Silva-Risso, Rob Stavins, Chris Timmins, Roger
von Haefen, Glen Weyl, Matt White, and seminar participants at the Air Force Academy, Analysis
Group, Carnegie Mellon, Colorado School of Mines, Harvard, Kent State University, Mathematica
Policy Research, MIT, NBER Summer Institute, Northwestern, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de
Chile, Princeton, Society for Economic Dynamics, Stanford University, Stanford Institute for Theoretical
Economics, Texas A&M, Universidad de los Andes, University of California Energy Institute, University
of Delaware, University of Wisconsin, University of Toronto, and Washington University for their
feedback. Funding for this project was provided by Princeton's Industrial Relations Section, Harvard's
Energy Technology Innovation Policy group, the Harvard University Center for the Environment,
and the Sloan Foundation. We thank JD Power for providing vehicle transaction price data. Thanks
to Lonnie Miller at RL Polk for helpful conversations. We thank Manheim Consulting for providing
auction data and Gary George, Nirmeet Kacheria, Pete Sauber, and Tom Webb at Manheim for sharing
their expertise. We thank Carmen Collyns and Jordon Ricks for research assistance on this and related
projects. We especially appreciate meticulous research assistance by Sounman Hong. Code for replicating
the estimation is available from Hunt Allcott's website. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Hunt Allcott and Nathan Wozny. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox
Hunt Allcott and Nathan Wozny
NBER Working Paper No. 18583
November 2012
JEL No. D03,D12,L62,Q41
ABSTRACT
It is often asserted that consumers undervalue future gasoline costs relative to purchase prices when
they choose between automobiles, or equivalently that they have high "implied discount rates" for
these future energy costs. We show how this can be tested by measuring whether relative prices of
vehicles with different fuel economy ratings fully adjust to time series variation in gasoline price forecasts.
We then test the model using a detailed dataset based on 86 million transactions at auto dealerships
and wholesale auctions between 1999 and 2008. Over our base sample, vehicle prices move as if consumers
are indifferent between one dollar in discounted future gas costs and only 76 cents in vehicle purchase
price. We document how endogenous market shares and utilization, measurement error, and different
gasoline price forecasts can affect the results, and we show how to address these issues empirically.
We also provide unique empirical evidence of sticky information: vehicle markets respond to changes
in gasoline prices with up to a six month delay.
Hunt Allcott
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
hunt.allcott@nyu.edu
Nathan Wozny
2354 Fairchild Dr
Department of Economics and Geosciences
Suite 6K144
USAFA, CO 80840
nathan.wozny@usafa.edu

1

Introduction

In some situations, it appears that consumers choosing between products are less attentive to ancillary costs than to purchase prices. Consumers on eBay, for example, are less elastic to shipping
and handling charges than to the listed purchase price (Hossain and Morgan 2006). Mutual fund
investors appear to be less responsive to ongoing management fees than to upfront payments (Barber, Odean, and Zheng 2005). Senior citizens are two to …ve times more sensitive to a Medicare
Part D plan’s premium than to its out-of-pocket costs (Abaluck and Gruber 2011). Shoppers are
less elastic to sales taxes than to purchase prices (Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 2009).
Similarly, it is often asserted that gasoline costs are not fully salient to automobile consumers
when they choose between automobiles with di¤erent fuel economy ratings (e.g. Greene et al. 2005).
If this is true, consumers buy vehicles with lower fuel economy and higher resulting fuel costs than
they would in their private optima. In 2007, the median-income American household spent $2400
on gasoline, and consumers spent $286 billion in total (U.S. BLS 2007). Misoptimization over such
a large expenditure class could cause substantial welfare losses. The purported undervaluation
of future gasoline costs would also help explain what Ja¤e and Stavins (1994) call the "Energy
Paradox": consumers and …rms are puzzlingly slow to make seemingly high-return investments in
energy e¢ ciency.
Externalities from energy use related to national security and climate change would add to
these potential private losses. Policymakers have long debated whether it is preferable to address
these externalities through gasoline taxes or Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards,
which mandate an increase in the average fuel economy of new vehicles. In the absence of other
market failures or misoptimization by consumers, economic analyses typically conclude that CAFE
standards are highly ine¢ cient relative to gas taxes.1 If consumers undervalue fuel costs when they
choose between vehicles, however, CAFE standards can increase welfare, as they e¤ectively force
consumers to buy the energy e¢ cient vehicles that they would want if they were optimizing. This
"paternalistic" argument for energy e¢ ciency policies has long been employed by both academic
1

Jacobsen (2010), for example, shows that the CAFE standard has a welfare cost of $222 per metric ton of carbon
dioxide abated, compared to $92 per metric ton for an increase in the gasoline tax that reduces gasoline consumption
by the same amount.

2

economists (e.g. Hausman 1979)2 as well as the U.S. government.3 Put simply, while political
feasibility plays an important practical role, paternalism is a leading economic justi…cation for one
of the most important and costly public policies a¤ecting the U.S. automotive and energy industries.
However, one problem with the paternalistic justi…cation for fuel economy standards is that there
is not much solid evidence on whether automobile buyers are actually misoptimizing (Parry, Walls,
and Harrington 2007).
The relevant null hypothesis is that consumers are willing to pay one dollar more to purchase
a vehicle with one dollar less in total forecasted future fuel costs, discounted to present value at
their intertemporal opportunity cost of funds. For expositional purposes, we say that rejecting this
hypothesis is evidence that consumers "undervalue or overvalue gasoline costs." This hypothesis is
related to a long literature, dating at least to the energy crises of the 1970s, that estimates consumers’"implied discount rates" for energy e¢ ciency investments and compares them to benchmark
consumer discount rates.4 The typical empirical approach in this literature has been to exploit variation in the prices and energy e¢ ciency ratings of a cross-section of energy-using durable goods.
For example, our null hypothesis in a cross-sectional discrete choice framework would be that,
after conditioning on other observed product characteristics, a one dollar increase in a product’s
purchase price is associated with the same decrease in market share as a one dollar increase in
total discounted energy costs. Analogous cross-sectional approaches are used in a seminal paper
by Hausman (1979) on air conditioners, as well as analyses of other energy-using durables such
as houses (Dubin 1992), water and space heating (Dubin and McFadden 1984), and autos (e.g.
2

Hausman (1979) …nds that consumers implicitly use a discount rate of 15 to 25 percent per year when they
trade o¤ purchase prices and future energy costs of new air conditioners. He then argues that "this …nding of a high
individual discount rate does not surprise most economists. At least since Pigou, many economists have commented
on a "defective telescopic faculty." A simple fact emerges that in making decisions which involve discounting over
time, individuals behave in a manner which implies a much higher discount rate than can be explained in terms of
the opportunity cost of funds available in credit markets. Since this individual discount rate substantially exceeds
the social discount rate used in bene…t-cost calculations, the divergence might be narrowed by policies which lead to
purchases of more energy-e¢ cient equipment."
3
For example, the Regulatory Impact Analysis that justi…es the 2011-2015 increase in the CAFE standard argues
that about $15 billion per year in net bene…ts will ‡ow to consumers who undervalue the bene…ts of fuel economy
(NHTSA 2010).
4
The implied discount rate is simply a shorthand way of capturing how people appear to trade o¤ upfront costs
against an analyst’s estimate of future cash ‡ows. Many underlying factors other than consumers’actual discount rates
might a¤ect the implied discount rate, including time horizons, beliefs, and inattention. In our setting, as in many
others, these factors are empirically indistinguishable. We therefore prefer the "undervaluation or overvaluation"
language, as it is more explicitly agnostic. Regardless of the choice of language, the analyst must eventually take a
stand on consumers’actual discount rates in order to determine whether people’s decisions conform to the theoretical
prediction.

3

Dreyfus and Viscusi (1995), Espey and Nair (2004), and Goldberg (1998)).
For the cross-sectional estimator to be unbiased, the functional form for how other observed
product characteristics enter utility must be correctly speci…ed, and any unobserved characteristics
must be uncorrelated with energy e¢ ciency. Especially with automobiles, these assumptions appear
problematic. Fuel economy is mechanically correlated with weight and horsepower, and it has often
proven di¢ cult to separately identify preferences for these di¤erent characteristics.5 Furthermore,
fuel economy is highly negatively correlated with price in the cross section, suggesting that larger
vehicles have more observed and unobserved amenities.
This paper formalizes one potentially-promising alternative approach, which exploits the signi…cant ‡uctuations in gasoline price forecasts over the past …fteen years. The approach exploits
the fact that a vehicle’s future fuel costs vary as a function of both fuel economy and forecasted
gasoline prices, so changes in gas price forecasts should a¤ect the relative value of high- vs. low-fuel
economy vehicles. Indeed, media reports and academic analyses have documented that as gasoline
prices rise, the relative prices of low-fuel economy vehicles drop (Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer
2012, Langer and Miller 2012). The above null hypothesis, however, does more than predict that
gasoline price forecasts should a¤ect vehicle demand: it predicts exactly how much demand should
be a¤ected. Intuitively, if relative vehicle prices are not su¢ ciently responsive to changes in forecasted gasoline costs, this suggests that consumers undervalue gasoline costs when they purchase
vehicles. Conversely, if vehicle prices respond to gas price forecasts more than theory predicts, this
suggests that consumers overvalue gasoline costs.
We begin from the primitives of a discrete choice utility function and show the empirical assumptions required to test the null hypothesis. We then implement this test using data from
86 million transactions at both auto dealerships and wholesale auctions between 1999 and 2008.
For each month of this study period, these data are collapsed to the average price for each new
and used vehicle in consumers’choice sets.6 Each vehicle has a di¤erent present discounted value
5
At least since Atkinson and Halvorsen (1984), it has been pointed out that the high correlation between weight
and fuel economy makes it di¢ cult to separately identify demand for fuel economy. In fact, cross sectional estimation
of automobile demand in characteristic space sometimes gives a negative sign on fuel economy, which would imply
that consumers dislike fuel economy.
6
By "vehicle," we mean a model-by-age combination, where "model" is a highly disaggregated de…nition capturing
essentially all variation in make, nameplate, trim, body type, fuel economy, engine displacement, number of cylinders,
and design generation.

4

(PDV) of fuel costs, depending on its fuel economy rating, future survival probabilities, gasoline
price forecasts, discount rates, and annual vehicle-miles traveled. We condition on vehicle …xed effects, which sweep out all observed and unobserved characteristics, and test whether relative prices
move one-for-one with changes in the PDV of fuel costs.
Under the assumptions that consumers’gas price forecasts match those of oil futures markets
and that consumers’ real intertemporal cost of funds is six percent, auto consumers appear to
be indi¤erent between one dollar in discounted future gas costs and 76 cents in purchase price.
The corresponding "implied discount rate," the discount rate for future gas costs that rationalizes
market behavior, is just under 15 percent. We show that the results are robust to a number of
potential confounding factors, such as endogenous changes in utilization patterns and market shares
in response to gas prices, changes in underlying preferences for "green vehicles," and changes in
characteristics over model years.
However, some empirical issues are extremely important. We use the grouping estimator (Wald
1940, Angrist 1991) to address potential measurement error, and we show that failing to do so
would cause signi…cant attenuation bias. We show that the result that consumers undervalue gas
costs is largely driven by older vehicles: prices for vehicles aged 11-15 years appear to be highly
insensitive to gasoline prices, while prices for relatively-new used vehicles move much more closely
to the theoretical prediction. In addition, undervaluation appears to be more severe when current
gas prices instead of oil futures are used as a proxy for consumers’forecasts of future gas prices.
The data also show clear evidence of sticky information. In models such as Mankiw and Reis
(2002), Sims (2003, 2010), and Woodford (2003), information about prices, in‡ation, and other
economic variables takes time to di¤use through the population of consumers and …rms, causing
delays in responses to news. In this context, sticky information would cause vehicle prices to adjust
with a delay to changes in gas price forecasts. Indeed, when the model is estimated using monthly
di¤erences instead of the demeaning estimator, vehicle markets appear to be highly insensitive to
the current month’s change in gas price forecasts. Four to six month lags of gas price changes
are conditionally associated with the current month’s change in vehicle prices, suggesting that
sticky information keeps vehicle markets from updating immediately. These results add a unique
microdata-based analysis to the limited set of empirical tests of the sticky information model,

5

which includes Coibion (2010), Khan and Zhu (2006), Klenow and Willis (2007), and Mankiw and
Reis (2003). Aside from being of interest in macroeconomics and …nance, sticky information also
has important implications for how the undervaluation hypothesis can be tested: identifying o¤ of
high-frequency gas price variation can cause the econometrician to falsely conclude that consumers
undervalue fuel economy as a product attribute when they are instead inattentive to changes in gas
prices.
Before continuing, it is worth doing a simple calibration to demonstrate why it is di¢ cult
to overstate the importance of this question. Substantial volumes of academic research and policy
discussions have centered on the welfare losses from transport sector carbon emissions and the costs
and bene…ts of di¤erent policy responses. Using the U.S. government’s estimated marginal damage
of carbon emissions (Greenstone, Kopits, and Wolverton 2011), gasoline consumption imposes an
externality of $0.18 per gallon, or about …ve percent of the current gasoline price. Thus, if the carbon
externality is not internalized, consumers account for about 95 percent of the total social cost of
gasoline when they choose between vehicles with di¤erent fuel economy ratings. By comparison,
an implied discount rate of 15 percent, which is well within the range of Hausman (1979) and
other estimates in the literature, would suggest that consumers value only 75 percent of the cost of
gasoline when they choose between vehicles. Thus, while undervaluation and uninternalized carbon
externalities distort vehicle purchases in the same direction, inducing consumers to buy vehicles
that use more gas than in the …rst best, undervaluation could generate distortions several times
larger than the distortions from climate change externalities.
The paper progresses as follows. In Section 1.1, we discuss related literature. Section 2 models
consumers’ utility functions. Section 3 presents our data, devoting particular attention to the
construction of each vehicle’s total discounted gasoline costs. Section 4 details our estimation
strategy. Section 5 presents empirical results and a long series of robustness checks. Section 6
details the evidence of sticky information, and Section 7 concludes.

6

1.1

Related Literature

Within the broader literatures on consumer choice of energy-using durables7 and the e¤ects of
gasoline prices on vehicle markets,8 our analysis is most closely related to four papers. Kahn
(1986) tests whether relative prices of used vehicles fully adjust to changes in the relative discounted
present value of relative gas prices caused by the gasoline price shocks of the 1970s and 1980s. A
working paper by Kilian and Sims (2006) builds on Kahn’s approach with updated data. The key
di¤erence between our analysis and these two papers is that we use transaction prices from auctions
and dealerships instead of data from used car price guides such as the Kelley Blue Book or the
National Auto Dealers’Association Used Car Guide. It is crucial to use transaction data because
used car price guides re‡ect the opinion of a small team of analysts who may or may not fully
adjust their price assessments for each vehicle to re‡ect current market conditions. Data from used
car price guides could cause us to falsely conclude that vehicle market prices do not fully adjust to
changes in gasoline prices.
Sallee, West, and Fan (2009) exploit transaction data from used vehicle auctions to test whether
vehicle prices move one-for-one with the present discounted value of future gasoline costs. Their
identi…cation strategy is di¤erent and complementary to ours: they exploit the fact that autos with
di¤erent odometer readings have di¤erent remaining lifetimes, and an increase in gas prices has a
larger e¤ect on the remaining PDV of gas costs for autos with lower current odometer readings.
One bene…t of their approach is that it allows a more extensive set of …xed e¤ects than we use.
By construction, however, they are testing a di¤erent empirical hypothesis: they ask whether
consumers correctly value di¤erences in odometer readings within vehicle models when gas prices
change, while we ask whether consumers correctly value di¤erences in fuel economy across models
when gas prices change. Conceptually, our hypothesis is closer to the policy-relevant question of
7
This literature includes Hausman (1979), Dubin and McFadden (1984), Davis and Kilian (2011a), Beresteanu
and Li (2011), and others.
8
Other work that examines how vehicle prices adjust in response to gasoline prices include Sawhill (2008), Langer
and Miller (2012), and Austin (2008). Verboven (1999) estimates the discount rates implied by di¤erences between
the prices of gasoline and diesel vehicles in Europe. Ohta and Griliches (1986) examine whether the 1970s gasoline
price shocks a¤ected consumers’valuations of vehicle characteristics. Edelstein and Kilian (2009) document how gas
prices a¤ect consumer expenditures, including demand for domestic vs. foreign automobiles. Li, Timmins, and von
Haefen (2009) and Klier and Linn (2010) test how the price of gasoline a¤ects sales of new vehicles with di¤erent fuel
economy ratings.

7

whether consumers undervalue energy e¢ ciency.
Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2012) estimate how changes in gasoline prices a¤ect equilibrium
prices and quantities of new and used vehicles in di¤erent quartiles of the fuel economy distribution.
They then plug these estimates into an Excel spreadsheet which outputs the implied discount rates
at which the average prices of vehicles in each MPG quartile fully adjust to changes in gasoline costs.
Depending on their assumptions, they …nd implied discount rates ranging from negative 6.2 percent
to positive 20.9 percent. When using assumptions that correspond most closely to ours, they …nd
an implied discount rate for used vehicles of 13 percent.9 Our analysis di¤ers by being somewhat
more formal: for example, we specify the undervaluation hypothesis from the primitives of a utility
function, which helps in understanding the economic meaning of the identifying assumptions. We
also uncover additional empirical …ndings, such as the evidence of sticky information in Section 6.

2

Model

In this section, we specify a static discrete choice model. In Appendix A, we show that under
the assumption of stationarity, this simple model can be derived from a dynamic model in which
consumers buy and re-sell their vehicles. Consumers derive utility from owning a vehicle and from
consuming a numeraire good. We de…ne a "vehicle" as a model-by-age combination, where j indexes
models and a indexes age in years. Consumers also can choose an outside option, denoted j = 0,
which is to own no vehicle. The utility of this outside option is normalized to zero. Consumer i
has budget constraint wi .
The purchase price of vehicle ja at time t as pjat . Gjat is the present discounted value (PDV) of
future gasoline costs over the vehicle’s remaining life. The average consumer’s utility from owning
and using vehicle ja over its remaining life is e jat ; we call this the "average usage utility." Individual

i’s usage utility also has an unobserved deviation from average usage utility, denoted

ijat .

The

variable e ja captures the mean value of average usage utility for vehicle ja across all time periods,
and ejat
9

e

jat

e

ja

is the period-speci…c deviation.

This 13 percent …gure is from Table 7 of Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2012). It is the mean of the implicit
discount rates for the three di¤erent quartile pairs for used vehicles when using vehicle-miles traveled and survival
probabilities from NHTSA, which uses the same underlying data as we do.

8

Consumer i’s indirect utility from vehicle ja at time t is:

uijat = (wi

pjat

Gjat ) + e ja + ejat +

ijat

(1)

The marginal utility of money is . The "valuation weight" on fuel costs is : if consumers value
purchase prices and discounted fuel costs equally, then
fuel costs, then

< 1 or

= 1. If consumers undervalue or overvalue

> 1, respectively. This framework is analogous to the attention weight

models in Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009), DellaVigna (2009, page 349), and other analyses. We
assume that both

and

are constant.

In specifying the basic model, we assume that

takes the extreme value distribution, giving

the traditional representative-consumer logit model. Integrating over the distribution of

gives a

market-level relationship between prices and shares, which are denoted by s. Typically, this identity
is arranged to give the term ln sjat

ln sjat

ln s0t on the left:

ln s0t =

Gjat + e ja + ejat

pjat

(2)

Of course, this identity can also be re-arranged with prices on the left:

pjat =

Gjat

This equation includes new variables

1

ja

(ln sjat
e

ja

ln s0t ) +

and

ja

e

jat

jat

+

jat

(3)

, which represent the dollar value

of the utility represented by e ja and ejat . Section 4 begins with this equation in presenting our

empirical strategy.

3

Data

Our dataset includes average prices, quantities, and characteristics of all used passenger vehicle
models registered in the U.S., in monthly cross sections from January 1999 to December 2008.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics.
Fuel economy data were obtained from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which

9

measures fuel use over a standardized laboratory drive cycle and then adjusts the results to account
for the typical consumer’s actual in-use fuel economy. For all model years, we use the EPA’s most
recent adjustment, which was calculated in 2008. Per Greene et al. (2007), we also assume that fuel
economy degrades over each vehicle’s life at 0.07 MPG per year. Vehicle class designations - pickups,
sport utility vehicles, minivans, vans, two-seaters, and …ve classes of cars based on interior volume
- are also taken from the EPA’s fuel economy dataset. All other vehicle characteristics, including
horsepower, curb weight, wheelbase, and Manufacturer’s Suggested Retail Price (MSRP), are from
Ward’s Automotive Yearbook. All dollar …gures in this paper are real July 2005 dollars, de‡ated
using the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index series for "All Urban Consumers, All
Items Less Energy."
Vehicle prices are based on microdata obtained from Manheim, a …rm which intermediates
approximately half of auto auction transactions in the United States. The principal sellers are
dealerships, rental car companies, and auto manufacturers re-selling o¤-lease vehicles. Buyers are
typically dealerships which then retail the used vehicles. We observe each of Manheim’s approximately 45 million transactions between 1999 and 2008. While only about one in four used vehicles
traded passes through an auction (Manheim 2009), the auction market is the largest source of
transaction price data. Furthermore, the Kelley Blue Book and other price guides, which are the
starting point for price negotiations in many of the non-auction transactions, are largely based on
auction prices. To get pjat , we simply collapse the data to the level of mean price for each vehicle
in each month, after excluding vehicles rated as low-quality or scrap quality.
Some alternative speci…cations employ prices from the JD Power and Associates (JDPA) "Power
Information Network," which collects detailed microdata on approximately 31 percent of US retail
auto transactions through a network of more than 9,500 dealers. For each vehicle ja, we obtained
monthly mean prices adjusted for customer cash rebates and, if the transaction included a trade-in,
the di¤erence between the trade-in vehicle’s actual resale value and the negotiated trade-in price.
We use the Manheim used vehicle price data in our base speci…cations because these data include
more than twice as many observations at the jat level, while there are fewer than 1000 observations
in JDPA that are not in Manheim.
We observe national-level registered quantities of each vehicle in each year from 1999 through

10

2008 in the National Vehicle Population Pro…le, a dataset obtained from market research …rm R.L.
Polk. The quantities represent all vehicles registered to private individuals and to ‡eets such as
taxi and rental car companies and corporate and government motor pools. These quantity data
are matched to the price data using vehicle-speci…c serial numbers called Vehicle Identi…cation
Numbers.
We de…ne the choice set to include all "substitutable" used gasoline-fueled light duty vehicles
that have EPA fuel economy ratings and are less than 25 years old. By "substitutable," we mean
cars, pickups, SUVs, minivans, and other light trucks, but not motorcycles, cutaway motor homes,
limousines, camper vans, chassis cab and tilt cab pickups, hearses, and other unusual vehicles where
we expect the substitution elasticity to be very small. In our base speci…cation, we also exclude
cargo and passenger vans as well as ultra-luxury and ultra-high performance exotic vehicles10 due
to their low substitutability with the rest of the market. It turns out that including these vehicles
does not change the results.
We de…ne a "model" j to capture all possible variation in fuel economy ratings and much of
the observable variation in prices. This is more disaggregated than a "nameplate," which refers to
a colloquial name such as "Ford Taurus" or "Honda Civic." We de…ne a "model" at the level of
make, nameplate, trim, body type, fuel economy, engine displacement, and the number of cylinders.
As a result, the average make and nameplate combination in our dataset includes seven di¤erent
"models." For example, there are 11 di¤erent con…gurations of model year 2004 cars called the
"Honda Civic" that appear in our dataset as separate "models," including coupe and sedan versions
of the DX, EX, and LX, the Si Hatchback, the Civic Hybrid, and several others.
Vehicles with the same model name are typically o¤ered for several consecutive model years,
although some are o¤ered for many more. As extreme examples, the Ford F-150 and Honda Civic
have each been o¤ered in every model year since 1973. Of course, the 1973 and 2008 versions of
these models are very di¤erent. Every several years, auto manufacturers redesign their models and
de…ne a new "generation" of a vehicle. For example, Honda introduced new generations of the Civic
for the 1980, 1984, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2001, 2006, and 2012 model years. A "generation" is a well10
These excluded exotic vehicles are the Acura NSX, Audi R8 and TT, Chrysler Prowler and TC, Cadilliac Allante
and XLR Roadster, Chevrolet Corvette, Dodge Viper and Stealth, Ford GT, Plymouth Prowler, and all vehicles
made by Alfa Romeo, Bentley, Ferrari, Jaguar, Lamborghini, Maserati, Maybach, Porsche, Rolls-Royce, and TVR.

11

de…ned concept, and the generation de…nitions for each vehicle can even be found on Wikipedia.
Within each generation, models do not change signi…cantly. We rede…ne each new generation of a
car or truck as a separate "model" j in our dataset.

3.1

Discounted Gasoline Costs

The variable Gjat is the present discounted value of lifetime gasoline costs over future years y, for
the average driver of vehicle ja at time t:

Gjat =

L
X

y

gy mjay fjay1

jay

(4)

y=0

L denotes the maximum possible lifetime of a vehicle, which we take to be 25 years. The
variable gy is the gasoline price forecast for year y, mjay is expected vehicle-miles traveled, fjay
is fuel economy in miles per gallon,

jay

is the probability that the vehicle survives to year y

conditional on surviving to its current age a, and
Our parameter of interest

is the annual discount factor.

is the coe¢ cient on this variable, and decisions we make here

mechanically a¤ect the parameter estimates. For example, using a lower discount rate than consumers actually face would in‡ate Gjat , thereby biasing b toward zero. Alternatively, understating
a vehicle’s expected lifetime or usage would de‡ate Gjat , biasing b away from zero.
3.1.1

Vehicle-Miles Traveled and Survival Probability

To estimate vehicle-miles traveled (VMT), we use publicly-available data from the 2001 National
Household Travel Survey (NHTS). This is a nationally-representative survey of approximately
25,000 households that includes the age, fuel economy, and vehicle class for each vehicle owned. As
part of the survey, about 25,000 vehicles in the national sample had their odometers read twice, with
several months between readings. These two readings were then used to estimate annualized VMT.
We regress annualized VMT on class dummies and vehicle age and use these estimates to …t mjay
for all vehicles in our sample. When we adjust for uncertainty in the …rst-step estimates of Gjat
(Murphy and Topel 1985), we use the Huber-White robust standard errors from this regression.

12

Our base speci…cation assumes that this …tted mjay does not depend on the gasoline price
forecast in year y. Either of two separate arguments can justify this. First, empirical estimates of
VMT demand show that it is relatively inelastic (Hughes, Knittel, and Sperling 2007, Small and
Van Dender 2007, Gillingham 2010, Bento et al. 2009, Kilian and Murphy 2011, Davis and Kilian
2011b). Second, the Envelope Theorem can be used to show that since indirect utility uijat is a
function of an optimized value of VMT, changes in VMT caused by marginal changes in gasoline
prices have only second-order e¤ects on uijat and vehicle prices. In Appendix C, however, we derive
an alternative approach that makes mjay a function of gy and allows for non-marginal changes.
The results are very similar to the base speci…cation.
We use an analogous approach to …t vehicle survival probabilities based on the NVPP registered
quantity data. We use a grouped data probit model, where the outcome variable is the number of
vehicles of a model and model year registered next year divided by the number of vehicles registered
today. We estimate coe¢ cients on vehicle age dummies, model year, and fuel economy, with robust
standard errors clustered by vehicle, and then predict survival probabilities

jay

for all vehicles in

our sample.

3.1.2

Discount Rate

The discount rate r =

1

1 is the intertemporal opportunity cost of money: the rate at which

a vehicle’s purchase price is amortized over future years or future gasoline costs are discounted to
the present. To implement this empirically, we calculate the weighted average

across used vehicle

buyers. For vehicle buyers whose marginal dollar comes from a loan or lease, the opportunity cost
of paying more to purchase a vehicle is the Annual Percentage Rate (APR). For consumers whose
marginal dollar comes from savings, the opportunity cost is the return that could be realized on
savings.
Table 2 details the calculation. Using data from the 2001, 2004, and 2007 Surveys of Consumer
Finances (SCF), we estimate that 37 percent of used vehicles are …nanced, while 63 percent are paid
for in cash. We transform interest rates reported in the SCF from nominal to real by de‡ating by
in‡ation expectations implied by Treasury In‡ation-Protected Securities. In the SCF, the average
real interest rate for used vehicle loans is 6.9 percent. For vehicles purchased with cash, we assume
13

that the opportunity cost of funds is equity market returns, and the average real return on the S&P
500 between 1945 and 2008 (inclusive) was 5.8 percent. As shown in Table 2, averaging these two
discount rates weighted by their share of transactions gives a 6.2 percent discount rate, which we
round to six percent for our base speci…cation.
While we think that this is the most reasonable and straightforward approach, it surely is
debatable. For example, the real average used vehicle loan APR reported by dealerships through
the JD Power Information Network is 8.9 percent, two percentage points higher than the average
value reported in the SCF. On the other hand, including years before 1945 or after 2008 would give
lower stock market returns. Furthermore, if we modeled consumers with declining marginal utility
of consumption, they would want to risk-adjust returns for covariance with the market. Because
annual changes in gasoline prices have very low correlation with market returns, risk adjustment
using the Capital Asset Pricing Model would give an interest rate close to the real risk-free rate:
about 1.6 percent. In the results section, we show the sensitivity of b to alternative discount rates.
3.1.3

Gasoline Price Forecast

We use three measures of vehicle consumers’ gasoline price forecasts: seasonally-adjusted retail
prices, oil futures prices, and beliefs elicited via surveys. The seasonally-adjusted retail price
measure is equivalent to assuming that consumers forecast that gasoline prices are a martingale
with seasonal trends. To construct this measure, we take the U.S. City Average Motor Gasoline
Retail Prices for all types of gasoline from the U.S. Energy Information Administration’s (2011)
Monthly Energy Review and convert to real July 2005 dollars.11 We then eliminate seasonal trends
by regressing the level of monthly gasoline prices on eleven month dummies, subtracting the …tted
values, and re-adjusting so that the mean monthly gasoline price is unchanged.
Our second measure assumes that oil futures markets re‡ect vehicle consumers’gasoline price
forecasts. To construct this measure, we use Light Sweet Crude Oil spot prices from the U.S.
Energy Information Administration’s (2011) Monthly Energy Review and futures prices from the
New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) and the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE). The oil futures
prices are transformed into current dollars using in‡ation expectations implied by Treasury In‡ation
11

Edelstein and Kilian (2009) and Kilian (2010) also use data on the real price of gasoline.

14

Protected Securities, then de‡ated into real July 2005 dollars, then transformed to dollars per gallon
of gasoline using the average historical relationship between oil and gasoline prices.12 Appendix
Table A1 reports annual average retail gas prices and futures-based gas price forecasts. In every
year of our sample, there are futures trades for settlement dates up to 6-7 years in the future, and
in later years, trades are observed for dates as far as 10 years out.13
Our third measure is derived from the Michigan Survey of Consumers (MSC), which elicits
beliefs about future gasoline prices, in‡ation, and other economic variables from a nationally representative sample. Respondents are asked whether they think the price of gasoline will go up, go
down, or stay the same during the next …ve years. Those who think it will change are asked how
much the price will increase or decrease. Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (2011) analyze these data,
and interested readers should refer to their paper for more details. For our analysis, the authors
provided us with the mean real gasoline price forecast across all respondents for each month between 1999 and March 2008. Each respondent’s forecast is de‡ated to current dollars as of the date
of the survey using his or her own in‡ation expectation.
Figure 1 plots seasonally-adjusted retail gasoline prices along with the gasoline prices implied
by oil futures at three di¤erent horizons. The …gure illustrates that futures prices di¤er from
retail prices in two important ways. First, the futures market does not believe that gasoline prices
are a martingale. Especially when spot prices spiked in mid-2008, the futures market expected
prices to eventually decrease at least slightly. As a result, G averages seven percent larger under
the martingale forecast than the futures forecast. This suggests that the b estimated under the

martingale forecast will be smaller than the b with the futures-based forecast. Second, while the

two series follow the same trends, retail prices are substantially more volatile from month to month.
This is not a spurious result of adjusting for seasonality: retail prices are also more volatile when we
do not condition on month-of-year e¤ects. As we shall see, this will cause b to di¤er substantially
12

Speci…cally, this average historical relationship is predicted with a simple linear regression of levels of the Motor
Gasoline Retail Prices on the levels of Light Sweet Crude Oil prices. The reason we transform oil futures prices into
gasoline prices instead of directly using gasoline futures is that gasoline futures are typically not traded for time
horizons longer than three years, while oil futures are traded, albeit with limited liquidity, at time horizons of up to
ten years.
13
To model expectations for periods beyond the last settlement date observed at each time t, our base speci…cation
uses a simple model of mean-reverting expectations, where deviations from a $1.50/gallon mean decay exponentially
using a mean reversion parameter calibrated using all futures data since 1991. The equation …ts the data very well:
it explains 85% of the variation in the observed futures prices over our 1999-2008 study period.

15

between the two forecasts when using a monthly di¤erence estimator.
It is important to acknowledge several limitations of oil futures price data in light of recent work
in this area. First, Kilian (2010) has shown that in the short run, there can be important deviations
between crude oil and gasoline prices. Over our sample period, monthly oil spot prices predict 94
percent of the variance in monthly gasoline prices, not 100 percent. However, what matters for our
analysis is the expected future relationship between oil and gasoline: oil futures could be a good
measure of long-run gasoline price forecasts even if the short-run relationship does not have an R2
of one. Second, Alquist and Kilian (2010), Alquist, Kilian, and Vigfusson (2011), and Baumeister
and Kilian (2012) have shown that oil futures prices are typically not as good as current oil prices
at predicting actual future oil prices at both short-term horizons of 12 months and longer-term
horizons of up to seven years. This suggests that factors other than oil price expectations can a¤ect
futures markets, which would introduce noise in our estimates. Third, oil futures are only traded
with high liquidity for settlement dates less than two to three years in the future. While this is a
concern, it is not clear if this would bias the estimates in any particular direction.

3.2

Vehicle Price Trends

Three related facts about vehicle prices have important implications for our empirical strategy.
First, as Figure 2 illustrates, low-MPG vehicles are more expensive than high-MPG vehicles. The
…gure shows the results of a regression of Manufacturer’s Suggested Retail Price on a set of MPG
indicator variables, for all models of model years 1984 through 2008 in the Ward’s Automotive
Yearbook data. Between 15 and 30 MPG, which includes nearly all of our dataset, MSRPs decline
from $30,000 to $11,000. This …gure corroborates concerns about the traditional cross-sectional
approaches to estimating

: low-MPG and high-MPG vehicles are systematically di¤erent, and

some of these di¤erences may be unobservable. The …gure also means that we must control for
factors such as depreciation that di¤erentially a¤ect vehicles with higher price levels and might be
correlated with gas prices.
Second, Figure 3 shows that vehicle prices have systematic seasonal patterns, and they tend to
decrease within each year. Because this systematic depreciation is approximately a percentage of
price and lower-MPG vehicles have higher prices, these patterns a¤ect the price levels of low-MPG
16

vehicles more than high-MPG vehicles. Since gas price forecasts rise on average during the study
period, failing to account for within-year trends that a¤ect low- vs. high-MPG vehicles di¤erently
could cause us to falsely attribute seasonality to adjustments caused by gas price forecasts.
Third, there are other underlying shifts in seasonally-adjusted average prices that could a¤ect
low-MPG vs. high-MPG vehicles di¤erently. If correlated with changes in gasoline prices, such
shifts could bias our estimator. The double blue line on Figure 3 shows that after demeaning prices
within vehicles and removing seasonal trends using month dummies, prices declined somewhat from
1999-2003. The decline from 1999-2002 appears to be driven by a decrease in the absolute price
level for low-MPG vehicles. This may have been precipitated by an increase in the number of new
low-MPG vehicles sold during the mid- and late- 1990s, which appears to have caused their prices
to drop as they became available for resale as used vehicles. Manheim’s analysts attribute the
nadir in 2003 to the 2001 economic slowdown, during which both low- and high-MPG vehicles were
o¤ered at attractive lease terms and an unusually large share were leased instead of sold. When
this larger volume of vehicles came o¤ of lease two years later, this depressed resale prices. We
therefore document whether the estimates are sensitive to excluding the period before 2004.
Demeaned and seasonally-detrended prices remained relatively steady from 2004-2007 before
dropping sharply as the 2008 recession took hold. It is possible that this recession di¤erentially
a¤ected low- vs. high-MPG vehicles, for example by di¤erentially a¤ecting people of di¤erent
income levels, who tend to buy di¤erent types of vehicles. We therefore eliminate from our base
speci…cation all data beginning with April 2008, when the recession began to a¤ect vehicle market
prices. Similarly, we would certainly not want to include data from 2009, when the Cash for Clunkers
program signi…cantly changed used vehicle markets, di¤erentially a¤ecting prices of low-MPG vs.
high-MPG vehicles.

4
4.1

Estimation
Empirical Strategy

We use vehicle …xed e¤ects and look within the same vehicle over time as gasoline price forecasts
change. The bene…t of a panel is that the …xed e¤ects soak up unobserved vehicle characteristics
17

that may be correlated with MPG: formally, our estimator is still unbiased even if E[G ] 6= 0.
We move from Equation (3) to our base speci…cation estimating equation in three steps. First,
we de…ne an econometric error term that contains and the market share term: "
Second, we add time dummies

t,

1

ln sjat +

jat .

which absorb the outside option share s0t and any shift in the

overall market price level. Third, we de…ne f 50 as the median of the MPG distribution, and we
include

jat ,

11 indicator variables for month-of-year interacted with 1(fja > f 50 ). As we shall

discuss momentarily, these control for the di¤erential seasonal trends in the prices of low- vs.
high-MPG vehicles. Our base speci…cation is:

pjat =

Gjat +

t

+

jat

+

ja

+ "jat

(5)

Equation (5) is quite intuitive: it tests whether the relative vehicle prices move one-for-one
with changes in the relative PDV of gasoline costs. If vehicle prices do not respond su¢ ciently to
gasoline costs, we conclude that the market undervalues gasoline costs. If vehicle prices respond
more than predicted to gasoline costs, we conclude that the market overvalues gasoline costs.14
Figure 4 illustrates our identifying variation by graphing the average G for an example month
within age and fuel economy groups. Younger vehicles and lower-MPG vehicles have higher G.
Equation (5) is identi…ed by interacting this cross-sectional variation by the time-series variation in
gasoline price forecasts illustrated in Figure 1. As gasoline price forecasts ‡uctuate over time, the
bars in Figure 4 extend and contract proportionally. A given change in gas price forecasts has a
larger e¤ect on the level of G for younger and lower-MPG vehicles, and we test for whether relative
prices move correspondingly.
Equation (5) is a consistent estimator of

if E[G"j( ; ; )] = 0. Because " contains both s

and , this actually contains two di¤erent economically-meaningful identifying assumptions:
Assumption 1: E [Gsj( ; ; )] = 0
Assumption 2: E [G j( ; ; )] = 0
14
Although we derive it di¤erently, this is fundamentally the same estimating equation used by Kahn (1986) and
Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2012). The latter paper uses a slightly di¤erent con…guration of …xed e¤ects and
controls. Sallee, West, and Fan (2009) allow G to vary at the transaction level, instead of at the jat level, based
on the odometer reading of the speci…c auto being transacted. They can then insert jat-level …xed e¤ects. This
allows them to relax our two identifying assumptions and substitute an alternative assumption, which is that the
within-jat relationship between odometer readings and transaction prices is not a¤ected by unobserved factors that
are correlated with gas prices.

18

In words, Assumption 1 is that gasoline costs are uncorrelated with market shares, conditional
on time dummies and vehicle …xed e¤ects. For new vehicles, this assumption would not hold:
sales of low-fuel economy vehicles decrease relative to high-fuel economy vehicles when gas prices
increase, as documented by Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2012), Klier and Linn (2010), and
Li, Timmins, and von Haefen (2009). This assumption might also not hold for older used vehicles,
whose scrappage rates respond most to changes in gasoline prices (Li, Timmins, and von Haefen
2009). Therefore, we limit our sample to used vehicles less than or equal to 15 years old. In
Appendix B, we show that weakening this assumption by allowing for endogenous market shares
does not signi…cantly a¤ect the estimates, largely because we have limited our sample to the ages
for which the conditional correlation between gasoline prices and market shares is insigni…cant.
Assumption 2 states that changes in discounted gasoline costs are not correlated with changes
in preferences and unobserved characteristics that vary over the di¤erent model years within a generation of a vehicle. In Section 5, we discuss and test several potential violations of this assumption
and document that they do not appear to substantially a¤ect the results.

4.2

Measurement Error and the Grouping Estimator

Jerry Hausman’s (2001) "Iron Law of Econometrics" is that the magnitude of a parameter estimate
is usually smaller in absolute value than expected. This is due to attenuation bias that can occur
even in seemingly high-quality data. In most applications in which the null hypothesis is that a
parameter equals zero, this makes a test more conservative. By contrast, in our test of whether
b = 1, this "Iron Law" would make us more likely to falsely reject, meaning that we could falsely

conclude that consumers undervalue gasoline costs. One potential source of measurement error is
the EPA fuel economy ratings, as discussed by Sallee (2010). As in any other application, the use of
…xed e¤ects exacerbates attenuation bias, as even small amounts of measurement error in G worsen
the signal-to-noise ratio in Gj .

We address measurement error using the grouping estimator, which is just Wald’s (1940) binary
instrumental variables (IV) estimator generalized to the case with many group indicator variables.
Wald’s (1940) original objective in developing the estimator was to address measurement error,
and Ashenfelter (1984), Angrist (1991), and others have used the grouping estimator for this same
19

purpose in various applications. In our base speci…cation, we place each jat-level observation into
one of 222 mutually exclusive and exhaustive groups: above- and below-median MPG vehicles for
each of the 111 months in the sample. This grouping retains the fundamental identifying variation,
which comes from how time-series changes in gas price forecasts a¤ect G for high- vs. low-MPG
vehicles. However, identifying

o¤ of group-level aggregates means that we average over any

observation-level measurement error.
u = 1(f > f 50 ) 1(t = u) as an indicator variable for whether observation
Formally, we de…ne Zjat
ja
u variables
jat occurs at time u and has above-median MPG. We denote Zjat as the vector of 100 Zjat

for every month of the sample beginning with January 2000, and we instrument for Gjat with Zjat .
Between instruments Zjat , time controls

t,

and month-by-MPG group controls

jat ,

we have a full

set of indicator variables in the "…rst stage" for each of the 222 groups, and the "second stage"
…tted values of G are essentially group-level averages.
We also present results for groups at di¤erent levels of aggregation. Aggregating observations
into fewer larger groups allows us to average over measurement error that is more severe or correlated
across observations. However, using fewer groups e¤ectively reduces the amount of identifying
variation, which increases the IV standard errors.
We need not control for any variables that vary at a more disaggregated level than Zjat . For
example, consider our controls

jat

that soak up di¤erential monthly price trends for above- vs.

below-median MPG vehicles. The highest-MPG quartile also has di¤erent monthly price trends
than the second-highest MPG quartile. However, we do not need to control for this because the
…tted values of G do not vary between these two quartiles, and thus

is not identi…ed o¤ of these

di¤erential price trends. In alternative speci…cations where we de…ne Zjat by more disaggregated
MPG groups, we also control for di¤erential price trends for each separate MPG group.

5
5.1

Results
Graphical

Figure 5 illustrates our identi…cation. On the vertical axis is the di¤erence between the mean
price across transactions for vehicles with below-median MPG versus above-median MPG. On the
20

horizontal axis is the di¤erence in mean G. This is raw data, unadulterated by …xed e¤ects, time
controls, or other manipulations. Even in this raw data, it is starkly visible that relative prices and
relative gas costs are negatively correlated. The slope of a best …t line would be -1 if

= 1 and if

…xed e¤ects are uncorrelated with G.
Figure 6 is a plot of the price and gas cost residuals that identify . The solid blue line is the
di¤erence between average Gj( ; ), the seasonally detrended and demeaned G, for below- minus
above-median MPG vehicles over the months of the study period. The dotted blue line is the same
as the solid blue line, except that it uses the martingale forecast instead of the futures forecast. The
double black line is the di¤erence between average pj( ; ), the seasonally detrended and demeaned
transaction price, for above- minus below-median MPG vehicles. If

= 1, the blue and black lines

should move in parallel. From this …gure, it is again clear that relative prices are at least somewhat
responsive to relative gasoline costs. However, vehicle prices do not appear to respond very much
to the high-frequency volatility in retail gasoline prices. To test whether prices are as responsive
as theory predicts under the martingale and futures-based forecasts, we now turn to the formal
estimates.

5.2

Base Speci…cation

For our "base speci…cation," we estimate Equation (5) using the …xed e¤ects (demeaning) estimator
while grouping Zjat at the level of above- and below-median MPG by time, assuming a six percent
discount rate and using data from January 1999 through March 2008. To re‡ect the fact that pjat
is an average across varying numbers of transactions, we weight the jat-level observations by the
number of transactions. We are careful to call this our "base speci…cation," indicating that the
alternative speci…cations modify individual assumptions from this base, but we do not call it our
"preferred speci…cation." This is because di¤erent readers may prefer di¤erent sets of alternative
assumptions.
Table 3 reports the estimated coe¢ cients on G from Equation (5), which correspond to

b. We

denote the futures-based and martingale gas price forecasts as Gf and Gm , respectively. Columns
1 and 2 show that the estimated b coe¢ cients are 0.76 and 0.55. The smaller b for the martingale
forecast is consistent with our earlier discussion of the fact that the martingale forecast implies
21

higher levels of G and more monthly volatility compared to the futures forecast.
Using consumers’gas price forecasts elicited from the Michigan Survey of Consumers, Anderson,
Kellogg, and Sallee (2011) show that the average consumer believes that real gasoline prices in …ve
years will be the same as they are at the time of the survey. This suggests that the martingale-based
b will be very close to the MSC-based estimate. This is indeed the case: using the MSC-based gas

price forecast provided by Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee, b = 0:51 (SE=0.029), not statistically
distinguishable from the martingale-based b.

One way to test whether it is more realistic to assume the futures-based or martingale gas price

forecast is to test which …ts the data better in a "horse race." Because Gm and Gf are highly
correlated, we do not include both in a regression. Instead, we estimate Equation (5) using Gf
and add [Gm

Gf ] as an additional explanatory variable. Column 3 presents the results of this

regression. Neither the futures nor the martingale assumption appears to fully capture consumers’
forecasts: conditional on Gf , [Gm

Gf ] is still associated with vehicle prices. (Mechanically, this

also means that conditional on Gm , [Gf

Gm ] is still associated with vehicle prices.) Of course,

these results are conditional on the model being correctly speci…ed. Because there appears to be
some evidence for both forecasts under this model, we present both sets of results in most of the
robustness checks that follow.
One way of putting b in context is to compare the observed vehicle price adjustments to the

amounts predicted by theory. Consider a hypothetical set of used vehicles that have di¤erent fuel
economy ratings but would all be driven 12,000 miles per year over a remaining lifetime of seven
years. The double red line in Figure 7 re‡ects the change in vehicle prices that would be expected
in response to a $1 increase in the gas price forecast, relative to the price of a 25 MPG vehicle. The
blue "Predicted Price Change" line illustrates the change in relative prices predicted by b = 0:76
from the futures-based gas forecast.

For example, b = 0:76 predicts that the price of a 20 MPG vehicle decreases by $506 relative to

a 25 MPG vehicle. In comparison,

= 1 predicts that the relative price should decrease by $670,

which is $164 more. As another example,

= 1 predicts that the price of a 30 MPG vehicle should

increase by $2230 relative to a 15 MPG vehicle. By contrast, b = 0:76 suggests that the relative
price adjusts by 72 percent of that amount, or $1690. The dollar values of the apparent mispricing

22

are certainly not trivial.

5.3

Standard Errors

Throughout the paper, we report robust standard errors, clustered at the level of model j by age
a. These standard errors are unbiased in the presence of serial correlation over time in the price of,
for example, a three-year-old Honda Civic DX sedan. Clustering at the level of "nameplate" by age
gives a standard error is 0.054. This standard error is unbiased in the presence of serial correlation
over time in the price of, for example, all three-year-old models of Honda Civic. Clustering at the
level of model j gives a standard error of 0.086. Analogously, this is unbiased in the presence of
serial correlation in the price of all Honda Civic DX sedans of any age.
In addition, all standard errors can be adjusted to account for the fact that G is a generated
regressor estimated from …rst-step regressions that predict each observation’s vehicle-miles traveled and survival probability. Murphy and Topel (1985) show that the true covariance matrix is
additively separable in the usual covariance matrix and an additional matrix that accounts for the
uncertainty in the …rst-step parameter estimates. We estimate this additional variance by bootstrapping draws from the estimated distribution of …rst-step parameters and estimating b for each

draw. Using the base speci…cation with Gf as an example, the clustered, robust IV standard error
is 0.046. The standard deviation of the bootstrapped set of b estimates is 0.023. Adding together

these two variances and taking the square root gives an adjusted standard error of 0.052.

5.4
5.4.1

Alternative Speci…cations
Level of Grouping

Correcting for measurement error appears to be extremely important. Rows 1 through 3 of Table
4 present estimates of

using increasingly disaggregated grouping estimators, while Row 4 is the

ungrouped OLS estimator. As we disaggregate, the estimated values of

drop toward the OLS

estimate. This suggests that measurement error signi…cantly biases the OLS estimates, and even
some of the disaggregated grouping estimators. This pattern can arise either if the variance of the
measurement error is large or if it is correlated across observations.
23

5.4.2

Alternative Time Periods

As discussed earlier, vehicle markets changed over the study period. How sensitive is b to the

choice of time periods? Rows 11 and 12 in Table 4 repeat the base speci…cation for 2004 through
March 2008 and for 1999 through the end of 2008, respectively. In both cases, b is closer to one

than the 1999-March 2008 base speci…cation, although both are still statistically less than one for
both Gf and Gm . In row 11, the fact that excluding the early period does not signi…cantly change
the result mitigates our earlier concern that market-level trends during 1999-2003 could bias the
estimator. In row 12, including the gas price spike of 2008 increases b more under Gf than under

Gm . This is consistent with the fact that futures markets did not expect the high spot prices in
2008 to be sustained, which mechanically decreases G and thus increases b.

There are two explanations for the fact that including the latter part of 2008 moves b statistically

closer to one under the futures-based gas price forecast. First, changes in vehicle markets unrelated
to changes in gasoline price forecasts could bias the estimated . Second, the true

may have

increased over this period as gas prices ‡uctuated substantially. This would be consistent with
models of endogenous or "rational" inattention in which consumers pay more attention to more
important attributes (Gabaix 2012, Sallee 2011). It would also be consistent with models in which
large changes cause consumers to update beliefs between coarse categories, for example from gas
costs being "inconsequential" to gas costs being "high" (Mullainathan 2002).

5.4.3

Alternative Discount Rates

Rows 21-25 of Table 4 show the sensitivity of b to the assumed discount rate. At a discount rate
just higher than 11 percent, we fail to reject

= 1 with 90 percent con…dence using the Murphy-

Topel standard errors and the futures forecast. The "implied discount rate," the discount rate that
rationalizes the data by giving

= 1, is just under 15 percent for the futures forecast and just over

24 percent for the martingale.

24

5.4.4

Changes in Characteristics

The identifying assumption that E[G j( ; ; )] = 0 would be violated if a model’s characteristics
change in ways that are correlated with G. For example, since gasoline price forecasts rise on
average during the study period, if characteristics improve more over model years for high-MPG
models, we would misattribute these vehicles’ increased desirability to changes in gasoline price
forecasts. Our policy of rede…ning a new generation of a model as a di¤erent j addresses the bulk
of these concerns. Even within a generation, however, there can be some variation in observable
characteristics (Knittel 2011, …gure 1).
An additional suggestive test is to add controls for observable characteristics to the estimation. Rows 31-35 re-estimate the base speci…cation with progressively more controls for observable
characteristics: horsepower, curb weight, wheelbase, anti-lock brakes, stability control, and traction control. The estimated b remains very similar. Although whether controlling for observables
a¤ects a parameter estimate does not directly tell us whether controlling for unobservables would

a¤ect the estimate, it is plausible that changes in observable and unobservable characteristics are
correlated, by logic similar to that of Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005). Therefore, this suggests
that changes in unobservable characteristics might not bias our estimates.

5.4.5

Changes in Preferences

Aside from representing changes in vehicle characteristics, changes in

jat

can also represent changes

in preferences for a vehicle with the same characteristics. Since gasoline price forecasts rise on
average during the study period, di¤erential trends in preferences for low- vs. high-MPG vehicles
would violate the assumption that E[G j( ; ; )] = 0, which would bias b.

One potential concern is that consumers became increasingly "green," or environmentally-

oriented, over the study period, resulting in increased preference for high fuel economy vehicles
independent of the …nancial savings. This would bias b upward, as it would increase the prices of

high-MPG vehicles over the study period as gasoline price forecasts rose. To test this, we exclude
hybrids and the top 60 most green vehicles ranked by Yahoo (2009). Rows 41 and 42 of Table 4
show that this does not a¤ect the results.

25

An opposite concern is that preferences for particular classes of large vehicles, for example
SUVs or pickups, strengthened over the study period. This would bias b downward, as it would

increase the prices of low-MPG vehicles over time, attenuating the decrease in relative prices that
the model would expect as gasoline price forecasts rose. To test this, Rows 43 through 45 exclude
SUVs, minivans, and all cars, respectively, from the estimation. While the point estimates change
somewhat, the di¤erences are not statistically signi…cant, except for when excluding cars and using
the martingale gas price forecast.

5.4.6

Age-by-Time Controls

Rows 51-53 of Table 4 include age-by-time controls to account for potential changes in depreciation
patterns over time. These controls address bias that would occur if depreciation patterns changed
as gas prices rose over the study period and the age composition of above- vs. below-median MPG
groups changed. For example, older vehicles could have become systematically more valuable in
later years, and there could be increasingly more below-median or above-median MPG vehicles
on the road. The table shows that identifying b only o¤ of within-age variation in G does not
signi…cantly change the estimates.

5.5

Observation Weights and Heterogeneity by Vehicle Age

A natural question to ask is whether

might be heterogeneous across consumer groups. For

example, the types of consumers that buy newer or older vehicles might be more or less informed
about or attentive to fuel economy. In fact, there is signi…cant heterogeneity in b by vehicle age.
Column 1 of Table 5 displays estimates of Equation (5) for speci…c vehicle age groups. The b is
0.93 for vehicles aged 1-3, but it drops to 0.26 for vehicles aged 11-15. All estimates in Table 5
use the futures-based gas price forecast, but the martingale forecast similarly shows that b declines
with vehicle age.

The di¤erences in b depend mechanically on the di¤erences in G. Returning to Figure 4, we

can see how G varies with age. In June 2004, the transaction-weighted average values of G for
above-median and below-median MPG vehicles aged 11-15 were $2620 and $4150, respectively.
26

These are about 37 percent of the values for vehicles aged 1-5. These …gures depend on underlying
data for survival probabilities and VMT. According to the registration data, the average vehicle
between 11 and 15 years old will survive for 6.1 more years. According to the National Household
Travel Survey odometer readings, the average vehicle between 11 and 20 years old will be driven
8980 miles per year, conditional on survival.
Several factors could explain the di¤erences across ages. First, we could systematically overstate G for the nationwide population of older vehicles by overestimating either VMT or survival
probabilities. This appears to be unlikely. Because vehicle registrations must be renewed every
year at some cost, it is unlikely that many vehicles would have their registrations renewed if not in
use. Thus, it seems most accurate to estimate survival probabilities from vehicle registration data,
and it is unlikely that this would overstate survival probabilities. However, we can also estimate
survival probabilities using the cross-sectional age distribution observed in the National Household
Travel Survey. There are fewer older vehicles observed in the NHTS than in the registration data,
suggesting that the NHTS might under-sample households that own the oldest vehicles, even after
weighting for national representativeness on other observables. As a result, using the NHTS to
calculate survival probabilities should make G smaller for new vehicles, thereby increasing . Depending on the shape of the survival functions, this could change the estimated
in either direction. Column 2 of Table 5 presents estimates of

for older vehicles

using the NHTS survival proba-

bilities. All of the point estimates increase, but none of them change signi…cantly, and the pattern
of decreasing

with vehicle age is unchanged.

Second, even if our G is appropriate for the US population of older vehicles, the population of
vehicles going through auctions might have smaller G. This would happen if auctioned vehicles had
lower future VMT or survival probabilities, perhaps because they are low quality or being sold for
scrap. The data also do not support this. The average odometer reads for 11 to 15 year old vehicles
di¤er by only a few percent between Manheim auctioned vehicles and vehicles in the NHTS, so
auctioned vehicles have not been more heavily used. Furthermore, in constructing vehicle prices
pjat , we exclude transactions in which the auctioneers rated the auto as low-quality or scrap quality.
As a robustness check, column 3 presents these same speci…cations using JDPA retail prices, which
are for autos that are in good enough condition for retail sale. The signi…cant decrease in b for
27

older vehicles remains.
Third, the identifying assumption that E [Gsj( ; ; )] = 0 might be increasingly violated for
older vehicles. As gas prices rise, increased scrappage of older gas guzzlers would raise the prices
of these vehicles both because demand is downward-sloping and because selective scrappage of the
lowest-quality gas guzzlers would raise the average quality of remaining ones. However, while there
is a strong negative correlation between G and market share for vehicles older than 15 years (which
are excluded from our regressions), the correlation between G and s conditional on ( ; ; ) for
11-15 year old vehicles is not statistically signi…cant, and the point estimate is actually positive.
Fourth, buyers of older vehicles may have higher intertemporal opportunity costs of capital, i.e.
higher discount rates r, compared to buyers of younger vehicles. If this were the case, our use of
the average discount rate still gives an unbiased estimate of the market average . However, it
would cause us to overstate

for younger vehicles and overstate

give the pattern of decreasing

for older vehicles, and it would

with age observed in Table 5. The SCF data do not support

this hypothesis: auto loan interest rates are not statistically signi…cantly di¤erent by vehicle age,
and the standard errors are tight enough to rule out that the average interest rate for 11-15 year
old vehicles is greater than 0.5 percentage points above the average rate for 1-5 year old vehicles.
However, Adams, Einav, and Levin (2009) analyze subprime auto loans with interest rates of 25-30
percent, and consumers buying older vehicles may have very high intertemporal opportunity costs
of capital because they cannot get any loan.
One implication of the di¤erences in b across ages is that regression weighting matters. In

our base speci…cations, we weight jat-level observations by the number of observed transactions.
Column 5 of Table 5 shows that most vehicles that pass through auctions are less than …ve years
old, meaning that the jat-level observations for newer vehicles have more underlying transactions
and thus are weighted more heavily. The di¤erence in
estimated

coe¢ cients across ages means that the

for all ages should be smaller when weighting observations equally instead of by number

of transactions. The …rst row of column 4 con…rms this, showing that b = 0:62 for equal weights.

Comparing columns 1 and 4 shows that when the regressions are restricted to particular age groups,
the

coe¢ cient does not depend much on how observations are weighted.

28

6

Sticky Information

Mankiw and Reis (2002), Sims (2003), Woodford (2003), and others propose models of "sticky
information," in which macroeconomic news di¤uses slowly through the population of consumers
and …rms. This causes prices, savings, investment, and other decisions to respond to information
with a delay. Sticky information could explain the visual evidence in Figure 6 that vehicle market
prices do not respond to high-frequency ‡uctuations in retail gasoline prices.
Interestingly, neither of the two surveys that have elicited consumers’ beliefs about gasoline
prices were structured to provide evidence on sticky information. The Vehicle Ownership and
Alternatives Survey analyzed by Allcott (2011) and Allcott (Forthcoming) asks consumers what
current gasoline prices are in their area, and shows that responses are very close to state-level
averages. However, the survey was carried out in October 2010, at a time when gas prices had not
‡uctuated by more than $0.10 per gallon for eight months. If the survey were repeated at a time
of more volatility, the sticky information model predicts that beliefs would lag current prices.
The Michigan Survey of Consumers (Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee 2011) is a repeated cross
section that covers multiple periods of gas price volatility. However, it does not ask consumers
their beliefs about current gas prices. Instead, it only asks whether consumers believe that prices
will increase or decrease relative to "current prices." We do not know what consumers believe are
"current prices" in months when retail gasoline prices have changed signi…cantly.
One prediction of a sticky information model is that

should be attenuated when using the

di¤erence estimator instead of the demeaning estimator. This is because the former is identi…ed
only o¤ of the variation at monthly frequency, while the latter is identi…ed o¤ of demeaned levels
over the entire period that the vehicle is observed. Table 6 tests this by estimating Equation (5)
using the di¤erence estimator instead of the …xed e¤ects (demeaning) estimator. In this table,
unlike Tables 4 and 5, we report the coe¢ cient on the G variable, which is

, instead of

itself.

Columns 1-3 use the futures-based forecast Gf , while columns 4-6 use the martingale forecast Gm .
Columns 1 and 4 show that the contemporaneous di¤erences in G are negatively associated with
contemporaneous di¤erences in vehicle prices, as would be expected. However, the estimates are
signi…cantly attenuated relative to the …xed e¤ects estimates, especially for the martingale forecast.

29

Column 2, 3, 4, and 6 add lags of the change in G. These results show that changes in vehicle
prices are strongly associated with changes in gasoline prices as far as three to four months in the
past. The association becomes smaller and statistically insigni…cant by the …fth or sixth monthly
lag.
Table 7 builds on these results by estimating Equation (5) using more aggregated units of
time t instead of monthly time units used in the rest of the paper. For example, the "2-Month
Units" row presents estimates with prices and gasoline costs aggregated to the bimonthly level. The
…xed e¤ects estimates of

in the top panel do not change with this increased aggregation, as the

demeaning estimator identi…es

o¤ of lower-frequency variation. However, the estimates from the

di¤erence estimator move toward the …xed e¤ects estimates as we aggregate over more months. This
provides additional evidence that markets do not immediately adjust to high-frequency gasoline
price variation.
Klenow and Willis (2007) use the data underlying the Consumer Price Index to document that
US retailers set prices based on information that is up to one year old. Our results complement
theirs by providing additional empirical support for the sticky information model in this particular
market. Table 6 suggests that changes in gasoline price forecasts take four to six months to be
full incorporated into vehicle market prices. This could either be because consumers are not aware
that gasoline prices have changed, or because they somehow do not incorporate this knowledge into
their willingness to pay when shopping for vehicles.
These results also highlight the distinction between models of rational inattention in macroeconomics and …nance, in which agents do not immediately update beliefs about time-varying decision
variables, and consumer choice models of static inattention, such as Gabaix and Laibson (2006) or
Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009). Energy e¢ ciency policies such as CAFE standards are motivated by the latter form of inattention or some similarly static misoptimization, not by inattention
to high-frequency ‡uctuations in energy prices. While our strategy of exploiting time-series variation in energy costs allows us to sweep our unobserved product attributes using …xed e¤ects, it
is important to account for the fact that consumers appear to update gasoline price forecasts with
some delay. Using quarterly or higher-frequency variation and a di¤erence estimator could cause
an analyst to misattribute inattention to high-frequency ‡uctuations in gasoline costs to static

30

undervaluation of fuel economy as a product attribute.

7

Conclusion

At least since the energy crises of the 1970s, economists and policymakers have been interested in
how consumers trade o¤ future costs of energy using durable goods with their purchase prices. We
propose a di¤erent and relatively plausible approach to estimating demand for energy e¢ ciency,
which exploits the interaction of time series variation in gasoline price forecasts with cross-sectional
variation in fuel economy ratings of di¤erent vehicles. In our base speci…cation assuming the futuresbased gas price forecast, consumers appear to be indi¤erent between one dollar in discounted future
gas costs and only 76 cents in vehicle purchase price. The parameter estimates are insensitive to
many factors, including the potential endogeneity of market shares and vehicle-miles traveled and
potential changes over time in consumer preferences or vehicle characteristics. However, assuming a
lower discount rate or using the martingale gas price forecast strengthen the qualitative conclusion
that

< 1. On the other hand, other speci…cations move b closer to one, including plausibly

higher discount rates and adding the 2008 recession to the sample. Although b is less than one in
most of our alternative speci…cations, it is not hard to imagine plausible combinations of alternative

assumptions that could generate this result. Importantly, the parameter estimates are very di¤erent
for subsamples of younger vs. older vehicles.
Given the uncertainty in these estimates, it is worth returning to our calculation from the introduction. Even if

is closer to one than our base speci…cations suggest, misoptimization distorts ve-

hicle markets more than the failure to internalize climate change externalities. Given the amount of
policy attention and academic interest surrounding climate change, this remarkable result suggests
that economists should be devoting signi…cant additional e¤ort to understanding how consumers
value energy costs and understanding the policy consequences of potential undervaluation.

31

References
[1] Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber (2011). "Choice Inconsistencies Among the Elderly: Evidence
from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program." American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 4 (June),
pages 1180-1210.
[2] Adams, William, Liran Einav and Jonathan Levin (2009). "Liquidity Constraints and Imperfect Information in Subprime Lending." American Economic Review, Vol. 99, No. 1 (March), pages 49-84.
[3] Allcott, Hunt, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Dmitry Taubinsky (2012). "Energy Policy with Externalities
and Internalities." NBER Working Paper No. 17977 (September)
[4] Allcott, Hunt (2011). "Consumers’ Perceptions and Misperceptions of Energy Costs." American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 2 (May), pages 98-104.
[5] Allcott, Hunt (Forthcoming). "The Welfare E¤ects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and Calibrations from the Automobile Market." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
[6] Alquist, Ron, and Lutz Kilian (2010), “What Do We Learn from the Price of Crude Oil Futures?”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 25, No. 4, pages 539-573.
[7] Alquist, Ron, Lutz Kilian, and Robert Vigfusson (2011). "Forecasting the Price of Oil." In Elliot,
Graham, and Allan Timmerman, Eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Vol. 2, forthcoming.
[8] Altonji, Joseph, Todd Elder and Christopher Taber (2005). "An Evaluation Of Instrumental Variables
Strategies For Estimating The E¤ects Of Catholic Schooling." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 40,
No. 4 (Fall), pages 791-821.
[9] Anderson, Soren, Ryan Kellogg, and James Sallee (2011). "What Do Consumers Believe About Future
Gasoline Prices." NBER Working Paper No. 16974 (April).
[10] Angrist, Joshua (1991). "Grouped-Data Estimation and Testing in Simple Labor-Supply Models." Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 47, No. 2-3 (February), pages 243-266.
[11] Arellano, Manuel (1987). "Computing Robust Standard Errors for Within-Groups Estimators." Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 49, No. 4 (November), pages 431-434.
[12] Ashenfelter, Orley (1984). "Macroeconomic Analyses and Microeconomic Analyses of Labor Supply."
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 21, No. 1 (January), pages 117-156.
[13] Atkinson, Scott, and Robert Halvorsen (1984). "A New Hedonic Technique for Estimating Attribute
Demand: An Application to the Demand for Automobile Fuel E¢ ciency." Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 66, No. 3 (August), pages 417-426.
[14] Austin, David (2008). "E¤ects of Gasoline Prices on Driving Behavior and Vehicle Markets." U.S.
Congressional Budget O¢ ce Working Paper (January).
[15] Barber, Brad, Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng (2005). “Out of Sight, Out of Mind: The E¤ects of
Expenses on Mutual Fund Flows." Journal of Business, Vol. 78, No. 6 (November), pages 2095-2120.
[16] Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian (2012). "Real-Time Forecasts of the Real Price of Oil." Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics, forthcoming.
[17] Bento, Antonio, Lawrence Goulder, Mark Jacobsen, and Roger von Haefen (2009). "Distributional
and E¢ ciency Impacts of Increased U.S. Gasoline Taxes." American Economic Review, Vol. 99, pages
667–699.
[18] Beresteanu, Ari, and Shanjun Li (2011). "Gasoline Prices, Government Support and the Demand for
Hybrid Vehicles in the U.S." International Economic Review, Vol. 52, No. 1 (February), pages 161-182.
[19] Berry, Steven (1994). "Estimating Discrete Choice Models of Product Di¤erentiation." RAND Journal
of Economics, Vol. 23, No. 2 (Summer), pages 242-262.

32

[20] Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes (1995). "Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium."
Econometrica, Vol. 63, No. 4 (July), pages 841-890.
[21] Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes (2004). "Di¤erentiated Products Demand Systems
from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car Market." Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 112, No. 1 (February), pages 68-105.
[22] Busse, Meghan, Christopher Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer (2012). “Are Consumers Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[23] Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft (2009). "Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence."
American Economic Review, Vol. 99, No. 4 (September), pages 1145-1177.
[24] Coibion, Olivier (2010). "Testing the Sticky Information Phillips Curve." Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 92, No. 1, pages 87-101.
[25] Cragg, John, and Stephen Donald (1993). "Testing Identi…ability and Speci…cation in Instrumental
Variable Models," Econometric Theory, Vol. 9, No. 2 (April), pages 222-240.
[26] Davis, Lucas, and Lutz Kilian (2011a). "The Allocative Cost of Price Ceilings in the U.S. Residential
Market for Natural Gas." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119, No. 2 (April), pages 212-241.
[27] Davis, Lucas, and Lutz Kilian (2011b). "Estimating the E¤ect of a Gasoline Tax on Carbon Emissions."
Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 26, No. 7 (November-December), pages 1187-1214.
[28] DellaVigna, Stefano (2009). "Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field." Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol. 17, No. 2, pages 315-372.
[29] Dreyfus, Mark, and Kip Viscusi (1995). "Rates of Time Preference and Consumer Valuations of Automobile Safety and Fuel E¢ ciency." Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 38, No. 1, pages 79-98.
[30] Dubin, Je¤rey (1992). "Market Barriers to Conservation: Are Implicit Discount Rates Too High?" Social
Science Working Paper 802, California Institute of Technology (July).
[31] Dubin, Je¤rey, and Daniel McFadden (1984). "An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption." Econometrica, Vol. 52, No. 2 (March), pages 345-362.
[32] Edelstein, Paul, and Lutz Kilian (2009). "How Sensitive Are Consumer Expenditures to Retail Energy
Prices?" Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 56, pages 766-779.
[33] Espey, Molly, and Santosh Nair (2005). "Automobile Fuel Economy: What Is It Worth?" Contemporary
Economic Policy, Vol. 23, No. 3 (July), pages 317-323.
[34] Finkelstein, Amy (2009). "E-ZTAX: Tax Salience and Tax Rates." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 124, No. 3 (August), pages 969-1010.
[35] Fischer, Carolyn, Winston Harrington, and Ian Parry (2007). “Do Market Failures Justify Tightening
Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) Standards?”The Energy Journal, Vol. 28, No. 4, pages 1-30.
[36] Gabaix, Xavier (2012). "A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality." Working Paper, New York
University (September).
[37] Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson (2006). "Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information
Suppression in Competitive Markets.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 121, No. 2, pages 505-540.
[38] Gillingham, Kenneth (2010). "Identifying the Elasticity of Driving: Evidence from a Gasoline Price
Shock in California." Working Paper, Stanford University (September).
[39] Goldberg, Pinelopi (1998). "The E¤ects of the Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards in the US."
Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 46, pages 1-33.
[40] Greene, David, Janet Hopson, R. Goeltz and Jia Li, (2007). “Analysis of In-Use Fuel Economy Shortfall
Based on Voluntarily Reported Mile-per-Gallon Estimates,”Transportation Research Record, No. 1983,
pages 99-105.

33

[41] Greene, David, Philip Patterson, Margaret Singh, and Jia Li (2005). "Feebates, Rebates, and GasGuzzler Taxes: A Study of Incentives for Increased Fuel Economy." Energy Policy, Vol. 33, No. 6
(April), pages 757-775.
[42] Greenstone, Michael, Elizabeth Kopits, and Maryann Wolverton (2011). "Estimating the Social Cost of
Carbon for Use in U.S. Federal Rulemakings: A Summary and Interpretation." NBER Working Paper
No. 16913 (March).
[43] Hausman, Jerry (1979). "Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of Energy-Using
Durables." Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 10, No. 1, pages 33-54.
[44] Hausman, Jerry (2001). "Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the Right
and Problems from the Left." Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, No. 4 (Fall), pages 57-67.
[45] Hossain, Tanjim, and John Morgan (2006). “...Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue (Non)Equivalence
in Field Experiments on eBay.” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, Vol. 6.
[46] Hughes, Jonathan, Christopher Knittel, and Daniel Sperling (2008). "Evidence of a Shift in the ShortRun Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand." The Energy Journal, Vol. 29, No. 1, pages 113-134.
[47] Jacobsen, Mark (2010). "Evaluating U.S. Fuel Economy Standards In a Model with Producer and
Household Heterogeneity." Working Paper, University of California at San Diego (September).
[48] Ja¤e, Adam, and Robert Stavins (1994). "The Energy Paradox and the Di¤usion of Conservation
Technology." Resource and Energy Economics, Vol. 16, pages 91-122.
[49] Kahn, James (1986). "Gasoline Prices and the Used Automobile Market: A Rational Expectations Asset
Price Approach." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 101, No. 2 (May), pages 323-340.
[50] Khan, Hashmat, and Zhenhua Zhu (2006). “Estimates of the Sticky-Information Phillips Curve for the
United States.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 38, No. 1, pages 195–207.
[51] Kilian, Lutz (2010). “Explaining Fluctuations in Gasoline Prices: A Joint Model of the Global Crude
Oil Market and the U.S. Retail Gasoline Market,” The Energy Journal, Vol. 31, No. 2 (April), pages
87-104
[52] Kilian, Lutz, and Daniel Murphy (2011). "The Role of Inventories and Speculative Trading in the Global
Market for Crude Oil." Working Paper, University of Michigan (May).
[53] Kilian, Lutz and Eric Sims (2006). “The E¤ects of Real Gasoline Prices on Automobile Demand: A
Structural Analysis Using Micro Data,” Working Paper, University of Michigan (April).
[54] Klenow, Peter, and Jonathan Willis (2007). "Sticky Information and Sticky Prices." Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 54, pages 79-99.
[55] Klier, Thomas, and Joshua Linn (2010). "The Price of Gasoline and New Vehicle Fuel Economy: Evidence from Monthly Sales Data." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 2, No. 3, pages
134-153.
[56] Knittel, Christopher (2011). "Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-O¤s and Technological
Progress in the Automobile Sector.” American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 7, pages 3368-3399.
[57] Langer, Ashley, and Nathan Miller (2012). "Automakers’Short-Run Responses to Changing Gasoline
Prices." Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
[58] Li, Shanjun, Christopher Timmins, and Roger von Haefen (2009). "Do Gasoline Prices A¤ect Fleet Fuel
Economy?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 1, No. 2 (August), pages 113-137.
[59] Manheim (2009). "Used Car Market Report." 14th Edition. Atlanta, GA: Manheim Consulting.
[60] Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis (2002). “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal
to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, No. 4, pages
1295–1328.

34

[61] Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis (2003). “A Model of Monetary Non-Neutrality
and Structural Slumps.” in P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford (Eds.),
Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund Phelps.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
[62] Mullainathan, Sendhil (2002). "Thinking Through Categories." Working Paper, MIT (April).
[63] Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert Topel (1985). "Estimation and Inference in Two-Step Econometric
Models." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Vol. 3, No. 4 (October), pages 370-379.
[64] National Highway Tra¢ c Safety Administration (NHTSA) (2010). "Final Regulatory Impact Analysis:
Corporate Average Fuel Economy for MY 2012-MY 2016 Passenger Cars and Light Trucks." O¢ ce of
Regulatory Analysis and Evaluation, National Center for Statistics and Analysis (March).
[65] Ohta, Makoto, and Zvi Griliches (1986). "Automobile Prices and Quality: Did the Gasoline Price
Increases Change Consumer Tastes in the U.S.?" Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Vol. 4,
No. 2 (April), pages 187-198.
[66] Parry, Ian, Winston Harrington, and Margaret Walls (2007). "Automobile Externalities and Policies."
Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 45, pages 374-400.
[67] Reis, Ricardo (2006). "Inattentive Consumers." Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 53, No. 8 (November), pages 1761-1800.
[68] Rust, John (1985). "Stationary Equilibrium in a Market for Durable Assets." Econometrica, Vol. 53,
No. 4 (July), pages 783-805.
[69] Sallee, James (2010). "The Taxation of Fuel Economy." In Brown, Je¤rey,
Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 25. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ed.,

[70] Sallee, James (2011). "Rational Inattention and Energy E¢ ciency." Working Paper, University of
Chicago (June).
[71] Sallee, James, Sarah West, and Wei Fan (2009). "Consumer Valuation of Fuel Economy:
A Microdata Approach." Working Paper, University of Chicago (September). Available from
http://www.ntanet.org/images/stories/pdf/proceedings/09/032.pdf.
[72] Sawhill, James (2008). "Are Capital and Operating Costs Weighted Equally in Durable Goods Purchases? Evidence from the US Automobile Market." Working Paper, University of California at Berkeley
(April).
[73] Sims, Christopher (2003). "Implications of Rational Inattention." Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol.
50, No. 3, paes 665-690.
[74] Sims, Christopher (2010). "Rational Inattention and Monetary Economics." Handbook of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 3, pages 155-181.
[75] Small, Kenneth, and Kurt Van Dender (2007). "Fuel E¢ ciency and Motor Vehicle Travel: The Declining
Rebound E¤ect." The Energy Journal, Vol. 28, No. 1, pages 25-51.
[76] Small, Kenneth, and Harvey Rosen (1981). "Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete Choice Models."
Econometrica, Vol. 49, No. 1 (January), pages 105-130.
[77] Staiger, Douglas, and James Stock (1997). "Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments."
Econometrica, Vol. 65, No. 3 (May), pages 557-586.
[78] Stock,
James,
and
Motohiro
Yogo
(2005).
"Testing
for
Weak
Instruments
in
Linear
IV
Regression."
In
Stock,
James,
and
Donald
Andrews,
Identi…cation and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas J. Rothenberg.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

35

[79] Stolyarov, Dmitriy (2002). "Turnover of Used Durables in a Stationary Equilibrium: Are Older Goods
Traded More?" Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 110, No. 6 (December), pages 1390-1413.
[80] U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) (2007). "Consumer
ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/ce/standard/2007/quintile.txt
[81] U.S.
Department
of
Transportation
http://nhts.ornl.gov/download.shtml#2001.

(2001).

[82] U.S.
Energy
Information
Administration
http://www.eia.doe.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/.

"National
(2011).

Expenditure

Household
"Monthly

Travel
Energy

Survey."
Survey."
Review."

[83] U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2008). "Light-Duty Automotive Technology and Fuel Economy Trends: 1975 Through 2008. Appendix A: Database Details and Calculation Methods."
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/cert/mpg/fetrends/420r08015appx-a.pdf.
[84] Verboven, Frank (1999). "The Markets for Gasoline and Diesel Cars in Europe." Centre for Economic
Policy Research Discussion Paper 2069 (February).
[85] Wald, Abraham (1940). "The Fitting of Straight Lines if Both Variables are Subject to Error." Annals
of Mathematical Statistics, Vol. 11, pages 284-300.
[86] Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
[87] Yahoo Autos (2009). "Top 100 Cars by Green Rating." http://autos.yahoo.com/green_center-top100/,
accessed August 2009.

36

Tables
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min.
Max.
N
Year
2003.5
2.9
1999
2008
1,068,459
Model Year
1996
5.2
1984
2007
1,068,459
Age
7.5
4.2
1
15
1,068,459
Price ($)
7227
9845
0
358,289
1,068,459
Quantity
18,537
27,612
0
370,512
1,068,459
PDV of Gas Cost ($)
7163
4147
686
41,576
1,068,459
Fuel Economy (MPG)
18.8
4
6.9
52.9
1,068,459
Horsepower
174
61
46
700
1,024,709
Weight (pounds)
3440
838
2.2
34,903
1,022,499
Wheelbase (inches)
110
13.9
79.9
972
1,025,023
Number of Transactions
37.8
122
1
9679
1,068,459
Notes: The number of observations di¤ers from the base speci…cation because this table includes observations between April and December 2008 and vehicles for which there is only one observation per …xed e¤ect
group. Unlike the regressions, this table is not weighted by number of transactions within an observation.

Table 2: Calculating the Average Discount Rate
Payment Method
Share of Vehicles
Discount Rate
Financed
37%
6.9%
Leased
0%
N/A
Cash
63%
5.8%
Weighted Average
6.2%
Notes: Share of Vehicles and the Finance Discount Rate are real averages from the 2001, 2004, and 2007
Survey of Consumer Finances. Cash Discount Rate is the real average return to the S&P 500 between 1945
and 2008, inclusive.

37

Table 3: Base Speci…cation Results
(1)
Futures
Forecast
-0.76
( 0.046 )

Gf
Gm
(Gm

(2)
Martingale
Forecast

(3)
Both
-0.73
( 0.046 )

-0.55
( 0.032 )
Gf )

-0.14
( 0.037 )

Time Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Month-by-MPG Group Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Vehicle Fixed E¤ects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
931,888
931,888
931,888
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (5) assuming the futures-based and martingale gas
price forecasts, which are denoted Gf and Gm , respectively. All speci…cations use data from 1999 through
March 2008 and use the grouping estimator with groups at the level of time by MPG group, with two MPG
groups. Observations are weighted by number of transactions. Robust standard errors, clustered by vehicle,
are in parenthesis.

38

Table 4: Alternative Assumptions

0

Gas Price Forecast:
Speci…cation
Base
2 MPG Quantiles

0.76

0.046

Martingale
b
0.55

0.032

1
2
3
4

Grouping
5 MPG Quantiles
10 MPG Quantiles
20 MPG Quantiles
OLS (No grouping)

0.64
0.64
0.58
0.60

0.037
0.034
0.034
0.028

0.49
0.49
0.47
0.46

0.026
0.024
0.024
0.020

11
12

Time Periods
2004-March 2008
1999-End 2008

0.80
0.85

0.037
0.035

0.61
0.57

0.027
0.025

21
22
23
24
25

Discount Rate
r=0%
r=3%
r=10%
r=11%
r=15%

0.59
0.67
0.87
0.90
1.01

0.046
0.035
0.040
0.053
0.060

0.42
0.48
0.65
0.67
0.77

0.024
0.028
0.037
0.039
0.045

31
32
33
34
35

Characteristics
Sample with characteristics
Control for HP
Control for HP, weight
Control for HP, weight, wheelbase
Control for all characteristics

0.76
0.76
0.76
0.76
0.75

0.049
0.049
0.049
0.049
0.048

0.56
0.57
0.57
0.56
0.55

0.034
0.034
0.035
0.034
0.034

41
42
43
44
45

Preferences
Exclude hybrid vehicles
Exclude "green" vehicles
Exclude SUVs
Exclude all cars
Exclude minivans

0.76
0.73
0.71
0.87
0.70

0.046
0.048
0.065
0.087
0.046

0.55
0.54
0.52
0.68
0.51

0.032
0.033
0.046
0.061
0.032

Row

Futures
b

SE(b)

SE(b)

Age-by-Time Controls
One year per group
0.79
0.041
0.57
0.029
Two years per group
0.79
0.043
0.57
0.030
Four years per group
0.78
0.044
0.57
0.031
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (5) under alternative assumptions. Unless otherwise
stated, all speci…cations include 1999 through March 2008. For these speci…cations, N=931,888, and there
are 37,677 ja …xed e¤ect groups. N=433,815 for row 11, N=1,010,667 for row 12, N=614,217 for rows
31-35, N=931,618 for row 41, N=886,300 for row 42, N=826,180 for row 43, N=319,361 for row 44, and
N=874,497 for row 45. All speci…cations include a full set of month-by-year time dummies and MPG group
by month-of-year controls. Observations are weighted by number of transactions. Unless otherwise stated,
all speci…cations use the grouping estimator with groups at the level of time by MPG group, with two MPG
groups. Robust standard errors, clustered by vehicle, are in parenthesis.
51
52
53

39

Table 5: Age Subgroups
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
TransactionNHTS Survival
JDPA Retail
EquallyTransactions
Ages
Weighted b
Probabilities b
Prices b
Weighted b
per Observation
All
0.76
0.84
0.60
0.62
37.8
( 0.046 )
( 0.050 )
( 0.041 )
( 0.027 )
1-3
0.93
1.03
0.66
0.97
89.2
( 0.074 )
( 0.082 )
( 0.057 )
( 0.072 )
4-6
0.64
0.70
0.52
0.56
43.9
( 0.054 )
( 0.060 )
( 0.055 )
( 0.049 )
7-10
0.45
0.50
0.37
0.48
21.3
( 0.032 )
( 0.036 )
( 0.040 )
( 0.030 )
11-15
0.26
0.28
0.18
0.24
7.7
( 0.017 )
( 0.019 )
( 0.032 )
( 0.015 )
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (5) for di¤erent age groups using the futures-based gas
price forecast. All speci…cations use data from 1999 through March 2008, include a full set of month-by-year
time dummies and MPG group by month-of-year controls, and use the grouping estimator with groups at the
level of time by MPG group, with two MPG groups. Observations are weighted by number of transactions,
except for in column 4. Robust standard errors, clustered by vehicle, are in parenthesis.

Table 6: Di¤erence Estimator
(1)
Futures
Forecast
-0.33
( 0.036 )

Gt
Gt
Gt
Gt
Gt
Gt
Gt

1

2

3

4

5

6

(2)

-0.30
( 0.041 )
-0.43
( 0.029 )
-0.40
( 0.030 )

(3)

-0.27
( 0.044
-0.49
( 0.033
-0.34
( 0.032
-0.26
( 0.028
-0.08
( 0.037
0.03
( 0.035
-0.02
( 0.040

)
)
)
)
)
)
)

(4)
Martingale
Forecast
-0.16
( 0.009 )

(5)

-0.16
( 0.011 )
-0.14
( 0.009 )
-0.13
( 0.012 )

(6)

-0.20
( 0.014
-0.19
( 0.012
-0.13
( 0.015
-0.13
( 0.013
-0.07
( 0.016
-0.09
( 0.013
-0.03
( 0.014

)
)
)
)
)
)
)

Number of Obs.
835,837
719,936
573,961
835,837
719,936
573,961
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (5) with the di¤erence estimator instead of the …xed
e¤ects (demeaning) estimator. The dependent variable is pjat pja;t 1 . The table reports the coe¢ cient on
Gt = Gjat Gja;t 1 , which corresponds to
. All speci…cations use data from 1999 through March 2008,
include a full set of month-by-year time dummies and MPG group by month-of-year controls, and use the
grouping estimator with groups at the level of time by MPG group, with two MPG groups. Observations
are weighted by the number of observed transactions in each pair of di¤erenced months. Robust standard
errors, clustered by vehicle, are in parenthesis.

40

Table 7: Time Aggregation

Fixed E¤ects
1-Month Units (Base)
2-Month Units
3-Month Units
4-Month Units
6-Month Units

(1)
Futures
Forecast b
0.76
( 0.046
0.76
( 0.045
0.75
( 0.045
0.74
( 0.046
0.72
( 0.046

(2)
Martingale
Forecast b
0.55
( 0.032
0.57
( 0.032
0.57
( 0.034
0.59
( 0.034
0.58
( 0.038

)
)
)
)
)

Di¤erences
1-Month Units (Base)

Observations

931,888

)
503,146
)
342,551
)
263,573
)
182,300
)

0.33
0.16
835,837
( 0.036 )
( 0.009 )
2-Month Units
0.49
0.21
446,100
( 0.035 )
( 0.010 )
3-Month Units
0.65
0.24
294,862
( 0.038 )
( 0.015 )
4-Month Units
0.82
0.39
219,650
( 0.038 )
( 0.017 )
6-Month Units
0.86
0.57
141,295
( 0.036 )
( 0.026 )
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (5) with time units at di¤erent levels of aggregation.
All speci…cations use data from 1999 through March 2008, include a full set of time dummies and MPG
group by season controls, and use the grouping estimator with groups at the level of time by MPG group,
with two MPG groups. Observations weighted by number of observed transactions. Robust standard errors,
clustered by vehicle, are in parenthesis.

41

Figures
Figure 1: Retail Gasoline and Futures Prices

Notes: This …gure shows seasonally adjusted retail gasoline prices and the gasoline prices implied by oil
futures at di¤erent settlement horizons.

Figure 2: Manufacturer’s Suggested Retail Price vs. Fuel Economy

Notes: This …gure shows the mean Manufacturer’s Suggested Retail Price and the standard error of the
estimated mean for each integer MPG rating. Data include all new vehicles from model year 1984 through
2008.

42

Figure 3: Vehicle Price Trends

Notes: The black line shows the mean vehicle price across all transactions in our dataset. The double
blue line is the average price conditional on vehicle …xed e¤ects and month dummies. The Futures-Based
Gas Forecast series is the average of oil futures prices for all future years, transformed into dollars per gallon
of gasoline.

Figure 4: Identifying Variation in Gas Cost

Notes: This …gure shows the present discounted value of fuel costs under the futures-based gas price
forecast, for vehicles of di¤erent MPG ratings and ages in June 2004.

43

Figure 5: Raw Data Scatterplot

Notes: This …gure plots the di¤erence in transaction-level average prices for below-median minus above
median-MPG vehicles against the di¤erence in the PDV of gasoline costs, using the futures-based gas price
forecast. There is one observation for each month.

Figure 6: Conditional Variation Over Time

Notes: The double black line is the di¤erence in transaction-level average prices for above-median minus
below-median MPG vehicles, conditional on vehicle …xed e¤ects and MPG group by month-of-year dummies.
The solid blue line is the conditional di¤erence in the PDV of gasoline costs using the futures forecast. The
dotted blue line is the conditional di¤erence in the PDV of gasoline costs using the martingale forecast.

44

Figure 7: Predicted Mispricing

Notes: The double red line shows the price changes if = 1 in response to a $1 increase in the gas price
forecast for vehicles that would be driven 12,000 miles per year over a remaining lifetime of seven years,
relative to a 25 MPG vehicle. The single blue line shows the predicted relative price changes for the base
speci…cation b = 0:76. The equations for the double red line and the blue line are, respectively, (Price Change
7
7
P
P
y
y
1
1
1
1
if = 1) = ( 25
and (Predicted Price Change)= (1 0:76) ( 25
.
f ) $1 12; 000
f ) $1 12; 000
y=1

y=1

45

Appendices: Not for Publication
Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox
Hunt Allcott and Nathan Wozny

46

A

Derivation from Dynamic Model

In Section 2, we derive the market share equation from a static discrete choice model. In this
appendix, we show how that static model can in turn be derived from a simple dynamic model.
This is also helpful in clarifying the nature of our econometric assumptions.
In each period t, each consumer chooses one vehicle from a set of new and used vehicles, including
the vehicle that he or she already owns. Consumers expect to own the vehicle for a holding period
of h years, after which time it will be resold at price pja;t+h . The budget constraint wi should now
be interpreted as the budget constraint over that holding period. Individuals discount utility and
cash ‡ows in future periods by discount factor

=

1
1+r .

The PDV of gas costs, Gjat , can be divided into two parts: Gjat = Gojat +

h

variable Gojat is the PDV of gasoline costs during consumer i’s holding period, and

h

Gja;t+h . The
Gja;t+h is the

o
PDV over the remainder of the vehicle’s life after it is resold, discounted to time t. The variable e jat

captures the average utility across consumers from owning and using vehicle ja over the holding
period.
The indirect utility function in this model is:

uijat = (wi

pjat

Gojat +

h

o

pja;t+h ) + e jat +

ijat

(6)

o
The variable e jat now captures average usage utility over the holding period e jat plus the

present discounted utility value of resale price plus remaining gasoline costs:

e

jat

o
= e jat +

h

(pja;t+h + Gja;t+h )

(7)

In our estimation, we assume that e ja is constant within a vehicle ja over time up to an

idiosyncratic deviation which is uncorrelated with G. Why is this intuitively sensible? Consider the

o
two elements of e de…ned by Equation (7). The …rst element, the utility e from using the vehicle

over a given holding period, is assumed constant for a given model of a given age, independent of
the time t when the holding period starts. For example, buying a three-year-old Ford Taurus in
1999 gives the same expected usage utility as buying a three-year-old Ford Taurus in 2000, up to

47

the idiosyncratic error term.
The second element of e contains the total user cost for the next owner: the sum of the

vehicle’s resale price and remaining fuel cost, weighted by . In essence, we assume a weak version

of stationarity, a common assumption in dynamic analyses of durable goods markets, such as Rust
(1985) and Stolyarov (2002). Under this assumption, consumers believe that resale prices of the
same good are constant over time, after adjusting for changes in other user costs and allowing for
an idiosyncratic error. Continuing the above example, we assume that consumers believe that if
gasoline prices are constant, the resale price of an eight-year-old Ford Taurus in 2004 is the same
as the resale value of an eight-year-old Ford Taurus in 2005. If gasoline price forecasts change,
the vehicle’s resale price will change by the di¤erence in discounted remaining fuel costs Gja;t+h
multiplied by the valuation weight . This demonstrates why a consumer’s utility from choosing
a particular vehicle depends not just on the gasoline costs that he himself will pay, but on the
entire remaining fuel cost incurred by all future owners: the consumer expects that if gasoline price
forecasts increase, this will a¤ect both his own gasoline expenditures Go and also the resale value.

B

Endogenous Quantities

In deriving our base estimating equation in the body of the paper, we assume that the PDV of
gasoline costs G is uncorrelated with market shares. In this appendix, we relax this assumption.

B.1

Empirical Strategy

Our estimating equation for the endogenous quantity speci…cations simply adds time dummies
and model year dummies

at

t

to Equation (3):

pjat =

Gjat

1

ln sjat +

t

+

at

+

ja

+

jat

(8)

To control for seasonal depreciation patterns that might be correlated with MPG, we de…ne
…xed e¤ects

ja

at the level of model by age (in months), instead of model by age (in years). These

disaggregated controls are necessary instead of MPG group by month-of-year dummies
48

because

we now identify o¤ of all the variation in MPG. By contrast, the grouping estimator identi…es
using only variation in p and G between the two MPG groups.
Even conditional on our …xed e¤ects, Equation (8) would su¤er from the usual simultaneity
bias: E[ s] 6= 0. In words, the model year-speci…c unobservable characteristic

jat

could still be

correlated with market shares if, for example, a feature that is speci…c to particular model year
a¤ects both price and market share. To address this, we need an instrument that generates variation
in market shares that is uncorrelated with unobserved quality.
Our instrument for used vehicle market shares is the predicted lifetime gasoline costs of model
j at the time when it was new, which we denote G0;jat . More precisely, because a given model year
is typically manufactured between September of the year before the model year through August of
the model year, we use the average futures-based gasoline price forecast for those twelve months to
construct G0;jat . This instrument acts conditional on the model year dummy variables

in Equation

(8), meaning that vehicles that have high values of G0;jat relative to other vehicles produced in the
same year are expected to have lower sales.
The instrument exploits the fact that new vehicle market shares respond to gasoline prices.
In particular, in years when gasoline prices are high, more high fuel economy vehicles are sold.
Appendix Figure A1 illustrates the identifying variation. As gasoline prices rose between 2004 and
2007, sales of vehicles with fuel economy greater than or equal to 20 MPG increased from 6.5 to
7.7 million, while sales of vehicles rated less than 20 MPG dropped from 8.1 to 6.6 million. This
di¤erence in quantities then persists over time. For example, there are more two-year-old highMPG vehicles on the road in 2008 than in 2006. This di¤erence in quantities is not due to changes
in quality ; instead, it is due to the di¤erent gasoline price forecasts at the time when the vehicles
were new.
This allows us to relax Assumption 1 from Section 4: we can now allow the market share of
vehicle ja to be correlated both with gas costs G and unobservable characteristics . In its place,
we substitute the exclusion restriction: E[G0 j( ; ; )] = 0. We also note that for other empirical
studies of used vehicle markets during periods when there is variation in gas price forecasts, our instrument could be an appealing alternative to the Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995) instruments,
which depend on assumptions about the nature of the supply-side price setting game.

49

In theory, it might be possible to estimate Equation (8) using a grouping estimator, while
instrumenting with group dummies (primarily to predict G) and with group-level averages of G0
(primarily to predict ln s). However, the grouping estimator involves a large number of instruments,
of which only G0 has e¤ectively any correlation with ln s. This causes a many instruments problem
in …tting ln s. Thus, in this appendix, we cannot use the grouping estimator, and we therefore must
maintain the assumption that G is measured without error.
As Appendix Figure A1 suggests, most of the variation in the instrument a¤ects model years
2004 and later. Thus, the IV parameter estimates are "local" to …xed e¤ect groups with at least
some observations of post-2004 model year vehicles. Including additional observations where an
instrument has no variation does not change the Local Average Treatment E¤ect but does reduce
the power of the instrument. To maintain su¢ cient power by the standards of Stock and Yogo
(2005), we therefore restrict our sample to transactions from 2004-March 2008.

B.2

Results

Column 1 of Appendix Table A2 presents estimates of Equation (5) for January 2004-March 2008
under the futures-based gasoline price forecast. Column 2 presents the "reduced form" estimates
of Equation (8), without instrumenting for s. The coe¢ cient on ln s is positive. This is the usual
apparently upward-sloping demand symptomatic of simultaneity bias, driven by the correlation of
equilibrium market share with the unobserved demand shifter . Column 3 instruments for s with
G0 .
In the …rst stage of the IV estimates, the instrument G0 is negatively correlated with market
share, conditional on the vehicle …xed e¤ects and the model year dummies. The coe¢ cient estimate
implies that a 1000 dollar increase in lifetime gas costs relative to other vehicles of the same model
year reduces a vehicle’s market share by 0.0669 percent. For example, the average gas price forecast
for September 2004 through August 2005, the period when most 2005 model year vehicles were
manufactured, was $2.03 per gallon, while the gasoline price forecast for model year 2006 vehicles
was $2.40. Between those two years, the value of G0 for a Ford F-150 pickup went from $16,057 to
$19,362, while it went from $6865 to $8204 for a Honda Civic sedan. The di¤erence in G0 changed
by $1966 between the two years, and as a result, the Civic market share is predicted to decrease
50

by 13 percent relative to the F-150. The …rst stage Angrist-Pischke F-statistic is 11.76, meaning
that the estimates for this sample of years do not su¤er from a weak instruments problem (Stock
and Yogo 2005).
Now consider the estimated IV coe¢ cients on ln s. The ln s coe¢ cient implies that if the
quantity available of a given new or used vehicle increased by ten percent, its equilibrium price
would decrease by $361. Conversely, this also implies that if the price of a given vehicle were
increased by $1000, its market share would decrease by 28 percent. Because we de…ne a vehicle at
a …nely disaggregated submodel level, there are many close substitutes for a given "vehicle," so a
high degree of price sensitivity is expected.
Because these speci…cations do not use the grouping estimator, the estimated b is attenuated

toward zero due to measurement error. Therefore, the key point of this table is not the absolute

magnitudes of the b coe¢ cients. Instead, it is how the estimated coe¢ cients compare across

columns. Regardless of whether we instrument, using the logit model does not make any di¤erence
compared to the estimates of Equation (5) in column 1. This implies that our base speci…cation
assumption that E [Gsj( ; ; )] = 0 does not generate statistically signi…cant bias.

The basic reason for this is straightforward. Omitted variables bias requires both G and s as
well as p and s to be correlated conditional on the other controls. Appendix Table A2 shows that p
and s are indeed somewhat correlated: demand is downward sloping when we instrument properly.
However, G and s are not highly correlated for our sample of used vehicles between ages 1 and 15,
because once used vehicles have been sold, their stock is …xed until their value drops enough for
some to be scrapped. In fact, when we estimate Equation (5) in our sample but use ln s as the
left-hand-side variable instead of price, we cannot reject that E [Gsj( ; ; )] = 0: the t-statistic is
-1.597. This is why we restrict the sample to ages 1-15. If we were to include new vehicles or very
old vehicles in our speci…cations, this assumption would not hold. For example, when we estimate
Equation (5) with ln s as the left-hand-side variable for vehicles aged 15-25 years, we resoundingly
reject that E [Gsj( ; ; )] = 0: the t-statistic is -4.584.
In summary, it would ideally be possible to both allow endogenous market shares and address
measurement error in the same speci…cation, but we cannot do this because the grouping estimator
requires a large number of instruments that only weakly predict ln(s). Appendix Table A2 shows

51

that endogenizing market shares does not signi…cantly change the estimated

, while we know

from the body of the paper that measurement error causes signi…cant attenuation bias. Therefore,
we focus on the grouping estimator in the body of the paper and can realistically maintain the
assumption that E [Gsj( ; ; )] = 0.

C

Endogenous Vehicle-Miles Traveled

C.1

Model

Our base speci…cation assumes that vehicle-miles traveled (VMT) is independent of gasoline prices.
In reality, demand for VMT is inelastic, but not fully inelastic, and the changes in g over the study
period could be large enough that the Envelope Theorem approximation might not hold. This
section presents an alternative speci…cation that endogenizes VMT.
As illustrated in Appendix Figure A2, the change in VMT resulting from a change in gasoline
prices a¤ects utility through two channels. First, changes in VMT a¤ect gasoline expenditures
Gjat . The NHTS survey that measures VMT was carried out in 2001; at 2001 gas price g2001 , the
cost to drive vehicle ja one mile is g2001 =fja;2001 , and the consumer chooses VMT mja;2001 (g2001 ).
In future year y with higher gasoline price gy , the consumer reduces VMT to mjay (gy ). The annual
gasoline cost is now the shaded blue rectangle bounded by the gy =fjay and mjay .
The second e¤ect is that usage utility e jat also decreases when an increase in gas price reduces

VMT. For example, the utility from owning a vehicle and driving it 12,000 miles per year is di¤erent
than the utility of owning a vehicle and driving it 11,500 miles per year. In Appendix Figure A2,
the consumer’s total willingness to pay for vehicle use is the area under the VMT demand curve. As
the gasoline price increases from g2001 to gy and the consumer’s utility-maximizing VMT decreases,
this total willingness to pay decreases by the solid green area.
Of course, for a marginal change in mjay from mja;2001 , the change in usage utility equals the
change in gasoline expenditures, because consumers’observed choices must be such that marginal
cost of driving equals the marginal willingness to pay. This is the Envelope Theorem logic that we
used in the body of the paper to help justify the assumption that mjat is constant over t.
To formalize these two e¤ects of a non-marginal change, explicitly denote Gjat (mjat (gt ) ; ) and
52

e

jat (mjat (gt ))

as functions of mjat (gt ), where gt and mjat in boldface represent the vectors of

forecasted gas prices and utility-maximizing VMTs in each future period of the vehicle ja’s life
beginning at time t. The utility function in Equation (1) can be written as:

uijat = (wi

pjat

G(mjat (gt ) ; )) + e jat (mjat (g2001 )) +

Z

gt

g2001

@ e jat (mjat (gt ))
dgt +
@gt

ijat

(9)

The per-period dollar value of this new term with the integral is the solid green area in Appendix
Figure A2. It can be calculated under an assumed functional form of VMT demand. Here, we derive
this under the assumption of constant elasticity, denoted . The demand function intercept

ja

is

pinned down by the vehicle’s …tted VMT from the 2001 NHTS data and the gas prices from that
year.15 The dollar value of the usage utility changes over the vehicle lifetime is denoted Ijat (gt ):

1

Ijat (gt )

Z

gt

g2001

=

L
X
y=0

C.2

y

@ e jat (mjat (gt ))
dgt
@gt
8
<
1+1=
1+1=
m
mja;2001
: jay

(12a)
exp

ja

1 + 1=

9
=
;

fjay1

jay

(12b)

Empirical Strategy

Using the same steps as in the derivation of the base speci…cation, we carry the Ijat (gt ) term
through from the utility function to an alternative estimating equation. Because Ijat and Gjat are
15

This can also be stated mathematically. Under constant elasticity of demand , we have VMT at any gasoline
price:

ln(mjas ) =

ln(gs ) +

ja

(10)

The constant ja is pinned down by mja;2001 , the …tted VMT from the 2001 National Household Travel Survey
data, and the gas prices at that time:

ja

= ln(mja;2001 )

53

ln(g2001 )

(11)

highly correlated, we move Ijat to the left hand side. The estimating equation is:

pjat

Ijat (gt ) =

Gjat (mjat (gt )) +

t

+

ja (mja (g2001 ))

+

jat

(13)

In this equation, Gjat (mjat (gt )) is calculated as before in Equation (4), except with VMT as
a constant elasticity function of gas price. The term

ja (mja (g2001 ))

is constant, and it thus can

represent a vehicle …xed e¤ect, as in the base speci…cation.

C.3

Results

Appendix Table A3 presents the results of the endogenous quantity speci…cations under the futuresbased gasoline price forecast. Row 0 of Appendix Table A3 repeats column 1 from Table 3, our
base speci…cation estimates of Equation (5) using Gf , for 1999-March 2008. Rows 1-4 estimate
Equation (13) for that same time period. We use both the linear and constant elasticity functional
forms. The point estimate of

hardly changes from the base speci…cation with an elasticity of 0.2,

which is larger than or equal to recent empirical estimates by Hughes, Knittel, and Sperling (2007),
Small and Van Dender (2007), and Gillingham (2010). Even with an elasticity of 0.5, which is even
larger than the empirical estimates of Bento et al. (2009), Kilian and Murphy (2011), and Davis
and Kilian (2011b), b is still very close to the base estimates.

Row 10-14 and 20-24 present the same set of estimates for the late period (2004-March 2008)

and for the entire sample (1999-End 2008). As discussed in the body of the paper, the estimated
from Equation (5) is sensitive to the time period. However, endogenizing vehicle-miles traveled
does not change the estimates in any time period. For this reason, the body of the paper focuses
on the simpler speci…cation that assumes that VMT is exogenous.

54

Appendix Tables
Appendix Table A1: Gas Prices and Futures-Based Gas Price Forecasts
Year

Spot

Future Year
0-1
1-2
2-3
3-4
4-5
5-6
6-7
7-8
8-9
9-10
1998
1.34
1.44
1.46
1.47
1.47
1.46
1.46
1.46
1.45
1999
1.43
1.50
1.46
1.45
1.44
1.44
1.43
1.43
1.39
2000
1.77
1.73
1.61
1.56
1.51
1.49
1.47
1.46
2001
1.69
1.65
1.59
1.55
1.52
1.51
1.49
1.48
1.47
2002
1.56
1.63
1.58
1.55
1.53
1.51
1.50
1.48
1.50
2003
1.74
1.71
1.62
1.59
1.58
1.57
1.56
1.55
1.59
2004
1.99
1.95
1.84
1.78
1.74
1.70
1.68
1.66
1.75
2005
2.34
2.33
2.28
2.22
2.15
2.10
2.06
2.03
2.02
2006
2.55
2.55
2.55
2.49
2.42
2.36
2.32
2.27
2007
2.68
2.59
2.55
2.50
2.46
2.42
2.39
2.40
2.37
2.35
2.56
2008
3.00
3.12
3.10
3.08
3.06
3.04
3.02
2.99
2.97
2.95
2.67
Notes: All prices are in dollars per gallon and are in‡ation adjusted to 2005 dollars. Futures prices are
de‡ated to 2005 dollars using in‡ation expectations implied by Treasury In‡ation-Protected Security yields,
then transformed from oil prices to retail gasoline prices using their historical average relationship.

Appendix Table A2: Results with Endogenous Quantities
Model:
-G

(1)
Base

(2)
Logit
Non-IV
0.44
( 0.033 )
61
29

0.44
( 0.033 )

ln(s)
First Stage
G0 =106

(3)
Logit
IV
0.44
( 0.048 )
-3,607
( 1,380 )

-66.9
19.5 )
G=106
32.3
11.5 )
Angrist-Pischke F Stat
11.76
Notes: The …rst column of this table presents estimates of Equation (5), while the second two columns
present estimates of Equation (8). All speci…cations include 2004 through March 2008. N = 314; 519, and
there are 120.917 …xed e¤ect groups. Observations are weighted by number of observed transactions. All
speci…cations include a full set of month-by-year time dummies and model year controls. Standard errors
are in parenthesis; they are robust, clustered at the level of model by age, and use bootstrapping to account
for the variance in …rst step estimates of G.

55

Appendix Table A3: Results with Endogenous Utilization
b

SE(b)

0
1
2
3
4

Speci…cation
Time Period: 1999-March 2008
Base
Constant elasticity = 0.2
Linear elasticity = 0.2
Constant elasticity = 0.5
Linear elasticity = 0.5

0.76
0.76
0.76
0.77
0.76

0.052
0.063
0.060
0.097
0.072

10
11
12
13
14

Time Period: 2004-March 2008
Base
Constant elasticity = 0.2
Linear elasticity = 0.2
Constant elasticity = 0.5
Linear elasticity = 0.5

0.80
0.82
0.81
0.88
0.82

0.044
0.053
0.052
0.083
0.063

Row

Time Period: 1999-End 2008
Base
0.85
0.042
Constant elasticity = 0.2
0.90
0.053
Linear elasticity = 0.2
0.88
0.052
Constant elasticity = 0.5
1.03
0.086
Linear elasticity = 0.5
0.90
0.067
Notes: Row 0 presents estimates of Equation (5), while all other rows present estimates of Equation (13).
For rows 0-4, N = 931; 888, and there are 37,677 …xed e¤ect groups. For rows 10-14, N = 433; 815, and there
are 21,839 …xed e¤ect groups. For rows 20-24, N = 1; 010; 667, and there are 37,922 …xed e¤ect groups. All
speci…cations include a full set of month-by-year time dummies and MPG group by month-of-year controls,
and all speci…cations use the grouping estimator with groups at the level of time by MPG group, with two
MPG groups. Observations are weighted by number of transactions. Robust standard errors, clustered by
vehicle, are in parenthesis.
20
21
22
23
24

56

Appendix Figures
Appendix Figure A1: New Vehicle Sales by MPG Rating

Notes: This …gure shows the total sales by model year for vehicles rated less than versus greater than
20 MPG. The Futures-Based Gas Forecast series is the average of oil futures prices for all future years,
transformed into dollars per gallon of gasoline.

Appendix Figure A2: VMT Demand

Notes: This …gure illustrates how utility and gasoline expenditures change when gas prices rise from
g2001 to gy .

57

