                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE MISSING "ONE-OFFS":
        THE HIDDEN SUPPLY OF HIGH-ACHIEVING, LOW INCOME STUDENTS

                                          Caroline M. Hoxby
                                          Christopher Avery

                                         Working Paper 18586
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18586


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2012




For inspiration, generous help with data, and numerous useful suggestions, we thank the ACT and
The College Board. These two organizations' dedication to providing students with well-informed
college application advice is the reason that this research exists. We have been especially helped by
Connie Betterton, Michael Matthews, Anne Sturvenant, Ryan Williams, Robert Ziomek. For useful
comments and suggestions, we thank Sarah Turner, Eric Bettinger, Scott Carrell, Charles Clotfelter,
Susan Dynarski, Bridget Long, Bruce Sacerdote, Douglas Staiger, and Jacob Vigdor. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Caroline M. Hoxby and Christopher Avery. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Missing "One-Offs": The Hidden Supply of High-Achieving, Low Income Students
Caroline M. Hoxby and Christopher Avery
NBER Working Paper No. 18586
December 2012, Revised December 2012
JEL No. I21,I23,I24

                                                 ABSTRACT

We show that the vast majority of very high-achieving students who are low-income do not apply
to any selective college or university. This is despite the fact that selective institutions would often
cost them less, owing to generous financial aid, than the resource-poor two-year and non-selective
four-year institutions to which they actually apply. Moreover, high-achieving, low-income students
who do apply to selective institutions are admitted and graduate at high rates. We demonstrate that
these low-income students' application behavior differs greatly from that of their high-income counterparts
who have similar achievement. The latter group generally follows the advice to apply to a few "par"
colleges, a few "reach" colleges, and a couple of "safety" schools. We separate the low-income, high-achieving
students into those whose application behavior is similar to that of their high-income counterparts
("achievement-typical" behavior) and those whose apply to no selective institutions ("income-typical"
behavior). We show that income-typical students do not come from families or neighborhoods that
are more disadvantaged than those of achievement-typical students. However, in contrast to the achievement-typical
students, the income-typical students come from districts too small to support selective public high
schools, are not in a critical mass of fellow high achievers, and are unlikely to encounter a teacher
or schoolmate from an older cohort who attended a selective college. We demonstrate that widely-used
policies–college admissions staff recruiting, college campus visits, college access programs–are likely
to be ineffective with income-typical students, and we suggest policies that will be effective must depend
less on geographic concentration of high achievers.


Caroline M. Hoxby
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Building, 579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
choxby@stanford.edu

Christopher Avery
Harvard Kennedy School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
christopher_avery@hks.harvard.edu
1 Introduction
In this study, we show that a large number--probably the vast majority--of very high-achieving
students from low-income families do not apply to a selective college or university.1 This is in
contrast to students with the same test scores and grades who come from high-income backgrounds:
they are overwhelmingly likely to apply to a college whose median student has achievement much
like their own. This gap is puzzling because the subset of high-achieving, low-income students who
do apply to selective institutions are just as likely to enroll and progress toward a degree at the same
pace as high-income students with equivalent test scores and grades.2 Added to the puzzle is the fact
that very selective institutions not only offer students much richer instructional, extracurricular, and
other resources, they also offer high-achieving, low-income students so much financial aid that the
students would often pay less to attend a selective institution than the far less selective or non-
selective post-secondary institutions that most of them do attend.
     We attempt to unravel this puzzle by characterizing low-income, very high-achieving students
in the U.S. using a rich array of data, including individual-level data on every student who takes one
of the two college assessments, the ACT and the SAT. We divide the low-income, very high-
achieving students into those who apply similarly to their high-income counterparts ("achievement-
typical" behavior) and those who apply in a very dissimilar manner ("income-typical" behavior).
We do this because we are interested in why some low-income, high-achieving students appear to
base their college-going on their achievement and others base it on their income. We find that
income-typical students are fairly isolated from other high achievers, both in terms of geography and
in terms of the high schools they attend. In fact, their lack of concentration is such that many


         1
            Hereafter, "low income" and "high income" mean, respectively, the bottom and top quartiles of the
income distribution for families with a child who is a high school senior. "High-achieving" refers to a student who
scores at or the 90th percentile on the ACT comprehensive or the SAT I (math and verbal) and who has a high
school grade point average of A- or above. This is approximately 4 percent of U.S. high school students. W hen we
say "selective college" in a generic way, we refer to colleges and universities that are in categories from Very
Competitive Plus to M ost Competitive in Barron's Profiles of American Colleges. There were 236 such colleges in
the 2008 edition. Together, they have enrollment equal to 2.8 times the number of students who scored at or above
the 90th percentile on the ACT or SAT I. Later, we are much more specific about colleges' selectivity: we define
schools that are "reach," "match," and "safety" for an individual student, based on a comparison between his college
aptitude test scores and the median aptitude test scores of enrolled students at the school.

         2
             Below, we demonstrate that this is true using evidence from the National Student Clearinghouse.

                                                           1
traditional strategies for informing high-achieving students about college--for instance, college
admission staff visiting high schools or after-school programs that provide mentoring--are probably
prohibitively expensive. We also show that income-typical students have only a negligible
probability of meeting a teacher, high school counselor, or schoolmate from an older cohort who
herself attended a selective college.
    In contrast, we show that achievement-typical students are highly concentrated. Many of these
low-income students attend a small number of high schools that admit students on the basis of an
exam or previous grades. Since these high schools are nearly all located in large metropolitan areas
(not even in smaller metropolitan areas), their students are far from representative of high-achieving,
low-income students in general. Moreover, we show evidence that suggests that these schools may
be "tapped out"--that is, their students are already so recruited by selective colleges that further
recruitment may merely shift students among similar, selective colleges, not cause students to
change their college-going behavior in more fundamental ways.
    The evidence that we present is descriptive, not causal. This is an important distinction. For
instance, we cannot assert that a high-achieving, low-income student would act like an achievement-
typical student rather than an income-typical student if he were moved to a large metropolitan area
with a high school that practices selective admission. Moreover, we do not assert that income-
typical students would be more likely to, say, graduate from college if they applied to college in the
same way that achievement-typical and high-income, high-achieving students do. We leave such
causal tests for related studies in which we are conducting randomized, controlled interventions.
Nevertheless, our descriptive evidence makes three important contributions. First, it documents that
the number of low-income, high-achieving students is much greater than college admissions staff
generally believe. Since admissions staff see only students who apply, it is logical that they
underestimate the number who exist. Second, our evidence suggests hypotheses for why so many
low-income, high-achieving students apply to colleges in a manner that may not be in their best
interests and certainly differs from the manner in which similarly high-achieving, high-income
students apply. Most of the hypotheses are related to the idea that income-typical students--despite
being intelligent, literate, and on colleges' search lists (the lists to which selective colleges mail
brochures)--lack information or encouragement that achievement-typical students have because they
are part of local, critical masses of high-achievers. Third, our descriptive evidence allows us to

                                                  2
explain why some traditional interventions are unlikely to change the situation and allows us to
identify other interventions that could plausibly do so.
    Our previous work (Avery, Hoxby, Jackson, Burek, Pope, Raman 2006) was perhaps the first
to identify the phenomena described in this paper, but there is now a small literature on the topic of
"undermatching." We especially note the work of Bowen, Chingos, and McPherson (2009), Dillon
and Smith (2012), and Pallais (2009). Relative to those studies, our study's strengths are its
comprehensiveness (we analyze the entire population of high-achieving students, not a sample); our
complete characterization of each U.S. high school, including its college-going history; our ability
to map students to their exact high schools and neighborhoods (this allows us to investigate exactly
what they experience); and our use of accurate administrative data to identify students' aptitude,
application behavior, college enrollment, and on-time degree completion.                  The sheer
comprehensiveness and accuracy of our data is what allow us to form strong hypotheses about why
some high-achieving, low-income students are income-typical and others are achievement-typical.
Our data also allow us to assess which interventions might plausibly (and cost effectively) alter such
behavior.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present some
background on college policies directed toward low-income, high-achieving students. In section 3,
we describe our data sources. In section 4, we present a descriptive portrait of very high-achieving
U.S. students--their family incomes, parents' education, race, ethnicity, and geography. In section
5, we show that high-achieving students' college application behavior differs greatly by family
income. We also show that, conditional on applying to a college, students' enrollment, college
grades, and degree receipt do not differ by family income among students with similar incoming
qualifications. In section 6, we divide low-income, high-achieving students into achievement-
typical and income-typical groups. We then compare factors that might affect the application
behavior of the groups. In section 7, we consider several interventions commonly directed towards
low-income, high-achieving students, and we demonstrate that they are likely to be cost-prohibitive
for income-typical students. We conclude by speculating on the sort of interventions that could
plausibly improve income-typical students' welfare.




                                                  3
2 Background on College Policies Directed Toward Low-Income,
High-Achieving Students
Many students from low-income families have poor college outcomes: they do not attend college;
they drop out before attaining a degree; they earn so few credits each term that they cannot graduate
even in 1.5 times the "correct" time to degree; they attend institutions with such poor resources that,
even when they do graduate, they earn much less than the median college graduate. These poor
college outcomes are often attributed to low-income students being less academically prepared for
college and less able to pay for college. These are certainly valid concerns. As we show later, high-
income (top income quartile) students are in fact much more likely to be high achievers at the end
of high school than are low-income students. Nevertheless, some low-income students are very high
achievers: at the end of high school, they have grades and college aptitude test scores that put them
in the top 4 percent of all U.S. secondary school students or--equivalently--the top 10 percent of
students who take one the ACT or SAT college assessment exams.
     High-achieving, low-income students are considered very desirable by selective colleges,
private and public, which are eager to make their student bodies socio-economically diverse without
enrolling students who are unprepared for their demanding curricula.3 Therefore, these students tend
not only to be offered admission by selective schools if they apply, they also tend to be offered very
generous financial aid. In recent years, selective schools' aid for low-income, high-achieving
students has become so generous that such students' out-of-pocket costs of attendance are sometimes
zero and nearly always small.
     Figure 1 shows the income distribution for families with a child in the twelfth grade--a good
indicator for a family having a child of college-going age in the next year.4 It demonstrates that the


         3
           There are many reasons for selective institutions to prefer socio-economic diversity. These include, to
name just a few: a deep respect for merit regardless of need; a recognition that students whose lives were
transformed by highly-aided college education tend to be great donors if they do become rich; a belief that a diverse
student body makes instruction and research more productive; pressure from politicians.

         4
           W e pick families with a twelfth-grader (or with a 17-year-old, which works similarly) because children
are nearly always still dependents at that grade and age. If we were to pick families with 19-year-olds, say, we
would find numerous families headed by the 19-year-old himself and such families would generally have lower
income than the families from which they would have applied to college as "dependent" students. It is such
dependent students with whom we are concerned since a negligible share of "mature", independent students are

                                                          4
20th percentile of this income distribution was $35,185. Table 1 shows what out-of-pocket costs
and loans such a student would have experienced in the 2008-09 school year at a variety of selective
and non-selective institutions. The table is organized based on institutions' selectivity as classified
by Barrons' Profiles of American Colleges: most selective, very selective, selective 4-year
institutions, non-selective 4-year institutions, and (non-selective by definition) community colleges
and other 2-year institutions.        Table 1 also shows the colleges' comprehensive cost for a student
who needs no financial aid (the "sticker price") and shows their instructional expenditure per
student. What the table reveals is that a low-income student who can gain admission to one of the
most selective colleges in the U.S. can expect to pay less to attend a very selective college with
maximum instructional expenditures than to attend a non-selective 4-year college or 2-year
institution. In short, the table demonstrates the strong financial commitment that selective colleges
have made towards becoming affordable to low-income students.5
     In related work (Avery, Hoxby, Jackson, Burek, Pope, Raman 2006), we analyze Harvard's
introduction of zero costs for students with incomes of $40,000 and below starting in 2005.
(Harvard is a relevant option for the students we analyze in this paper.) Harvard's policy was
quickly imitated or outdone by the institutions with which it most competes: Yale, Princeton,
Stanford, and so on. All such institutions subsequently raised the bar on what they considered to
be a low enough income to merit zero costs. Thus, even students from families with income above
the U.S. median can often attend such institutions for free. Although less well-endowed institutions
followed suit to a lesser extent (usually by setting the bar for zero costs at a lower family income
than the aforementioned institutions did), the result was very low costs for low-income students at
selective institutions, as shown in Table 1.
     In our other work, we show that Harvard's policy change had very little effect--at least, very
little short-term effect--on the income composition of its class. We estimate that it increased the
number of low-income students by approximately 15, in a class of more than 1600. Interestingly,


high-achieving according to the criteria we employ, which mimic admissions standards at selective colleges.

         5
           It is interesting to note that a student's out-of-pocket costs and loans, in absolute terms, peak at private
colleges of middling to low selectivity. This is because these colleges have little endowment with which to subsidize
low-income students and they also receive no funding from their state government (as public colleges do) with
which to subsidize students.

                                                          5
this very modest effect was not a surprise to many college admissions staff. They explained that
there was a small pool of low-income, high-achieving students who were already "fully tapped" so
that additional aid and recruiting could do little except shift them among institutions that were fairly
similar. Put another way, they believed that the overall pool of high-achieving, low-income students
was inelastic with respect to additional aid and recruiting. While they believed that they might
diversify their student bodies by poaching from other selective schools or lowering their admissions
standards for low-income students, they did not expect additional aid alone to affect matters much.6
     In this paper, we show that--viewed one way--the admissions staff are correct. The pool of
high-achieving, low-income students who apply to selective colleges is small: for every high-
achieving, low-income student who applies, there are about 15 high-achieving, high-income students
who apply. Viewed another way, the admissions staff are too pessimistic: the vast majority of high-
achieving, low-income students do not apply to any selective college. There are, in fact, only about
2.5 very high-achieving, high-income students for every high-achieving, low-income student in the
population. The problem is that most high-achieving, low-income students do not apply to any
selective college so they are invisible to admissions staff. Moreover, we will show that they are
unlikely to come to the attention of admissions staff through traditional recruiting channels.
     High-achieving students are traditionally recruited by selective colleges through a few means.
First, colleges can purchase from the ACT or College Board mailing lists of students who satisfy
certain criteria--for instance, students with high scores on the college assessment exams. Colleges
can then send brochures to the student on the mailing lists. However, with rare exceptions, most of
these mailings are not differentiated by a student's economic disadvantage.7 Thus, a low-income,

         6
            Personal communication with the authors at conferences of the Association of Black Admissions and
Financial Aid Officers of the Ivy League and Sister Schools (ABAFAOILSS). Because many very selective
institutions practice need-blind admissions, they maintain "Chinese W alls" between the admissions and financial aid
offices. Thus, many schools can only precisely identify economically disadvantaged students once they have been
admitted. However, many admissions officers say that they use students' essays, teachers' letters, parents' education,
attendance at an "under-resourced" high school, and similar indicators to identify, provide favorable terms of
admission to, and strongly recruit students whom they believe to be economically disadvantaged.

         7
            The authors have worked with the ACT, College Board, and a variety of other organizations to create
mailing lists that do take account of a student's family income. However, these projects could more accurately be
described as pilots than as widespread practice. The main reason that differentiated mailings have not been used is
that the organizations did not (at least, until their involvement with researchers like the authors) identify low-income
students with accuracy. Some colleges do target extra mailings to students who live in low-income zipcodes, but--
unlike Census Blocks and Block Groups--zipcodes are not configured to maximize socio-economic uniformity or

                                                           6
high-achieving student is likely to receive numerous brochures from selective colleges, but the
brochures will give him the same information about the college's costs and financial aid as they
would give to a rich student who needed no aid at all. Second, colleges maintain strong
relationships with counselors at high schools that reliably send them numerous qualified, low-
income applicants. Many of these high schools are those that practice selective admissions, are
magnet high schools, or are otherwise well-known "feeders".                 Third, colleges maintain strong
relationships with (and in cases pay for the services of) college access programs that reliably send
them qualified, low-income applicants. Since the vast majority of college access programs rely on
students to self-select into their activities, it is unclear whether they identify students who would
otherwise be unknown to colleges or merely serve as a channel for students to identify themselves
as good college prospects. Fourth, college staff visit high schools to describe their offerings and to
meet prospective students. However, given that there are more than 42,000 high schools in the U.S.,
staff can visit only a tiny fraction of schools. A college whose staff visit 100 high schools is
considered to be exceptionally dedicated and well-funded. Staff tend to visit schools that are feeders
or that are located such that students from numerous high schools can attend the visit. Finally, most
colleges welcome on-campus visits from prospective students and often issue special invitations to
students from local high schools. Thus, low-income students who happen to live within easy
distance of a college campus are quite likely to have opportunities to visit it, although not to visit
colleges in general.


3 Data and Identifying High-Achieving, Low-Income Students
     We attempt to identify the vast majority of U.S. students who are very high-achieving.
Specifically, we are interested in students who are well-prepared for college and who are very likely
to be admitted to the majority of selective institutions if they apply. Thus, as mentioned above, we
choose students whose college aptitude test scores place them in the top 10 percent of test takers




recognizable neighborhoods. Thus, zipcode-based mailing lists are very imperfect ways of targeting low-income
students.

                                                       7
based on either the SAT I (combined math and verbal) or the ACT (comprehensive).8 Since only
about 40 percent of U.S. secondary school students take a college aptitude test, these students are
in the top 4 percent of U.S. students. We include in our target group only those students who self-
report a grade point average of A- or higher in high school. In practice, this criterion for inclusion
hardly matters once we condition on having test scores in the top 10 percent.9
     Our key data comes from the ACT and the College Board, both of whom supplied us with de-
identified, student-level data on everyone in the high school graduating class of 2008 who took
either the ACT or the SAT I.10 Apart from students' test score history, these datasets contain
students' high school identifiers, their self-reported grades, their race and ethnicity, and their gender.
Validation exercises have shown that students self-report their grades quite accurately to the ACT
and College Board (with just a hint of upward bias), probably because students perceive the
organizations as playing a semi-official role in the college application process (Freeberg, 1988).
The data also contain answers to numerous questions about students' high school activities and their
plans for college.
     Importantly, the ACT and College Board data contain a full list of the colleges to which
students have sent their test scores. Except in rare circumstances, a student cannot complete his
application to a selective college without having the ACT or the College Board send his verified test
scores to the college. Thus, score sending is necessary but not sufficient for a completed application.
Put another way, score sending may exaggerate but does not understate the set of selective colleges
to which a student applies. Past studies have found that score sending corresponds closely with

        8
            The cut-off is 1300 for combined mathematics and verbal ("Critical Reading") scores on the SAT. The
cut-off is 29 for the ACT composite score.

          9
            W e also considered excluding students who had taken no subject tests since some selective colleges
require them. Subject tests include SAT II tests, Advanced Placement (AP) tests, and International Baccalaureate
tests. However, we dropped this criterion for a few reasons. First, many selective colleges do not require subject
tests or make admissions offers that are conditional on a student taking subject tests and scoring well on them.
Second, among SAT I takers, few students were excluded by this criterion. Third, ACT comprehensive takers
usually take subject tests offered by the College Board or International Baccalaureate. W hen we attempt to match
students between these data sources, errors occur so that at least some of the exclusions were false.
          W e match students between the ACT comprehensive and the SAT I to ensure that we do not double-count
high-achieving students. However, this match is easier than matching the ACT comprehensive takers to College
Board subject tests, which students often take as sophomores or juniors in high school.

        10
           There are approximately 2,400,000 students per cohort who take a College Board test. There are
approximately 933,000 students per cohort who take the ACT.

                                                         8
actual applications to selective colleges (Card and Krueger 2005, Avery and Hoxby 2004). Students
who are admitted via an Early Decision or Early Action program often do not apply to colleges other
than the one that admitted them early. However, such students typically send scores to all of the
schools to which they would have applied had the Early school not admitted them (Avery,
Glickman, Hoxby, Metrick, forthcoming). Thus, it is somewhat better to observe score sending than
actual applications: score sending more accurately reveals the set of selective colleges to which the
student would have applied. Note, however, that as most two-year colleges and some non-selective
colleges do not require verified ACT or SAT I scores, we do not assume that a student who sends
no scores is applying to no postsecondary institutions. Rather, he is applying to no selective
institution.
     For some of our analyses, we need to know where students actually enrolled and whether they
are on-track to attain a degree on time (June of 2012 for baccalaureate degrees). We therefore match
students to their records at the National Student Clearinghouse, which tracks enrollment and degree
receipt. We match all low-income, high-achieving students and 25 percent random sample of high-
income, high-achieving students. We do not match all students simply because of expense.
     The addresses in the data are geocoded for us at the census block level, the smallest level of
Census geography (22 households on average). We match each student to a rich description of his
neighborhood. The neighborhood's racial composition, gender composition, age composition, and
population density are matched at the block level. Numerous socio-demographic variables are
matched at the block group level (556 households on average): several moments of the family
income distribution, adults' educational attainment, employment, the occupational distribution,
several moments of the house value distribution, and so on. We also merge in income data from the
Internal Revenue Service at the zipcode level.
     In addition to the data on the graduating class of 2008, we have parallel data for previous
cohorts of students who took an ACT or a College Board test. (We have one previous cohort for the
ACT; we have more than 10 previous cohorts for the College Board.) We use the previous cohort
data in a few ways that will become clear below.
     We create a profile of every high school, public and private, in the U.S. using administrative
data on enrollment, graduates, basic school characteristics and socio-demographics. The sources
are the Common Core of Data (NCES 2009) and the Private School Survey (NCES 2009). By

                                                 9
summarizing our previous cohort data at the high school level, we also create profiles of each
school's usual test scores, application behavior, and college plans. For instance, we know how many
students from the high school typically apply to each selective college or to any given group of
selective colleges. Finally, we add high schools' test scores, at the subgroup level, for each state's
statewide test, as mandated by No Child Left Behind. These scores are all standardized to have a
zero mean and a standard deviation of one.
    We estimate a student's family income rather than relying on the students' self-reported family
income. This is for a few reasons. First, both the ACT's and the College Board's family income
questions provide a series of somewhat wide income "bins" as potential answers. Second, although
the College Board's questionnaire appears to elicit unbiased self-reports of family income, students
make substantial unsystematic mistakes when their data are compared to their verified data used in
financial aid calculations. Also, about 62 percent of students simply do not answer the College
Board's family income question. Third, although the ACT's questionnaire elicits a high response
rate, its question refers to the fact that colleges offer more generous financial aid to students with
lower family incomes. This framing apparently induces students to underestimate their family
incomes: we find that students often report family incomes that are lower than the 10th percentile
of family income in their Census block group.
    We predict students' family income using all the data we have on previous cohorts of College
Board students, matched to data used by financial aid officers to compute grants and loans. That is,
using previous cohorts, we regress accurate administrative data on family income using all of our
Census variables, the IRS income variables, the high school profile variables, and the student's own
race and ethnicity. In practice, the income variables from the Census have the most explanatory
power. However, our goal is simply to maximize explanatory power and many of the variables we
include are somewhat multicollinear. We choose predicted income cut-offs to minimize Type I error
(false positives) in declaring a student to be low-income. Specifically, we choose cut-offs such that,
in previous cohorts, only 5 percent of students who are not actually in the bottom quartile of the
income distribution are predicted to be "low-income." We recognize that by minimizing Type I
error, we expand Type II error, but it is less worrisome for our exercise if we mistakenly classify a
low-income student as middle-income than if we do the reverse. This is because we wish to
characterize the college-going behavior of students who are low-income. Since we also find that

                                                 10
there are more high-achieving, low-income students than college admissions staff typically believe,
we make decisions that will understate rather than overstate the low-income, high-achieving
population.
     More generally, it is not important for our exercise that our measure of income be precise. What
matters for our exercise is that the students we analyze are, in fact, capable of gaining admission and
appropriate financial aid at selective colleges. We are confident that they are because, for the most
part, we are using the same verified data that the colleges themselves use. Also, we show later that
we can predict the colleges at which students enroll, conditioning on the colleges to which they
applied. We would not be able to make accurate predictions if we lacked important achievement
and other data that colleges use in their admissions processes.
     Hereafter, we describe as low-income any student whose estimated family income is at or below
the cut-off for the bottom quartile of the 2008 distribution of incomes among families who had a
child in his senior year of high school: $41,472.11 We describe as high-income any student whose
estimated family income is at or above the cut-off for the top quartile of the same distribution:
$120,776. See Figure 1 for other percentiles.


4 A Portrait of High-Achieving Students in the U.S.
Who and where are the high-achieving students in the U.S.? In this section, we briefly characterize
them, leaving more detailed analysis of the low-income, high-achieving group for later.
     Figure 2 shows that 34 percent of high achievers have estimated family income in the top
quartile and 27 percent have estimated family income in the third quartile. That is, high income
families are overrepresented in the high-achieving population. However, 22 percent and 17 percent
of high achievers have estimated family incomes in, respectively, the second and bottom quartiles.
We estimate that there are at least 25,000 and probably something like 35,000 low-income high
achievers in the U.S.
     Table 2 shows that among high achievers, those who are from higher income families do have
slightly higher college aptitude scores, but the difference is small. The average low-income high


       11
          Since we require microdata to create the relevant distribution, our source for this information is the
American Community Survey 2008.

                                                         11
achiever scores at the 94.1th percentile. The average high-income high achiever scores at the 95.7th
percentile.
     Data on the parental education of high achievers are unfortunately very incomplete because
ACT takers are not asked to report their parents' education and 52 percent of SAT I takers fail to
answer the question about their parents' education. Moreover, SAT I takers are apparently less
likely to report their parents' education when it is low. We base this assessment on the observation
that parents' education is more likely to be missing for students who live in Census block groups
with low adult education. For what they are worth, however, the data on the parents' education are
shown in Figure 3.12 More precisely, we show the maximum of father's reported educational
attainment and mother's reported educational attainment. 50.7 percent of students who report their
parents' education say that at least one parent has a graduate degree. 27.9 percent say that at least
one parent has a baccalaureate degree and another 6 percent cite "some graduate school" (but no
degree). 11.6 percent claim that at least one parent has an associate's degree or "some college or
trade school" (but no degree). Only 3.8 percent report having parents neither of whom has more
than a high school degree. Perhaps the most interesting thing about the parents' education data is
that it seems to indicate that high achievers are reluctant to report that they have poorly educated
parents.
     Figure 4 displays information on high achievers' race and ethnicity, which 98 percent of
students voluntarily report. 75.8 percent of high achievers say that they are white non-Hispanic and
another 15.0 percent say that they are Asian. The remaining 9.2 percent of high achievers are
associated with an underrepresented minority.13 They are Hispanic (4.7 percent), black non-
Hispanic (1.5 percent), Native American (0.4 percent), or mixed race/ethnicity (2.6 percent). If we
focus on low-income high achievers only (Figure 5), we see that 15.4 percent are underrepresented
minorities. Interestingly, the entire increase in this share comes out of the percentage who are white.
Asians make up 15.2 percent of low-income high achievers, almost identical to their share of all high
achievers.


        12
             W e do not attempt to correct these data for biases because we do not have verified data on parents'
education.

        13
             Underrepresented minority is the term of art in college admissions. Notably, it excludes Asians.

                                                           12
     A key take-away from Figure 5 is a student's being an underrpresented minority is not a good
proxy for his being low-income. Thus, if a college wants its student body to exhibit income diversity
commensurate with the income diversity among high achievers, it cannot possibly attain this goal
simply by recruiting students who are underrepresented minorities. If admissions staff do most of
their outreach to low-income students by visiting schools that are largely Hispanic and black, the
staff should realize that this strategy is likely to lead to a student body that is not income-diverse.
     The choropleth map in Figure 6 shows the number of high achieving students in each county
of the U.S. Counties are an imperfect unit of observation because some are large in land area and
some are small. Nevertheless, they are most consistent political units in the U.S.14 The darker is the
county's coloring, the more high-achieving students it contains. What the map demonstrates is that
critical masses of high-achieving students are most likely to be found in urban counties in southern
New England (Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island), the Mid-Atlantic (New York, New
Jersey, eastern Pennsylvania), southern Florida, and coastal California from the Bay Area to San
Diego. The other critical masses are more scattered, but a person familiar with U.S. geography can
pick out Chicago (especially), Houston, Dallas/Fort Worth, Atlanta, and some smaller cities. In
short, if one's goal were to visit every county where one could gather at least 100 high achievers,
one could concentrate entirely on a limited number of cities on the east and west coasts and a few
cities in between.
     Some part of the above statement is due to the fact that high-income, highly educated parents
are somewhat concentrated in the aforementioned areas and such parents, we have seen, are more
likely to have high-achieving children. However, some part of the above statement is due purely
to population density. That is, even if children in all counties of the U.S. were equally likely to be
high-achieving, there would still be critical masses of them in densely populated counties and vice
versa. The choropleth map in Figure 7 illustrates the role of population density by showing the
number of high-achieving students per 17 year old in each county. The darker a county is, the
higher is its decile on this relative measure. The map makes it clear that this relative measure is far
less concentrated than the absolute measure that favors dense counties. In fact, there is a belt of



         14
            That is, the size and scope of municipalities, school districts, and other jurisdictions are far less
consistent than those of counties.

                                                            13
counties that tend to produce high achievers that runs from Minnesota and the Dakotas south through
Missouri and Kansas. There are also a good number of Appalachian, Indiana, and non-coastal
California but still Western counties that tend to produce high achievers. In short, if one's goal were
to meet a representative sample of high achievers, one's trip could not be concentrated on a limited
number of counties on the Coasts and a few cities in-between.


5 College Applications, Enrollment, and Degree Receipt among
High-Achieving Students in the U.S.
In this section, we analyze the college application choices, enrollment decisions, and on-time degree
receipt of high-achieving students in the U.S., paying attention to how low-income students'
behavior does or does not differ from that of high-income students. Because colleges in the U.S.
are so varied and large in number, we characterize them by the college aptitude score of their median
student, expressed in percentiles of the national college aptitude test score distribution. This
statistic, although admittedly insufficient to describe them fully, has important qualities. First, it is
probably the single best, simple indicator of selectivity--much better than the admissions rate, for
instance (Avery, Glickman, Hoxby, and Metrick, forthcoming). Second, when an expert college
counselor advises students on how to choose a portfolio of schools to which to apply, he usually tells
students to apply to a few schools that are a "reach," four or more schools that are "par" or "match,"
and one of more schools that are "safe." Similar advice is widely available on internet sites of
college advising organizations with a strong reputation, including the College Board and the ACT.
Experts use schools' median scores to define "reach" (typically: the school's median score is five
or more percentiles above the student's own), "match" (typically: the absolute value of the
difference between the school's median score and the student's own is less than five percentiles, and
"safety" (typically: the school's median score is five to fifteen percentiles below the student's own).
Naturally, the exact cut-offs for these categories vary by expert, and high-achieving students are
often advised to apply to their state's public flagship university, even if it falls below the safety




                                                   14
zone.15 High-achieving students are generally advised to apply to at least eight schools.

a College Application Behavior -- A Graphical Analysis
In this sub-section, we provide graphical evidence of what student's application portfolios look like.
This is somewhat informal but useful for fixing ideas and defining categories before we move to
formal econometric analysis in the next sub-section. In what follows, an "application" is sending
a score to a college.16
       Figure 8 shows a histogram of the application portfolios of high income students. It is
important to understand how this figure is constructed. On the horizontal axis is the difference
between the applied-to college's median aptitude score and the student's own score, in percentiles.
Thus, if an application is located at 0, the student is applying to a match school whose median
student has exactly his scores. An application at +8 is a reach. An application at, say, -13 is a
safety. Since non-selective colleges do not require their students to take college aptitude tests (and
thus do not report a median student score), an application to a non-selective school is placed at -94,
which is 0 minus the average percentile score of high-achieving students in the data. It is not
obvious where to place applications to non-selective schools, but -94 has the advantage that such
applications cannot be mistaken for applications to a school that is selective but that sets a very low
bar.
       Each student is given a weight of one in the histogram and this weight is split evenly over his
applications. This is to ensure that the histogram does not over-represent the behavior of students
who apply to more schools since, after all, each student will only enroll at a single one (initially).
Thus, if a student puts all of his eggs in one basket and applies to a single +8 school, his full weight



          15
            Experts also advise students to look at the high school grade point average that is typical of a college's
student. However, such grade-based categories are not terribly relevant to high-achieving students because selective
colleges vary so much more on the basis of college aptitude test scores than on the basis of high school grades.

          16
            As noted above, a student may often apply to a non-selective college without sending scores, although a
good number of students send scores to them for no apparent reason except that the first few sends are free. A
student may also send scores to a non-selective college for placement purposes (that is, to avoid being placed in
lower-level or even remedial courses). If we match students to their enrollment records in the National Student
Clearinghouse, we can add to their set of applications any non-selective school in which they enrolled without
sending scores. This does not change the figures much although it does systemically amplify the bar for non-
selective applications. W e do add applications in this way for the analysis in the second half of this section, but it
makes too little difference here to be worthwhile.

                                                          15
of one will show up in the +8 bar. If a student applies to one +8 school, one +6 school, one +4
school, and so on down to one -4 school, one -6 school, and one -8 school, then one 9th of his weight
will show up in each of the relevant bars. Note that each bar is 2 percentiles wide.
     Figure 8 shows that high income students largely follow the advice of expert counselors. The
bulk of their applications are made to match schools. They apply to some reach schools as well, but
they are mechanically limited in the extent to which they can do this. There are no reach schools
for slightly more than half of the high-achieving students we study.17 High-income, high-achieving
students also apply fairly frequently to safety schools. It is noteworthy that many such students
apply to their state's flagship university, probably as a safe school but possibly out of state loyalty.
These schools vary greatly in selectivity, so that some such applications are in the safe range, but
other applications to flagships are safer than safe. For instance, an application to a flagship with
median scores at the 50th percentile would end up at -40 to -50.
     The reader might be surprised to find that high income, high-achieving students apply to some
colleges that are non-selective on academic grounds. However, these appear to be students with
special abilities and tastes because the schools in question are often specialty schools--music
conservatories, art or design schools, drama or performing arts schools, cooking schools, and so on.
     Figure 9 shows that few low-income, high-achieving students follow the advice of expert
counselors. More than 40 percent of the mass in the histogram loads on non-selective schools. (This
is an underestimate because scores are not sent to some non-selective schools. If we include every
non-selective enrollment as a non-selective application, the non-selective bar on the histogram
would rise by 5.1 percent.) Moreover, the non-selective colleges to which low-income students
apply are rarely of the performing arts type mentioned above. They are often local community
colleges or local four-year institutions with low instructional spending per student and low
graduation rates. Much of the size of the non-selective bar is due to the fact that many low-income,
high-achieving students apply only to a single non-selective college or to a single non-selective
college and one additional college, which is often only weakly selective. In fact, 53 percent of low-
income, high-achieving students fit the profile we will hereafter describe as income-typical: they


         17
           For instance, consider a student whose own scores put him at the 94th percentile. In order to apply to a
reach school, he would need to apply to a school whose median student scored at the 99th percentile. There are no
such schools--at least no schools that admit to having such a high median score.

                                                         16
apply to no school whose median score is within 15 percentiles of their own and they do apply to
at least one non-selective college.
    At the other extreme, 8 percent of low-income, high-achieving students apply in a manner that
is somewhat close to what is recommended and to what their high-income counterparts do: they
apply to at least one match college, at least one safety college with median scores not more than 15
percentiles lower than their own, and apply to no non-selective colleges. We hereafter designate
such students as achievement-typical, noting that once a student fits the above criteria, he usually
also applies to other match colleges.
    The remaining 39 percent of low-income, high-achieving student use application strategies that
an expert would probably regard as odd. It is not unusual, for instance, to see students who apply
to only a local non-selective college and one extremely selective and well-known college--Harvard,
for instance. No expert would advise such a strategy because the probability of getting into an
extremely selective, well-known college is low if a student applies to just one--even if the student's
test scores and grades are typical of the college's students. Another strategy that appears fairly often
is for a student to apply to a single public college within his state that is selective but is much less
selective than the state's flagship university. Although about half of these application choices could
be motivated by distance from home, the other half cannot because the flagship university is nearer.
Another strategy that falls into the idiosyncratic category is a student applying to a single private
college outside his state that is selective but much less selective and much poorer in resources than
the student's private match colleges would be. Such choices are odd because although the private
match colleges might offer fewer scholarships that are explicitly merit-based, they offer much more
generous need-based aid so that the student would pay less to attend and would enjoy substantially
more resources. Furthermore, it is almost never sensible for a low-income student to apply to a
single private, selective college: he may be able to use competing aid offers to improve the aid
package he gets from his most preferred college.
    We have described a few salient strategies that appear among low-income, high-achieving
students who are neither achievement-typical nor income-typical. However, most of these students
do not fit an obvious pattern. Thus, below we turn to an econometric analysis, in which we can
simultaneously consider a large number of factors correlated with students' application choices.
    Before doing this, however, we offer Figure 10, which overlays the histograms for low-income,

                                                  17
middle-income, and high-income students who are high-achieving. It cuts off the portion of the
histogram that shows non-selective colleges so that readers can focus on application choices among
colleges that selective to at least some degree. It will be observed that middle-income students'
behavior is about midway between that of their low- and high-income counterparts. Moreover, even
within the subset of applications that are made to selective colleges, high-income students apply
much more to match colleges and low-income students apply much more to colleges far below the
safety level.

b College Application Behavior -- An Econometric Analysis
In this sub-section, we assess the factors that are associated with a student's choice of his application
portfolio using a conditional logit model in which a student can apply to all colleges in the U.S. but
decides to apply only to some. This model is based on a random utility framework and assumes that
the student prefers all colleges to which he applies over the colleges to which he does not apply. We
do not assume anything about the student's preference ordering within the colleges to which he
applied.18 Each possible college matched with each student is an observation and the dependent
variable is a binary variable equal to one if the student submits an application to the college and zero
otherwise.
     The explanatory variables we consider are the difference between a school's median test score
and the student's own test score if positive, the same difference if negative,19 an indicator for the
school's being non-selective, the distance between the student's home and the school, the square of
this distance, an indicator for the school being the most proximate, an indicator for the school being
public, an indicator for the school being in-state for the student, an indicator for the school being the
flagship university of the student's state of residence, the sticker price of the college, the likely net


         18
            W e considered estimating a rank-ordered logit model (Beggs, Cardell, and Hausman 1981) based on the
assumption that the order in which the student sent scores to colleges indicates the rank order of his preference
among them. (All colleges to which no application are assumed to generate net utility below the bottom ranked
college.) If we do this, the rank-ordered logit generates fairly similar results, in part because many students do not
send scores to more than a few colleges. However, the order of score sending might be a poor proxy for some
students' preference orderings because many students choose a first batch of colleges to receive their scores before
they know what those scores are. Once they learn their scores, students often choose a second batch of colleges to
receive their scores. At application time, they presumably prefer the second batch to the first.

        19
           That is, we do not assume that the response of a student to mismatch is symmetric around his own test
score. He may only slightly like being at a reach school, for instance, but strongly dislike being at a safety school.

                                                          18
cost of the college for the student, and the student-oriented resources per student at the college. We
fully interact these explanatory variables with indicators for the student being low-income, high-
income, or in between. Thus, we estimate separate coefficients for each income group. In the tables,
we do not show the coefficients for the middle income group because they nearly always fall
between those of the high- and low-income students, but the estimates are available upon request.
     Table 3 shows the results of this estimation. The coefficients are expressed as odd ratios so that
a coefficient greater than one means that an increase in the covariate is associated with increase in
the probability that the student applies to the school, all other covariates held constant. Based on
our graphical analysis, we expect to find very different coefficients for low- and high-income
students, and we do.20 Note that, although it is convenient to describe the coefficients as though they
literally revealed preference, they should not be given a causal interpretation. For instance, students
might "disfavor" distance not because distance itself generates negative utility but because distant
schools have, say, distinct cultures that the student dislikes.
     We find that high-income students strongly favor reach colleges and disfavor safety colleges
(those for which the score difference is negative). Per percentile of difference, this effect is much
stronger on the reach side than on the safety side but recall that high-achieving students can only
reach a bit whereas they can apply to very safe schools. High-income students strongly dislike non-
selective institutions. High-income students dislike higher net costs but (all else equal) like higher
sticker prices. This is probably because higher sticker prices are associated with higher per-student
resources, one measure of which they also like. High-income students dislike distance, but the
quadratic term is such that they dislike it only up to a point, after which they are fairly indifferent.
They have a mild preference for in-state schools and their state's flagship university. They do not
have a statistically significant preference for publicly controlled schools.
     The low-income students exhibit several immediate contrasts. Such students strongly favor
non-selective colleges. This was obvious in the graphical evidence. They do not disfavor schools
whose median scores are lower than theirs. They slightly disfavor schools with higher sticker prices


         20
             In Avery and Hoxby 2004, we found much smaller differences in the behavior of low- and high-income
students, but all the students we sampled attended high schools that were reliable feeder schools. As shall be seen,
the low-income students we sampled were thus disproportionately achievement-typical students who do behave
similarly to high-income students.

                                                         19
(recall that these were favored by high-income students) and do not have a preference for net costs
that is statistically significantly different from zero. Low-income students favor schools with higher
expenditure per student, but not nearly as much as high-income students do. Distance is strongly
disfavored for schools within 100 miles but, thereafter, low-income students are fairly indifferent
to it. Low-income students favor in-state schools somewhat more than high-income students do, but
low-income students do not exhibit a preference in favor of their state's flagship university. They
slightly favor publicly controlled colleges.
     Table 4 repeats the estimation but interacts the covariates with indicators for high-income,
middle-income, low-income achievement-typical students, low-income income-typical students, and
other low-income students. The estimated coefficients for achievement-typical students are fairly
similar to those of high-income students. It is the income-typical students whose coefficients are
strikingly different. Of course, these results are somewhat by design, given the way we categorized
low-income students into achievement-typical and income-typical groups. However, the coefficients
validate the categorization: achievement-typical students do pursue similar application strategies
as high-income students. In the next section of the paper, we assess which factors predict a student
being achievement-typical and which predict his being income-typical.

c College Enrollment and Progress toward a Degree
In this sub-section, we demonstrate that, conditional on applying to a specific college, high- and
low-income students thereafter behave similarly. There is no statistical difference in their
probability of enrolling or in their progress toward a degree.
     To find the first of these results, we estimate a conditional logit model in which the binary
outcome is 1 for the college in which the student initially enrolled and 0 for all others. Importantly,
we limit the student's choice set to the colleges to which he applied. So that the student's enrollment
decision is compared to those of students who applied to the same college, we include a fixed effect
for each college. We also include interactions between these fixed effects and an indicator for a
student's having high or low income. We then test whether each college's high-income or low-
income interaction is statistically significantly different from zero. Thus, we test, specifically,
whether high- and low-income students who apply to the same college are differentially likely to
enroll in it.


                                                  20
         Because there are so few high-income students who apply to non-selective and low
selectivity colleges, many of the high-income-by-college-indicators are dropped by the regression.
Therefore, the effects of income on enrolling in such colleges, conditional on having applied, is not
identified. This is noted in the table.
     The reader should observe that this test subsumes colleges' admissions decisions. That is, if we
find that high- and low-income students are equally likely to enroll in a college, conditional on
having applied to it, they must be getting treated similarly in the admissions process. Otherwise,
they would enroll differentially simply because they had been admitted differentially.21
     Table 5 shows the results from this estimation. The table is organized by colleges' median test
scores, with more selective colleges closer to the top. We find that only very small shares of low-
and high-income enrollment probabilities (conditional on applying) are statistically significantly
different from one another at the 5 percent level. For instance, low-income enrollment probabilities
differ from high-income enrollment probabilities in only 4 percent of the colleges that have median
scores at the 90th percentile or above. This is about what we expect from a test at the 5 percent
level. The remaining rows of the table contain similar results, all suggesting that low- and high-
income students do not enroll differentially, conditional on applying.
      Our test for differential progress toward a degree, conditional on the school at which a student
initially enrolled, is constructed in an analogous way. The dependent variable is now the percentage
of coursework toward a four-year degree that the student has completed as of June 2012.22 A student
who is making on-time progress should have completed 100 percent of his coursework by then. We
estimate a fixed effect for every college so that students are compared to others who enrolled in the
same school. We interact the fixed effects with high- and low-income indicators, and we test
whether these interactions are statistically significantly different. Again, the effects for non-
selective and low selectivity colleges are not identified because so few high-income students enroll


         21
             W e can interact additional student characteristics that might affect admission--for instance, race and
ethnicity--with colleges' fixed effects. This effectively "soaks up" each college's admissions standards. However,
such a specification does not change the estimated coefficients of interest to a noticeable extent and it makes
interpretation slightly harder.

         22
            W e do not consider progress toward a two-year degree because virtually none of the high-achieving
students reported that a two-year degree was their educational goal in the descriptive questionnaires that accompany
the ACT and SAT I tests.

                                                          21
in them.
    Table 6, which is organized like Table 5, shows the results from this estimation. For selective
colleges, we find that only very small shares of colleges have statistically significant differences
between the progress of their low- and high-income students. For instance, low-income students'
progress toward a degree differs from high-income students' progress toward a degree at only 5
percent of the colleges that have median scores at the 90th percentile or above. This is what we
expect from a test at the 5 percent level.
    There are two key take-aways from this sub-section. First, the application stage is where
interesting differences appear in the behavior of high-income, high-achieving students and low-
income, high-achieving students. If they apply to the same colleges, their educational paths are
similar afterwards. Thus, interventions that could make low-income, high-achieving students'
college careers look more like those of their high-income counterparts probably must, as a logical
matter, be focused on the application stage or preparation for it. Second, the data do not suggest that
low-income students who currently fail to apply to selective colleges and therefore fail to attend one
would perform badly if they did attend one. Of course, we cannot say that they would perform just
as well as the low-income students who do apply and do enroll. We would need to estimate causal
effects to make such a claim and we do not attempt to do that in this paper.23 However, we are
certainly not struck by evidence that low-income students have poor outcomes when they apply to
selective schools, and it is worth remembering that not all low-income students who do this are
achievement-typical. Some are students who are neither achievement-typical nor income-typical
but who pursue an idiosyncratic application strategy such as applying to one non-selective college
and to Harvard.


6 Factors that Predict a Student's Being Achievement-Typical or
Income-Typical
In this section, we use simple descriptive statistics to identify some factors that predict whether a
low-income student is achievement-typical or income-typical. Our goal in this section is to


       23
            However, Hoxby's ongoing work with Sarah Turner attempts to estimate some of these causal effects.

                                                       22
characterize the two types of low-income students sufficiently well that we can build hypotheses
about why they apply to colleges so differently.
    Ex ante, our hypotheses fall into three broad categories:
(i) Despite the fact that both income-typical and achievement-typical students have estimated family
incomes in the bottom quartile, income-typical students are found to be socio-economically
disadvantaged compared to achievement-typical students when we examine their backgrounds more
carefully.
(ii) Income-typical students are likely to be poorly informed about college compared to
achievement-typical students.
(iii) Income-typical students are making rational, well-informed choices about college. Their utility
from attending non-selective or less selective colleges exceeds the utility they would derive from
attending more selective colleges.
    We can look for evidence of hypotheses in categories (i) and (ii). The hypothesis in category
(iii) is inherently untestable, so it is effectively the residual explanation if there is no evidence for
other hypotheses. Note that if hypothesis (iii) is the true one, students need not get more utility from
attending a non-selective college because it is a good academic match for them. A student might
attend a school that is obviously a poor academic match because it enables him, say, to look after
his family. He might derive sufficient utility from doing this that his college choice is utility
maximizing.
    Table 7 shows several family factors that might reveal that income-typical students are truly
socio-economically disadvantaged relative to achievement-typical students. The statistics tend to
go the wrong way for hypotheses of type (i). Income-typical students have slightly higher estimated
family income than achievement-typical students do. The (admittedly very flawed) reports of
parents' education suggest that income-typical students' parents might have 0.7 years more of
education than those of achievement-typical students. Achievement-typical students are more likely
to be black or Hispanic, so they are presumably more, not less, likely to have experienced
discrimination or expect to experience it in college.
    Table 8 shows several neighborhood factors that are useful for assessing hypotheses of both
types (i) and (ii).    A person's neighbors reveal something about his own socio-economic
disadvantage, but they also reveal something about the information he is likely to encounter. The

                                                   23
statistics show that income-typical and achievement-typical students live in Census block groups
with very similar family income. However, achievement-typical students' block groups are less
white, and more black, Hispanic, and Asian that those of income-typical students. Achievement-
typical students also have more baccalaureate degree holders in their block groups--both in absolute
number (207 versus 144) and as a share of adults (22.0 percent versus 16.8 percent). This last fact
suggests that income-typical students may be less likely to get advice about college from a neighbor
with a degree.
     Table 9 compares the geography of income-typical and achievement-typical students, and the
contrast is striking. 65 percent of achievement-typical students live in the main city of an urban
area, whereas only 30 percent of income-typical students do. Even within the main city residents,
achievement-typical students are much more likely to live in a large urban area (one with population
greater than 250,000). Indeed, 70 percent of the achievement-typical students come from just fifteen
urban areas: San Francisco, Oakland, Los Angeles, San Diego, Dallas, Houston, Chicago,
Cleveland, Pittsburgh, Portland, Boston, Providence, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore. Only
21 percent of achievement-typical students live in a non-urban area (not necessarily rural, but a town
rather than an urban area suburb). 47 percent of income-typical students live in a non-urban area.
Put another way, income-typical students tend to be the high-achievers who live in counties that had
a large number of high-achievers per 17-year-old (Figure 7) but not a large number of achievers in
absolute terms (Figure 6).
     Using administrative data from the U.S. Department of Education, Table 10 compares the
schools attended by income-typical and achievement-typical students. The statistics should help us
to assess the students' academic disadvantages and also the amount of college-related information
they might obtain at school. Achievement-typical students are considerably more likely to attend
a school that is classified as a magnet school or an independent (as opposed to religious) private
school. These statistics certainly understate the extent to which the achievement-typical students
attend high schools that admit students on the basis of exams or grades. Finn and Hockett (2012)
find that only a small share of such high schools are classified as magnet schools.24 The per-pupil


         24
            Finn and Hockett found most of the selective high schools in their study by word of mouth and
contacting all high schools that were so dissimilar to other schools in their district that they seemed likely to practice
selective admissions. Interestingly, many school districts deemphasize the existence of their selective high schools,

                                                           24
spending of achievement-typical students' public schools is higher, but since facilities and staff costs
are often higher in the urban areas where they tend to live, it is unclear whether they are actually
advantaged by the higher spending. The pupil-teacher and pupil-counselor ratios are fairly similar
for achievement-typical and income-typical students: 18.3 versus 17.2 and 328 versus 305.
     Using survey data from the Schools and Staffing Surveys from 1987 to 2007 and data on
previous cohorts from the College Board and ACT, Table 11 compares college-related factors at the
high schools attended by achievement-typical and income-typical students.25 The first striking
statistic in the table is what a tiny share of low-income students' teachers graduated from colleges
that would be match or safety colleges for high-achieving students. Only 1.1 percent of income-
typical students' teachers attended match colleges and only 5.0 percent attended safety colleges. The
shares are larger for achievement-typical students' teachers, but still not large: 2.9 percent from
match colleges and 7.5 percent from safety colleges. Even high-income students do not encounter
many teachers with degrees from very selective colleges.
     Income-typical students attend high schools where just 1.6 percent of students in previous
cohorts applied to one of the top ten most selective colleges in the U.S.26 In contrast, 7.6 percent
of students so applied from the previous cohorts of achievement-typical students' schools. In
addition, only 3.8 percent of income-typical students' high school class consists of high-achievers
(including the student himself) whereas 11.2 percent of achievement-typical students' class consists
of high-achievers. Since income-typical students' high schools are, on average, less than two-thirds
the size of achievement-typical students' high schools, their low percentages translate into very little
school-based contact with other high achievers or high school alumni who attended selective
colleges. The low percentages also suggest that their counselors are unaccustomed to advising


which can be controversial. This is perhaps why there was no reasonably accurate list of them prior to Finn and
Hockett (2012).

         25
            W e use all of the Schools and Staffing surveys in an attempt to pick up as many high schools as possible,
but we nevertheless end up with teacher data for only 34 percent of the high-achieving students we study. W e use
the survey weights to create statistics that should be nationally representative. For the statistics based on previous
cohorts, we use the actual previous cohorts from the College Board but must assume that our one previous cohort
from the ACT was representative of the whole previous decade.

         26
            Arguably, focusing on these colleges overstates the extent of previous cohorts' sophistication about
college applications. These colleges are the most likely to show up in odd strategies like applying to one
non-selective institution and to Harvard.

                                                         25
students who have opportunities to attend selective colleges.27
     Of course, one might gather and advise a critical mass of high achievers outside of the high
school setting, but the bottom rows of Table 11 show that even this is difficult for income-typical
students. The radius needed to gather 50 high-achievers is 37.3 miles for the average income-typical
student, where as it is merely 12.2 miles for the average achievement-typical student. Since a
college access program cannot expect to get participation from every qualified student in the area
it covers, the radii shown suggest that most income-typical students cannot be reached by programs
that require a critical mass of high-achievers to operate at efficient scale.28


7 Thought Experiments: Interventions that Might Inform Income-
Typical Students
In this section, we consider a few interventions that might affect how informed income-typical
students are about their college-going opportunities. We do this because, as shown in the previous
section, the data evince no support for hypothesis i (that income-typical students are actually more
disadvantaged than achievement-typical ones) so that we are left with hypotheses ii (students are
poorly informed) and iii (students are well-informed and utility-maximizing). One way to assess
hypothesis ii is to consider what information actually reaches or could reach income-typical
students. After all, high-achieving, low-income students are desirable applicants. Why should they
not, for instance, become informed in the process of being recruited by colleges?
     Colleges often send admissions staff to high schools in order to recruit high-achieving.
Therefore, let us consider a thought experiment whereby any student who attends a high school that
contains at least 20 high achieving students will have contact with some college admissions staff.


         27
            At College Board sessions attended by high school counselors, the authors have received similar
suggestions from the counselors themselves. Strikingly, several counselors reported that when the rare student in
their school was qualified to attend very selective colleges, they told him to guide himself by gathering information
independently on the internet because they lacked expertise. This is despite the fact that counselors who attend
College Board sessions are probably more sophisticated and informed than the average counselor.

         28
            Of course, there are college access programs in many areas where income-typical students tend to live,
but the typical program is focused on ensuring that students simply attend college, as opposed to not attending. Such
programs tend not to focus on the decisions faced by high-achieving students with many college opportunities, and
they provide limited advice on negotiating the multi-layered application process that very selective colleges use.

                                                          26
(We chose a cut-off of 20 because it is expensive in time and money for admissions staff to visit
high schools in which they cannot fill at least a classroom with potential applicants.) If this
experiment occurred, 92 percent of high-income, high-achieving students and 66 percent of
achievement-typical students would have contact with admissions staff, but only 17 percent of
income-typical students would have such contact.
    Of course, admissions staff can hold evening or weekend events that students from multiple
high schools can attend. Thus, we should also consider what would happen if admissions staff
visited every location in the U.S. where they could gather at least 20 high achieving students from
a 10 mile radius. Such visits would ensure that 94 percent of high-achieving, high-income students
and 73 percent of achievement-typical students could meet with admissions staff. But such visits
would allow only 21 percent of income-typical students to meet admissions staff.
    Clearly, admissions staff visiting students is unlikely to be an effective method of informing
income-typical students. What about students visiting colleges? As a thought experiment, consider
what would happen if every high achieving student visited colleges if he could reach five "match"
colleges by traveling 2000 miles or less. 75 percent of high-income, high-achieving students and
71 percent of achievement-typical students would do a college "tour." Only 22 percent of income-
typical students would.
    In fact, remembering that 70 percent of achievement-typical students are drawn from only
fifteen urban areas, we note that many of these students need not travel at all to visit one or more
selective colleges. Without needing anything other than a subway pass, a New York City student
could easily visit Columbia, Barnard, New York University, Cooper Union, and at least six other
colleges that are "Very Competitive" or more selective. A Boston, San Francisco Bay Area, Los
Angeles, Chicago, or Philadelphia student would also be spoiled for choice. Even a student from
Portland, Maine--an area that might have seemed out of place on the list of fifteen urban areas--has
Bates, Bowdoin, Colby, and Dartmouth (all very selective institutions) within a modest radius. In
fact, we know from colleges' own published materials and communications with the authors that
many colleges already make great efforts to seek out low-income students from their area. These
strategies, while no doubt successful in their way, fall somewhat under the heading of "searching
under the lamp-post." That is, many colleges look for low-income students where the college is
instead of looking for low-income students where the students are.

                                                27
    We have already seen that income-typical students are very unlikely to encounter a teacher,
counselor or neighbor who attended a selective college, so interventions that depend on their
presence are unlikely to be effective. Also, the logic that made admissions staff visits ineffective
with income-typical students works similarly for after-school or weekend college access programs:
programs with sustainable costs are unlikely to reach income-typical students.
    What are some interventions that might inform income-typical students about college and are
any of them tried on a large scale, so that their effectiveness might be evaluated? First, a college
has many more alumni than admissions staff, and alumni are much more broadly dispersed,
geographically, than admissions staff. For instance, the anonymous private, very selective university
studied by Meer and Rosen (2012) has at least one alum in the vast majority of U.S. counties.29
Presumably, it would be possible for colleges to have their alumni inform and recruit local students
who appear on their "search lists" of students who are likely qualified for admission. Such alumni-
based information interventions might work precisely because they are unlikely to be hampered by
the lack of geographic concentration among income-typical students. The main challenges for such
interventions would seem to be the need to coordinate and train alumni. It would be problematic,
for instance, if alumni knew very little about their college's current curriculum or financial aid
policies.
    Income-typical students are intelligent and able to absorb written material. Thus, other
interventions that might affect them would be purely informational, written interventions--
distributed by mail, online, or through social media. However, if they are to be effective, such
interventions cannot simply replicate the content that students already receive in the form of
numerous college brochures. As noted above, the two most obvious deficiencies of these brochures
are (i) that they are generic rather than customized to a student's situation (for instance, his family's
finances) and (ii) that they have a boosterism that may make it difficult for students to derive
information from them. Taking these points to heart, we test several interventions in follow-up work
(Hoxby and Turner 2012) that has the potential to identify causal effects of giving low-income
students information about their college-going opportunities.




        29
             Meer and Rosen generously computed the relevant statistics for the authors.

                                                         28
8 Conclusions
We demonstrate that the majority of high-achieving, low-income students do not apply to any
selective colleges despite apparently being well-qualified for admission. These students exhibit
behavior that is typical of students of their income rather than typical of students of their
achievement. There are, however, high-achieving, low-income students who apply in much the
same way as their high-income counterparts. These "achievement-typical" students also enroll and
persist in college like their high-income counterparts. We demonstrate that achievement-typical
students come disproportionately from the central cities of large urban areas where they are likely
to attend selective, magnet, or other high schools with a critical mass of high achievers.
    We note that the majority of achievement-typical students are drawn from only fifteen urban
areas, in each of which there is at least one and often several selective colleges. We believe that this
phenomenon occurs because many colleges are "searching under the lamp-post." That is, many
colleges look for low-income students where the college is instead of looking for low-income
students where the students are. The students "under the lamp-post" are already more likely to apply
to and attend selective colleges.
    In contrast, high-achieving, low-income students whose behavior is typical for their income
("income-typical" students) attend schools and live in neighborhoods that lack others who have
attended or could attend selective colleges. They are insufficiently geographically concentrated to
be reached, cost-effectively, by popular methods of informing students about their college
opportunities: visits by admissions staff to high schools, campus visits by students, after school
college access programs, contact with teachers who attended selective colleges, and the like.
    We speculate that admissions staff believe that the supply of high-achieving, low-income
students to selective colleges is inelastic for two reasons. First, many of the students are not on the
"radar screen" because they do not apply. Second, the staff spend much of their time informing
students who attend high schools that are already "tapped out," so that their efforts offset one
another's. That is, their efforts move a well-defined set of students among colleges but do not
expand the pool of high-achieving, low-income students who apply to college. Our results suggest
that interventions are more likely to affect low-income students' college-going behavior if they do
not depend, for their efficacy, on the students being concentrated in a limited number of schools or


                                                  29
small geographic areas.


9 References
Avery, C., M. Glickman, C. Hoxby, and A. Metrick. forthcoming. "A Revealed Preference
    Ranking of American Colleges and Universities," Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Avery, C., C. Hoxby, C. Jackson, K. Burek, G. Pope, and M. Raman, "Cost Should Be No
    Barrier: An Evaluation of the First Year of Harvard's Financial Aid Initiative," NBER WP
    12029.
Avery, C. and C. Hoxby, "Do and Should Financial Aid Packages Affect Students' College
    Choices?" in ed C. Hoxby, College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and
    How to Pay For It. University of Chicago Press: 2004.
Avery, C. and S. Turner. 2009. "Aid and Application Awareness." Unpublished manuscript.
Bowen, W., M. Chingos, M. McPherson. 2009. Crossing the Finish Line: Completing College at
    America's Public Universities. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Card, D. and A.B. Krueger. 2005. "Would the Elimination of Affirmative Action Affect Highly
    Qualified Minority Applicants?: Evidence from California and Texas." Industrial and Labor
    Relations Review, 58(3): 416-434.
Dillon, E. and J. Smith. 2012. "Determinants of Mismatch Between Student Ability and College
    Quality." University of Michigan unpublished manuscript.
Finn, C. and J. Hockett. 2012.           Shiny Needles in the Education Haystack: America's
    Academically-selective Public High Schools. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press.
Freeberg, N. 1988. "Accuracy of Student Reported Information." College Board Report Number
    88-5. http://professionals.collegeboard.com/profdownload/pdf/RR%2088-5.PDF
Hill, C., G. Winston, and S. Boyd. 2005. "Affordability: Family Incomes and Net Prices at Highly
    Selective Private Colleges and Universities." Journal of Human Resources, 40(4):769-790.
Hoxby, C. 2010. "The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges and Universities: Its Implications
    for Students, Resources, and Tuition." Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Hoxby, C. and S. Turner.         2012.     "Expanding College Opportunities for Low-Income,
    High-Achieving Students," NBER Conference paper.

                                               30
Meer, J. and H. Rosen. 2012. "Does Generosity Beget Generosity? Alumni Giving and
    Undergraduate Financial Aid," NBER Working Paper No. w17861.
Pallais, A. 2009. "Small Differences that Matter: Mistakes in Applying to College." Revise and
    resubmit, Journal of Labor Economics. http://econ-www.mit.edu/files/4030.




                                             31
 Figure 1




Figure 2




  32
Figure 3




Figure 4




  33
                 Figure 5




                  Figure 6
  Number of High Achievers by County
darker = a greater number of high achievers




                    34
                        Figure 7
       Number of High Achievers per 17-year-old
darker = greater number of high achievers per 17-year-old




                       Figure 8
High Income Students' Portfolios of College Applications
               (1 student = weight of 1)




                           35
                             Figure 10
        Low Income Students' Portfolios of College Applications
                      (1 student = weight of 1)




                                Figure 9
 Low, Middle, and High Income Students' Portfolios of College Applications
Excluding Applications to Non-Selective Institutions (1 student = weight of 1)
     blue = low income, brown = middle income, purple = high income




                                   36
                                            Table 1
                           College Costs and Resources by Selectivity
 Selectivity (Barron's)      Out-of-Pocket Cost        Comprehensive Cost              Instructional
                             for a Student at the       (includes room and          Expenditure per
                                20th Percentile of                   board)                 Student
                                  Family Income
                             (includes room and
                                           board)
most competitive                            6,754                    45,540                    27,001
highly competitive plus                    13,755                    38,603                    13,732
highly competitive                         17,437                    35,811                    12,163
very competitive plus                      15,977                    31,591                     9,605
very competitive                           23,813                    29,173                     8,300
competitive plus                           23,552                    27,436                     6,970
competitive                                19,400                    24,166                     6,542
less competitive                           26,335                    21,262                     5,359
some or no selection, 4-                   18,981                    16,638                     5,119
year
private 2-year                               14,852                  17,822                     6,796
public 2-year                                 7,573                  10,543                     4,991
for-profit 2-year                            18,486                  21,456                     3,257
Notes: The sources are colleges' net cost calculators for the out-of-pocket cost column and
IPEDS for the remaining columns. The net cost data were gathered for the 2009-10 school year
by the authors, for the institutions at the very competitive and more selective levels. For the
institutions of lower selectivity, net cost estimates are based on the institution's published net cost
calculator for the year closest to 2009-10--never later than 2011-12. Net costs are then reduced
to approximate 2009-10 levels using the institution's own room and board and tuition net of aid
numbers from IPEDS, for the relevant years.


                                            Table 2
                College Assessment Results of High Achievers, by Family Income
 Income Quartile                                     Average SAT/ACT Percentile among High
                                                     Achievers
 1st quartile (lowest income)                        94.1
 2nd quartile                                        94.3
 3rd quartile                                        94.8
 4th quartile (highest income)                   95.7
Notes: A "high achiever" is student with ACT or SAT scores at or above the 90th percentile and
a high school grade point average of A- or above. The source is authors' calculations based on
the combined dataset (ACT, College Board, IPEDS, and other sources) described in the text.


                                                  37
                                           Table 3
                         Factors Associated with Applying to College
             Results of a Conditional Logit Estimation (expressed in odds ratios)
                                    Low-Income High Achievers          High-Income High Achievers
 college is a close match                      1.015                              76.214***
 college is a safety school                    3.009***                           14.895***
 institution is nonselective                   0.748***                           1.6e-9***
 tuition in thousands (sticker                 0.865***                           1.176***
 price, in- or out-of-state as
 relevant for individual)
 average tuition discount in                   1.091**                            0.925**
 percent
 could live at family home                     4.942***                           0.810***
 (<10 miles)
 could go home often (<120                     1.556***                           1.185***
 miles)
 distance in miles                             0.996                              0.998
 (distance/1000)2                              1.056**                            1.283***
 college is in-state                           2.595***                           1.206***
 college is private                            0.838***                           1.002
 institution is for-profit                     0.834***                           0.012***
 highest degree offered by                     0.925**                            0.009***
 institution is 2-year
 institution is a university                   0.997                              0.567***
 institution is a liberal arts                    0.717***                          0.973*
 college
Notes: The table presents the results of conditional logit estimations in which the dependent
variable is an indicator for a high achieving student's having applied to a postsecondary
institution. The results are expressed in odds ratios. A "high achiever" is student with ACT or
SAT scores at or above the 90th percentile and a high school grade point average of A- or above.
Low-income and high-income students are defined, respectively, as ones from the bottom and top
quartile of the family income distribution. The data source is the combined dataset (ACT,
College Board, IPEDS, and other sources) described in the text. Asterisks indicate that the odds
ratio is statistically significantly different than 1 at the 1 percent level (***), 5 percent level (**),
or 10 percent level (*).


                                                   38
                                           Table 4
                         Factors Associated with Applying to College,
                     Income-typical versus Achievement-typical Students
             Results of a Conditional Logit Estimation (expressed in odds ratios)
                                              Income-             Achievement-        High-
                                              typical             typical             income
                                              Students            Students            Students
 college is a close match                     7.21e-8***          87.808***           76.214***
 college is a safety school                   2.142***            19.817***           14.895***
 institution is nonselective                  0.795***            1.04e-8***          1.6e-9***
 tuition in thousands (sticker price, in-     0.973***            1.004               1.176***
 or out-of-state as relevant for
 individual)
 average tuition discount in percent          1.000               1.020*              0.925**
 could live at family home (<10 miles)        5.140***            1.477***            0.810***
 could go home often (<120 miles)             1.972***            1.436***            1.185***
 distance in miles                            0.999               0.999               0.998
 (distance/1000)2                             1.042*              1.448***            1.283***
 college is in-state                          4.891***            7.455***            1.206***
 college is private                           0.662***            0.296***            1.002
 institution is for-profit                    0.806***            0.001***            0.012***
 highest degree offered by institution is     0.855***            0.016***            0.009***
 2-year
 institution is a university                  0.956**             0.861***            0.567***
 institution is a liberal arts college          0.515***             0.167***             0.973*
Notes: The table presents the results of conditional logit estimations in which the dependent
variable is an indicator for a high achieving student's having applied to a postsecondary
institution. The results are expressed in odds ratios. A "high achiever" is a student with ACT or
SAT scores at or above the 90th percentile and a high school grade point average of A- or above.
Low- and high-income students are, respectively, ones from the bottom and top quartile of the
family income distribution. Achievement-typical (income-typical) students are low-income,
high-achieving students whose application behavior does (does not) resemble that of high-
income, high-achieving students. The data source is the combined dataset (ACT, College Board,
IPEDS) described in the text. Asterisks indicate that the odds ratio is statistically significantly
different than 1 at the 1 percent level (***), 5 percent level (**), or 10 percent level (*).


                                                39
                                               Table 5
            Estimates Showing Whether Low- and High-Income Students Have
    Different Probabilities of Enrolling in a College Conditional on Having Applied to It
               (results from conditional logit estimation in which coefficients are
                       allowed to differ for low- and high-income students)
 College Selectivity                                        Share of Colleges where Low- and High-
                                                         Income Students' Probability of Enrollment
                                                           Conditional on Application is Statistically
                                                        Significantly Different at the 5 Percent Level
 median student is $ 90th percentile                                                                4%
 median student is $80thand <90th percentile                                                       5%
 median student is $70thand <80th percentile                                                       4%
 median student is $60thand <70th percentile                                                       3%
 median student is $50thand <60th percentile                                                       6%
 college is selective but median student is                                 not identified (see notes)
 <50th percentile
 college is non-selective                                                     not identified (see notes)
Notes: The table summarizes results from a conditional logit estimation in which the dependent
variable is an indicator for a high achieving student's having enrolled in postsecondary
institution. Each student's choice set is the set of colleges to which he applied. The estimating
equation's only independent variables are indicators for each college interacted with an indicator
for whether the student is high- or low-income. If the coefficients on the high- and low-income
indicators for a college are statistically significantly different, then that college is counted in the
shares shown in the right-hand column. Each college's results are placed in a row on the basis of
the college's selectivity. The results are not identified for low selectivity and non-selective
colleges because there are an insufficient number of high-income students who apply to such
colleges. That is, for such colleges, the high-income*college-indicator variables are dropped in
the process of estimation. A "high achiever" is student with ACT or SAT scores at or above the
90th percentile and a high school grade point average of A- or above. Low-income and high-
income students are defined, respectively, as ones from the bottom and top quartile of the family
income distribution. The data source is the combined dataset (ACT, College Board, IPEDS,
NSC, and other sources) described in the text.




                                                   40
                                                Table 6
             Estimates Showing Whether Low- and High-Income Students Have
      Different Probabilities of Persisting in a College Conditional on Having Enrolled
             (results from ordinary least squares estimation in which coefficients are
                        allowed to differ for low- and high-income students)
 College Selectivity                                      Share of Colleges where Low- and High-
                                                        Income Students' Persistence (measured in
                                                        share of degree completed) Conditional on
                                                           Enrollment is Statistically Significantly
                                                                   Different at the 5 Percent Level
 median student is $ 90th percentile                                                             5%
 median student is $80thand <90th percentile                                                     4%
 median student is $70thand <80th percentile                                                     4%
 median student is $60thand <70th percentile                                                     5%
 median student is $50thand <60th percentile                                                     4%
 college is selective but median student is                                not identified (see notes)
 <50th percentile
 college is non-selective                                                   not identified (see notes)
Notes: The table summarizes results from an ordinary least squares estimation in which the
dependent variable is a student's share of a baccalaureate degree completed by June 2012.
Students who do not enroll in postsecondary institution are not included in the regression. The
estimating equation's only independent variables are indicators for each college interacted with
an indicator for whether the student is high- or low-income. If the coefficients on the high- and
low-income indicators for a college are statistically significantly different, then that college is
counted in the shares shown in the right-hand column. Each college's results are placed in a row
on the basis of the college's selectivity. The results are not identified for low selectivity and non-
selective colleges because there are an insufficient number of high-income students who enroll in
such colleges. That is, for such colleges, the high-income*college-indicator variables are
dropped in the process of estimation. A "high achiever" is student with ACT or SAT scores at or
above the 90th percentile and a high school grade point average of A- or above. Low-income
and high-income students are defined, respectively, as ones from the bottom and top quartile of
the family income distribution. The data source is the combined dataset (ACT, College Board,
IPEDS, NSC, and other sources) described in the text.




                                                 41
                                         Table 7
                 Socio-economic Characteristics of High-Achieving Students
                    Achievement-typical versus Income-typical Students
                                High-income        Achievement-typical     Income-typical
 Estimated variables:
 family income                        $157,569                   $30,475               $32,418
 Self-reported variables:
 parents’ education                   18.7 years                16.0 years           16.7 years
 (see notes)
 white                                  74.80%                    45.10%                79.50%
 black                                   2.10%                     5.20%                 2.90%
 Hispanic                                5.60%                    12.60%                 6.00%
 Asian                                  20.50%                    31.80%                 7.30%
Notes: The table summarizes the characteristics of high-achieving students' families. A "high
achiever" is a student with ACT or SAT scores at or above the 90th percentile and a high school
grade point average of A- or above. Low-income and high-income students are defined,
respectively, as ones from the bottom and top quartile of the family income distribution.
Achievement-typical (income-typical) students are low-income, high-achieving students whose
application behavior does (does not) resemble that of high-income, high-achieving students. The
data source is the combined dataset (ACT, College Board, IPEDS, and other sources) described
in the text. Self-reported parental education is highly unreliable because students whose parents
probably have low education do not report. See text for further explanation.




                                               42
                                          Table 8
             Characteristics of the Neighborhoods of High-Achieving Students
                  Achievement-typical versus Income-typical Students
                                      High-income Achievement-typical    Income-typical
 family income (BG)                      $123,684                 $32,142           $31,767
 adjusted gross income (zipcode)         $121,448                 $41,358           $37,652
 number with a BA (BG)                         863                     207               144
 % with a BA (BG)                          66.70%                  22.00%            16.80%
 % white (BG)                              86.70%                  58.20%            77.10%
 % black (BG)                               2.60%                  12.80%            10.10%
 % Hispanic (BG)                            4.10%                  16.90%             8.70%
 % Asian (BG)                               9.20%                   8.50%             2.20%
Notes: The table summarizes the characteristics of high-achieving students' Census Block
Groups (BG) or zipcodes. These "neighborhoods" are noted in parentheses. A "high achiever" is
a student with ACT or SAT scores at or above the 90th percentile and a high school grade point
average of A- or above. Low-income and high-income students are defined, respectively, as ones
from the bottom and top quartile of the family income distribution. Achievement-typical
(income-typical) students are low-income, high-achieving students whose application behavior
does (does not) resemble that of high-income, high-achieving students. The data source is the
combined dataset (ACT, College Board, IPEDS, Geolytics Census Tract, IRS estimates for 2008,
and other sources) described in the text.




                                             43
                                          Table 9
             Characteristics of the Home Locations of High-Achieving Students
                   Achievement-typical versus Income-typical Students
                                      High-income Achievement-typical     Income-typical
 Main city in urban area w pop                  17%                      26%                 8%
 250k+
 Main city in urban area w pop                  14%                      21%               13%
 100-250k
 Main city in urban area w pop                  48%                      18%                 9%
 <100k
 Suburb in urban area 250k+                      8%                       9%                 9%
 Suburb in urban area 100-250k                   0%                       2%                 2%
 Suburb in urban pop<100k                        0%                       4%               12%
 Town, near an urban area                        0%                       5%               12%
 Town, far from an urban area                    5%                       7%               15%
 Rural, near an urban area                       6%                       4%               10%
 Rural, far from urban area                      0%                       5%               10%
Notes: The table summarizes the characteristics of the home locations of high-achieving
students. A "high achiever" is a student with ACT or SAT scores at or above the 90th percentile
and a high school grade point average of A- or above. Low-income and high-income students are
defined, respectively, as ones from the bottom and top quartile of the family income distribution.
Achievement-typical (income-typical) students are low-income, high-achieving students whose
application behavior does (does not) resemble that of high-income, high-achieving students. The
data source is the combined dataset (ACT, College Board, Census, and other sources) described
in the text.




                                               44
                                           Table 10
               Characteristics of the High Schools of High-Achieving Students
                   Achievement-typical versus Income-typical Students
                                       High-income Achievement-typical     Income-typical
 school cohort size                             333                     330                241
 regular public school                         66%                     73%                86%
 magnet school                                  4%                     11%                 0%
 independent private school                    16%                      7%                 3%
 Catholic or other religious school            15%                      9%                11%
 per pupil spending (public                $15,558                  $12,975           $10,701
 schools)
 pupil-teacher ratio (all schools)             16.8                    18.3               17.2
  pupil-counselor ratio (public                  307                      328              305
  schools)
Notes: The table summarizes the characteristics of the high schools of high-achieving students.
A "high achiever" is a student with ACT or SAT scores at or above the 90th percentile and a high
school grade point average of A- or above. Low-income and high-income students are defined,
respectively, as ones from the bottom and top quartile of the family income distribution.
Achievement-typical (income-typical) students are low-income, high-achieving students whose
application behavior does (does not) resemble that of high-income, high-achieving students. The
data source is the combined dataset (ACT, College Board, Common Core of Data, and other
sources) described in the text.




                                              45
                                          Table 11
      College-Related Characteristics of the High Schools of High-Achieving Students
                   Achievement-typical versus Income-typical Students
                                     High-income Achievement-typical       Income-typical
  %teachers graduated from close                 8.90%                  2.90%               1.10%
  match college
  %teachers graduated from safety              14.40%                   7.50%               5.00%
  college
  # applicants to top 10 colleges in               12.9                    7.6                 1.6
  each cohort (average of last 10
  cohorts)
  # admits to top 10 colleges in                   12.3                    7.4                 1.5
  each cohort (average of last 10
  cohorts)
  # who enrolled at top 10 colleges                12.3                    7.4                 1.5
  each cohort (average of last 10
  cohorts)
  %high school cohort who are                  17.10%                 11.20%                3.80%
  high achievers
  radius to gather 20 high                    2.6 miles              7.7 miles         19.3 miles
  achievers
  radius to gather 50 high                    4.1 miles            12.2 miles          37.3 miles
  achievers
Notes: The table summarizes college-related characteristics of the high schools of high-
achieving students. A "high achiever" is a student with ACT or SAT scores at or above the 90th
percentile and a high school grade point average of A- or above. Low-income and high-income
students are defined, respectively, as ones from the bottom and top quartile of the family income
distribution. Achievement-typical (income-typical) students are low-income, high-achieving
students whose application behavior does (does not) resemble that of high-income, high-
achieving students. The data source is the combined dataset (ACT, College Board, Common
Core of Data, Schools and Staffing Survey, and other sources) described in the text.




                                                46
