NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING THE MECHANISMS THROUGH WHICH AN INFLUENTIAL
EARLY CHILDHOOD PROGRAM BOOSTED ADULT OUTCOMES
James J. Heckman
Rodrigo Pinto
Peter A. Savelyev
Working Paper 18581
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18581
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012

Lena Malofeeva, then at the HighScope Foundation, worked with us in supplying the Perry data and
interpreting it for us. We are deeply grateful for her assistance and the cooperation of the HighScope
Foundation. Versions of this paper were presented at numerous conferences and seminars starting
in 2006 that are listed in the Web Appendix. We thank participants at these meetings for useful comments.
We are grateful to Clancy Blair, Dan Benjamin, Martin Browning, Sarah Cattan, Kenneth Dodge,
Angela Duckworth, Amy Finklestein, Miriam Gensowski, Matt Gentzkow, Maryclare Griffen, Jeff
Grogger, Emir Kamenica, Costas Meghir, Jorn-Steffen Pischke, Devesh Raval, Brent Roberts, Cullen
Roberts, Tino Sanandaji, Larry Schweinhart, Sandra Waxman, Ben Williams, and Junjian Yi for helpful
comments. The paper was presented at a Public Policy and Economics Seminar at the Harris School,
University of Chicago, October, 2009, attended by Diane Schatzenbach. We are grateful to Christopher
Hansman, Kegon Tan Teng Kok, Min Ju Lee, Xiliang Lin, Yun Pei, and Ivana Stosic for excellent
research assistance. This research was supported in part by the American Bar Foundation, the JB &
MK Pritzker Family Foundation, Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation, NICHD R37HD065072, R01HD54702,
a grant to the Becker Friedman Institute for Research and Economics from the Institute for New Economic
Thinking (INET), and an anonymous funder. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the funders, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or other persons
named here.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by James J. Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter A. Savelyev. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding the Mechanisms through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted
Adult Outcomes
James J. Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter A. Savelyev
NBER Working Paper No. 18581
November 2012
JEL No. I21,I28,I29,J13,J15,J16,J24,O15
ABSTRACT
A growing literature establishes that high quality early childhood interventions targeted toward disadvantaged
children have substantial impacts on later life outcomes. Little is known about the mechanisms producing
these impacts. This paper uses longitudinal data on cognitive and personality traits from an experimental
evaluation of the influential Perry Preschool program to analyze the channels through which the program
boosted both male and female participant outcomes. Experimentally induced changes in personality
traits explain a sizable portion of adult treatment effects.
James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
Rodrigo Pinto
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
rodrig@uchicago.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18581

Peter A. Savelyev
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
peter.savelyev@vanderbilt.edu

1.

Introduction

A growing literature establishes that early childhood environments substantially impact later life outcomes (e.g., Knudsen et al., 2006, Heckman, 2008 and
Almond and Currie, 2011). Less is known about the channels through which early
environments operate to produce their long term effects. This paper examines the
sources of the success of the Perry Preschool program, a flagship early childhood
intervention in the US.1
The Perry program was a randomized trial that targeted disadvantaged, low
IQ African American children ages 3-4. After two years, all participants left the
program and entered the same public school. Data were collected for treatment
and control groups through age 40.
Heckman et al. (2010a) and Conti et al. (2012) show that the Perry program
significantly enhanced adult outcomes including education, employment, earnings,
marriage, and participation in healthy behaviors, and reduced participation in
crime.2 We summarize many of these findings in Table 1. All treatment effects
displayed there are statistically significant and survive adjustments for multiple
hypothesis testing.3 Heckman et al. (2010b) show that the internal rate of return
to the program for both boys and girls is a statistically significant 6–10 percent
per year—above the historical return to equity.4 Positive effects of the Perry
program have become a cornerstone of the argument for preschool programs (e.g.,
Shonkoff and Phillips, 2000). Currently, about 30 percent of all Head Start centers
nationwide offer a version of the Perry curriculum (ICPSR, 2010).5
Previous studies of Perry focus on estimating treatment effects and do not
attempt to explain their sources.6 This paper identifies the psychological skills
changed by the Perry program and decomposes the treatment effects on adult
outcomes displayed in Table 1 into components attributable to improvements in
these skills.
1 The formal name of the program is the “HighScope Perry Preschool Program” (see Schweinhart
et al., 2005).
2 The small sample size of the Perry experiment (123 participants) has led some researchers to question
the validity and relevance of its findings (e.g., Herrnstein and Murray, 1994, and Hanushek and Lindseth,
2009). Heckman et al. (2010a) use a method of exact inference that is valid in small samples. They find
that Perry treatment effects remain statistically significant even after accounting for multiple hypothesis
testing and compromised randomization.
3 One of the outcomes, the number of felony arrests for males at age 27, is borderline statistically
significant at the 10% level.
4 The historical post-World War II stock market rate of return to equity is 5.8 percent (DeLong and
Magin, 2009).
5 Although not necessarily with the same quality of staff and background of participants as in the
original program.
6 See Weikart (1967); Weikart, Bond and McNeil (1978); Berrueta-Clement et al. (1984); Schweinhart,
Barnes and Weikart (1993).

2

The literature in the economics of education assumes the primacy of cognitive
ability in producing successful lifetime outcomes (e.g., Hanushek and Woessmann,
2008). From this perspective, the success of the Perry program is puzzling. Although the program initially boosted the IQs of participants, this effect soon
faded. A few years after the program finished, there was no statistically significant difference in IQ between treatments and controls for males and only a
borderline statistically significant difference for females (see Figure 1). Consistent with this evidence, we show negligible effects of increases in IQ in producing
program treatment effects.
Although Perry did not produce long run gains in IQ, it did create persistent improvements in personality skills.7 The Perry program substantially improved Externalizing Behaviors (aggressive, antisocial, and rule-breaking behaviors), which,
in turn, improved a number of labor market outcomes, health behaviors, and
criminal activities (see panels (a) and (b) of Figures 2 and 3).8
The program also enhanced Academic Motivation (see panels (c) and (d) of
Figures 2 and 3), but the effect is primarily for girls.9 This differential enhancement of endowments by gender helps to explain the positive treatment effects for
education-related outcomes such as achievement tests and mental impairment for
girls. Academic Motivation is not significantly enhanced for boys, and plays no
role in explaining their treatment effects.
While the Perry program did not boost long-term IQ, it did boost long-term
achievement test scores (see panels (e) and (f) of Figures 2 and 3). The effect is
stronger for girls, but also occurs for boys.10 Achievement tests measure acquired
knowledge, which is enhanced for children with better cognitive and personality traits. Enhanced personality skills promote learning, which, in turn, boosts
achievement test scores.11 This finding is consistent with recent evidence that 30–
40 percent of the explained variance in achievement test scores across students is
due to personality traits and not IQ.12 .
This paper contributes to an emerging literature on the economics of personality. Our demonstration of the powerful role of personality skills is in agreement
with a large body of evidence summarized in Borghans et al. (2008) and Almlund
et al. (2011).13
7 See

Heckman (2000) and Carneiro and Heckman (2003).
in crime is a major benefit of the Perry program (Belfield et al., 2006; Heckman et al.,

8 Reduction

2010b).
9 See Figure C.7 of the Web Appendix for breakdowns by gender.
10 See Figure B.5 in the Web Appendix.
11 See Cunha and Heckman (2008) and Cunha, Heckman and Schennach (2010) for evidence that
personality traits boost acquisition of cognition as measured by achievement tests.
12 Borghans et al. (2011a) show that achievement test scores are explained, in part, by both personality
traits and IQ. See also Heckman and Kautz (2012)
13 See also Bowles and Gintis (1976, 2001); Heckman, Stixrud and Urzúa (2006); Segal (2008, 2009).

3

Our analysis shows the benefits and limitations of social experiments. The
Perry study generated experimentally determined treatment effects for outcomes
and skills. However, knowledge that the program enhanced skills and improved a
number of outcomes is not enough to establish that the improvement in measured
skills caused the improvement in outcomes. Without further assumptions, data
from the experiment do not determine the production function relating changes
in skills to changes in adult outcomes. The program may also improve unmeasured skills. Changes in measured skills may simply proxy changes in unmeasured
skills that affect outcomes. To address this issue, we supplement the treatment
effects obtained from the experiment with an econometric model that estimates
the relationship between outcomes and experimentally induced changes in measured skills. Our method accounts for measurement error and treatment-induced
changes in unmeasured skills. Access to experimental data allows us to test some
of its identifying assumptions. Evidence from a series of specification tests supports our econometric procedure.
The paper proceeds in the following way. Section 2 describes the Perry program and the experiment that evaluated it. Section 3 presents our econometric
model. Section 4 discusses the variety of measures of psychological traits at our
disposal and the need to create low-dimensional summaries of them. It explains
how we construct summary measures and test for the validity of the constructed
summaries. Section 5 presents our analysis of the sources of the Perry treatment
effects. Section 6 concludes. A Web Appendix presents supplementary material.
2.

The Perry Program: Design and Background

The Perry program targeted African American children with low IQs and socioeconomic status (Schweinhart and Weikart, 1981). The experiment was conducted
during the mid-1960s in the district of the Perry elementary school in Ypsilanti,
Michigan. Children began the program at age three and were enrolled for two
years.14 Parents were disadvantaged as measured by their income and education.
Roughly 47 percent of the children in the study did not have fathers present in
the household at age three.
The 123 participants were randomized into treatment and control groups.15
The Perry sample consists of 51 females (25 treatment and 26 control) and 72
males (33 treatment and 39 control). There was relatively little attrition: only
11 participants left the study by the time of the interview at age 40.16
14 The

first entry cohort was enrolled for only one year of the program, beginning at age four.
et al. (2010a) describe the protocol and develop statistical procedures for testing treatment
effects which take into account the peculiarities of the Perry randomization protocol.
16 Five control and two treatment group participants died; two control and two treatment group participants were missing.
15 Heckman

4

The Perry curriculum is based on the principle of active participatory learning,
in which children and adults are treated as equal partners in the learning process,
and children engage with objects, people, events, and ideas.17 Abilities to plan,
execute, and evaluate tasks were fostered, as were social skills, including cooperation with others and resolution of interpersonal conflicts. The Perry curriculum
has been interpreted as implementing the theories of Lev Vygotsky (1986) in
teaching self control and sociability.18 A widely implemented program based on
these principles — Tools of the Mind — is designed to promote self control.19

Sessions lasted 2.5 hours and were held five days a week during the school
year. Teachers in the program, all of whom had bachelor’s degrees (or higher) in
education, made weekly 1.5-hour home visits to treatment group mothers with
the aim of involving them in the socioemotional development of their children.
The control group had no contact with the Perry program other than through
annual testing and assessment (Weikart, Bond and McNeil, 1978).

Perry predates Head Start and had no competitors, so there was no control
group contamination (see Schweinhart and Weikart, 1981). All eligible parents
enrolled their children in the program, so there was no issue of bias arising from
noncompliance (Weikart, Bond and McNeil, 1978).

Numerous measures were collected annually from ages 3–15 on a variety of socioeconomic outcomes for treatment and control participants. There were three
additional follow-ups at ages 19, 27, and 40. The Perry sample was representative of a particularly disadvantaged cohort of the African American population.
About 16 percent of all African American children in the US had family and
personal attributes similar to those of Perry participants at the time when the
Perry program was conducted.20 The statistically significant treatment effects
of the experiment for boys and girls survive rigorous adjustments for multiple
hypothesis testing and compromises in the randomization protocol.21
17 See

Web Appendix A for more information on the Perry curriculum.
curriculum of the Perry program was also grounded, in part, in the research on cognitive
development by Jean Piaget (Piaget and Inhelder, 2000) and in the progressive educational philosophy
of John Dewey (Dewey, 1997).
19 See Tough (2009) for a popular exposition of the Tools of the Mind program. See Bodrova and Leong
(2007) for a complete description of the Tools of the Mind program. Diamond et al. (2007) present a
recent evaluation of the program that demonstrates that it enhanced self-control by participants. For a
discussion of the Vygotskian foundations of the Perry program see Sylva (1997).
20 Heckman et al. (2010a).
21 Anderson (2008) adjusts test statistics for the Perry program treatment effects for the effects of
multiple hypothesis testing. He claims that the program only affected girls. Heckman et al. (2010a)
critically evaluate this conclusion and his procedures. They establish statistically significant program
treatment effects for both boys and girls. Heckman et al. (2010b) show that the rate of return to the
program is statistically significantly different from zero for both boys and girls.
18 The

5

3.

Methodology

This paper explains the sources of the Perry treatment effects in terms of improvements in early measures of psychological traits broadly classified into cognitive and personality skills.22 We first estimate treatment effects for these skills.
We then estimate the relationship between skills and later life outcomes and decompose treatment effects for adult outcomes into components due to treatmentinduced changes in different skills.23
To perform valid decompositions, we need to address two features of the Perry
data. First, as previously noted, the randomized design of the Perry study allows
us to identify the causal effect of the treatment on measured skills and on adult
outcomes, but it does not directly allow us to identify the causal effect of increases
in measured skills on outcomes. We use econometric methods to address this
problem. Using experimental variation, we can be more confident in the validity
of our decompositions because we can test some of the assumptions maintained in
our procedure. However, it is necessary to maintain some exogeneity assumptions
in order to construct valid decompositions. This section makes those assumptions
explicit.
Second, the Perry study has many highly correlated measurements of psychological traits (skills) that are laden with measurement error.24 Moreover, the
sample size of the study is small. We would exhaust the available degrees of
freedom if we use all available psychological measurements to predict outcomes.
Instead, we use factor analysis to create low dimensional, interpretable and informative aggregates that summarize a range of psychological traits and account
for measurement error.
Section 3.3.1 presents our model for outcomes. Section 3.3.2 presents our strategy for reducing numerous error-laden measurements to manageable summary
22 Throughout the paper we assume that the Perry program has either positive or no effect on outcomes
and use one sided p-values to test hypotheses. The literature shows that high-quality intervention programs targeting disadvantaged children generally show either beneficial or no effects from the program.
For example, Gray and Klaus (1970), Lazar et al. (1982), Campbell and Ramey (1994, 1995), Yoshikawa
(1995), and Reynolds et al. (2001) document beneficial effects of intervention programs targeting disadvantaged children. Barnett (1995) reviews a variety of early intervention programs and shows that
there were mainly beneficial effects on children’s development outcomes, although some programs had no
treatment effects. He explains the lack of treatment effects as a consequence of the difference in program
quality. Baker, Gruber and Milligan (2008) investigate the effects of Quebec’s universal childcare program and find a number of adverse effects of this program on children’s socio-emotional skills, possibly
casting doubt on use of one-sided p-values in this paper. The program they study is a warehousing childcare program, not a high quality early intervention program. Ramey and Ramey (2010) show that low
quality childcare program can have adverse effects. The Perry program was of extremely high quality and
targeted highly disadvantaged children who generally lacked adequate parenting. Therefore, we should
expect positive or no effects from the program.
23 These are called mediation analyses in the statistics literature. See, e.g., Pearl (2011). Such analyses
have been used for decades in economics. See, e.g., Klein and Goldberger (1955) and Theil (1958).
24 For evidence on the extent of measurement error in these traits see Cunha and Heckman (2008) and
Cunha, Heckman and Schennach (2010).

6

measures and addressing the problem of measurement error. Section 3.3.3 discusses identification. We establish what features of the model are overidentified,
and hence testable. Section 3.3.4 summarizes a simple and robust three-step
estimation procedure that is developed more extensively in the appendix.

3.1.

The Outcome Equation

Let D denote treatment assignment. D = 1 if an agent is treated and D = 0
otherwise. Let Y1 and Y0 be the counterfactual outcomes when D is fixed at “1”
and “0” respectively. We use the subscript d ∈ {0, 1} to represent variables when
treatment is fixed at d. Fixing corresponds to manipulating treatment status d
holding everything else constant.25 The observed outcome is
(1)

Y = DY1 + (1 − D)Y0 .

We assume that outcomes are independent across participants conditional on
observed pre-program variables X that are assumed not to be affected by the
program. We introduce the notion of skills that can be changed by the program
and that they produce (in part) the treatment effect. The vector of skills when
treatment is fixed at d is given by θd = (θdj : j ∈ J ), where J is an index set for
skills. We define θ in a fashion analogous to Y : θ = Dθ1 + (1 − D)θ0 .
Our analysis is based on the following linear model:
(2)

Yd = κd + αd θd + βd X + ˜d , d ∈ {0, 1},

where κd is an intercept, αd and βd are, respectively, |J |-dimensional and |X|dimensional vectors of parameters where |Q| denotes the number of elements in
Q. While the pre-program variables X are assumed not to be affected by the
treatment, their effect on Y can be affected by the treatment. ˜d is a zero-mean
error term assumed to be independent of regressors θd and X.
Perry analysts collected a rich array of measures of cognitive and personality
skills. However, it is very likely that there are relevant skills that they did not
measure. Notationally, let Jp ⊆ J be the index set of skills on which we have
measurements. The measurements may be imperfect so even these skills may
not be directly observed. We decompose the term αd θd in equation (2) into
25 The distinction between fixing and conditioning traces back to Haavelmo (1943). See Pearl (2009)
and Heckman and Pinto (2012a) for recent discussions.

7

components due to skills we measure and skills we do not:
X j j
(3)
Yd = κd +
αd θd + βd X + ˜d
j∈J

= κd +

X

αdj θdj

X

+

j∈Jp

|

= τd +

{z

αj θdj

+βd X + ˜d

j∈J \Jp

}

|

{z

}

skills on which we
skills on which we
have measurements
have no measurements
X j j
αd θd + βd X + d ,
j∈Jp

P
where d ∈ {0, 1}, τd = κd + j∈J \Jp αdj E(θdj ), and d is a zero-mean error term
P
defined by d = ˜d + j∈J \Jp αdj (θdj − E(θdj )). Any differences in the error terms
between treatment and control groups can be attributed to differences in the skills
on which we have no measurements. Without loss of generality we assume that
dist
dist
˜1 = ˜0 , where = means equality in distribution. Note that the error term
d is correlated with the measured skills if measured skills are correlated with
unmeasured skills.
We seek to decompose treatment effects into components attributable to changes
in the skills that we can measure. Assuming that changes in unmeasured skills
attributable to the experiment are independent of X, treatment effects can be
decomposed into components due to changes in skills E(∆θj ) and components
due to changes in parameters ∆αj (= α1j − α0j ):
(4)

E(∆Yd |X) =E(Y1 − Y0 |X)

=(τ1 − τ0 ) + E 


X



α1j θ1j − α0j θ0j  + (β1 − β0 ) X

j∈Jp

= (τ1 − τ0 )



 
X 


+E
∆αj + α0j E ∆θj + ∆αj E θ0j 
j∈Jp

+ (β1 − β0 )X.26

Equation (4) can be simplified if treatment affects skills, but not the impact
of skills and background variables on outcomes, i.e. α1j = α0j ; j ∈ Jp and β1 =
26 Alternative

decompositions are discussed in Appendix E.3

8

β0 .27 Under the latter assumption, the term associated with X drops from the
decomposition.
We establish below that if measured and unmeasured skills are independent
in the no-treatment outcome equation, α0 can be consistently estimated by a
standard factor analysis. Under this assumption, and if α1 = α0 , we can test
if the experimentally-induced increments in unmeasured skills are independent
of the experimentally induced increments in measured skills.28 The intuition
for this test is as follows. The skills for treated participants are the sum of the
skills they would have had if they were assigned to the control group plus the
increment due to treatment. If measured and unmeasured skill increments are
independent, α1 is consistently estimated by a standard factor analysis and we can
test if plim α̂1 = plim α̂0 where (α̂0 , α̂1 ) are estimates of (α0 , α1 ).29 Assuming
the exogeneity of X, we can also test if plim β̂1 = plim β̂0 , where (β̂0 , β̂1 ) are
estimates of β0 and β1 . We test and do not reject these hypotheses.
Imposing these assumptions simplifies the notation. Equation (3) may be expressed as
X
αj θdj + βX + d , d ∈ {0, 1}.
(5)
Yd = τd +
j∈Jp

In this notation, equation (1) becomes
X
X
(6) Y = D (τ1 +
αj θ1j + βX + 1 ) +(1 − D) (τ0 +
αj θ0j + βX + 0 )
j∈Jp

|
= τ0 + τ D +

j∈Jp

{z
Y1

X

}

|

{z
Y0

}

αj θj + βX + ,

j∈Jp

where τ = τ1 − τ0 is the contribution of unmeasured variables to mean treatment
effects,  = D1 +(1−D)0 is a zero-mean error term, and θj = Dθ1j +(1−D)θ0j , j ∈
Jp denote the skills that we can measure.
If the θj , j ∈ Jp , are measured without error and are independent of the error
term , least squares estimators of the parameters of equation (6) are unbiased
27 These are called structural invariance or autonomy assumptions in the econometric literature. See,
e.g., Hurwicz (1962). These assumptions do not rule out heterogenous responses to treatment because
θ1 − θ0 may vary in the population.
28 See Appendix J for details.
29 If skill increments are not independent, then in general even if α = α , plim α 6= plim α . This
1
0
1
0
test is valid in general even when α0 cannot be consistently estimated. See Appendix J. A distinct test of
autonomy (H0 : α1 = α0 ) is possible if we maintain full exogeneity (i.e. measured skills are independent
of unmeasured skills in both treatment regimes).

9

for αj , j ∈ Jp .30 If, on the other hand, the unmeasured skills are correlated
with both measured skills and outcomes, least squares estimators of αj , j ∈ Jp ,
are biased and capture the effect of changes in the unmeasured skills as they are
projected onto the measured components of θ, in addition to the direct effects of
changes in measured components of θ on Y .
Equation (6) is the basis for the decompositions reported in this paper. The
treatment effect is
X
E(Y1 − Y0 ) =
(τ1 − τ0 )
+
αj E(θ1j − θ0j ) .
(7)
| {z }
j∈Jp
|
{z
}
treatment effect due
to unmeasured skills

treatment effect due
to measured skills

Skill j can explain treatment effects only if it affects outcomes (αj 6= 0) and, on
average, is affected by the experiment (E(θ1j − θ0j ) 6= 0). We test both conditions.
Decomposition (7) would be straightforward to identify if the measured variables are independent of the unmeasured variables, and the measurements are
accurate. The second term of (7) is easily constructed by using consistent estimates of the αj and the effects of treatment on skills. However, psychological
measurements are riddled with measurement error (Cunha and Heckman, 2008).
In addition, there are a large number of highly intercorrelated psychological measures that need to be condensed. We address these problems in this paper.
3.2.

Low-Dimensional Characterizations of Skills

One way to summarize the psychological measures is to form simple unweighted
indices constructed by taking averages of interpretable groups of items. This
way of proceeding is widely used in psychology.31 It is, however, fraught with
difficulties. First, there are many ways to form aggregates. Second, the weightings
of the measures used to form such aggregates are arbitrary. Third, this approach
does not correct for measurement error, except through simple averaging.
This paper forms interpretable aggregates through factor analysis—a statistical
method that summarizes the covariability among observed measures using lowdimensional latent variables. The method also accounts for measurement error.32
30 Web Appendix G shows that the estimates of α in equation (6) are unbiased if measured and
unmeasured skills are independent.
31 See the review in Borghans et al. (2008)
32 See, e.g., Wansbeek and Meijer (2000). Table L.1 in Web Appendix L gives estimates of the measurement error for the psychological measures used in this paper. In some measures, up to 80 percent of
the variance is measurement error.

10

We use the early measures of skills in the Perry data to extract the latent skills
(θj ; j ∈ Jp ) in equation (7) where the latent skills are the factors. We use a
common measurement system for treated and untreated participants although
θ1j , j ∈ Jp and θ0j , j ∈ Jp , may differ.
More formally, let the index set for measures associated with factor j ∈ Jp be
j
Mj . Denote the measures for factor j in treatment group d by Mm
j ,d , d ∈ {0, 1}.
Henceforth, let θd denote the vector of factors associated with the skills that can
be measured in treatment state d, i.e., θd = (θdj : j ∈ Jp ), d ∈ {0, 1}.
Following the psychometric literature summarized in Gorsuch (1983, 2003) and
Thompson (2004), we assume that each measure is associated with at most one
factor. We assume that the same measurement equations govern treatment and
control groups so that the following equation is assumed to describe the relationship between the measures associated with factor j and the factor:
(8)

j
j
j
j
j
j
j
Measures : Mm
j ,d = νmj + ϕmj θd + ηmj , j ∈ Jp , m ∈ M .

j
To simplify the notation, we keep the covariates X implicit. Parameters νm
j are
measure-specific intercepts. Parameters ϕjmj are factor loadings. The d in (5) and
j
ηm
j are mean-zero error terms assumed to be independent of θd , d ∈ {0, 1}, and
of each other. The factor structure is characterized by the following equations:

(9)
(10)

Factor Means : E[θdj ] = µjd , j ∈ Jp
Factor Covariance : Var[θd ] = Σθd , d ∈ {0, 1}.

j
j
j
j
j
The assumption that the parameters νm
j , ϕmj , Var(ηmj ) : m ∈ M , j ∈ Jp ,
do not depend on d simplifies the notation, as well as the interpretation of the
estimates obtained from our procedure. It implies that the effect of treatment
on the measured skills operates only through the latent skills and not through
changing the measurement system for those skills. This assumption can be tested
by estimating measurement systems separately for treatment and control groups
and testing if measurement equation factor loadings and measurement equation
intercepts differ between treatment and control groups.33 We do not reject the
hypotheses of equality of these parameters across treatment and control groups.34

3.3.

Identification

Identification of factor models requires normalizations that set the location and
scale of the factors (e.g., Anderson and Rubin, 1956a).35 We set the location of
33 See

Web Appendix E.2 and the discussion in Section 3.3.3.
Web Appendix Tables L.2–L.4.
35 We refer the reader to Web Appendix E for a more detailed discussion of identification.

34 See

11

each factor by fixing the intercepts of one measure—designated “the first”—to
zero, i.e. ν1j = 0, j ∈ Jp . This defines the location of factor j for each counterfactual condition. We set the scale of the factor by fixing the factor loadings
of the first measure of each skill to one, i.e. ϕj1 = 1, j ∈ Jp . For all measures
that are related to a factor (i.e. have a non-zero loading on the factor, ϕjmj ),
the decomposition of treatment effects presented in this paper is invariant to the
choice of which measure is designated as the “first measure” for each factor and
to any affine transformations of the measures.36
Identification is established in four steps. First, we identify the means of the factors, µjd . Second, we identify the measurement factor loadings ϕjmj , the variances
j
Var(ηm
j ) of the measurement system, and the factor covariance structure Σθd .
Third, we use the parameters identified from the first and second steps to secure
j
identification of the measurement intercepts νm
j . Finally, we use the parameters
identified in the first three steps to identify the factor loadings α = (αj ; j ∈ Jp )
and intercept τd of the outcome equations. We discuss each of these steps in turn.
1. Factor Means

We identify µj1 and µj0 from the mean of the designated first measure for treatj
ment and control groups: E(M1,d
) = µjd , j ∈ Jp , d ∈ {0, 1}.
2. Measurement Loadings

From the covariance structure of the measurement system, we can identify: (a)
the factor loadings of the measurement system ϕjmj ; (b) the variances of the
j
measurement error terms, Var(ηm
j ); and (c) the factor covariance matrix, Σθd .
Factors are freely correlated. We need at least three measures for each skill j ∈ Jp ,
all with non-zero factor loadings.37 The ϕjmj can depend on d ∈ {0, 1}, and we
can identify ϕjmj ,d . We test if H0 : ϕjmj ,1 = ϕjmj ,0 , j ∈ Jp , and we do not reject
these hypotheses.38
36 See Web Appendix E.3 for a proof. If α 6= α , we acquire another term in the decomposition that
1
0
is not invariant to affine transformations of the measures used to extract factors. However, even in this
case, the treatment effect arising from measured skills in (7) is invariant. See also James J. Heckman and
Rodrigo Pinto (2012b) for a more general analysis of the combinations of parameters identified under
monotonic transformations of the measures.
37 Having three measures allows us to form three covariances and to solve for the three unrestricted
parameters of the three-measurement system. With two measures, we form one covariance which cannot,
by itself, be used to identify the two unrestricted parameters of the two measurement system. See T. W.
Anderson and H. Rubin (1956b).
38 Table L.4 in the Web Appendix. Proof of identification of this more general model is given in
Appendix E.

12

3. Measurement Intercepts
j
j
j
j
From the means of the measurements, i.e. E(Mm
j ,d ) = νmj +ϕmj µd , we identify
j
j
j
j
νm
j , m ∈ M \ {1}, j ∈ Jp . Recall that the factor loadings ϕmj and factor means
j
µjd are identified. Assuming equality of the intercepts (νm
j ) between treatment
j
and control groups guarantees that treatment effects on measures, i.e. E(Mm
j ,1 )−
j
j
j
E(Mm
j ,0 ), operate solely through treatment effects on factor means, i.e. µ1 − µ0 .
However, identification of our decomposition requires intercept equality only for
j
the designated first measure of each factor. We test and do not reject H0 : νm
j ,1 =
j
j
j
39
νm
j ,0 for all m ∈ M \ {1}, j ∈ Jp .

4. Outcome Equation

Adult outcome factor loadings in equation (5) can be identified using the covariances between outcomes and the designated first measure of each skill. We
form the covariances of each outcome Yd with the designated first measure of each
skill j ∈ Jp to obtain Cov(Yd , M1,d ) = Σθd α where α = (αj ; j ∈ Jp ). By the
previous argument, Σθd is identified. Thus α is identified whenever det(Σθd ) 6= 0.
Outcome factor loadings α can depend on d ∈ {0, 1}, as they can be identified
through Cov(Yd , M1,d ) = Σθd αd , which can be separately identified for treatments and controls. We test H0 : α1j = α0j , j ∈ Jp , and we do not reject these
hypotheses.40 Using E(Yd ), we can identify τd because all of the other parameters
of each outcome equation are identified.

3.4.

Estimation Procedure

We estimate the model using a simple three stage procedure. First, we estimate
the measurement system. Second, from these equations we can estimate the skills
for each participant. Third, we estimate the relationship between participant
skills and lifetime outcomes. Proceeding in this fashion makes identification and
estimation transparent. In Section 5 and Appendix L we show that a one-step
procedure produces estimates very similar to those obtained from the three-step
procedure. We estimate the model separately for males and females in light of
the evidence that there are strong gender differences in program effects.41
39 See

Table L.4 in the Web Appendix.
L.2 and L.3 in the Web Appendix.
41 See Heckman et al. (2010a) and Tables L.5 and L.6 in Appendix L.

40 Tables

13

We compute p-values using the bootstrap. We draw K = 1000 bootstrap
samples of the original data and apply the estimation procedure to each pseudosample the same way we apply it to the original data. For a one-tailed test with
an upper tail rejection region, the bootstrap p-value is estimated by
K
1 X
p̂(%̂) =
1(%∗k > %̂),
K

(11)

k=1

where %̂ is the parameter of interest as estimated from the original data, and
%∗k is the k-th draw from the bootstrap data-generating process satisfying the
null hypothesis.42 We describe the details of our estimation procedure in the
Appendix.
4.

Measures of Cognitive and Personality Skills

This section explains how we condense the data on psychological traits. Using
standard psychometric methods, we establish that only three factors are required
to explain the available psychological measures. The extracted factors have clear
interpretations. After extracting the factors, we test the validity of the derived
system.
4.1.

Our Measure of Cognition

A large literature establishes the importance of cognition, as measured by IQ,
in explaining a variety of life outcomes (see, e.g., Gottfredson, 1997, and Jensen,
1998, for surveys). We use the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Test (Terman and
Merrill, 1960) as our measure of cognition. Mean differences in Stanford-Binet
scores between treatment and control groups are plotted by age in panels (a) and
(b) of Figure 1. A boost in the IQs of children in the treatment group is observed
soon after the program starts at age three. A few years after the program ends,
the effect of treatment on IQ essentially disappears for males. A small, borderline
statistically significant, positive effect remains for females. In our analysis, we
use IQs at ages 7, 8, and 9, since this is the period when the treatment effect on
IQ becomes relatively stable for both genders, and IQ becomes rank stable after
those ages.43
42 See

Wasserman (2006) for details.
of IQ from alternative tests, the Leiter and the PPVT, evolve in a fashion similar to scores
on the Stanford-Binet test (see panels (a)-(d) of Figure B.6 of Web Appendix B). Among IQ measures
available in the Perry data, Stanford-Binet is the most established one. The Stanford-Binet IQ test is
widely used and has high reliability (see Santrock, 2008). Web Appendix B presents a detailed description
of the test. Borghans et al. (2008) and Almlund et al. (2011) discuss the evidence on the rank stability
of IQ after age 10 or so.
43 Measures

14

4.2.

Personality Skills

The most influential taxonomy of personality skills is the Big Five personality
inventory (McCrae and John, 1992; John and Srivastava, 1999).44 Unfortunately,
the Big Five was developed long after the Perry experiment was conducted. We
only have access to psychological measures of personality skills collected before
the Big Five was codified.45

Perry Measures of Personality Skills

There are 43 child personality measures in the Perry data. These measures
belong to two separate psychological inventories of personality skills: the Pupil
Behavior Inventory (PBI) and the Ypsilanti Rating Scale (YRS). These measures
are displayed in Tables C.1 and D.1 in the Web Appendix, where their correspondence with Big Five traits is noted.46 The PBI inventory was developed by Vinter
et al. (1966) to measure behavioral and attitudinal factors that affect academic
success. The YRS measures were developed by the Perry analysts to measure
academic potential and socio-emotional skills (Weikart, Bond and McNeil, 1978).
The PBI and YRS questionnaires consist of multiple questions called items. They
were given to teachers in classes attended by Perry students after the program
was completed to assess students in their classes. An example of one of the PBI
items is “lying or cheating”, and the possible answers are (1) very frequently,
(2) frequently, (3) sometimes, (4) infrequently, and (5) very infrequently. The
YRS questionnaire asks questions about socio-emotional skills, such as Academic
Potential and Social Development.47

4.3.

Approaches to Summarizing the Data

There are many ways to summarize the available psychological measures in an
interpretable fashion. One way is to form indices of measures using the groupings
employed by the Perry psychologists.48 The PBI and YRS scales were designed
to alert educators of behavioral and motivational problems of children in school.
44 However, even the Big Five is not universally accepted. See Borghans et al. (2008), and Almlund
et al. (2011), for surveys of personality psychology literature.
45 The traits can be related to the Big Five (see Tables C.1 and D.1 of the Web Appendix)
46 We thank Angela Duckworth for helping us make this correspondence.
47 Although measures are missing on the PBI and YRS, the longitudinal structure of the Perry experiment allows us to use closely adjacent measures by age to impute the missing data. See Web Appendices
C and D.
48 There are nine such groupings. We list the corresponding measures within groups in Tables C.1 and
D.1 of the Web Appendix.

15

There is considerable overlap among items in the groupings, and the relationship
of these measures to more interpretable psychological constructs is unclear.
An intuitively appealing way to construct summary measures is to ignore the
groupings used by the Perry psychologists and to select measures from all of their
scales based on common sense and previous research in psychology, such as their
interpretability in terms of the Big Five. This procedure is called “operationalization” in psychology, and is inherently subjective.49 There are many ways to
form such indices leading to a complex model selection problem.
The approach used in this paper is to apply exploratory factor analysis (EFA)
to the available measures. EFA is a standard statistical method widely used in
psychometrics to allocate measures to factors (e.g., Gorsuch, 2003; Thompson,
2004). It is used to form the Big Five (See Goldberg, 1993). EFA establishes
links between a small number of latent factors and the available measures. Each
measure is allowed to depend on at most one factor, and the derived factors are
allowed to be freely correlated.
Our application of EFA produces three interpretable factors which we interpret
as Cognition, Externalizing Behavior, and Academic Motivation.50 The derived
factors are consistent with previous research in psychology on the predictive power
of psychological traits. We implement EFA in two stages. We first select the
number of factors. We then allocate the measures of personality traits to different
factors.

4.4.

Exploratory Factor Analysis

We use several accepted procedures to determine the number of factors: the
scree test (Cattell, 1966), Onatski’s test (2009), and Horn’s (1965) parallel analysis test.51 Overall, these procedures point to a three-factor characterization for
both men and women.52
49 See

Borghans et al. (2008) and Almlund et al. (2011).
interpretation of a factor is derived from the interpretation of the measures from which it is
extracted.
51 Web Appendix H provides additional details about the criteria used in the literature to choose the
number of factors. The Guttman-Kaiser rule (Guttman, 1954, and Kaiser, 1960, 1961) suggests 7–9
factors. This rule is well known to overestimate the number of factors (see Zwick and Velicer, 1986,
Gorsuch, 2003, and Thompson, 2004) and this makes it less informative than the other methods. We do
not use it in this paper.
52 See Table H.1 in the Web Appendix.
50 The

16

Exploratory Factor Analysis: Establishing Dedicated Measures

We extract factors following the criteria for EFA laid out by Gorsuch (1983).53
This method is widely used although its application requires judgement on the
part of the analyst (see Gorsuch, 2003, and Thompson, 2004). EFA identifies
blocks of measures that are strongly correlated within the each block (i.e. satisfy convergent validity), but are weakly correlated between blocks (i.e. satisfy
discriminant validity). It discards measures that load on multiple factors. Application of standard EFA methodology to the 46 cognitive and personality Perry
measures gives the 13 measures displayed in Table H.2.54
We follow Gorsuch (2003) and Thompson (2004), and derive a fully dedicated
system as described by equations (8)–(10) i.e. a system in which each measure is
associated with at most one factor. This procedure is called confirmatory factor
analysis (CFA), which Gorsuch (2003) and Thompson (2004) advocate as the
next step after conducting EFA. It produces the interpretable system displayed in
Table 2, based on three factors: Cognition, Externalizing Behavior, and Academic
Motivation.55 Externalizing Behavior is proxied by measures of behavior related
to lying, stealing, and swearing, as well as being aggressive and disruptive. It
has been linked to crime and aggressive behavior.56 Academic Motivation is
proxied by measures of student interest, persistence, and initiative in learning
and is linked to performance in schools as measured by achievement tests. The
personality measures proxying Externalizing Behavior and Academic Motivation
are conceptually related to Big Five factors in personality psychology.57

The Predictive Power of Externalizing Behavior and Academic
Motivation

The factors extracted by the EFA procedure are closely linked to traits that have
been shown to be predictive of adult outcomes. This gives us greater confidence
in using them to explain the Perry treatment effects.
53 See Web Appendix H.1 for the algebra of factor rotation and for the definition of various factor
selection criteria. We use direct quartimin oblique rotation. We find that other widely recognized
oblique rotation methods such as geomin, lead to similar results and the same choice of measures as
quartimin (see Table L.7 of the Web Appendix, which shows the same pattern as the direct quartimin
solution in Table H.2 of Appendix H). This result is in line with the literature showing that widely
recognized methods of oblique rotation produce similar results (Fabrigar et al., 1999).
54 Measures are retained if they are strongly related to one and only one factor. For statements about
the standard EFA methodology, see Tabachnick and Fidell (2001), Thompson (2004), and Costello and
Osborne (2005).
55 The factor loadings for the dedicated system are presented in Table L.8 of Web Appendix L.
56 Externalizing behavior is linked to the Big Five traits of Agreeableness, Neuroticism and Conscientiousness. (see Almlund et al., 2011)
57 See Almlund et al. (2011) for a discussion of these relationships.

17

The recent literature in economics shows that Externalizing Behavior predicts child and adult outcomes (Segal, 2008, 2009).58 . The literature in psychology shows that Externalizing Behavior is negatively associated with Academic
Achievement.59 Childhood Externalizing Behaviors have also been shown to be
related to adolescent and adult delinquency (e.g., Nagin and Tremblay, 1999, and
Broidy et al., 2003).
The literature in criminology and psychology demonstrates that early antisocial behaviors are highly predictive of adolescent and adult antisocial behaviors
(Gersten et al., 1976; Huesmann et al., 1984; Olweus, 1979). Antisocial behaviors
measured between ages 7 and 11 strongly predict criminal behaviors in adulthood
(Loeber, 1982; Moffitt, 1993). Meanwhile, disobedient and aggressive behaviors
measured as early as ages 3–5 predict later childhood conduct disorders and adolescent arrests (Moffitt, 1993; White et al., 1990). Most children with conduct
disorders experience social difficulties in adulthood, whereas only 8 percent of
children without conduct disorders experience such difficulties (Zoccolillo et al.,
1992). Similarly, many children with antisocial behavior around ages 8–10 become
antisocial adults (Coie et al., 1995; Olweus, 1979; Robins, 1978)60 and chronic
criminal offenders (Loeber, 1982). Almost all antisocial adults were antisocial
children (Robins, 1978). Our analysis confirms previous evidence on the stability of antisocial traits into adulthood. We find stable rank correlations between
Externalizing Behavior at ages 7–9 and subsequent measures of crime as late as
ages 19, 27, and 40 (see Figure 4). The evidence from the literature in psychology
and criminology joined with the evidence from this paper suggests that reducing
early externalizing behavior reduces crime.
Academic Motivation, apart from its obvious link to performance in school,
has been shown to be a statistically significant predictor of decreased drug use
(Bryant et al., 2003, and Razzino et al., 2004) and alcohol consumption (Zimmerman and Schmeelk-Cone, 2003, Simons-Morton, 2004, and Vaughan, Corbin and
Fromme, 2009). Since drinking and drug use are associated with crime (Anglin
and Perrochet, 1998, and Greenfeld, 1998), youth with higher levels of Academic
Motivation are less likely to engage in criminal activities. Flouri and Buchanan
(2002) show that for both males and females, low academic motivation in adolescence is positively related to trouble with the police at age 16. Cymbalisty, Schuck
and Dubeck (1975) show that for males who have already committed crimes, recidivism decreases with motivation for learning. Therefore, it is expected that
experimentally induced enhancements in Academic Motivation would be a source
58 For more information about externalizing behaviors, see Achenbach (1978), Campbell et al. (1996),
and Brunnekreef et al. (2007).
59 See Richman, Stevenson and Graham, 1982, Egeland et al., 1990, Jimerson, Egeland and Teo, 1999,
and Jimerson et al., 2002.
60 Robins (1978) estimates that 36–41 percent of children with antisocial behaviors become highly
antisocial adults.

18

of treatment effects for education and crime outcomes. We confirm such effects
for education, but not for crime.

5.

The Effect of Treatment on Traits and the Sources of Treatment Effects

We first study how treatment affects the extracted factors. We then investigate
how the factors affect life outcomes. Finally, we decompose adult treatment effects
into components corresponding to changes in each factor. The first analysis is
based on the output of step two of the three-step estimation procedure described
in detail in the Appendix. The second and third analyses are based on the output
of the third step of the procedure.

5.1.

The Effect of the Perry Program on Cognitive and Personality Skills

Figure 5 graphs kernel densities of factor scores and presents one-sided p-values
for testing the equality of the means for each skill between the treatment and
control groups.61 The Perry program has a statistically significant treatment
effect on Externalizing Behavior at the 5 percent level for males and at the 1
percent level for females. The effects on Cognition and Academic Motivation are
statistically significant at the 10 percent and 5 percent levels, respectively, for
females, but are not statistically significant for males. This evidence is consistent
with the evidence in Table 1 of a statistically significant treatment effect on
achievement test scores, which is much stronger for girls than for boys.
The kernel densities reveal different patterns of the effect of the program on
the distribution of skills. The cognition of females is enhanced mostly in the
right tail of the distribution (panel b). In contrast, a substantial part of the
improvement in Externalizing Behavior for females operates through enhancing
low levels of the skill (panel d). Externalizing Behavior in males is improved at
all levels. Academic Motivation in females is improved at all levels except for the
top percentiles (see panel f). There is no statistically significant difference in the
distribution of Cognition for males (panel a).62
61 Cognition is uncorrelated with Externalizing Behavior, while Academic Motivation correlates with
both Externalizing Behavior and Cognition (see Table L.9 of Web Appendix L).
62 We also test for gender differences in skills and find that differences are not statistically significant.
In other words, for each skill and for each treatment group we cannot reject the null hypothesis of equality
of skills between males and females. See Figure L.1 of Web Appendix L.

19

5.2.

The Effect of Cognitive and Personality Skills on Outcomes

In order to estimate the effects of factors on outcomes we estimate a model described by a system of equations (5) and (8) conditioning on background variables
X. We present estimates of α = (αj , j ∈ Jp ) in equation (7). Table 3 shows that
all three factors (Cognition, Externalizing Behavior, and Academic Motivation)
have statistically significant effects on at least one outcome.
Different factors affect different outcomes. Cognition primarily affects achievement tests and also affects certain labor market outcomes. Externalizing Behavior
affects crime outcomes, labor market outcomes, and health behaviors. Academic
Motivation boosts educational outcomes and reduces long-term unemployment.
Treatment effects are generated through changes in skills if (1) skills affect
outcomes and (2) skills are enhanced by the intervention. Thus, even though
Cognition and Academic Motivation are positively related to the CAT scores of
males, the absence of a relationship for males between treatment and both Cognition and Academic Motivation makes this channel either weak or nonexistent.

5.3.

Decomposing Treatment Effects on Outcomes by Source

Figures 6 and 7 present our estimated decompositions of treatment effects into
experimentally induced improvements in Cognition, Externalizing Behavior, Academic Motivation, and other factors. By “other factors” we mean the residual
treatment effect associated with unmeasured skills. We report the percentage
of each treatment effect attributable to each component.63 The numbers shown
above each component are one-sided p-values for the test of whether the component is zero. We stress that these decompositions are invariant to the choice of
normalizing measures and to affine transformations of the measures.64
We decompose the treatment effect for a number of outcomes: performance on
the California Achievement Test (CAT), special education at school and mental
impairment, labor market outcomes such as income and employment, health behaviors such as smoking tobacco or using drugs, marriage duration, and crime
63 Figures 6 and 7 are slightly simplified representations of the results presented in Tables L.10 and
L.11 of the Web Appendix. To simplify the exposition, for the figures in the main text, contributions
opposite in sign to those of the total treatment effect are set to zero. These contributions are small
and statistically insignificant. Thus the figures in the text are an accurate summary of the essential
information in the tables. Appendix L explains the methodology for constructing the figures and shows
(see Figure L.2) that the the figures presented in the text closely approximate the actual decomposition.
64 See Web Appendix E.

20

outcomes. The crime outcomes are especially important since they are the dominant component of Perry program’s total benefit (e.g., Heckman et al., 2010b).
We only decompose treatment effects that have been shown to be statistically significant at the 10 percent level or below after adjusting for the effects of multiplehypothesis testing on significance levels (Heckman et al., 2010a, Conti et al.,
2012). Proceeding in this fashion leads to somewhat different decompositions for
males and females.
The effect of the intervention on life outcomes operates primarily through the
program’s enhancement of Externalizing Behavior. Components attributable to
changes in this factor are generally statistically significant and, in most cases,
explain 20–60 percent of the treatment effects on crime for males and about 40–
60 percent for females (see Figures 6 and 7).
The mediating effects of Externalizing Behavior are not only statistically significant, but also economically significant. Reported arrests and registered crimes
are only a small fraction of the actual number of crimes. For instance, only one
in 15 property crimes and one in five violent crimes actually leads to an arrest.65
We find that experimentally induced reductions in Externalizing Behavior (by
one standard deviation) leads to a decline in the total number of lifetime arrests
by statistically significant 1.7 (p=0.077) and the number of felony arrests by 0.6
(p=0.056) for males at age 40.66 For females, the total number of felony arrests by
age 40 is reduced by 0.31 (p=0.050), and the number of registered lifetime violent
crimes is reduced by 0.65 (p=0.046).67 The reduction in actual crimes is likely
several times larger than these reductions in the number of arrests and registered
crimes. Since Externalizing Behavior is both malleable at early ages (see Figure
5) and strongly predictive of crime (see Table 3), it should not be surprising that
crime reduction has been found to be a major benefit of the Perry program.
We also decompose the effect of the program on an achievement test (CAT)
for both males and females. For females, enhancements in Academic Motivation
explain about 30 percent of the treatment effect on CAT scores at age 8. This
estimate is statistically significant at a 10 percent level (p = 0.057). For CAT
scores at age 14, the role of Academic Motivation is not precisely determined for
males or for females (p = 0.161 and 0.528).
Finally, we decompose a number of education, labor market, and health outcomes. Academic Motivation consistently explains a share of treatment effects
65 Heckman et al. (2010b) estimate that the average victimization to arrest ratio in Midwestern urban
areas is 15.0 for property crimes and 5.3 for violent crimes.
66 Control group means for the number of total lifetime and felony arrests for males are 12.4 and 3.2,
with standard errors 1.9 and 0.7.
67 Tables L.10 and L.11 of the Web Appendix present the effects in terms of absolute levels rather than
in relative levels as shown in Figures 6 and 7. Control group means for the number of lifetime felony
arrests and number of registered lifetime violent crimes are .42 and .65 respectively, with standard errors
0.18 and 0.29.

21

for all education-related outcomes, which is not surprising given strong links between Academic Motivation and education outcomes presented in Table 3. However, only some components of these decompositions are precisely determined
(e.g. CAT and the status of being mentally impaired for females).
For labor market outcomes, we find that about 20 percent of the treatment effect
on monthly income at age 27 (p=0.089) and also about 20 percent of the treatment
effect on the probability of employment at age 40 (p=0.085) are explained by early
improvements in Externalizing Behavior. Additionally, Externalizing Behavior
explains about 40 percent of tobacco use at age 27 (p = 0.046).

5.4.

Decompositions Based on Indices vs. Decompositions Using Factor Scores

A simple alternative to our factor procedure for summarizing the evidence on
the effects of experimentally induced changes in measurements on outcomes is
to use indices of the measures in place of factor scores. Such indices, which are
unweighted averages over the measures, are commonly used. In making this comparison we take as given the cluster of measures identified by application of EFA
(see Table 2). Picking the clusters of the traits in this fashion avoids the serious
practical problem that many groupings are possible, and many tests among competing specifications are non-nested. The comparison being made is one between
using unweighted averages of measures not correcting for measurement error with
a method that extracts factors by weighting the measures by the estimated factor
loadings and adjusting for measurement error.
Figure 8 decomposes a selection of the treatment effects for a variety of outcomes
for each gender using both indices and factor models.68 For each outcome, we
show the results of the two different estimation procedures using a pair of bars.
The first bar in each pair corresponds to the estimates from the procedure used
in this paper. These bars are identical to those presented in Figures 6 and 7.
The second bar in each pair corresponds to the decomposition obtained from
estimating equation (7) using indices.
Comparing the first bar with the second bar reveals that even though results
of the two procedures lead to similar qualitative conclusions about the role of
mediating skills, the estimates of the explained treatment effect components and
the associated p-values are numerically different. As is apparent from equation
(7), there are two possible sources of difference in the decompositions: (1) different factor loadings αj and (2) different estimates of the treatment effect on the
68 We present a full comparison of indices with factors in Appendix L for all treatment effects analyzed
in this paper. See Figures L.6 and L.7 to be compared to Figures 6 and 7 respectively.

22

factors: E(θ1j − θ0j ), j ∈ Jp . The approach using indices only partially corrects
for attenuation bias by reducing measurement error through simple averaging.
Our factor approach explicitly addresses measurement error. Thus the index approach likely generates downward-biased decompositions. Indeed, the shares of
the treatment effects explained by Externalizing Behavior are generally smaller
for the index-based procedure. The p-values from the index-based procedure are
somewhat smaller for females but somewhat larger for males. Most of the comparisons presented in Figure 8 are consistent with this interpretation.69,70

5.5.

More Efficient Estimates

The three step estimation procedure used in this paper is simple and intuitive.
In general, it is not statistically efficient given that we do not impose crossequation restrictions across the stages of the estimation. In Web Appendix L, we
compare the decompositions obtained from our three-step estimation procedure
to those obtained from a one-step maximum likelihood estimation method where
the measurement system and outcome equation are estimated jointly.71 The
results from both procedures are in close agreement, although p-values from the
maximum likelihood procedure are generally lower.72

5.6.

Testing the Validity of the Derived System

The procedure used to create the dedicated factor system is based in part on
judgements by the analyst. Such judgements are widely used in the psychometric
literature.73 To gain greater confidence in the system created by our EFA analysis,
we test the validity of the derived factor structure.
69 Upward bias may arise for the following reason. An index uses equal weights for all measures. It
may happen that for some particular outcome, measures that are more predictive of that outcome have
relatively higher weights in the index compared to their weights on the true factor scores. Then the index
will be more predictive of that particular outcome than the factor score. If the effect of using an index
outweighs the attenuation bias due to measurement error, it may happen that a decomposition based on
an index is biased upwards. There are only two instances of this occurring in Figure 8 (tobacco use and
felony arrests for males).
70 A related issue, somewhat tangential to the main point of this paper, is the decomposition that
results from using achievement test scores in place of IQ test scores in constructing our decomposition.
As noted by Borghans et al. (2011a,b), 30-40 percent of the variation in achievement test scores is
attributable to variation in personality scores. Thus the common practice of assuming that achievement
tests proxy intelligence is misleading. When we use the CAT scores at ages 7-9 in place of IQ scores at
those ages, and construct an “Achievement” cognition factor, we overstate the importance of “Cognition”
as a source of treatment effects. See Tables L.12–L.13, Figure L.3, and the discussion in Web Appendix
L.
71 See Web Appendix L, Figure L.4.
72 Tables L.5 and L.6 of the Web Appendix L show the full set of estimates for the decompositions.
73 See Gorsuch (2003) and Thompson (2004).

23

Our application of the EFA methodology yields 13 dedicated measures out of
46 available cognitive and personality measures. The 33 unused measures do
not survive the EFA testing criteria. To test the validity of this specification,
we run a series of tests on the measurement and outcome equations. We first
determine if, conditional on the extracted factors, the unused measures exhibit
a treatment effect. If they do not, they are not candidates for explaining the
treatment effect for outcomes. We also determine whether, conditional on the
extracted factors, the unused measures explain outcomes. Evidence from both
types of tests support the low-dimensional specification of equations (5) and (8)–
(10) derived from applying EFA. Web appendix M presents a detailed discussion
of these tests.

5.7.

A Framework for Unifying Diverse Studies of Child Development

The framework developed in this paper facilitates the interpretation of diverse
treatment effects within and across programs as the manifestations of programinduced changes in a low-dimensional set of skills of participants. This framework
can be used to unify the interpretation of the treatment effects across different
studies with different interventions applied to different populations. By focusing
on the channels through which the different programs produce their effects, we
gain a deeper understanding of the traits that matter and how they can be affected
by various influences on the child. Systematic application of this framework will
enable the intervention literature to move beyond meta analyses to understand
the common mechanisms producing success in children and how different interventions boost different traits to different degrees. This framework also offers a basis
for unifying observational studies of family influence with intervention studies.74
Investments made by families boost θ as do the investments made in intervention
programs. Using the framework developed and applied in this paper, we can in
principle compare family investments and interventions in terms of their effects
on θ.

6.

Conclusions

Using experimental data from an influential early childhood program, we analyze the sources of program treatment effects. Coupling experimental variation
with an econometric model, we estimate the role of enhancements in Cognition,
Externalizing Behavior, and Academic Motivation in producing the Perry treatment effects. Persistent changes in personality skills play a substantial role in
74 For

a template of this program see Cunha and Heckman (2009).

24

producing the success of the Perry program. The reduction in Externalizing Behavior, which explains the bulk of the effects of Perry program on criminal, labor
market, and health behavior outcomes, is especially strong.75
We offer a new understanding of how a few hours per day of preschool at ages
three and four with a curriculum that promotes social competency, planning, and
organization can significantly and beneficially affect life outcomes. The importance and malleability of these skills deserves greater emphasis in public policies
designed to promote skills and alleviate poverty.76

75 Our analysis cannot rule out the possibility that the initial enhancement of IQ in the Perry program permanently boosted personality traits (e.g. by giving participants more understanding of their
environment and promoting self confidence and other traits) even though the initial IQ surge faded. To
examine this possibility would require estimating the state space model of Cunha and Heckman (2008)
to examine the transient dynamics of the model. This would be a formidable empirical challenge for a
sample the size of the Perry study.
76 Since we analyze one program in one site with one level of program intensity, we are unable to
determine the external validity of our evidence for other sites or intensity levels, nor can we discuss how
easy it is to go to scale with the program. An analysis of these questions for early childhood outcomes
is possible using data from ICPSR (2010) because roughly 30 percent of Head Start centers adopt some
version of the Perry curriculum.

25

100
95

(a) Stanford-Binet, Males
Treatment

100
95

Age
75
5
6
7
8
9
10
95.4 91.5 91.1 88.3 88.4 83.7
Treatment
84.8 85.8 87.7 89.1 89.0 86.0
Control
97.62 93.52 92.84 90.59 90.19 85.38
Treatment + SD
93.18 89.45 89.40 86.07 86.60 82.01
Treatment - SD
86.57 87.57 89.50 90.92 91.18 87.95
Control + SD
83.02 84.07 85.93 87.19 86.87 84.10
Control - SD
Figure 1. Stanford-Binet IQ Test Scores by Gender

80

90

Control

90

4
94.9
83.1
97.07
92.75
84.85
81.30

85

Entry
79.2
77.8
80.40
78.02
78.99
76.71

85
80
75
Treatment
Control
Treatment + SD
Treatment - SD
Control + SD
Control - SD

8
87.8
83.6
90.66
85.02
85.38
81.82

(b) Stanford-Binet, Females
Treatment

7
92.5
86.0
95.30
89.74
87.82
84.18

Control

Entry
4
5
6
80.0 96.4 94.3 90.9
79.6 83.7 81.7 87.2
80.93 98.42 97.85 93.66
79.15 94.30 90.79 88.16
80.86 85.33 84.11 88.82
78.30 82.05 79.19 85.50
and Treatment Status

9
86.7
83.0
89.22
84.26
85.18
80.91

Age

10
86.8
81.8
89.43
84.07
83.96
79.62

Note: Bold lines display mean IQs. Fine lines represent standard errors for the corresponding means (one standard error above and below). For a detailed
description of the cognitive measures and results for other IQ tests, see Web Appendix B. Numbers below each chart are treatment and control mean test
scores. See panels (a)-(d) of Figure B.6 of Web Appendix B for comparable graphs on the Leiter and PPVT measures of IQ.

26

.8
1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
0

0

.1

.2

.3

density

.4

.5

.6

(d) Academic Motivation, Treatment

.6

(c) Academic Motivation, Control

density

.6
0

.2

.4

density

.6
0

.2

.4

density

.8

1

(b) Externalizing Behavior, Treatment

1

(a) Externalizing Behavior, Control

1

2

3

4

5

1

3

4

5

(f) CAT total at age 14, Treatment

.04

density

.02

.04

0

0

.02

density

.06

.06

.08

.08

(e) CAT total at age 14, Control

2

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

percentile

20

40

60

80

100

percentile

Figure 2. Histograms of Indices of Personality Skills and CAT scores
Note: Indices for Externalizing Behavior and Academic Motivation are unweighted averages of measures
listed in Table 2. “CAT” is the California Achievement Test score expressed in percentiles of the general
population distribution of the scores. See Web Appendix B.4 for description of the CAT. The onesided p-values for difference in means between treatments and controls are 0.001, 0.043, and 0.000 for
Externalizing Behavior, Academic Motivation, and CAT scores respectively. Histograms are based on
the pooled sample of males and females. See Figures C.6 and C.7 of Web Appendix C and Figure B.5 of
Web Appendix B for the corresponding gender-specific figures.

27

(a) Externalizing Behavior, Male

(b) Externalizing Behavior, Female

p = p=.031
0.031

p = p=.006
0.006

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2
0

0
1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

control

4

4.5

1

5

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

control

treatment

(c) Academic Motivation, Male

4.5

5

treatment

(d) Academic Motivation, Female

p = p=.211
0.211

p = p=.053
0.053

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2
0

0
1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

control

4

4.5

1

5

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

control

treatment

(e) CAT total at age 14, Male

4

4.5

5

treatment

(f) CAT total at age 14, Female

p = p=.016
0.016

p = p=.002
0.002

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
0

10

20

30

40

control

50

60

70

80

90

100

0

treatment

10

20

30

40

control

50

60

70

80

90

100

treatment

Figure 3. Cumulative Distribution Functions of Indices of Personality Skills and CAT scores
by Gender
Note: Indices for Externalizing Behavior and Academic Motivation are unweighted averages of measures
listed in Table 2. “CAT” is the California Achievement Test score expressed in percentiles of the general
population distribution of the scores. Numbers above the charts are one-sided p-values testing the
equality of means of the indices for the treatment and control groups.

28

0.6

0.370***

0.348***
0.289**
0.230*

0

Correlation
0.2
0.4

0.392***

0.369***

19

27
Age
Males

40

Females

Figure 4. Spearman’s Rank Correlations between Externalizing Behavior at Ages 7–9 and
Number of Arrests by Ages 19, 27, and 40
Note: *** - 1 percent, ** - 5 percent, * - 10 percent significance levels (one-sided tests).

29

(b) Cognition, Females

p = 0.683

p = 0.095

0

0

.1

.1

.2

.2

.3

.3

.4

.4

.5

.5

.6

.6

(a) Cognition, Males

−3

−2

−1

0

1

control

2

3

−3

4

−2

−1

0

1

control

treatment

2

3

4

treatment

(d) Externalizing Behavior, Females

p = 0.038

p = 0.006

0

0

.1

.1

.2

.2

.3

.3

.4

.4

.5

.5

.6

.6

(c) Externalizing Behavior, Males

−3

−2

−1

0

control

1

2

−3

3

−2

−1

0

control

treatment

1

2

3

treatment

(f) Academic Motivation, Females

p = 0.183

p = 0.048

0

0

.1

.1

.2

.2

.3

.3

.4

.4

.5

.5

.6

.6

(e) Academic Motivation, Males

−3

−2

−1

control

0

1

2

3

−3

treatment

−2

−1

0

control

1

2

3

treatment

Figure 5. Kernel Densities of Factor Scores
Note: Probability density functions of Bartlett (1937) factor scores are shown. Densities are computed
based on a normal kernel. Numbers above the charts are one-sided p-values testing the equality of factor
score means for the treatment and control groups. Higher Externalizing Behavior corresponds to more
socially desirable behavior. See Web Appendix L for the empirical CDFs of the factor scores (Figure L.5).
Vertical lines locate factor score means for treatment and control groups.

30

31
20%

0.557

60%

Academic Motivation

40%

Figure 6. Decompositions of Treatment Effects on Outcomes, Males

Externalizing Behavior

0%

0.085

0.077

0.086

0.056

0.136

0.046

0.089

0.062

0.071

0.071

0.161

80%

Other Factors

100%

0.018

0.204

0.149

0.403

0.088

0.141

0.027

0.144

0.246

0.114

0.013

Note: The total treatment effects are shown in parentheses. Each bar represents the total treatment effect normalized to 100 percent. One-sided p-values
are shown above each component of the decomposition. The figure is a slightly simplified visualization of Tables L.10 and L.14: small and statistically
insignificant contributions of the opposite sign are set to zero. See Web Appendix L for detailed information about the simplifications made to produce
the figure. “CAT total” denotes California Achievement Test total score normalized to control mean zero and variance of one. Asterisks denote statistical
significance: * – 10 percent level; ** – 5 percent level; *** – 1 percent level. Monthly income is adjusted to thousands of year-2006 dollars using annual
national CPI.

Cognitive Factor

Employed, age 40 (0.200**)

# of lifetime arrests, age 40 (-4.20*)

# of adult arrests (misd.+fel.), age 40 (-4.26**)

# of felony arrests, age 40 (-1.14*)

# of misdemeanor arrests, age 40 (-3.13**)

Use tobacco, age 27 (-0.119*)

Monthly income, age 27 (0.876**)

# of adult arrests (misd.+fel.), age 27 (-2.33**)

# of felony arrests, age 27 (-1.12)

# of misdemeanor arrests, age 27 (-1.21**)

CAT total at age 14, end of grade 8 (0.566*)

CAT total, age 8 (0.565*)
CAT total, age 14 (0.806**)
Any special education, age 14 (-0.262**)
Mentally impaired at least once, age 19 (-0.280**)
# of misdemeanor violent crimes, age 27 (-0.423**)
# of felony arrests, age 27 (-0.269**)
Jobless for more than 1 year, age 27 (-0.292*)
Ever tried drugs other than alcohol or weed, age 27 (-0.227**)
# of misdemeanor violent crimes, age 40 (-0.537**)
# of felony arrests, age 40 (-0.383**)
# of lifetime violent crimes, age 40 (-0.574**)

0.153
0.256
0.344

0.528
0.533

0.057

0.283

0.232

0.071

0.109

0.305

0.042

0.099

0.319

0.339

0.120

0.127

0.150

Other Factors

100%

0.352

0.320

0.371

0.199

0.497

80%

0.066

0.224

0.228

0.269

60%

Academic Motivation

40%

0.369

20%

0.050
0.046
0.185

0%

Externalizing Behavior

Months in all marriages, age 40 (39.6*)

Cognitive Factor

Figure 7. Decompositions of Treatment Effects on Outcomes, Females

Note: The total treatment effects are shown in parentheses. Each bar represents the total treatment effect normalized to 100 percent. One-sided p-values
are shown above each component in each outcome. The figure is a slightly simplified visualization of Tables L.11 and L.15: small and statistically
insignificant contributions of the opposite sign are set to zero. See Web Appendix L for detailed information about the simplifications made to produce
the figure. “CAT total” denotes California Achievement Test total score normalized to control mean zero and variance of one. Asterisks denote statistical
significance: * – 10 percent level; ** – 5 percent level; *** – 1 percent level.

32

# of misdemeanor
violent crimes, age 27 (-)
# of felony arrests,
age 27 (-)
# of misdemeanor
violent crimes, age 40 (-)
# of felony arrests,
age 40 (-)
Use tobacco, age 27 (-)
Monthly income,
age 27 (+)
# of felony arrests,
age 27 (-)

SCORE
INDEX

0.028

0.075

0.120

0.319

0.061

0.090

SCORE
INDEX
SCORE
INDEX

0.305

0.099

0.371
0.469

0.043

0.092
0.369

0.533

0.017

0.043
0.141

0.046

SCORE
INDEX

0.454

SCORE
INDEX

0.089

0.027

0.480 0.226 0.559

0.021

SCORE
INDEX

0.380

# of lifetime arrests,

SCORE
INDEX

0.220

0.170

0.118

0.148
0.018

0.085
0.172

0.038

0%

.513.000
.038
.000
.000
.000

0.204

0.077
0.410

.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.050
.479
.000

0.246

0.071

0.365

.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000

0.015

0.050

SCORE
INDEX

SCORE
INDEX

Cognition

0.338

0.066

Employed, age 40 (+)

age 40 (-)

0.109

0.042

0.186

Females

least once, age 19 (-)

0.339

SCORE⁽¹⁾
INDEX⁽²⁾

Males

Mentally impaired at

0.111

0.101

20%

40%

Externalizing Behavior

60%

Academic Motivation

80%

100%

Other Factors

Figure 8. Decompositions of Treatment Effects by Indices versus Factor Scores
Note: The total treatment effect is normalized to 100 percent. One-sided p-values are shown above each
component in each outcome. (1)“SCORE” denotes models where personality traits are measured by
factor scores.(1) “INDEX” denotes models where personality traits are measured by indices constructed
using unweighted averages over the items. The figure is a slightly simplified visualization of results from
Tables L.10, L.11, K.1, and K.2 of the Web Appendix: small and statistically insignificant contributions of
the opposite sign are set to zero. See Web Appendix L for detailed information about the simplifications
used to produce the figure.

33

Monthly income, age 27

# of adult arrests (misd.+fel.), age 27

# of felony arrests, age 27

# of misdemeanor arrests, age 27

CAT total at age 14, end of grade 8

-0.119 *

0.876 **

-2.33 **

-1.12

-1.21 **

0.566 *

-0.372

-0.236

0.607

-0.402

-0.324

-0.363

0.652

(0.092)

(0.039)

(0.093)

(0.018)

(0.024)

(0.101)

(0.036)

(0.060)

Treatment Effect
Effect
Size
p-value

11.7

3.26

8.46

0.538

1.43

5.36

2.33

3.03

0.000

Mean

(1.945)

(1.831)

(0.684)

(1.348)

(0.081)

(0.231)

(0.927)

(0.554)

(0.533)

(0.164)

Control Group
Standard
Error

8.21

7.46

2.12

5.33

0.419

2.31

3.03

1.21

1.82

0.566

Mean

(0.085)

(1.778)

(1.515)

(0.598)

(1.042)

(0.090)

(0.352)

(0.734)

(0.342)

(0.445)

(0.204)

Table 1—Program Treatment Effects

Use tobacco, age 27
-3.13 **

-0.266

(0.041)

12.4

Variable

# of misdemeanor arrests, age 40

-1.14 *

-0.373

(0.053)

0.700

Treatment Group
Standard
Error

# of felony arrests, age 40

-4.26 **

-0.346

(0.085)

Effect

# of adult arrests (misd.+fel.), age 40

-4.20 *

0.500

A. Males

# of lifetime arrests, age 40

(0.024)

Jobless for more than 1 year, age 27

# of felony arrests, age 27

# of misdemeanor violent crimes, age 27

Mentally impaired at least once, age 19

Any special education, age 14

CAT total, age 14

CAT total, age 8

-0.227 **

-0.292 *

-0.269 **

-0.423 **

-0.280 **

-0.262 **

0.806 **

0.565 *

-0.364

-0.530

-0.573

-0.325

-0.292

-0.569

-0.514

0.909

0.614

(0.028)

(0.016)

(0.045)

(0.071)

(0.021)

(0.032)

(0.017)

(0.025)

(0.014)

(0.062)

0.654

0.423

0.577

0.227

0.542

0.269

0.423

0.364

0.462

0.000

0.000

(0.293)

(0.177)

(0.289)

(0.091)

(0.104)

(0.162)

(0.284)

(0.105)

(0.100)

(0.209)

(0.196)

0.080

0.040

0.040

0.000

0.250

0.000

0.000

0.083

0.200

0.806

0.565

(18.853)

(0.055)

(0.040)

(0.040)

(0.000)

(0.090)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.058)

(0.082)

(0.204)

(0.223)

33

0.394

Ever tried drugs other than alcohol or weed, age 27

-0.537 **

-0.425

(0.019)

39

0.200 **

Sample

# of misdemeanor violent crimes, age 40

-0.383 **

-0.384

87.5

72

Employed, age 40

# of felony arrests, age 40

-0.574 **

(15.015)

B. Females

# of lifetime violent crimes, age 40

47.8

25

(0.076)

26

0.539

51

39.6 *

Sample

Months in all marriages, age 40

Note: Statistics are shown for the outcomes analyzed in this paper. There are differences in treatment effects by gender although strong effects are found
for both. “CAT total” denotes the California Achievement Test total score normalized to control mean zero and variance of one. Test statistics are
corrected for the effect of multiple hypothesis testing and threats to validity (see Heckman et al., 2010a, Conti et al., 2012). The reported effect is the
difference in means between treatment and control groups. The effect size is the ratio of the effect to the standard deviation of the control group. Stars
denote statistical significance: *** - 1 percent level, ** - 5 percent level, * - 10 percent level. Monthly income is adjusted to thousands of year-2006 dollars
using annual national CPI.

34

35

squares, males

0.70

7–9
7–9
7–9
7–9
7–9
7–9
7–9

0.82

Cronbach's alpha, males 0.906
Cronbach's alpha, females 0.916

Disrupts classroom procedures
Swears or uses obscene words
Steals
Lying or cheating
Influences others toward troublemaking
Aggressive toward peers
Teases or provokes students

Externalizing Behavior
Measures(a) Age(b)

7–9
7–9
7–9

0.81

Cronbach's alpha, males 0.901
Cronbach's alpha, females 0.896

Shows initiative
Alert and interested in school work
Hesitant to try, or gives up easily

Academic Motivation
Measures(a) Age(b)

Note: (a) See Web Appendix B for a detailed description of Stanford-Binet IQ measures. Externalizing Behavior and Academic Motivation are proxied
0.83 (PBI) described in Web Appendix C. PBI items are
0.84
0.80
bysquares,
items offemales
the Pupil Behavior Inventory
described in this table the same way they appear in
the
questionnaire. For example, “lying or cheating” and “steals” were the full descriptions of misbehavior that teachers were asked to evaluate. (b) Each
personality measure is an average over non-missing observations at ages 7, 8, and 9. (c) Cronbach’s alpha (see Cronbach, 1951) is a statistic that captures
how well a set of measures proxies a latent skill. Cronbach’s alpha is the lower bound of the internal consistency reliability of measures that are proxies
for a skill. The internal consistency reliability is defined as the square of the correlation between the measured scale defined as the sum of the measures
and the underlying skill θ (Allen and Yen, 2002). In our case, the correlations between the skills and the scales (equal to the square roots of alphas) range
from 0.70 to 0.82 for males and from 0.80 to 0.84 for females. The Cronbach’s alphas can also be interpreted as a correlation between the observed scale
and a hypothetical alternative scale measuring the same skill and based on the same number of hypothetical alternative items (Nunnally and Bernstein,
1994). For this table, the alphas (i.e., the correlations) range from 0.84 to 0.91 for males and from 0.90 to 0.92 for females.

(c)

7
8
9

Stanford-Binet IQ
Stanford-Binet IQ
Stanford-Binet IQ

Cronbach's alpha , males 0.838
Cronbach's alpha, females 0.913

Age

Cognition
Measures(a)

Table 2—Cognitive and Personality Factors and Their Measures

Table 3—Factor Loadings of Outcome Equations
Outcome

Cognition

Externalizing Behavior
p -value

Coefficient

Coefficient

p -value

Academic Motivation
Coefficient

p -value

Sample
Size

Males
CAT total at age 14, end of grade 8 (+)
# of misdemeanor arrests, age 27 (-)

0.819 ***
-0.259

(0.000)

-0.203

(0.845)

(0.359)

-1.226 **

(0.028)

0.700 ***
-0.152

(0.000)

45

(0.367)

59

# of felony arrests, age 27 (-)

-0.618

(0.235)

-1.333 **

(0.023)

0.219

(0.557)

59

# of adult arrests (misd.+fel.), age 27 (-)

-0.876

(0.251)

-2.559 **

(0.014)

0.067

(0.549)

59

Monthly income, age 27 (+)
Use tobacco, age 27 (-)

0.970 **
-0.179

(0.038)

0.698 **

(0.046)

-0.257

(0.670)

55

(0.121)

-0.332 ***

(0.001)

0.159

(0.847)

57

# of misdemeanor arrests, age 40 (-)

-0.620

(0.383)

-2.424 *

(0.087)

0.196

(0.501)

59

# of felony arrests, age 40 (-)

-0.628

(0.266)

-1.755 **

(0.014)

0.293

(0.570)

59

# of adult arrests (misd.+fel.), age 40 (-)

-1.248

(0.327)

-4.180 **

(0.039)

0.489

(0.525)

59

# of lifetime arrests, age 40 (-)

-1.100

(0.359)

-4.740 **

(0.030)

0.239

(0.519)

59

(0.012)

0.230 **

(0.011)

-0.270

(0.991)

54

Employed, age 40 (+)

0.277 **

Females
CAT total, age 8 (+)

0.219 **

(0.039)

-0.134

(0.729)

0.689 ***

(0.000)

35

CAT total, age 14 (+)

0.154

(0.113)

-0.448

(0.931)

0.899 ***

(0.001)

31

Any special education, age 14 (-)

-0.041

(0.273)

0.119

(0.759)

-0.209 *

(0.064)

37

Mentally impaired at least once, age 19 (+)

-0.039

(0.283)

0.227

(0.948)

-0.308 ***

(0.008)

33

# of misdemeanor violent crimes, age 27 (-)

0.083

(0.778)

-1.080 **

(0.043)

0.150

(0.700)

37

# of felony arrests, age 27 (+)

0.021

(0.609)

-0.451 *

(0.053)

0.140

(0.808)

37

Jobless for more than 1 year, age 27 (-)
Ever tried drugs other than alcohol or weed, age 27 (-)

0.139

(0.920)

0.048

(0.608)

-0.043

(0.201)

-0.146

(0.144)

-0.465 ***
0.122

(0.003)

36

(0.854)

34

# of misdemeanor violent crimes, age 40 (-)

0.084

(0.774)

-1.078 **

(0.043)

0.081

(0.592)

37

# of felony arrests, age 40 (-)

0.047

(0.704)

-0.589 **

(0.014)

0.078

(0.643)

37

# of lifetime violent crimes, age 40 (-)
Months in all marriages, age 40 (+)

0.096

(0.807)

-1.220 **

(0.023)

0.165

(0.704)

37

21.748

(0.111)

13.591

(0.289)

10.453

(0.280)

36

Note: Regression coefficients for factor scores in Equation (5) are shown with one-sided p-values in
parentheses. (+) and (-) denote the sign of the total treatment effect on the corresponding variable.
Estimates are corrected based on the bias-correcting procedure described in Equation (A4). “CAT
total” denotes the California Achievement Test total score normalized to control mean zero and variance
of one. See Tables L.14 and L.15 of Web Appendix L for more detailed versions of this table containing
coefficients for background variables. Stars denote significance levels: *** - 1 percent, ** - 5 percent,
and * - 10 percent. Monthly income is adjusted to thousands of year-2006 dollars using annual national
CPI.

36

Appendix on the Three Step Estimation Procedure

Step 1:

For a given set of dedicated measurements, and choice of the number of factors,
we estimate the factor model using measurement system (8)–(10).
Step 2:

We use the measures and factor loadings estimated in the first step to compute
a vector of factor scores for each participant i. We form unbiased estimates of
the true vector of skills θi = (θij ; j ∈ Jp ) for agent i. The factor measure equations contain X which we suppress to simplify the expressions. Notationally, we
represent the measurement system for agent i as
(A1)

M =
|{z}i

|M|×1

ϕ
|{z}

θi + ηi ,
|{z}
|{z}

|M|×|Jp | |Jp |×1

|M|×1

where ϕ represents a matrix of the factor loadings estimated in first step and
Mi is the vector of stacked measures for participant i subtracting the intercepts
j
νm
j of equation (8). The dimension of each element in equation (A1) is shown
beneath it, where M = ∪j∈Jp Mj is the union of all the index sets of the measures
Mj , j ∈ Jp . The error term for agent i, ηi , has zero mean and is independent of
the vector of skills θi . Cov(ηi , ηi ) = Ω. The most commonly used estimator of
factor scores is based on a linear function of measures: θS,i = L0 Mi . Unbiasedness
requires that L0 ϕ = I|p| , where I|p| is a |p|-dimensional identity matrix.77 To
achieve unbiasedness, L must satisfy L0 = (ϕ0 Ω −1 ϕ)−1 ϕ0 Ω −1 . The unbiased
estimator of the factor is:
θS,i = L0 Mi = (ϕ0 Ω −1 ϕ)−1 ϕ0 Ω −1 Mi .
Factor score estimates can be interpreted as the output of a GLS estimation
procedure where measures are taken as dependent variables and factor loadings
are treated as regressors. By the Gauss-Markov theorem, for a known ϕ the
proposed estimator is the best linear unbiased estimator of the vector of skills
θi .78
77 The method is due to Bartlett (1937) and is based on the restricted minimization of mean squared
error, subject to L0 ϕ = I|J | .
78 Web Appendix F discusses other estimators considered in the literature. Note that the assumption
that ϕ is known can be replaced with the assumption that ϕ is consistently estimated and we can use
an asymptomatic version of the Gauss-Markov theorem replacing ”unbiased” with ”unbiased in large
samples”.

37

Step 3:

The use of factor scores instead of the true factors to estimate equation (5)
generates biased estimates of outcome coefficients α. Even though estimates of
θi are unbiased, there is still a discrepancy between the true and measured θi due
to estimation error. To correct for the bias, we implement a bias-correction procedure. Because we estimate the variance of θ and the variance of the measurement
errors in the first step of our procedure, we can eliminate the bias created by the
measurement error.
Consider the outcome model for agent i :
(A2)

Yi = αθi + γZi + i ,

where (θi , Zi ) ⊥⊥ i and E(i ) = 0. For brevity of notation, we use Zi to denote
pre-program variables, treatment status indicators, and the intercept term of
equation (5). From equation (A1), the factor scores θS,i can be written as the
skills θi plus a measurement error Vi , that is,
θS,i = θi + Vi such that (Zi , θi ) ⊥⊥ Vi and E(Vi ) = 0.

(A3)

Replacing θi with θS,i yields Yi = αθS,i + γZi + i − αVi . The linear regression
estimator of α and γ is inconsistent:
(A4)

plim

|

α̂
γ̂


=

Cov(θS , θS ) Cov(θS , Z)
Cov(Z, θS ) Cov(Z, Z)

−1 

Cov(θ, θ) Cov(θ, Z)
Cov(Z, θ) Cov(Z, Z)

{z
A



α
γ


.

}

This is the multivariate version of the standard one-variable attenuation bias
formula. All covariances in A can be computed directly except for the terms
that involve θ. The covariance Cov(θ, θ) is estimated in step (1). Using equation (A3), we can compute Cov(Z, θS ) = Cov(Z, θ). Thus, A is identified. Our
bias-correction procedure consists of pre-multiplying the least squares estimators
(α̂, γ̂) by A−1 , thus providing consistent estimates of (α, γ).79 A one step maximum likelihood procedure, while less intuitive, directly estimates the parameters
without constructing the factors and accounts for measurement error. It is justified in large samples under standard regularity conditions. It produces estimates
very close to those obtained from the three step procedure but with smaller standard errors. See Web Appendix L.
79 See

Croon (2002) for more details on this bias correction approach.

38

*

REFERENCES
Achenbach, Thomas M. 1978. “The Child Behavior Profile: I. Boys Aged 611.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology in the Schools, 46(3): 478–
488.
Allen, Mary J., and Wendy M. Yen. 2002. Introduction to Measurement
Theory. Prospect Heights, IL:Waveland Press.
Almlund, Mathilde, Angela Duckworth, James J. Heckman, and Tim
Kautz. 2011. “Personality Psychology and Economics.” In Handbook of the
Economics of Education. Vol. 4, , ed. E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin and L.
Wößmann, 1–181. Amsterdam:Elsevier.
Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011. “Human Capital Development
before Age Five.” In Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 4B, , ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, Chapter 15, 1315–1486. North Holland:Elsevier.
Anderson, Michael. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool
and Early Training Projects.” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
103(484): 1481–1495.
Anderson, Theodore W., and Herman Rubin. 1956a. “Statistical Inference in Factor Analysis.” In Proceedings of the Third Berkeley Symposium on
Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 5. , ed. J. Neyman, 111–150. Berkeley:University of California Press.
Anderson, T. W., and H. Rubin. 1956b. “Statistical inference in factor analysis.” Proceedings of the third Berkeley Symposium on mathematical statistics
and probability, V.
Anglin, M. Douglas, and Brian Perrochet. 1998. “Drug Use and Crime: A
Historical Review of Research Conducted by the UCLA Drug Abuse Research
Center.” Substance Use and Misuse, 33(9): 478–488.
Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan. 2008. “Universal Child Care, Maternal Labor Supply, and Family Well-Being.” Journal of
Political Economy, 116(4): 709–745.
Barnett, W. Steven. 1995. “Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood Programs
on Cognitive and School Outcomes.” The Future of Children, 5(3): pp. 25–50.
Bartlett, Maurice S. 1937. “The Statistical Conception of Mental Factors.”
British Journal of Psychology, 28(1): 97–104.
39

Belfield, Clive R., Milagros Nores, W. Steven Barnett, and Lawrence
Schweinhart. 2006. “The High/Scope Perry Preschool Program: Cost-Benefit
Analysis Using Data from the Age-40 Followup.” Journal of Human Resources,
41(1): 162–190.
Berrueta-Clement, John R., Lawrence J. Schweinhart, Steven W. Barnett, Ann S. Epstein, and David P. Weikart. 1984. Changed Lives: The
Effects of the Perry Preschool Program on Youths Through Age 19. Ypsilanti,
MI:High/Scope Press.
Bodrova, Elena, and Deborah J. Leong. 2007. Tools of the Mind: The Vygotskian Approach to Early Childhood Education. Upper Saddle River:Pearson
Education, Inc.
Borghans, Lex, Angela L. Duckworth, James J. Heckman, and Bas ter
Weel. 2008. “The Economics and Psychology of Personality Traits.” Journal
of Human Resources, 43(4): 972–1059.
Borghans, Lex, Bart H. H. Golsteyn, James J. Heckman, and John Eric
Humphries. 2011a. “Identification Problems in Personality Psychology.” Personality and Individual Differences, 51(Special Issue on Personality and Economics): 315–320. E. Ferguson, J.J. Heckman, and P. Corr, editors.
Borghans, Lex, Bart H. H. Golsteyn, James J. Heckman, and
John Eric Humphries. 2011b. “IQ, Achievement, and Personality.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Maastricht and University of Chicago (revised
from the 2009 version).
Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. 1976. Schooling in Capitalist America:
Educational Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life. New York:Basic
Books.
Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. 2001. “Inheritance of Economic Status:
Education, Class, and Genetics.” In International Encyclopedia of the Social
& Behavioral Sciences. , ed. Neil J. Smelser and Paul B. Baltes, 4132–4141.
Oxford, UK:Pergamon.
Broidy, Lisa M., Daniel S. Nagin, Richard E. Tremblay, John E. Bates,
Bobby Brame, Kenneth A. Dodge, David Fergusson, John L. Horwood, Rolf Loeber, Robert Laird, Donald R. Lynam, Terrie E. Moffitt, Gregory S. Pettit, and Frank Vitaro. 2003. “Developmental Trajectories of Childhood Disruptive Behaviors and Adolescent Delinquency: A
Six-Site, Cross-National Study.” Developmental Psychology, Vol 39(2): 222–
245.
Brunnekreef, J. Agnes, Leo M. J. De Sonneville, Monika Althaus,
Ruud B. Minderaa, Albertine J. Oldehinkel, Frank C. Verhulst, and
40

Johan Ormel. 2007. “Information processing profiles of internalizing and externalizing behavior problems: evidence from a population-based sample of
preadolescents.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 48(2): 185–193.
Bryant, Alison L., John E. Schulenberg, Patrick M. O’Malley, Jerald G. Bachman, and Lloyd D. Johnston. 2003. “How Academic Achievement, Attitudes, and Behaviors Relate to the Course of Substance Use During
Adolescence: A 6-Year, Multiwave National Longitudinal Study.” Journal of
Research on Adolescence, 13(3): 361397.
Campbell, Frances A., and Craig T. Ramey. 1994. “Effects of Early Intervention on Intellectual and Academic Achievement: A Follow-Up Study of
Children from Low-Income Families.” Child Development, 65(2): 684–698. Children and Poverty.
Campbell, Frances A., and Craig T. Ramey. 1995. “Cognitive and School
Outcomes for High-Risk African-American Students at Middle Adolescence:
Positive Effects of Early Intervention.” American Educational Research Journal, 32(4): 743–72.
Campbell, Susan B., Elizabeth W. Pierce, Ginger Moore, Susan
Marakovitz, and Kristin Newby. 1996. “Boys’ externalizing problems at
elementary school age: Pathways from early behavior problems, maternal control, and family stress.” Development and Psychopathology, 8: 701–719.
Carneiro, Pedro, and James J. Heckman. 2003. “Human Capital Policy.” In
Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies?. , ed. James J.
Heckman, Alan B. Krueger and Benjamin M. Friedman, 77–239. Cambridge,
MA:MIT Press.
Cattell, Raymond B. 1966. “The Scree Test for the Number of Factors.” Multivariate Behavioral Research, 1(2): 245–276.
Coie, John, Robert Terry, Kari Lenox, John Lochman, and Clarine
Hyman. 1995. “Childhood peer rejection and aggression as predictors of stable
patterns of adolescent disorder.” Development and Psychopathology, 7: 697–713.
Conti, Gabriella, James Heckman, Seong Moon, and Rodrigo Pinto.
2012. “Long-term Health Effects of Early Childhood Interventions.” Unpublished manuscript, The University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Costello, Anna B., and Jason W. Osborne. 2005. “Best Practices in Exploratory Factor Analysis: Four Recommendations for Getting the Most From
Your Analysis.” Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 10(7).
Cronbach, Lee J. 1951. “Coefficient Alpha and the Internal Structure of Tests.”
Psychometrika, 16(3): 297–334.
41

Croon, Marcel A. 2002. Using predicted latent scores in general latent structure
models. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman. 2008. “Formulating, Identifying and
Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.”
Journal of Human Resources, 43(4): 738–782.
Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman. 2009. “The Economics and Psychology of Inequality and Human Development.” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 7(2-3): 320–364. Presented as the Marshall Lecture, European Economics Association, Milan, Italy, August 29, 2008.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach. 2010.
“Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.”
Econometrica, 78(3): 883–931.
Cymbalisty, Bohdan Y., Solomon Z. Schuck, and John A. Dubeck. 1975.
“Achievement level, institutional adjustment and recidivism among juvenile
delinquents.” Journal of Community Psychology, 3(3): 289–294.
DeLong, J. Bradford, and Konstantin Magin. 2009. “The U.S. Equity Return Premium: Past, Present and Future.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
23(1): 193–208.
Dewey, John. 1997. Experience and Education. New York:Free Press.
Diamond, Adele, Steven Barnett, Jessica Thomas, and Sarah
Munro. 2007. “Preschool Program Improves Cognitive Control.” Science,
318(5855): 1387–1388.
Egeland, Byron, Mark Kalkoske, Natan Gottesman, and Martha F. Erickson. 1990. “Preschool behavior problems: Stability and factors accounting
for change.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 31: 891–910.
Fabrigar, Leandre R., Duane T. Wegener, Robert C. MacCallum, and
Erin J. Strahan. 1999. “Evaluating the Use of Exploratory Factor Analysis
in Psychological Research.” Psychological Methods, 4: 272–299.
Flouri, Eirini, and Ann Buchanan. 2002. “Father Involvement in Childhood
and Trouble With the Police in Adolescence: Findings From the 1958 British
Cohort.” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 17(6): 689–701.
Gersten, Joanne C., Thomas S. Langner, Jeanne G. Eisenberg, Ora
Simcha-Fagan, and Elizabeth D. McCarthy. 1976. “Stability and Change
in Types of Behavioral Disturbance of Children and Adolescents.” Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 4(2).
Goldberg, Lewis R. 1993. “The Structure of Phenotypic Personality Traits.”
American Psychologist, 48(1): 26–34.
42

Gorsuch, Richard. 1983. Factor Analysis. Hillsdale, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gorsuch, Richard L. 2003. “Factor Analysis.” In Handbook of psychology: Research methods in psychology. Vol. 2, , ed. Irving B. Weiner, Donald K. Freedheim, John A. Schinka and Wayne F Velicer, Chapter 6, 143–164. Hoboken,
NJ:John Wiely & Sons, Inc.
Gottfredson, Linda S. 1997. “Why g Matters: The Complexity of Everyday
Life.” Intelligence, 24(1): 79–132.
Gray, Susan W., and Rupert A. Klaus. 1970. “The Early Training Project:
A Seventh-Year Report.” Child Development, 41(4): 909–924.
Greenfeld, Lawrence A. 1998. “Alcohol and Crime: An Analysis of National
Data on the Prevalence of Alcohol Involvement in Crime.” US Department of
Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics Statistical data 168632.
Guttman, Louis. 1954. “Some necessary conditions for common-factor analysis.” Psychometrika, 19: 149–161.
Haavelmo, Trygve. 1943. “The Statistical Implications of a System of Simultaneous Equations.” Econometrica, 11(1): 1–12.
Hanushek, Eric, and Alfred A. Lindseth. 2009. Schoolhouses, Courthouses,
and Statehouses: Solving the Funding-Achievement Puzzle in America’s Public
Schools. Princeton, NJ:Princeton University Press.
Hanushek, Eric, and Ludger Woessmann. 2008. “The Role of Cognitive
Skills in Economic Development.” Journal of Economic Literature, 46(3): 607–
668.
Heckman, James J. 2000. “Policies to Foster Human Capital.” Research in
Economics, 54(1): 3–56.
Heckman, James J. 2008. “Schools, Skills and Synapses.” Economic Inquiry,
46(3): 289–324.
Heckman, James J., and Rodrigo Pinto. 2012a. “Causal Analysis After
Haavelmo: Definitions and a Unified Analysis of Identification.” Unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago.
Heckman, James J., and Rodrigo Pinto. 2012b. “Econometric Mediation
Analysis.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.
Heckman, James J., and Tim Kautz. 2012. “Hard evidence on soft skills.”
Labour Economics, 19(4): 451–464.
43

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzúa. 2006. “The Effects
of Cognitive and Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social
Behavior.” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3): 411–482.
Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Q. Yavitz. 2010a. “Analyzing Social Experiments as Implemented: A Reexamination of the Evidence From the HighScope Perry Preschool
Program.” Quantitative Economics, 1(1): 1–46. First draft, September, 2006.
Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Q. Yavitz. 2010b. “The Rate of Return to the HighScope
Perry Preschool Program.” Journal of Public Economics, 94(1-2): 114–128.
Herrnstein, Richard J., and Charles A. Murray. 1994. The Bell Curve:
Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life. New York:Free Press.
Horn, John L. 1965. “A rationale and test for the number of factors in factor
analysis.” Psychometrika, 30(2): 179–185.
Huesmann, L. Rowel, Leonard D. Eron, Monroe M. Lefkowitz, and
Leopold O. Walder. 1984. “Stability of Aggression Over Time and Generations.” Developmental Psychology, 20(6): 1120–1134.
Hurwicz, Leonid. 1962. “On the Structural Form of Interdependent Systems.”
In Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science. , ed. E. Nagel, P. Suppes and
A. Tarski, 232–239. Stanford University Press.
ICPSR. 2010. Head Start Impact Study, 2002-2006: Spring 2003 Center Director Interview Data Codebook. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI:InterUniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR).
Jensen, Arthur R. 1998. The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability. Westport, CT:Praeger.
Jimerson, Shane, Byron Egeland, and Adrian Teo. 1999. “A Longitudinal
Study of Achievement Trajectories: Factors Associated with Change.” Journal
of Educational Psychology, 91(1): 116–126.
Jimerson, Shane R., Phillip Ferguson, Angela D. Whipple, Gabrielle E.
Anderson, and Michael J. Dalton. 2002. “Exploring the Association Between Grade Retention and Dropout: A Longitudinal Study Examining SocioEmotional, Behavioral, and Achievement Characteristics of Retained Students.” The California School Psychologist, 7: 51–62.
John, Oliver P., and Sanjay Srivastava. 1999. “The Big Five Trait Taxonomy: History, Measurement and Theoretical Perspectives.” In Handbook of
Personality: Theory and Research. , ed. L. A. Pervin and O. P. John, Chapter
4, 102–138. New York:The Guilford Press.
44

Kaiser, Henry F. 1960. “The application of electronic computers to factor analysis.” Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20: 141–151.
Kaiser, Henry F. 1961. “A note on Guttman’s lower bound for the number of
common factors.” British Journal of Statistical Psychology,, 14: 1–2.
Klein, Lawrence Robert, and Arthur Stanley Goldberger. 1955. An
Econometric Model of the United States, 1929-1952. Amsterdam:North-Holland
Publishing Company.
Knudsen, Eric I., James J. Heckman, Judy Cameron, and Jack P.
Shonkoff. 2006. “Economic, Neurobiological, and Behavioral Perspectives on
Building America’s Future Workforce.” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 103(27): 10155–10162.
Lazar, Irving, Richard Darlington, Harry Murray, Jacqueline Royce,
Ann Snipper, and Craig T. Ramey. 1982. “Lasting Effects of Early Education: A Report from the Consortium for Longitudinal Studies.” Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, 47(2/3): pp. i+iii+v–vii+ix–
xiv+1–151.
Loeber, Rolf. 1982. “The Stability of Antisocial and Delinquent Child Behavior:
A Review.” Child Development, 53(6): 1431–1446.
McCrae, Robert R., and Oliver P. John. 1992. “An introduction to the
five-factor model and its applications.” Jounral of Personality, 60(2): 175–215.
Moffitt, Terrie E. 1993. “Adolescence-Limited and Life-Course-Persistent
Antisocial Behavior: A Developmental Taxonomy.” Psychological Review,
100(4): 674–701.
Nagin, Daniel, and Richard E. Tremblay. 1999. “Trajectories of Boys Physical Aggression, Opposition, and Hyperactivity on the Path to Physically Violent and Nonviolent Juvenile Delinquency.” Child Development, 70(5): 1181–
1196.
Nunnally, Jum C., and Ira H. Bernstein. 1994. Psychometric Theory. New
York:McGraw-Hill.
Olweus, Dan. 1979. “Stability of Aggressive Reaction Patterns in Males: A
Review.” Psychological Bulletin, 86(4): 852–875.
Onatski, Alexei. 2009. “Testing hypotheses about the number of factors in large
factor models.” Econometrica, 77(5): 14471479.
Pearl, Judea. 2009. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. . 2nd ed.,
New York:Cambridge University Press.
45

Pearl, Judea. 2011. “The Mediation Formula: A Guide to the Assessment of
Causal Pathways in Nonlinear Models.” Forthcoming in Causality: Statistical
Perspectives and Applications.
Piaget, Jean, and Bärbel Inhelder. 2000. The Psychology of the Child. New
York:Basic Books.
Ramey, Craig T., and Sharon Landesman Ramey. 2010. Children’s Right
to Thrive: The Foundational Years. Unpublished manuscript, Georgetown University.
Razzino, Brian E., Sheila C. Ribordy, Kathryn Grant, Joseph R. Ferrari, Blake S. Bowden, and Jennifer Zeisz. 2004. “Gender-related processes and drug use: Self-expression with parents, peer group selection, and
achievement motivation.” Adolescence, 39(153): 167–177.
Reynolds, Arthur J., Judy A. Temple, Dylan L. Robertson, and
Emily A. Mann. 2001. “Long-term Effects of an Early Childhood Intervention on Educational Achievement and Juvenile Arrest: A 15-Year Follow-up of
Low-Income Children in Public Schools.” JAMA, 285(18): 2339–2346.
Richman, Naomi, James E. Stevenson, and Philip Jeremy Graham.
1982. Preschool to school: A behavioural study. San Diego:Academic Press.
Robins, Lee N. 1978. “Sturdy childhood predictors of adult antisocial behaviour: replications from longitudinal studies.” Psychological Medicine,
8: 611–622.
Santrock, John W. 2008. A Topical Approach to Life-Span Development. .
Fourth ed., New York:McGraw-Hill.
Schweinhart, Lawrence J., and David P. Weikart. 1981. “Effects of the
Perry Preschool Program on Youths Through Age 15.” Journal of Early Intervention, 4(1): 29–39.
Schweinhart, Lawrence J., Jeanne Montie, Zongping Xiang, W. Steven
Barnett, Clive R. Belfield, and Milagros Nores. 2005. Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 40. Ypsilanti,
MI:High/Scope Press.
Schweinhart, L. J., Helen V. Barnes, and David Weikart. 1993. Significant
Benefits: The High-Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 27. Ypsilanti,
MI:High/Scope Press.
Segal, Carmit. 2008. “Classroom Behavior.” Journal of Human Resources,
43(4): 783–814.
46

Segal, Carmit. 2009. “Misbehavior, Education, and Labor Market Outcomes.”
Unpublished manuscript, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Department of Economics
and Business.
Shonkoff, Jack P., and Deborah Phillips. 2000. From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of Early Child Development. Washington, DC:National
Academy Press.
Simons-Morton, Bruce. 2004. “Prospective association of peer influence,
school engagement, drinking expectancies, and parent expectations with drinking initiation among sixth graders.” Addictive Behaviors, 29(2): 299–309.
Sylva, Kathy. 1997. “The Quest for Quality in Curriculum.” A commentary
to the book by Lawrence J. Schweinhart & David P. Weikart, 1997. Lasting
Differences: The High/Scope Preschool Curriculum Comparison Study through
Age 23. High/Scope Press.
Tabachnick, Barbara G., and Linda S. Fidell. 2001. “Using multivariate
statistics.” . 4th ed., Chapter Principal components and factor analysis, 582–
633. Boston:Allyn and Bacon.
Terman, Lewis Madison, and Maud A. Merrill. 1960. Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale: Manual for the Third Revision Form L-M. Boston:Houghton
Mifflin.
Theil, Henri. 1958. Economic Forecasts and Policy. Amsterdam:North-Holland
Publishing Company.
Thompson, Bruce. 2004. Exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis : understanding concepts and applications. Washington, DC:American Psychological
Association.
Tough, Paul. 2009. “Can the Right Kinds of Play Teach Self-Control?” New
York Times.
Vaughan, Ellen L., William R. Corbin, and Kim Fromme. 2009. “Academic and social motives and drinking behavior.” Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 23(4): 564–576.
Vinter, R. D., Rosemary C. Sarri, Darrel J. Vorwaller, and Walter E.
Shafer. 1966. Pupil Behavior Inventory: A Manual for Administration and
Scoring. Ann Arbor, MI:Campus Publishers.
Vygotsky, Lev S. 1986. “Thought and language.” , ed. Alex Kozulin, Chapter
The genetic roots of thought and speech. Cambridge:MIT Press.
Wansbeek, Tom, and Erik Meijer. 2000. Measurement Error and Latent
Variables in Econometrics. Vol. 37, Washington D.C.:Advanced Textbooks in
Economics.
47

Wasserman, Larry. 2006. All of Nonparametric Statistics. Springer Texts in
Statistics, New York:Springer Science+Business Media.
Weikart, David P. 1967. “Preliminary Results From a Longitudinal Study of
Disadvantaged Preschool Children.” Unpublished manuscript, ERIC No. ED
030 490. Presented at the 1967 convention of the Council for Exceptional Children, St. Louis, MO.
Weikart, David P., James T. Bond, and Judy T. McNeil. 1978. The
Ypsilanti Perry Preschool Project: Preschool Years and Longitudinal Results
Through Fourth Grade. Ypsilanti, MI:Monographs of the High/Scope Educational Research Foundation.
White, Jennifer L., Terrie E. Moffitt, Felton Earls, Lee Robins, and
Phil A. Silva. 1990. “How Early Can We Tell?: Predicators of Childhood
Conduct Disorder and Adolescent Delinquency.” Criminology, 28: 507–533.
Yoshikawa, Hirokazu. 1995. “Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood Programs
on Social Outcomes and Delinquency.” The Future of Children, 5(3): pp. 51–75.
Zimmerman, Marc A., and Karen H. Schmeelk-Cone. 2003. “A longitudinal analysis of adolescent substance use and school motivation among African
American youth.” Journal of Research on Adolescence, 13(2): 185–210.
Zoccolillo, Mark, Andrew Pickles, David Quinton, and Michael Rutter. 1992. “The outcome of childhood conduct disorder: implications for defining adult personality disorder and conduct disorder.” Psychological Medicine,
22: 971–986.
Zwick, William R., and Wayne F. Velicer. 1986. “Comparison of five rules
for determining the number of components to retain.” Psychological Bulletin,
99(3): 432–442.

48

