                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CAPITAL AND LABOR REALLOCATION INSIDE FIRMS

                                           Xavier Giroud
                                          Holger M. Mueller

                                         Working Paper 18592
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18592


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




We thank Simon Gervais, Cam Harvey, Marcin Kacperczyk, Owen Lamont (NBER discussant), David
Matsa, Gordon Phillips, Adriano Rampini, Joshua Rauh, Michael Roberts, Philipp Schnabl, Antoinette
Schoar, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and seminar participants at the NBER Corporate Finance Summer
Institute (2012), the Micro@Sloan Conference (2012), MIT, NYU, HBS, Duke, INSEAD, Utah, ASU,
Florida, Bentley, and Stockholm School of Economics for helpful comments. The research in this
paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau
at the New York and Boston Census Research Data Centers. Any opinions and conclusions expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Capital and Labor Reallocation Inside Firms
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 18592
December 2012
JEL No. D24,G3,J63

                                              ABSTRACT

We document how a plant-specific shock to investment opportunities at one plant of a firm ("treated
plant") spills over to other plants of the same firm--but only if the firm is financially constrained. While
the shock triggers an increase in investment and employment at the treated plant, this increase is offset
by a decrease at other plants of the same magnitude, consistent with headquarters channeling scarce
resources away from other plants and toward the treated plant. As a result of the resource reallocation,
aggregate firm-wide productivity increases, suggesting that the reallocation is beneficial for the firm
as a whole. We also show that--in order to provide the treated plant with scarce resources--headquarters
does not uniformly "tax" all of the firm's other plants in the same way: It is more likely to take away
resources from plants that are less productive, are not part of the firm's core industries, and are located
far away from headquarters. We do not find any evidence of investment or employment spillovers
at financially unconstrained firms.


Xavier Giroud
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-639
Cambridge, MA 02142
xgiroud@mit.edu

Holger M. Mueller
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu
1       Introduction
When firms face binding financing constraints, headquarters can create value by actively
reallocating scarce resources across projects. In particular, headquarters’ control rights
allow it to take away resources from some projects and allocate them to other, more
deserving ones (Alchian, 1969; Williamson, 1975; Stein, 1997). Among other things, this
implies an interdependence between otherwise unrelated projects:

        “Thus, for example, if a company owns two unrelated divisions A and B, and
        the appeal of investing in B suddenly increases, the argument would seem
        to imply that investment in A would decline–even if it is positive NPV at
        the margin–as corporate headquarters channels relatively more of its scarce
        resources toward B” (Stein, 1997, p. 112).1

    This rationale for an internal capital market–based on the notion that headquarters
channels scarce resources toward the most deserving projects–has implications for the
boundaries of the firm. As Stein (1997) shows, it provides a plausible theory of optimal
firm size and scope that is consistent with firms (not individual managers) owning the
assets employed in the production process.2 It has also implications for the design of a
firm’s internal organizational structure, as the fear of losing scarce resources may lead to
managerial rent-seeking and, more generally, may distort managers’ incentives (e.g., Mil-
grom, 1988; Milgrom and Roberts, 1988; Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales, 2000; Scharfstein
and Stein, 2000; Brusco and Panunzi, 2004).
    As the quote above illustrates, a key hypothesis of the eﬃcient internal capital mar-
kets paradigm is that–when firms face binding financing constraints–an increase in the
appeal of investing in one project should lead to a decline in investment in other projects.
And yet, little is known about whether this hypothesis is true in the data. The paper

    1
     Similarly, Shin and Stulz (1998, p. 543) define an internal capital market to be eﬃcient if “its
allocation of funds to a segment falls when other segments have better investment opportunities.”
    2
     A shortcoming of the Grossman-Hart-Moore property-rights paradigm (Grossman and Hart, 1986;
Hart and Moore, 1990) is that it cannot explain why firms, as opposed to individual managers, own
productive assets. See Bolton and Scharfstein (1998) and, especially, Holmström (1999) for a critique
along these lines.

                                                 2
that perhaps comes closest to testing this hypothesis is Shin and Stulz (1998). Using
Compustat segment data, the authors regress investment by a segment on the industry
qs of the firm’s other segments. They overwhelmingly reject that the qs of the other
segments aﬀect the segment’s investment and conclude: “Unless one believes that firms
face no costs of external finance, this evidence suggests that the internal capital market
does not allocate resources eﬃciently” (Shin and Stulz, 1998, p. 544).
    This paper takes a fresh look at the eﬃcient internal capital markets hypothesis using
plant-level data from the U.S. Census Bureau. We consider a “natural experiment” that
is close in spirit to the thought experiment outlined in Stein’s quote: Suppose the appeal
of investing in one plant suddenly increases–does investment in other plants of the same
firm decline? To obtain exogenous variation in the “sudden increase in the appeal of
investing in one plant,” we use the introduction of new airline routes that reduce the
travel time between headquarters and plants. Giroud (2012) uses this source of variation
to study whether proximity to headquarters aﬀects plant-level investment. The idea is
that a reduction in travel time makes it easier for headquarters to monitor a plant, thereby
making investment in the (treated) plant more appealing.34
    In this paper, we use the “sudden increase in the appeal of investing in one plant”
as our starting point and examine whether it leads to a reallocation of resources within
the firm, whether headquarters–in order to provide the treated plant with resources–
“taxes” some plants more than others, and whether the reallocation is beneficial for the


   3
     The motivation for using travel time instead of geographical proximity is that the former entails
plausibly exogenous variation. Furthermore, it constitutes a more direct proxy for the ease of monitoring:
A plant may be located far away from headquarters, yet monitoring may be easy, because there exists a
short direct flight. Conversely, a plant may be located in the same state as headquarters, yet monitoring
may be costly, because it involves a long and tedious trip by car.
   4
     Anecdotal evidence that proximity matters for monitoring abounds. For example, Ray Kroc, founder
of McDonald’s, writes in his autobiography: “One thing I liked about that house was that it was perched
on a hill looking down on a McDonald’s store on the main thoroughfare. I could pick up a pair of
binoculars and watch business in that store from my living room window. It drove the manager crazy
when I told him about it. But he sure had one hell of a hard-working crew” (Kroc, 1992, p. 141).
For anecdotal evidence that top-level managers consider traveling to plants important, see the following
quote from Chief Executive magazine (October 1, 2003): “Lillie considers travel from headquarters to see
a company’s other plants or oﬃces a must. “You need to see it, feel it, touch it, taste it before you make
a good decision,” says Lillie.” (James Lillie is the current CEO and former COO of Jarden, a Fortune
500 company based in Rye, N.Y., with over 23,000 employees.)

                                                    3
firm as a whole, as argued by the internal capital markets hypothesis.
    For financially constrained firms, we find that investment and employment both in-
crease at the treated plant, while they both decline at other plants of the same firm.
Moreover, the increase at the treated plant is of the same order of magnitude as the
decline at the other plants: At the treated plant, investment (employment) increases
by $186,000 (five employees), while it declines by $179,000 (six employees) at all other
plants together.5 In contrast, for financially unconstrained firms, we find no evidence of
investment or employment spillovers across plants.6 Overall, this evidence suggests that
headquarters channels resources away from other plants and toward the treated plant–
but only if the firm is financially constrained.
    When we investigate the dynamics of the treatment eﬀect, we find that, for financially
constrained firms, the increase in investment and employment at the treated plant occurs
around the same time as the decline at other plants, namely, about one year after the
treatment. This is reassuring, for two reasons. First, that the eﬀect occurs with a lag
of about one year suggests that there are no existing pre-trends in the data. Second,
that the timing between the treated plant and the other plants coincides so well provides
further evidence that headquarters channels scarce resources away from other plants and
toward the treated plant.
    While our results suggest that headquarters takes away resources from other plants,
the average spillover eﬀect is relatively small. There are several reasons for this. First, the
amount of resources needed to “feed” the treated plant–and thus the amount that must

   5
     This points to an interesting potential “dark side” of internal labor markets. (See Tate and Yang
(2011) for a “bright side.”) Unless workers are transferred across plants–which is less likely if the treated
and the other plants are located far away from one another–our results suggest that the treated plant
hires new workers while some of the other plants are forced to lay oﬀ workers. Hence, some workers are
laid oﬀ not because their plant is doing poorly, but because some other plant within the same firm is
doing relatively better. While this is speculative, this additional layoﬀ risk due to headquarters engaging
in “winner-picking” could be an explanation for Schoar’s (2002) finding that conglomerates pay higher
wages on average.
   6
     Looking at financially unconstrained firms provides us with a useful falsification (or placebo) test.
Specifically, not finding any spillovers at financially unconstrained firms suggests that the introduction
of a new airline route between headquarters and the treated plant has no direct eﬀect on other plants of
the same firm, suggesting that the decline in investment and employment at other plants of financially
constrained firms is due to headquarters reallocating scarce resources and not, e.g., because the other
plants’ investment opportunities have suﬀered.

                                                     4
be taken away from other plants–is fairly modest. Second, this amount is divided among
many other plants, implying that the average amount taken away from any individual
plant is relatively small. Indeed, when we focus on firms that have only few other plants,
the spillover eﬀect becomes much stronger. Also, the average spillover eﬀect is quite noisy,
as headquarters does not uniformly “tax” all of the firm’s other plants in the same way.
While some plants may experience a large drop in their resources, others may experience
none. To address this issue, we examine which other plants are primarily aﬀected by the
resource reallocation. We find that headquarters is more likely to take away resources
from plants that are less productive, are not part of the firm’s core industries, and are
located far away from headquarters. When we focus on those other plants, we find again
that the spillover eﬀect becomes much stronger.
   We finally examine the aggregate (or net) eﬀect at the firm level. For financially
constrained firms, we find that the aggregate eﬀect on investment and employment at
the firm level is zero, consistent with our previous result showing that the increase in
investment and employment at the treated plant is oﬀset by a decrease at other plants of
the same magnitude. In contrast, for financially unconstrained firms, the aggregate eﬀect
on investment and employment is positive. Given that these firms exhibit no (negative)
spillovers, this is indeed what one would expect.
   A key premise of the eﬃcient internal capital markets paradigm is that the resource
reallocation is beneficial: While resources may be taken away from projects that are
positive NPV at the margin, they are channeled toward other projects whose investment
prospects are even better. To investigate this hypothesis, we consider the aggregate eﬀect
on productivity at the firm level. Doing so also helps us distinguish the eﬃcient internal
capital markets hypothesis from alternative stories, e.g., the resource reallocation might
be the outcome of lobbying by managers of the treated plant, who suddenly find it easier
to lobby given that their travel time to headquarters is reduced. While such lobbying
eﬀorts can explain why the treated plant gains at the expense of other plants, they are
unlikely to yield an increase in firm-wide productivity. Regardless of which productivity
measure we use, we find that, for financially constrained firms, firm-wide productivity
increases. For financially unconstrained firms, the firm-wide productivity increase is even

                                             5
higher, but this is not surprising, given that these firms are not forced to take resources
away from plants that are positive NPV at the margin.
   Aside from Shin and Stulz (1998), several papers examine whether segments within
conglomerates are interdependent. Notably, Lamont (1997) shows that when oil prices
decline, integrated oil companies cut investment across the board. In particular, they
cut investment in non-oil segments. His conclusion is that the cut is the reversal of
previous, wasteful overinvestment into these segments. While clearly related, Lamont’s
study and ours test diﬀerent hypotheses. His study examines whether a cash-flow shock
spills over to other segments holding investment opportunities constant. The hypothesis
is that, following a negative cash-flow shock to one segment, investment should decline
across all segments. In contrast, our hypothesis is that, following a plant-specific shock
to investment opportunities, investment at the treated plant and other plants of the same
firm should move in opposite directions.
   Both Lamont (1997) and Shin and Stulz (1998) use Compustat segment data. By
contrast, Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) construct segment-level data by aggregating
plant-level data at the firm-industry level. They find that a segment’s growth varies
positively (negatively) with the other segments’ productivity if the segment’s change in
shipments at the industry level is lower (higher) than that of the firm’s median seg-
ment. As they argue, this is consistent with a neoclassical model of optimal firm size
and growth. Lastly, Maksimovic and Phillips (2008) find that the negative eﬀect of a
segment’s (predicted) financial dependence on acquisitions and (to a lesser extent also
on) capital expenditures is greater for single-segment firms than it is for conglomerate
segments, especially in growing and consolidating industries.
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data,
empirical methodology, and summary statistics. Section 3.1 presents our main plant-level
regressions. Section 3.2 examines which other plants are primarily aﬀected by the resource
reallocation. Section 3.3 examines the aggregate (or net) eﬀect at the firm level. Section
4 oﬀers concluding remarks. The Appendix describes how our measures of financing
constraints are constructed.



                                            6
2       Data

2.1     Data Sources and Sample Selection

A. Plant-Level Data

The plant-level data are obtained from three diﬀerent data sets provided by the U.S.
Census Bureau. The first data set is the Census of Manufactures (CMF). The CMF is
conducted every five years (“Census years”) and contains detailed information about all
manufacturing plants in the U.S. with at least one paid employee. The second data set is
the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM). The ASM is conducted in all non-Census years
and covers a subset of the plants covered by the CMF: Plants with at least 250 employees
are included in every ASM year, while plants with fewer employees are randomly selected
every five years, where the probability of being selected is higher for relatively larger
plants. Although the ASM is technically referred to as a “survey,” reporting is mandatory,
and fines are levied for misreporting. The CMF and ASM cover approximately 350,000
and 50,000 plants per year, respectively, and contain information about key plant-level
variables, such as capital expenditures, total assets, value of shipments, material inputs,
employment, industry, and location.
    The third data set is the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), which is compiled
from the business register. The LBD is available annually and covers all business es-
tablishments in the U.S.–i.e., not only manufacturing plants–with at least one paid
employee.7 The LBD contains longitudinal establishment identifiers along with data on
employment, payroll, industry, location, and corporate aﬃliation. We use the longitudinal
establishment identifiers to construct longitudinal linkages between the CMF and ASM,
allowing us to merge the two data sets into a single, longitudinal panel.
    Information about headquarters is obtained from two additional data sets provided
by the U.S. Census Bureau: the Auxiliary Establishment Survey (AES) and the Stan-
dard Statistical Establishment List (SSEL). The AES contains information about non-

    7
    An establishment is a “single physical location where business is conducted” (Jarmin and Miranda,
2003, p. 15). Establishments are the economic units used in the Census data sets.

                                                 7
production (“auxiliary”) establishments, including headquarters. The SSEL contains the
names and addresses of all U.S. business establishments.
    Our sample covers the period from 1977 to 2005. (1977 is the first available AES year;
2005 is the latest available ASM year.) To be included in our sample, we require that
a plant has a minimum of two consecutive years of data. Following common practice in
the literature (e.g., Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson, 2008), we exclude plants whose
information is imputed from administrative records rather than directly collected. We also
exclude plant-year observations for which employment is either zero or missing. Finally,
to ensure that the physical distance between plants and headquarters is comparable across
years, we exclude firms that change the location of their headquarters during the sample
period. The results are virtually identical if we include these firms. These selection criteria
leave us with an initial sample of 1,332,824 plant-year observations.

B. Airline Data

The data on airline routes are obtained from the T-100 Domestic Segment Database (for
the period 1990 to 2005) and from ER-586 Service Segment Data (for the period 1977
to 1989), which are compiled from Form 41 of the U.S. Department of Transportation
(DOT).8 All airlines that operate flights in the U.S. are required by law to file Form 41
with the DOT and are subject to fines for misreporting. Importantly, the T-100 and
ER-586 are not samples; they include all flights that have taken place between any two
airports in the U.S.
    The T-100 and ER-586 contain monthly data for each airline and route (“segment”).
The data include the origin and destination airports, flight duration (“ramp-to-ramp
time”), scheduled departures, performed departures, enplaned passengers, and aircraft
type.

C. Financing Constraints


   8
    The T-100 Domestic Segment Database is provided by the Bureau of Transportation Statistics. The
annual files of the ER-586 Service Segment Data are maintained in the form of magnetic tapes at the U.S.
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). We obtained a copy of the tapes from NARA.

                                                   8
The data used to compute measures of firms’ financing constraints are obtained from
Compustat. We link Compustat to the CMF/ASM/LBD by using the Compustat-SSEL
bridge maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau. Limiting ourselves to plants of publicly
traded firms with a coverage in Compustat reduces our sample to 435,467 plant-year
observations.

D. Additional Sample Selection Criteria

Given that we wish to provide a comprehensive picture of investment and employment
spillovers within firms, we must focus on firms for which we have detailed information
about all, or at least most, of the firms’ plants. Since detailed plant-level data are only
available for manufacturing plants, we therefore limit our sample to “pure” manufacturing
firms. Specifically, we use the LBD to compute the total number of employees for each
firm. (As mentioned previously, the LBD covers all U.S. business establishments.) We
then limit our sample to those firms whose plants in the CMF/ASM account for at least
90% of the firm’s total employees.9 This additional selection criterion leaves us with a final
sample of 291,358 plant-year observations, corresponding to 33,695 firm-year observations.


2.2     Definition of Variables and Empirical Methodology

The introduction of new airline routes that reduce the travel time between headquarters
and plants makes it easier for headquarters to monitor plants. In this paper, we examine
the eﬀect of this “treatment” on the treated plant itself–i.e., the plant whose travel time
to headquarters is reduced–on other plants belonging to the same firm as the treated
plant, and on the firm as a whole. Theories of internal resource reallocation based on
“winner-picking” (e.g., Stein, 1997) rest on the premise that firms face binding financing
constraints. Accordingly, we examine the eﬀect separately for financially constrained and
unconstrained firms.

   9
     Using a 90% (instead of a 100%) cutoﬀ rule to classify “pure” manufacturing firms addresses
two measurement issues. First, auxiliary establishments of manufacturing firms may be assigned non-
manufacturing SIC codes in the LBD–e.g., warehouse facilities may be classified as SIC 4225 (general
warehousing and storage)–even though their very purpose is to support manufacturing plants. Second,
assigning industries to establishments is subject to potential measurement error.

                                                 9
A. Plant-Level Regressions

To examine the eﬀect on the treated plant and on other plants of the same firm, we use
a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences approach. Specifically, we estimate:


         =  +  +  ×  +  1 × treated +  2 × other + γ 0 X +           (1)


where  indexes plants,  indexes firms,  indexes plant location,  indexes years,  is the
dependent variable,  and  are plant and year fixed eﬀects,  ×  are location times
year fixed eﬀects, “treated” is a dummy variable that equals one if a new airline route
that reduces the travel time between plant  and its headquarters has been introduced by
year , “other” is a dummy variable that equals one if a plant belongs to the same firm
as the treated plant and the “treated” dummy is set equal to one, and X is a vector of
control variables. Location is defined at the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level.10
The main coeﬃcients of interest are  1 , which measures the eﬀect of the introduction of
the new airline route on the treated plant and, especially,  2  which measures the eﬀect
on other plants within the same firm.
    The dependent variables are investment and employment. Investment is capital ex-
penditures divided by capital stock.11 Employment is the logarithm of the number of em-
ployees. All dependent variables are measured at the plant level and are industry-adjusted
by subtracting the industry median across all plants in a given 3-digit SIC industry and
year. To mitigate the eﬀect of outliers, we winsorize all dependent variables at the 2.5th
and 97.5th percentiles of their empirical distributions. The control variables are plant
size and age. Plant size is the logarithm of the total value of shipments of a plant, while
plant age is the logarithm of one plus the number of years since the plant has been in the
LBD. To account for serial and cross-sectional dependence across diﬀerent plants within

  10
     The MSA classification is only available for urban areas. For rural areas, we treat the rural part
of each state as a separate region. There are 366 MSAs in the U.S. and 50 rural areas based on state
boundaries. (The District of Columbia has no rural area.) For expositional simplicity, we refer to these
416 geographical units as “MSAs.”
  11
     Both capital expenditures and capital stock are expressed in 1997 dollars. Capital expenditures are
deflated using the 4-digit SIC deflator from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. Real
capital stock is computed using the perpetual inventory formula.

                                                  10
the same firm, we cluster standard errors at the firm level. We obtain similar results if
we cluster standard errors at the MSA level.
    To examine whether the treatment eﬀect is diﬀerent for financially constrained and
unconstrained firms, we additionally estimate a variant of equation (1) in which we interact
the “treated” and “other” dummies with dummies indicating whether the company is
financially constrained:


    =  +  +  ×  +  1 × treated × FC +  2 × treated × non-FC

              + 3 × other × FC +  4 × other × non-FC + γ 0 X +                (2)


where FC is a dummy variable that equals one if a plant belongs to a company that is
financially constrained.12 Non-FC is defined analogously.

B. Measuring Financing Constraints

We use two popular measures of financing constraints: the Kaplan-Zingales (KZ) index
(Kaplan and Zingales, 1997) and the Whited-Wu (WW) index (Whited and Wu, 2006).
The Appendix describes how both measures are constructed.
    Several papers have questioned the external validity of the KZ-index. A common
critique is that the sample used to construct the KZ-index consists of manufacturing
firms from the 1970s and 1980s. Accordingly, the loadings used to construct the KZ-index
might be specific both to that period and to the manufacturing sector. This criticism is
summarized in Whited and Wu (2006, p. 533):

       “One diﬃculty with this approach is parameter stability both across firms and
       over time. Kaplan and Zingales demonstrate convincingly that the firms they
       classify as constrained do indeed have the characteristics one would associate
       with external finance constraints. For example, they have high debt to capital
       ratios, and they appear to invest at a low rate, despite good investment op-
       portunities. However, using the index coeﬃcients on a much larger sample of
  12
     To allow for diﬀerent time trends between financially constrained and unconstrained firms, we could
interact the year fixed eﬀects with FC and non-FC dummies. Doing so would not aﬀect our results.

                                                  11
        firms in a diﬀerent time period leaves open the question of whether this index
        is truly capturing financial constraints.”

   We believe this shortcoming of the KZ-index, while potentially a problem in other
contexts, is not a serious problem in our context. First, our sample consists only of
manufacturing firms. Second, while our sample period goes beyond the 1970s and 1980s,
we always use pre-treatment years to classify firms as financially constrained. These pre-
treatment years are largely from the 1970s and 1980s, which overlaps well with the time
period used by Kaplan and Zingales. Nevertheless, for robustness purposes, we estimate
all regressions using both the KZ-index and the WW-index. As it turns out, all results
are very similar regardless of which index we use.
   To classify firms as financially constrained, we sort in each year all firms into two
groups based on whether a firm’s measure of financing constraints lies above or below
the median in that year. If it lies above the median, the FC dummy is set equal to one.
Otherwise, the non-FC dummy is set equal to one. While this implies that firms can
move across groups over time, we are only interested in a firm’s status at the time of the
treatment. Accordingly, in order to determine whether a plant belongs to a firm that is
financially constrained, we use the value of the firm’s FC dummy in the year prior to the
treatment. Using pre-treatment values mitigates concerns that our classification might be
aﬀected by the treatment itself.
   Empirical studies using Compustat data typically classify about 30% to 40% of firms as
financially constrained. Thus, our choice of a median cutoﬀ may appear high. However,
our sample is not representative of the Compustat universe. It includes only “pure”
manufacturing firms, which are on average smaller than the typical Compustat firm–
e.g., large conglomerates with operations outside of manufacturing are excluded from
our sample–and thus more likely to be financially constrained. Indeed, if we applied
our cutoﬀs (for the KZ- and WW-index) to the Compustat universe, we would obtain
that 36.2% (KZ-index) and 31.8% (WW-index), respectively, of all firms are financially
constrained. Such cutoﬀs are very much in line with the extant literature.13

  13
       If we exclude utilities and financials, these cutoﬀs become 34.1% (KZ-index) and 36.4% (WW-index),

                                                    12
C. Empirical Methodology

The identification strategy follows Giroud (2012). To illustrate, suppose a company head-
quartered in Boston has plants located in Memphis, Chicago, and New York. In 1985,
no direct flight was oﬀered between Boston Logan International Airport and Memphis
International Airport. The fastest way to connect both airports was an indirect flight op-
erated by Delta Airlines with a stopover in Atlanta. In 1986, Northwest Airlines opened
a new hub in Memphis. As part of this expansion, Northwest started operating direct
flights between Boston and Memphis as of October 1986. The introduction of this new
airline route reduced the travel time between Boston and Memphis and is coded as a
“treatment” of the Memphis plant in 1986.14 Accordingly, in 1986, the “treated” dummy
switches from 0 to 1 for the Memphis plant, while the “other” dummy switches from 0 to
1 for the Chicago and New York plants.
    The control group includes all plants that have not (yet) been treated or have not (yet)
been “other” plants. This implies that, due to the staggered introduction of new airline
routes, a plant remains initially in the control group until it becomes either a “treated”
or “other” plant (which, for some plants, may be never).
    Airlines’ decisions to introduce new routes may depend on several factors, including
economic and strategic considerations as well as lobbying. As long as these factors are
orthogonal to plant-level investment and employment, this is not a concern. However, if
there are (omitted) factors that are driving both the introduction of new airline routes
and plant-level investment or employment, then any observed relationship between the
two could be spurious.
    One important source of endogeneity are (omitted) local shocks at the plant level. To
continue with the above example, suppose the Memphis area experiences an economic
boom. As a consequence, the company headquartered in Boston may find it more attrac-
tive to increase investment at the Memphis plant, while airlines may find it more attractive


respectively.
   14
     There was no reduction in travel time between Boston and either Chicago or New York in 1986.
Indeed, there have always been direct flights between these locations since the beginning of our sample
period.

                                                  13
to introduce new flights to Memphis, possibly due to lobbying by companies with plants in
Memphis. Fortunately, since a treatment is uniquely defined by two locations–the plant’s
and headquarters’ home airports–we are able to control for such shocks by including a
full set of MSA × year fixed eﬀects.15
    All of these (endogeneity) concerns apply first and foremost to the treated plant. While
it is conceivable that a local shock in the Memphis area might trigger both an increase
in investment at the Memphis plant and the introduction of a new airline route between
Boston and Memphis, it is less likely that a local shock in either the Chicago or New York
area would trigger the introduction of a new airline route between Boston and Memphis.16
Nevertheless, the inclusion of MSA-year fixed eﬀects also accounts for this possibility.
    Arguably, the introduction of a new airline route between Boston and Memphis–
aside from making investment at the Memphis plant more attractive–should have no
direct eﬀect on the company’s other (i.e., Chicago and New York) plants. To be clear,
whether or not it has a direct eﬀect does not aﬀect the internal validity of our results: As
long as the new airline route between Boston and Memphis is exogenous with respect to
investment at the Chicago and New York plants, the coeﬃcient on the “other” dummy will
be identified.17 However, it might aﬀect the interpretation of our results. For instance,
suppose the new airline route between Boston and Memphis had a direct negative eﬀect
on investment opportunities at the Chicago and New York plants. In that case, we
could no longer say with confidence that a decline in investment at these plants is due to
headquarters’ reallocating scarce resources, for the same decline would have happened also

   15
     To estimate the three-way fixed eﬀect model with year, plant, and MSA-year fixed eﬀects, we employ
the estimation method proposed by Guimarães and Portugal (2010). (See also the discussion in Gormley
and Matsa, 2012, especially Section 4.3.2.) In a previous version of this paper, we used time-varying
MSA-year controls–defined as the mean of the dependent variable in the plant’s MSA in a given year,
excluding the plant itself–in lieu of MSA-year fixed eﬀects. The results were virtually identical.
   16
      Indeed, as we will see, other plants of the same firm may suﬀer from the introduction of a new
airline route between headquarters and the treated plant. Thus, if anything, other plants might have an
incentive to lobby against the introduction of the new airline route.
   17
     To investigate the causal eﬀect of the introduction of new airline routes, Giroud (2012) performs a
number of additional tests. For instance, he shows that his results are robust if only new airline routes
are considered that are the outcome of a merger between two airlines or the opening of a new hub, and if
only indirect flights are considered where either the last leg of the flight (involving the plant’s home base
airport) or the first leg of the flight (involving headquarters’ home base airport) remains unchanged. Our
results are robust to performing any of these additional tests.

                                                     14
if the company was not financially constrained, simply because investment opportunities
at these plants have suﬀered.
   In this regard, looking at financially unconstrained firms provides us with a useful
falsification (or placebo) test. As we will see, the introduction of a new airline route
between headquarters and the treated plant has no eﬀect on other plants if the firm is
financially unconstrained. Arguably, if the new airline route had a direct negative eﬀect
on investment opportunities at other plants, then we should also observe a decline in
investment at these plants if the firm is financially unconstrained.

D. Firm-Level Regressions

To examine the eﬀect on the firm as a whole, we estimate the following firm-level analogue
of equation (1):
                      =  +  +  1 × treatment + γ 0 X +                 (3)

where  indexes firms,  indexes years,  and  are firm and year fixed eﬀects,  is the
dependent variable, “treatment” is a dummy variable that equals one if a plant of firm 
has been treated by year , and X is a vector of control variables.
   The main dependent variables are again investment and employment. Both variables
are the same as in our plant-level regressions, except that they are aggregated at the
firm level. For instance, firm-level investment is the ratio of total capital expenditures
to total capital stock, where total capital expenditures (total capital stock) is the sum
of capital expenditures (capital stock) across all of the firm’s plants. Other dependent
variables are the firm’s return on capital (ROC), operating margin (OM), and total factor
productivity (TFP). ROC is the ratio of total profits–i.e., the sum of shipments minus
labor and material costs across all of the firm’s plants–to total capital stock. OM is
defined analogously, except that the denominator is total shipments.
   To compute firm-level TFP, we follow Schoar (2002) and use the capital-weighted av-
erage of the individual plant-level TFPs. Plant-level TFP is the diﬀerence between actual
and predicted output, where predicted output is the amount of output a plant is expected
to produce for a given level of inputs. To compute predicted output, we follow common
practice and use a log-linear Cobb-Douglas production function (e.g., Lichtenberg, 1992;

                                             15
Schoar, 2002; Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003; Syverson, 2004; Foster, Haltiwanger, and
Syverson, 2008). Specifically, TFP of plant  in year  is the estimated residual from the
regression:
                              =  0 +    +    +    +                         (4)

where  is the logarithm of output and , , and  are the logarithms of capital, labor, and
material inputs, respectively.18 To allow for diﬀerent factor intensities across industries
and over time, we estimate equation (4) separately for each 3-digit SIC industry and
year.19 Thus, TFP measures the relative productivity of a plant within its industry.
   The control variables are firm size and age. Firm size is the logarithm of total
shipments–except in the ROC, OM, and TFP regressions, where it is the logarithm
of capital stock–while firm age is the logarithm of one plus the number of years the
firm has been in the LBD. To mitigate the eﬀect of outliers, we winsorize all dependent
variables at the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of their empirical distributions. As in our
plant-level regressions, we cluster standard errors at the firm level.
   To examine whether the treatment eﬀect is diﬀerent for financially constrained and
unconstrained firms, we additionally estimate a variant of equation (3) in which the
“treatment” dummy is interacted with dummies indicating whether the firm is financially
constrained:


  =  +  +  1 × treatment × FC +  2 × treatment × non-FC + γ 0 X +   (5)


where FC and non-FC have been defined previously.

E. Measuring Travel Time Reductions

  18
     While equation (4) is commonly estimated by OLS (see Syverson (2011) for a survey), research in
structural industrial organization has proposed alternative methods to account for the endogeneity of
input choices. Two prominent methods are those of Olley and Pakes (1996) and Levinsohn and Petrin
(2003). We obtain similar results throughout if we compute TFP using these methods.
  19
     SIC codes were the basis for all Census Bureau publications until 1996. In 1997, the Census Bureau
switched to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). SIC codes were not discontinued
until the 2002 Census, however. For the period from 2002 to 2005, SIC codes are obtained as follows.
For plants “born” before 2002, we use the latest available SIC code. For plants born between 2002 and
2005, we convert NAICS codes into SIC codes using the concordance table of the Census Bureau.

                                                   16
A treatment is the introduction of a new airline route that reduces the travel time between
headquarters and a plant relative to the previously optimal (i.e., fastest) way of traveling.
There are four distinct possibilities: (i) a new indirect flight using a diﬀerent route replaces
a previously optimal indirect flight (“indirect to indirect”); (ii) a new direct flight replaces
a previously optimal indirect flight, as in the Boston-Memphis example (“indirect to
direct”); (iii) a new direct flight using a diﬀerent route–i.e., either a diﬀerent origination
or destination airport–replaces a previously optimal direct flight (“direct to direct”);
(iv) a new direct or indirect flight replaces car travel as the previously optimal means of
transportation (“road to flight”).
   To compute the fastest way of traveling between headquarters and a given plant, we
follow Giroud (2012) and determine the route and means of transportation (e.g., car,
plane) that minimizes the total travel time (in minutes) between the plant’s 5-digit ZIP
code and that of headquarters (both from the LBD).20 We first compute the driving time
by car (in minutes) between the two ZIP codes using MS Mappoint. This travel time
serves as a benchmark and is compared to the travel time by air based on the fastest
airline route. Whenever traveling by car is faster, air transportation is ruled out by
optimality, and the relevant travel time is the driving time by car.
   To determine the fastest airline route between two ZIP codes, we use the itinerary
information from the T-100 and ER-586 data. The fastest airline route minimizes the
total travel time between headquarters and the plant. The total travel time consists of
three components: 1) the travel time by car between headquarters and the origin airport,
2) the duration of the flight, including the time spent at airports and, for indirect flights,
the layover time, and 3) the travel time by car between the destination airport and the
plant. The travel time by car to and from the origin and destination airport, respectively,
is obtained from MS Mappoint. Flight duration per segment is obtained from the T-100
and ER-586 data, which include the ramp-to-ramp time of all flights performed between
any two airports in the U.S. The only unobservables are the time spent at airports and
the layover time. We assume that one hour is spent at the origin and destination airports

  20
     Precisely, we use the latitude and longitude corresponding to the centroid of the area spanned by
the respective ZIP code.

                                                 17
combined and that each layover takes one hour. None of our results depend on these
assumptions. In fact, we obtain virtually identical results using diﬀerent assumptions.21


2.3     Summary Statistics

Table 1 presents summary statistics for all plants (“All Plants”) and separately for
plants that are treated during the sample period (“Eventually Treated Plants”), plants
that become “other” plants during the sample period (“Eventually “Other” Plants”), and
all remaining plants (“Remaining Plants”). For each plant characteristic, we report the
mean and standard deviation (in parentheses). We cannot report median or other quantile
values due to the Census Bureau’s disclosure policy. All dollar values are expressed in
1997 dollars (in thousands).
    As is shown, the three diﬀerent categories of plants are very similar. For example,
eventually treated plants have on average 379 employees compared to 432 employees at
eventually “other” plants and 376 employees at all remaining plants. The only diﬀerence
worth noting is that the remaining plants have slightly lower shipments and capital stock
than the other two categories. This is not a concern, however. Due to the staggered intro-
duction of new airline routes, plants in the “eventually treated” and “eventually other”
categories are initially in the control group–together with the “remaining” plants–until
they become either “treated” or “other” plants. Given the large number of plants in
these two categories, this ensures that the control group is indeed very similar to the
group of “treated” and “other” plants, respectively. In fact, one implication of the stag-
gered introduction of new airline routes is that we can estimate all our regressions using
only “eventually treated” and “eventually other” plants (see Bertrand and Mullainathan
(2003) for a similar exercise).
    We should note that the plants in our sample are larger than those in Giroud (2012).
For example, the average plant in our sample has 410 employees versus 213 employees
in Giroud’s sample. This is not surprising, given that our sample includes only publicly

   21
     The average layover time based on a random sample of 100 flights is approximately one hour. The
time spent at the origin and destination airports is completely immaterial for our results as it cancels out
when comparing “old” (i.e., previously optimal) and “new” flights.

                                                    18
traded companies that are covered in Compustat. Such companies are on average larger,
and own larger plants, than private firms. On the other hand, our plants are slightly
smaller than those in Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003), who also use a matched Census-
Compustat sample, and who report an average of 436 employees per plant. This diﬀerence
arises because our sample includes only “pure” manufacturing firms, while their sample
also includes large conglomerates with substantial operations outside of manufacturing.



3     Results
Section 3.1 contains our basic plant-level regressions. Section 3.2 examines which “other”
plants are primarily aﬀected by the resource reallocation. Section 3.3 shows the aggregate
(or net) eﬀect on investment and employment at the firm level. To address whether
the resource reallocation is overall beneficial, it also examines the aggregate eﬀect on
productivity at the firm level.


3.1       Plant-Level Regressions

Table 2 shows the eﬀect of the introduction of new airline routes on the treated plant
and on other plants of the same firm. In columns [1] to [3], the dependent variable is
plant-level investment, while in columns [4] to [6], the dependent variable is plant-level
employment. As column [1] shows, investment at the treated plant increases by 001
percentage points on average. Given that the average ratio of investment to capital stock
at the plant level is 01, this implies an increase in investment at the treated plant of
1% As for the firm’s other plants, they experience a small but insignificant decline in
investment on average. As we will see below, however, this eﬀect becomes stronger if we
focus on financially constrained firms and, in particular, on specific subsets of “other”
plants.
    Columns [2] and [3] display the eﬀect separately for financially constrained and un-
constrained firms. Several results are worth noting. First, in both cases, investment
at the treated plant increases, albeit the eﬀect is stronger for financially unconstrained


                                           19
firms: The coeﬃcient on treated × FC is 0008, while the coeﬃcient on treated × non-FC
is either 0012 (KZ-index) or 0011 (WW-index). The diﬀerence is significant at the 5%
level. Second, the eﬀect on investment at other plants of financially unconstrained firms is
literally zero. Third, the eﬀect on other plants of financially constrained firms is negative
and–at least when the KZ-index is used–marginally significant.
   The results in Table 2 suggest that financially constrained firms–but not financially
unconstrained firms–exhibit negative spillovers across their plants. Indeed, the increase
in investment at the treated plant is of the same order of magnitude as the decline at the
other plants: At the treated plant, investment increases by $186,000, while it declines by
$179,000 at all other plants together. This implies that, for financially constrained firms,
the aggregate (or net) change in investment at the firm level should be roughly zero. We
will confirm below that this is indeed true.
   While our main focus is on financially constrained firms, looking at financially uncon-
strained firms provides us with a useful falsification (or placebo) test. Specifically, that
the eﬀect on other plants of financially unconstrained firms is literally zero suggests that
the introduction of a new airline route between headquarters and the treated plant has
no direct eﬀect on other plants within the same firm. As we argued in Section 2.2.C, this
matters for the interpretation of our results: If the new airline route had a direct eﬀect on
other plants, we could no longer say with confidence whether a decline in investment at
those plants is due to headquarters’ reallocating scarce resources or simply because the
plants’ investment opportunities have suﬀered.
   Columns [4] to [6] display a similar pattern with respect to plant-level employment.
In particular, while there are no spillovers at financially unconstrained firms, there are
significant–at least when the KZ-index is used–spillovers at financially unconstrained
firms. Indeed, the increase in employment at the treated plant is of the same order of
magnitude as the decline at the other plants: At the treated plant, employment increases
by five employees, while it declines by six employees at all other plants together.
   That the patterns for investment and employment are so similar suggests that capital
and labor are complements in the firm’s production function. In untabulated regressions,
we examine this hypothesis more directly by using the capital-to-labor ratio (logarithm of

                                               20
the ratio of capital stock to the number of employees) as the dependent variable. We find
that this ratio remains unchanged throughout: at the treated plant, at the firm’s other
plants, and at the overall firm level. Hence, firms appear to respond to the treatment by
adjusting capital and labor in a proportionate fashion.
   Table 3 examines the dynamics of the treatment eﬀect. Given that annual records
in the CMF and ASM are measured in calendar years, the last month of each plant-
year observation is December. Since the T-100 and ER-586 segment data are recorded
at monthly frequency, this implies that we know precisely in which month a new airline
route is introduced. Hence, we are able to reconstruct how many months before or after
the introduction of a new airline route a plant-year observation is recorded. By exploiting
this detailed knowledge of the dates at which new airline routes are introduced, we can
introduce dummy variables indicating the time interval between a plant-year observation
and the treatment. For instance, year(-1) indicates the plant-year observation in the
year before the treatment, year(0) indicates the plant-year observation in the year of the
treatment, and so on. Accordingly, treated × FC × year(-1) measures the eﬀect on the
treated plant for financially constrained firms in the year before the treatment, treated ×
FC × year(0) measures the same eﬀect in the year of the treatment, and so on. Due to
space constraints, Table 3 only reports the dynamics of the treatment eﬀect for financially
constrained firms.
   Three results are worth noting. First, there are no existing pre-trends in the data.
Both with regard to investment and employment, the treatment eﬀect becomes significant
only with a lag of about one year after the treatment. Second, the increase in investment
and employment at the treated plant occurs around the same time as the decline at
other plants. Indeed, it is reassuring that the timing between the treated plant and
the other plants coincides so well, providing further evidence that headquarters channels
scarce resources away from the other plants and toward the treated plant. Third, at
least for financially constrained firms, the eﬀect appears to fade away after a few years.
Incidentally, the same is not true for financially unconstrained firms (untabulated results).
For these firms, the increase in investment at the treated plant is permanent, albeit it
becomes slightly weaker over time.

                                             21
    While our results suggest that headquarters takes away scarce resources from other
plants, the average spillover eﬀect shown in Table 2 is rather weak and (at best) mar-
ginally significant. There are several reasons for this. First, the amount of resources
needed to “feed” the treated plant–and thus the amount that must be taken away from
other plants–is fairly modest. Second, this amount is divided among many other plants,
implying that the average amount that is taken away from any individual plant is rela-
tively small. One immediate implication of this is that the spillover eﬀect should become
stronger if we focus on firms that have relatively few other plants. To see whether this
is true, we interact other × FC and other × non-FC with dummy variables indicating
whether the number of “other” plants lies below or above the median, respectively, across
all treated firms in the year prior to the treatment. Indeed, as is shown in Table 4, the
coeﬃcient on other × FC becomes twice as large if we focus on firms with relatively few
other plants. For example, the coeﬃcient on other × FC × (# other plants  median)
is −0004 while the coeﬃcient on other × FC–i.e., the coeﬃcient measuring the aver-
age spillover eﬀect–was previously only −0002 (see column [2] of Table 2). Moreover,
the coeﬃcient is now always significant at the 5% level, while it was previously either
marginally significant or insignificant.22
    Moreover, the average spillover eﬀect is likely to be noisy, as headquarters does not
uniformly “tax” all of the firm’s other plants in the same way. While some plants may
experience a large drop in their resources, others may experience none. To address this
issue, we examine next which other plants are primarily aﬀected by the resource reallo-
cation. As we will show, if we focus on those plants, the spillover eﬀect becomes again
much stronger.


3.2     Which Other Plants Are Primarily Aﬀected?

To examine which other plants are primarily aﬀected by the resource reallocation, we
interact other × FC with individual plant characteristics. These include plant productiv-

  22
     We obtain a similar pattern if we sort firms into three equal groups based on the number of “other”
plants: The coeﬃcient on other × FC is monotonic across terciles and largest for firms that have relatively
few other plants.

                                                    22
ity, whether the plant operates in a main or peripheral industry of the firm, whether it
operates in the same or in a diﬀerent industry as the treated plant, whether it has been
newly acquired during the sample period, and whether it is “close” to headquarters in
terms of geographical proximity or travel time. All plant characteristics are measured in
the year prior to the treatment.23
    Although our main focus is on financially constrained firms, we also interact other ×
non-FC with the same plant characteristics. Doing so provides us with a useful placebo
test, as we would not expect to observe any significant eﬀect on other plants of financially
unconstrained firms. Indeed, in all of the regressions below, the coeﬃcient on other × non-
FC is always close to zero and insignificant, regardless of the specific plant characteristic.
For brevity, we do not report the coeﬃcients on treated × FC and treated × non-FC.
These coeﬃcients are virtually identical to before, whether or not they are interacted with
plant characteristics. The remaining specification is the same as in Table 2, meaning it
includes control variables, plant fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, and MSA × year fixed
eﬀects. Table 5 reports pairwise correlations among the various plant characteristics.
For any given pair of plant characteristics, we compute for all treated firms the within-
firm correlation in the year prior to the treatment using all “other” plants and report the
average among all financially constrained firms. As is shown, regardless of whether we use
the KZ-index (Panel A) or WW-index (Panel B), all correlations are insignificant. The
only exception is when two plant characteristics proxy for the same thing–e.g., TFP and
ROC are both measures of plant productivity–in which case the pairwise correlation is,
and should be, significant.

A. Plant Productivity

If headquarters wants to maximize overall eﬃciency, it should take away resources from
those plants that are least productive. To see whether this is true, we interact other ×
   23
     Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) find that the capital reallocation between firms is procyclical. To see
whether a similar result also holds within firms, we interact treated × FC and other × FC with business
cycle dummies. (Precisely, we use the years before and after recession troughs, as identified by the
NBER, to capture recession periods). Although we find no significant diﬀerences in the reallocation
patterns across business cycles, we should note that our analysis captures only reallocations following
specific events, namely, the introduction of new airline routes. Hence, a firm’s normal capital reallocation
may well exhibit a cyclical (or countercyclical) pattern.

                                                    23
FC with dummy variables indicating whether plant productivity lies below or above the
median among all of the firm’s “other” plants in the year prior to the treatment. Thus,
productivity is measured relative to other plants within a firm, not across firms. We use
two measures of plant productivity: total factor productivity (TFP) and the plant’s return
on capital (ROC).
   As Table 6 shows, financially constrained firms are indeed more likely to withdraw re-
sources from their least productive plants. This is true regardless of how we measure plant
productivity or financing constraints and regardless of whether we consider plant-level in-
vestment (Panel A) or plant-level employment (Panel B). Importantly, the coeﬃcient on
other × FC × low is always significant at the 5% level and is about twice as large as
the corresponding coeﬃcient on other × FC reported in Table 2. Thus, when we focus
on the least productive plants within a firm, we obtain robust and significant spillover
eﬀects. Finally, the coeﬃcient on other × FC × high is always small and insignificant
and is always significantly diﬀerent from that on other × FC × low.

B. Peripheral versus Main Industries

The second plant attribute that we consider proxies for how important a plant is for the
firm as a whole. Specifically, we interact other × FC with dummy variables indicating
whether a plant operates in a main or peripheral industry of the firm. Peripheral plants
are those operating in (3- or 4-digit SIC) industries that account for less than 25% of the
firm’s total value of shipments in the year prior to the treatment (see Maksimovic and
Phillips, 2002).
   Table 7 presents the results. A quick look at the table shows that the results are
qualitatively similar to those in Table 6. And yet, whether or not a plant operates
in a main or peripheral industry is uncorrelated with its relative productivity (see the
correlation matrix in Table 5). Specifically, the results show that financially constrained
firms are indeed more likely to withdraw resources from peripheral plants. This is true
regardless of how we measure financing constraints, whether we use 3- or 4-digit SIC
industries to classify peripheral plants, and whether we consider plant-level investment
(Panel A) or plant-level employment (Panel B). Importantly, the coeﬃcient on other ×

                                            24
FC × peripheral is (almost) always significant at the 5% level and is about twice as large
as the corresponding coeﬃcient on other × FC reported in Table 2. Finally, the coeﬃcient
on other × FC × main is always small and insignificant and is always significantly diﬀerent
from that on other × FC × peripheral.

C. Same versus Diﬀerent Industries

The third plant attribute that we consider is whether a plant operates in the same or in
a diﬀerent industry as the treated plant. There are various reasons for why headquarters
might want to withdraw more resources from plants that operate in the same industry
as the treated plant. For example, doing so might minimize the impact on the firm’s
diversification strategy. Another reason is that–assuming divisions are organized by
industry–adding and subtracting resources within the same industry might minimize
wasteful inter-divisional rent-seeking.
   While there may be good (theoretical) reasons for why headquarters might want to
withdraw more resources from plants that operate in the same industry as the treated
plant, we find no empirical support for such reasons. As is shown in Table 8, the
coeﬃcients on other × FC × same and other × FC × diﬀerent are always close to each
other and, consequently, also close to the coeﬃcient on other × FC reported in Table 2.

D. Acquired versus Own Plants

The fourth plant attribute that we consider is whether a plant has been newly acquired
during the sample period. There are again various reasons for why headquarters might
want to withdraw more resources from newly acquired plants. For instance, newly ac-
quired plants may have less lobbying power, or headquarters may know less about them
than it does about plants that have been with the firm for a long time. However, we find
no empirical support for such reasons. As Table 9 shows, the coeﬃcients on other × FC
× acquired and other × FC × own are always close to each other and, consequently, also
close to the coeﬃcient on other × FC reported in Table 2.

E. Proximity to Headquarters


                                            25
The final plant attribute that we consider is how “close” a plant is to headquarters. We
use two measures of proximity: travel time and geographical distance, where the latter is
computed using the great-circle distance formula

                         ¡                                             ¢
                × arcos sin  sin  + cos  cos  cos[ −  ] 


where  ( ) and  ( ) are the latitude and longitude, respectively, corresponding
to the centroid of the area spanned by the ZIP code of the plant (headquarters), and  is
the approximate radius of the earth (3,959 miles).
   As Table 10 shows, financially constrained firms are indeed more likely to withdraw
resources from more distant plants. This is true regardless of how we measure proximity
to headquarters or financing constraints and regardless of whether we consider plant-level
investment (Panel A) or plant-level employment (Panel B). Importantly, the coeﬃcient
on other × FC × high is (almost) always significant at the 5% level and is about twice
as large as the corresponding coeﬃcient on other × FC reported in Table 2. Finally, the
coeﬃcient on other × FC × low is always small and insignificant and is always significantly
diﬀerent from that on other × FC × high.


3.3    Firm-Level Regressions

Table 11 presents the aggregate (or net) eﬀect on investment and employment at the firm
level. As column [1] shows, aggregate investment increases by 0002 percentage points on
average. Given that the average ratio of investment to capital stock at the firm level
is 01, this implies an increase in firms’ aggregate investment of 02% Columns [2] and
[3] display the aggregate eﬀect separately for financially constrained and unconstrained
firms. Regardless of which measure of financing constraints we use, we obtain the same
picture: For financially constrained firms, aggregate investment remains unchanged, which
is consistent with our previous result showing that the increase in investment at the
treated plant is oﬀset by a decrease at other plants of the same magnitude. In contrast,
for financially unconstrained firms, the change in aggregate investment is positive. Given
that financially unconstrained firms exhibit no (negative) spillovers among their plants,

                                            26
this is indeed what one would expect.
    Columns [4] to [6] display a similar pattern with respect to employment at the firm
level: While aggregate employment increases by 04% on average, firm-level employment
at financially constrained firms remains unchanged, which is consistent with our previous
result showing that the increase in employment at the treated plant is oﬀset by a decrease
at other plants of the same magnitude.
    A key premise of the eﬃcient internal capital markets paradigm is that the resource
reallocation is beneficial: While resources may be taken away from projects that are
positive NPV at the margin, they are channeled toward other projects whose investment
prospects are even better. To explore this hypothesis, we consider the aggregate eﬀect
on productivity at the firm level. Doing so also helps us distinguish the eﬃcient internal
capital markets hypothesis from alternative stories, e.g., the resource reallocation might
be the outcome of lobbying by managers of the treated plant, who suddenly find it easier
to lobby given that their travel time to headquarters is reduced. While such lobbying
eﬀorts can explain why the treated plant gains at the expense of other plants, they are
unlikely to yield an increase in firm-wide productivity.
    Table 12 shows the results. In columns [1] to [3], the dependent variable is aggregate
total factor productivity (TFP). In columns [4] to [6], the dependent variable is the firm’s
return on capital (ROC). Finally, in columns [7] to [9], the dependent variable is the firm’s
operating margin (OM). Regardless of which productivity measure we use, and regardless
of how we measure financing constraints, we find that, for financially constrained firms,
firm-wide productivity increases. Thus, it seems as though the channeling of resources
away from the other plants and toward the treated plant is beneficial for the firm as
a whole. For financially unconstrained firms, the firm-wide productivity increase is even
higher, though this is not surprising given that these firms are not forced to take resources
away from plants that are positive NPV at the margin.24
   24
      Giroud (2012) illustrates how, in the context of the treated plant, this productivity increase translates
into actual dollar profits. He also discusses whether there was “money left on the table,” in the sense
that it might have paid for headquarters to travel more often already prior to the treatment, use a private
jet, or hire “delegated monitors.” See Giroud (2012), especially Section III.C, for details. Note that the
profit increase at the treated plant overstates the profit increase at the firm level, for two reasons. First,
certain costs associated with the treatment, such as overhead costs and travel expenses, are assigned to

                                                      27
4     Conclusion
This paper documents how a plant-specific shock to investment opportunities at one plant
of a firm (“treated plant”) spills over to other plants of the same firm–but only if the
firm is financially constrained: While investment and employment both increase at the
treated plant, they both decline at other plants of the same firm. Moreover, the increase
in investment and employment at the treated plant is of the same order of magnitude as
the decline at other plants, implying that the aggregate (or net) eﬀect at the firm level is
zero. To determine whether the resource reallocation is beneficial, we examine its eﬀect
on aggregate productivity at the firm level. We find that–even if firms are financially
constrained–firm-wide productivity increases, suggesting that the channeling of resources
away from the other plants and toward the treated plant is beneficial for the firm as a
whole.
    We also explore which other plants are primarily aﬀected by the resource reallocation.
We find that financially constrained firms are more likely to withdraw resources from
plants that are relatively less productive, are not part of the firm’s core industries, and
are located far away from headquarters. On the other hand, whether a plant operates in
the same industry as the treated plant, or whether it has been newly acquired, plays no
significant role for the resource reallocation.
    Finally, our results have potential implications for internal labor markets. Unless
workers are transferred across plants–which is less likely if the treated and the other
plants are located far away from one another–our results suggest that the treated plant
hires new workers while some of the other plants are forced to lay oﬀ workers. Hence, some
workers are laid oﬀ not because their plant is doing poorly, but because some other plant
within the same firm is doing relatively better. While this is speculative, this layoﬀ risk
due to headquarters engaging in “winner-picking” could be an explanation for Schoar’s
(2002) finding that conglomerates pay higher wages on average.




headquarters, not to the treated plant. Second, at least for financially constrained firms, the positive
eﬀect at the treated plant is partly oﬀset by a negative eﬀect at the firm’s other plants.

                                                  28
5     Appendix: Measuring Financing Constraints
We use two popular measures to compute firms’ financing constraints: the Kaplan-
Zingales (KZ) index (Kaplan and Zingales, 1997) and the Whited-Wu (WW) index
(Whited and Wu, 2006).
    The KZ-index loads negatively on cash flow, cash holdings, and dividends, and posi-
tively on leverage and Tobin’s Q. To compute the KZ-index, we follow Lamont, Polk, and
Saa-Requejo (2001, pp. 551-552), who use the original coeﬃcient estimates of Kaplan and
Zingales. Precisely, the KZ-index is computed as:


      KZ-index = −1001909 × cash flow/capital + 02826389 × Tobin’s Q

                      +3139193 × debt/total capital − 393678 × dividend/capital

                      −1314759 × cash/capital,


where cash flow/capital is income before extraordinary items (Compustat item #18) plus
depreciation and amortization (item #14) divided by property, plant, and equipment
(item #8), Tobin’s Q is total assets (item #6) plus the December market value of equity
from CRSP minus the book value of common equity (item #60) minus balance sheet
deferred taxes (item #74) divided by total assets, debt/total capital is long-term debt
(item #9) plus debt in current liabilities (item #34) divided by long-term debt plus debt
in current liabilities plus stockholder’s equity (item #216), dividend/capital is dividends
on common stocks (item #21) plus dividends on preferred stocks (item #19) divided
by property, plant, and equipment, and cash/capital is cash and short-term investments
(item #1) divided by property, plant, and equipment. Property, plant, and equipment is
lagged by one fiscal year. All variables are obtained from the annual files of Compustat
and CRSP.
    The WW-index represents the shadow value of scarce funds and loads negatively on
cash flow, dividends, sales growth, and total assets, and positively on long-term debt and
sales growth in the firm’s industry. Following Whited and Wu (p. 543), we compute the




                                            29
WW-index as:


        WW-index = −0091 × cash flow/assets − 0062 × positive dividend

                          +0021 × long-term debt/assets − 0044 × log(assets)

                          +0102 × industry sales growth − 0035 × sales growth,


where cash flow/assets is income before extraordinary items (Compustat quarterly item
#8) plus depreciation and amortization (item #5) divided by total assets (item #44),
positive dividend is a dummy variable that equals one if cash dividend (item #89) is
positive, long-term debt/assets is long-term debt (item #51) divided by total assets,
log(assets) is the natural logarithm of total assets, sales growth is the growth in firm sales
(item #2), and industry sales growth is sales growth in the firm’s 3-digit SIC industry.
Total assets is deflated by the replacement cost of total assets, which is computed as
in Whited (1992). All variables are obtained from the quarterly file of Compustat. In
our regressions, we annualize the WW-index by taking the average of the four quarterly
WW-indices.



6     References
 Alchian, Armen, 1969, Corporate Management and Property Rights, in: H. Manne (ed.),
      Economic Policy and the Regulation of Corporate Securities. Washington, DC:
      American Enterprise Institute.

 Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2003, Enjoying the Quiet Life? Cor-
      porate Governance and Managerial Preferences, Journal of Political Economy 111,
      2003, 1043-1075.

 Bolton, Patrick, and David Scharfstein, 1998, Corporate Finance, the Theory of the
      Firm, and Organizations, Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, 95-114.

 Brusco, Sandro, and Fausto Panunzi, 2005, Reallocation of Corporate Resources and
      Managerial Incentives in Internal Capital Markets, European Economic Review 49,

                                             30
    659-681.

Eisfeldt, Andrea, and Adriano Rampini, 2006, Capital Reallocation and Liquidity, Jour-
    nal of Monetary Economics 53, 369-399.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, 2008, Reallocation, Firm Turnover,
    and Eﬃciency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability? American Economic
    Review 98, 394-425.

Giroud, Xavier, 2012, Proximity and Investment: Evidence from Plant-Level Data, Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Gormley, Todd, and David Matsa, 2012, Common Errors: How to (and Not to) Control
    for Unobserved Heterogeneity, mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

Grossman, Sanford, and Oliver Hart, 1986, The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A
    Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-
    719.

Guimarães, Paulo, and Pedro Portugal, 2010, A Simple Feasible Procedure to Fit Models
    with High-Dimensional Fixed Eﬀects, Stata Journal 10, 628-649.

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1990, Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm, Journal
    of Political Economy 98, 1119-1158.

Holmström, Bengt, 1999, The Firm as a Subeconomy, Journal of Law, Economics, and
    Organization 15, 74-102.

Jarmin, Ron, and Javier Miranda, 2003, The Longitudinal Business Database, CES
    Working Paper.

Kaplan, Steven, and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do Financing Constraints Explain Why Invest-
    ment Is Correlated with Cash Flow? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.

Kroc, Ray, 1992, Grinding it Out: The Making of McDonald’s. New York: St. Martin’s
    Paperbacks.

                                          31
Lamont, Owen, 1997, Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Mar-
    kets, Journal of Finance 52, 83-109.

Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk, and Jesus Saa-Requejo, 2001, Financial Constraints
    and Stock Returns, Review of Financial Studies 14, 529-554.

Levinsohn, James, and Amil Petrin, 2003, Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
    to Control for Unobservables, Review of Economic Studies 70, 317-341.

Lichtenberg, Frank, 1992, Corporate Takeovers and Productivity. Cambridge, MA: MIT
    Press.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2002, Do Conglomerate Firms Allocate Re-
    sources Ineﬃciently Across Industries? Theory and Evidence, Journal of Finance
    57, 721-767.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2008, The Industry Life Cycle, Acquisitions
    and Investment: Does Firm Organization Matter? Journal of Finance 63, 673-707.

Milgrom, Paul, 1988, Employment Contracts, Influence Activities and Eﬃcient Organi-
    zation Design, Journal of Political Economy 96, 42-60.

Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts, 1988, An Economic Approach to Influence Activities
    and Organizational Responses, American Journal of Sociology 94 (Supplement),
    S154-S179.

Olley, Steven, and Ariel Pakes, 1996, The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommu-
    nications Equipment Industry, Econometrica 64, 1263-1297.

Rajan, Raghuram, Henri Servaes, and Luigi Zingales, 2000, The Cost of Diversity: The
    Diversification Discount and Ineﬃcient Investment, Journal of Finance 55, 35-80.

Scharfstein, David, and Jeremy Stein, 2000, The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets:
    Divisional Rent-Seeking and Ineﬃcient Investment, Journal of Finance 55, 2537-
    2564.


                                           32
Schoar, Antoinette, 2002, Eﬀects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity, Journal
    of Finance 57, 2379-2403.

Shin, Hyun-Han, and René Stulz, 1998, Are Internal Capital Markets Eﬃcient? Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 113, 531-552.

Stein, Jeremy, 1997, Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Re-
    sources, Journal of Finance 52, 111-133.

Syverson, Chad, 2004, Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example, Journal
    of Political Economy 112, 1181-1222.

Syverson, Chad, 2011, What Determines Productivity? Journal of Economic Literature
    49, 326-365.

Tate, Geoﬀrey, and Liu Yang, 2011, The Bright Side of Corporate Diversification: Evi-
    dence from Internal Labor Markets, mimeo, UCLA.

Whited, Toni, 1992, Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evidence
    from Panel Data, Journal of Finance 47, 1425-1460.

Whited, Toni, and Guojun Wu, 2006, Financial Constraints Risk, Review of Financial
    Studies 19, 531-559.

Williamson, Oliver, 1975, Market and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications.
    New York: Free Press.




                                           33
                                                         Table 1
                                                     Summary Statistics

“All Plants” refers to all plants in the sample. “Eventually Treated Plants” refers to plants that are treated during the sample
period, i.e., plants whose travel time to headquarters is reduced through the introduction of a new airline route. “Eventually Other
Plants” refers to plants that become “other” plants during the sample period. “Remaining Plants” refers to all remaining plants.
Employees is the number of employees of the plant. Shipments, capital stock, and investment are expressed in 1997 dollars (in
1,000s) using 4-digit SIC deflators from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. Capital stock is constructed using the
perpetual inventory method. All figures are sample means. Standard deviations are in parentheses. The sample period is from
1977 to 2005.




                                                                 Eventually           Eventually           Remaining
                                              All Plants
                                                                Treated Plants      “Other” Plants           Plants


         Employees                                 410                 379                  432                 376
                                                  (929)               (756)                (968)               (975)
         Shipments                               97,255              95,403              103,929              79,235
                                               (360,818)           (304,582)            (360,623)           (411,983)
         Capital Stock                           42,078              41,666               45,756              31,501
                                               (141,084)           (139,036)            (147,219)           (122,738)
         Investment                               3,848              3,646                3,969               3,701
                                                (53,589)            (15,735)             (21,316)           (113,504)
         Investment / Capital Stock                0.10                0.10                 0.10                0.11
                                                 (0.14)              (0.13)               (0.14)              (0.16)

         Number of Observations                 291,358              61,007              172,667             57,684
                                                        Table 2
                                              Main Plant-Level Regressions

Investment is the ratio of capital expenditures to capital stock at the plant level. Employment is the natural logarithm of the
number of employees of the plant. “Treated” is a dummy variable that equals one if a new airline route that reduces the travel
time between the plant and its headquarters has been introduced. “Other” is a dummy variable that equals one if a plant belongs
to the same firm as a treated plant and the treated dummy is equal to one. FC (Non-FC) is a dummy variable that equals one if the
plant belongs to a firm whose measure of financing constraints lies above (below) the median across all firms in the year prior to
the treatment. In columns [2] and [5], financing constraints are measured using the KZ-index of Kaplan and Zingales (1997). In
columns [3] and [6], financing constraints are measured using the WW-index of Whited and Wu (2006). Control variables
include size and age. Size is the natural logarithm of the plant’s shipments. Age is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of
years since the plant has been in the LBD. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 1977 to
2005. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




  Dependent Variable:                           Investment                                         Employment


                                                  KZ-Index       WW-Index                            KZ-Index       WW-Index
                                      [1]             [2]             [3]                [4]             [5]            [6]


  Treated                         0.010***                                           0.025***
                                   (0.001)                                            (0.004)
  Other                             -0.001                                             -0.002
                                   (0.001)                                            (0.003)
  Treated × FC                                    0.008***        0.008***                           0.019***         0.019**
                                                   (0.002)         (0.003)                            (0.006)          (0.008)
  Treated × Non-FC                                0.012***        0.011***                           0.028***        0.026***
                                                   (0.002)         (0.001)                            (0.005)          (0.004)
  Other × FC                                       -0.002*          -0.003                            -0.006*           -0.007
                                                    (0.001)        (0.002)                            (0.004)          (0.006)
  Other × Non-FC                                     0.000          -0.000                              0.001           -0.000
                                                    (0.001)        (0.001)                             (0.004)         (0.003)

  Control Variables                  Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes
  Plant Fixed Effects                Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes
  Year Fixed Effects                 Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes
  MSA × Year Fixed Effects           Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes

  Observations                     291,358         291,358         291,358            291,358         291,358         291,358
  R-squared                          0.32           0.32             0.32              0.92             0.92           0.92
                                                        Table 3
                                            Dynamics of the Treatment Effect

This table presents variants of the plant-level regressions in columns [2]-[3] and [5]-[6], respectively, of Table 2, where Other ×
FC and Other × Non-FC are interacted with dummy variables indicating whether the plant-year observation is measured one year
before the treatment (-1), in the year of the treatment (0), one, two, and three years after the treatment (1, 2, and 3, respectively),
and four or more years after the treatment (4+). All other variables are described in Table 2. Standard errors are clustered at the
firm level. The sample period is from 1977 to 2005. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                    Dependent Variable:                      Investment                     Employment


                                                    KZ-Index       WW-Index           KZ-Index       WW-Index
                                                       [1]                [2]             [3]            [4]


                    Treated × FC × Year(-1)           -0.003           0.002             -0.003         -0.002
                                                      (0.004)        (0.005)             (0.011)       (0.017)
                    Treated × FC × Year(0)             0.005           0.004              0.004          0.003
                                                      (0.003)        (0.006)             (0.010)       (0.014)
                    Treated × FC × Year(1)          0.014***        0.014***          0.031***        0.041***
                                                      (0.003)        (0.004)             (0.010)       (0.014)
                    Treated × FC × Year(2)           0.009**         0.010*            0.029***       0.030***
                                                      (0.003)        (0.005)             (0.008)       (0.012)
                    Treated × FC × Year(3)           0.008*          0.008*             0.019**        0.022*
                                                      (0.004)        (0.005)             (0.010)       (0.014)
                    Treated × FC × Year(4+)            0.006          0.006               0.013          0.013
                                                      (0.004)        (0.005)             (0.011)       (0.015)
                    Other × FC × Year(-1)              0.001           0.002               0.001         0.001
                                                      (0.002)        (0.003)             (0.006)       (0.008)
                    Other × FC × Year(0)              -0.001          -0.002             -0.002         -0.002
                                                      (0.002)        (0.004)             (0.007)       (0.009)
                    Other × FC × Year(1)            -0.005**        -0.006**          -0.017***       -0.020**
                                                      (0.002)        (0.003)             (0.006)       (0.010)
                    Other × FC × Year(2)             -0.004*          -0.005            -0.011*         -0.014
                                                      (0.002)        (0.003)             (0.006)       (0.009)
                    Other × FC × Year(3)              -0.002          -0.002             -0.006         -0.010
                                                      (0.002)        (0.003)             (0.006)       (0.010)
                    Other × FC × Year(4+)             -0.001          -0.002             -0.003         -0.002
                                                      (0.002)        (0.003)             (0.006)       (0.009)
                    Treated × Non-FC                0.012***        0.012***           0.027***       0.026***
                                                      (0.002)        (0.001)             (0.005)       (0.004)
                    Other × Non-FC                     0.001           0.000              -0.000        -0.000
                                                      (0.001)        (0.001)             (0.004)       (0.003)

                    Control Variables                  Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes
                    Plant Fixed Effects                Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes
                    Year Fixed Effects                 Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes
                    MSA × Year Fixed Effects           Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes

                    Observations                     291,358         291,358           291,358         291,358
                    R-squared                         0.32            0.32              0.92            0.92
                                                      Table 4
                                      Firms with Few and Many “Other” Plants

This table presents variants of the plant-level regressions in columns [2] and [3] and columns [5] and [6], respectively, of Table 2,
where Other × FC and Other × Non-FC are interacted with dummy variables indicating whether the number of “other” plants lies
below or above the median, respectively, across all treated firms in the years prior to the treatment. All other variables are
described in Table 2. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 1977 to 2005. Standard errors are
in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




    Dependent Variable:                                               Investment                           Employment


                                                            KZ-Index        WW-Index             KZ-Index         WW-Index
                                                                [1]                [2]               [3]                [4]


    Treated × FC                                            0.008***         0.008***             0.019***         0.019**
                                                             (0.002)          (0.003)              (0.006)          (0.008)
    Treated × Non-FC                                        0.012***         0.011***             0.028***         0.026***
                                                             (0.002)          (0.001)              (0.005)          (0.004)
    Other × FC × (# Other Plants < Median)                  -0.004**         -0.005**             -0.011**         -0.014**
                                                             (0.002)          (0.003)              (0.006)          (0.007)
    Other × FC × (# Other Plants ≥ Median)                    -0.001           -0.002               -0.003           -0.002
                                                             (0.002)          (0.004)              (0.006)          (0.010)
    Other × Non-FC × (# Other Plants < Median)                 0.000           -0.001                0.001            0.001
                                                             (0.002)          (0.002)              (0.006)          (0.005)
    Other × Non-FC × (# Other Plants ≥ Median)                 0.001            0.000               -0.000           -0.001
                                                             (0.002)          (0.001)              (0.004)          (0.004)

    Control Variables                                          Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes
    Plant Fixed Effects                                        Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes
    Year Fixed Effects                                         Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes
    MSA × Year Fixed Effects                                   Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes

    Observations                                             291,358          291,358             291,358           291,358
    R-squared                                                  0.32            0.32                0.92              0.92
                                                              Table 5
                                                         Correlation Matrix

For each pair of plant characteristics, this table reports the average within-firm correlation among all “other” plants of financially
constrained firms in the year prior to the treatment. In Panel (A), financing constraints are measured using the KZ-index of
Kaplan and Zingales (1997). In Panel (B), financing constraints are measured using the WW-index of Whited and Wu (2006).
Total factor productivity (TFP) is the residual from estimating a log-linear Cobb-Douglas production function by Ordinary Least
Squares separately for each 3-digit SIC industry and year at the plant level. (See Section 2.2.D for more details.) Return on
capital (ROC) is the value of shipments minus labor and material costs divided by capital stock. Peripheral plants operate in (3-
or 4-digit SIC) industries that account for less than 25% of the firm’s total value of shipments. Geographical distance is the great-
circle distance between the plant’s ZIP code and the ZIP code of headquarters. Travel time is the total travel time based on the
fastest route and means of transportation (car or plane) between the plant’s ZIP code and the ZIP code of headquarters. Same
industry is a dummy variable that equals one if the plant operates in the same (3- or 4-digit SIC) industry as the treated plant.
Acquired is a dummy that equals one if the plant was acquired by the firm during the sample period. p-values are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

 Panel (A): KZ-Index


                                                        Peripheral Peripheral         Travel    Geographical       Same          Same        Acquired
                                    TFP      ROC           Plant         Plant        Time        Distance       Industry      Industry       Plant
                                                       (3-digit SIC) (4-digit SIC)                             (3-digit SIC) (4-digit SIC)

 TFP                               1.000

 ROC                              0.578***   1.000
                                   (0.002)
 Peripheral Plant (3-digit SIC)     -0.052    -0.039      1.000
                                   (0.824)   (0.874)
 Peripheral Plant (4-digit SIC)     -0.057    -0.037    0.822***        1.000
                                   (0.823)   (0.887)     (0.000)
 Travel Time                        -0.015    -0.033      0.073           0.093       1.000
                                   (0.955)   (0.904)     (0.770)        (0.741)
 Geographical Distance              -0.010    -0.014      0.066           0.093      0.857***      1.000
                                   (0.972)   (0.959)     (0.795)        (0.745)       (0.000)
 Same Industry (3-digit SIC)         0.004     0.033      -0.191         -0.146        -0.067     -0.079          1.000
                                   (0.989)   (0.900)     (0.625)        (0.703)       (0.864)     (0.840)
 Same Industry (4-digit SIC)        -0.003     0.029      -0.175         -0.180        -0.032     -0.053        0.870***        1.000
                                   (0.992)   (0.910)     (0.618)        (0.633)       (0.934)     (0.890)        (0.000)
 Acquired Plant                      0.011     0.054       0.003          0.009        -0.032      -0.031         0.179          0.146        1.000
                                   (0.966)   (0.826)     (0.992)        (0.976)       (0.938)     (0.939)        (0.634)        (0.700)


 Panel (B): WW-Index


                                                        Peripheral Peripheral         Travel    Geographical       Same          Same        Acquired
                                    TFP      ROC           Plant         Plant        Time        Distance       Industry      Industry       Plant
                                                       (3-digit SIC) (4-digit SIC)                             (3-digit SIC) (4-digit SIC)

 TFP                               1.000

 ROC                              0.550**    1.000
                                  (0.012)
 Peripheral Plant (3-digit SIC)    -0.060     -0.047      1.000
                                  (0.810)    (0.863)
 Peripheral Plant (4-digit SIC)    -0.060     -0.050    0.850***        1.000
                                  (0.821)    (0.853)     (0.000)
 Travel Time                       -0.008     -0.022      0.101           0.112       1.000
                                  (0.978)    (0.941)     (0.729)        (0.720)
 Geographical Distance             -0.001     -0.006      0.092           0.102      0.863***      1.000
                                  (0.998)    (0.983)     (0.755)        (0.742)       (0.000)
 Same Industry (3-digit SIC)        0.001      0.032      -0.176         -0.129        -0.052     -0.052          1.000
                                  (0.997)    (0.913)     (0.636)        (0.723)       (0.901)     (0.904)
 Same Industry (4-digit SIC)        0.003      0.029      -0.138         -0.145        -0.017     -0.027        0.879***        1.000
                                  (0.992)    (0.921)     (0.677)        (0.683)       (0.967)     (0.949)        (0.000)
 Acquired Plant                    -0.015      0.039       0.030          0.038         0.027      0.039          0.154          0.110        1.000
                                  (0.956)    (0.877)     (0.924)        (0.902)       (0.950)     (0.930)        (0.705)        (0.784)
                                                           Table 6
                                                      Plant Productivity

This table presents variants of the plant-level regressions in columns [2] and [3] and columns [5] and [6], respectively, of Table 2,
where Other × FC and Other × Non-FC are interacted with dummy variables (“Low” and “High”) indicating whether plant
productivity lies below or above the median productivity across all of the firm’s “other” plants in the year prior to the treatment.
Productivity is measured using TFP in columns [1] and [2] and ROC in columns [3] and [4]. The dependent variable is
investment in Panel (A) and employment in Panel (B). TFP and ROC are described Table 5. All other variables are described in
Table 2. For brevity, the coefficients on Treated × FC and Treated × Non-FC are omitted from the table. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 1977 to 2005. Standard errors are in parentheses (except for the F-statistics,
where p-values are in parentheses). *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


   Panel (A): Investment


                                                                     TFP                                     ROC

                                                        KZ-Index           WW-Index              KZ-Index          WW-Index
                                                            [1]                [2]                   [3]                [4]

   Other × FC × Low                                      -0.005**          -0.006**               -0.005**          -0.006**
                                                          (0.002)           (0.003)                (0.002)           (0.003)
   Other × FC × High                                       0.001             0.001                  0.001             0.001
                                                          (0.002)           (0.003)                (0.002)           (0.003)
   Other × Non-FC × Low                                    0.000            -0.001                  0.000             -0.001
                                                          (0.002)           (0.001)                (0.002)           (0.001)
   Other × Non-FC × High                                   0.001             0.000                  0.001             0.001
                                                          (0.002)           (0.002)                (0.002)           (0.002)

   Other × FC × Low versus Other × FC × High
   F-statistic                                            3.92**              3.00*                3.89**             2.91*
                                                          (0.048)            (0.083)               (0.049)           (0.088)


   Panel (B): Employment


                                                                     TFP                                     ROC

                                                        KZ-Index           WW-Index              KZ-Index          WW-Index
                                                            [1]                [2]                   [3]                [4]

   Other × FC × Low                                      -0.011**          -0.015**               -0.011**          -0.015**
                                                          (0.006)           (0.008)                (0.006)           (0.008)
   Other × FC × High                                       -0.002             0.004                 -0.002            0.004
                                                          (0.006)           (0.009)                (0.006)           (0.009)
   Other × Non-FC × Low                                    0.000            -0.001                   0.000            -0.002
                                                          (0.005)           (0.004)                (0.005)           (0.004)
   Other × Non-FC × High                                   0.003             -0.000                  0.003            0.000
                                                          (0.005)           (0.004)                (0.005)           (0.004)

   Other × FC × Low versus Other × FC × High
   F-statistic                                             3.31*              3.07*                 3.50*             2.70*
                                                          (0.069)            (0.080)               (0.061)           (0.100)
                                                         Table 7
                                            Peripheral versus Main Industries

This table presents variants of the plant-level regressions in columns [2] and [3] and columns [5] and [6], respectively, of Table 2,
where Other × FC and Other × Non-FC are interacted with dummy variables (“Peripheral” and “Main”) indicating whether a
plant operates in a peripheral or main industry of the firm in the year prior to the treatment. Industries are classified using 3-digit
SIC codes in columns [1] and [2] and 4-digit SIC codes in columns [3] and [4]. The dependent variable is investment in Panel (A)
and employment in Panel (B). Peripheral industries are described in Table 5. All other variables are described in Table 2. For
brevity, the coefficients on Treated × FC and Treated × Non-FC are omitted from the table. Standard errors are clustered at the
firm level. The sample period is from 1977 to 2005. Standard errors are in parentheses (except for the F-statistics, where p-values
are in parentheses). *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


  Panel (A): Investment


                                                                   3-digit SIC                               4-digit SIC

                                                         KZ-Index          WW-Index                KZ-Index          WW-Index
                                                             [1]                 [2]                   [3]                 [4]

  Other × FC × Main                                          0.000             -0.001                 0.000              -0.001
                                                           (0.002)            (0.003)                (0.002)            (0.003)
  Other × FC × Peripheral                                 -0.005**           -0.006**               -0.005**           -0.006**
                                                           (0.002)            (0.003)                (0.002)            (0.003)
  Other × Non-FC × Main                                      0.001              0.001                 0.001               0.001
                                                           (0.002)            (0.002)                (0.002)            (0.002)
  Other × Non-FC × Peripheral                               -0.000            -0.001                 -0.000             -0.001
                                                           (0.002)            (0.001)                (0.002)            (0.001)

  Other × FC × Main versus Other × FC × Peripheral
  F-statistic                                               3.48*              3.03*                  2.96*              3.00*
                                                           (0.062)            (0.082)                (0.085)            (0.083)


  Panel (B): Employment


                                                                   3-digit SIC                               4-digit SIC

                                                         KZ-Index          WW-Index                KZ-Index          WW-Index
                                                             [1]                 [2]                   [3]                 [4]

  Other × FC × Main                                         0.002              0.003                  0.003              0.002
                                                           (0.006)            (0.008)                (0.006)           (0.008)
  Other × FC × Peripheral                                 -0.011**           -0.017**               -0.012**           -0.016*
                                                           (0.006)            (0.009)                (0.006)           (0.009)
  Other × Non-FC × Main                                     0.003              0.002                  0.003              0.003
                                                           (0.006)            (0.005)                (0.006)           (0.005)
  Other × Non-FC × Peripheral                               0.000             -0.002                  0.000             -0.003
                                                           (0.005)            (0.004)                (0.005)           (0.004)

  Other × FC × Main versus Other × FC × Peripheral
  F-statistic                                               3.33*              3.20*                 3.93**              3.67*
                                                           (0.068)            (0.073)                (0.047)            (0.055)
                                                       Table 8
                                            Same versus Different Industries

This table presents variants of the plant-level regressions in columns [2] and [3] and columns [5] and [6], respectively, of Table 2,
where Other × FC and Other × Non-FC are interacted with dummy variables (“Same” and “Different”) indicating whether a plant
operates in the same industry as the treated plant in the year prior to the treatment. Industries are classified using 3-digit SIC
codes in columns [1] and [2] and 4-digit SIC codes in columns [3] and [4]. The dependent variable is investment in Panel (A) and
employment in Panel (B). All other variables are described in Table 2. For brevity, the coefficients on Treated × FC and Treated
× Non-FC are omitted from the table. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 1977 to 2005.
Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


       Panel (A): Investment


                                                            3-digit SIC                               4-digit SIC

                                                  KZ-Index           WW-Index               KZ-Index           WW-Index
                                                      [1]                 [2]                   [3]                 [4]

       Other × FC × Same                             -0.003             -0.003                 -0.003             -0.003
                                                    (0.003)            (0.004)                (0.003)            (0.004)
       Other × FC × Different                        -0.002             -0.003                 -0.002             -0.003
                                                    (0.002)            (0.002)                (0.002)            (0.002)
       Other × Non-FC × Same                          0.001             -0.001                  0.001             -0.000
                                                    (0.002)            (0.002)                (0.002)            (0.002)
       Other × Non-FC × Different                     0.000             -0.000                  0.000             -0.000
                                                    (0.002)            (0.001)                (0.002)            (0.001)


       Panel (B): Employment


                                                            3-digit SIC                               4-digit SIC

                                                  KZ-Index           WW-Index               KZ-Index           WW-Index
                                                      [1]                 [2]                   [3]                 [4]

       Other × FC × Same                             -0.004             -0.008                 -0.004             -0.008
                                                    (0.008)            (0.012)                (0.008)            (0.012)
       Other × FC × Different                        -0.006             -0.006                 -0.006             -0.006
                                                    (0.005)            (0.007)                (0.005)            (0.007)
       Other × Non-FC × Same                          0.002              0.001                  0.002              0.001
                                                    (0.006)            (0.005)                (0.006)            (0.005)
       Other × Non-FC × Different                     0.001             -0.002                  0.000             -0.003
                                                    (0.004)            (0.004)                (0.004)            (0.004)
                                                         Table 9
                                               Acquired versus Own Plants

This table presents variants of the plant-level regressions in columns [2] and [3] and columns [5] and [6], respectively, of Table 2,
where Other × FC and Other × Non-FC are interacted with dummy variables (“Acquired” and “Own”) indicating whether a plant
was acquired by the firm during the sample period. The dependent variable is investment in Panel (A) and employment in Panel
(B). All other variables are described in Table 2. For brevity, the coefficients on Treated × FC and Treated × Non-FC are omitted
from the table. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 1977 to 2005. Standard errors are in
parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                          Panel (A): Investment


                                                                     Acquired versus Own Plant

                                                                    KZ-Index             WW-Index
                                                                        [1]                   [2]

                          Other × FC × Own                             -0.003                -0.003
                                                                      (0.002)               (0.002)
                          Other × FC × Acquired                        -0.002                -0.004
                                                                      (0.002)               (0.005)
                          Other × Non-FC × Own                         0.000                 -0.000
                                                                      (0.001)               (0.001)
                          Other × Non-FC × Acquired                    0.000                 -0.001
                                                                      (0.003)               (0.002)


                          Panel (B): Employment


                                                                     Acquired versus Own Plant

                                                                    KZ-Index             WW-Index
                                                                        [1]                   [2]

                          Other × FC × Own                             -0.007                -0.008
                                                                      (0.005)               (0.007)
                          Other × FC × Acquired                        -0.006                -0.006
                                                                      (0.007)               (0.015)
                          Other × Non-FC × Own                         0.000                 -0.001
                                                                      (0.004)               (0.004)
                          Other × Non-FC × Acquired                    0.001                 0.000
                                                                      (0.008)               (0.005)
                                                        Table 10
                                                Proximity to Headquarters

This table presents variants of the plant-level regressions in columns [2] and [3] and columns [5] and [6], respectively, of Table 2,
where Other × FC and Other × Non-FC are interacted with dummy variables (“Low” and “High”) indicating whether the travel
time and geographical distance, respectively, lies below or above the median across all of the firm’s “other” plants in the year
prior to the treatment. The dependent variable is investment in Panel (A) and employment in Panel (B). Travel time and
geographical distance are described in Table 5. All other variables are described in Table 2. For brevity, the coefficients on
Treated × FC and Treated × Non-FC are omitted from the table. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The sample period
is from 1977 to 2005. Standard errors are in parentheses (except for the F-statistics, where p-values are in parentheses). *, **, and
*** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


    Panel (A): Investment


                                                               Travel Time                       Geographical Distance

                                                      KZ-Index          WW-Index               KZ-Index          WW-Index
                                                         [1]                 [2]                   [3]                [4]

    Other × FC × Low                                    0.001              0.001                  0.000             0.001
                                                       (0.002)            (0.003)                (0.002)           (0.003)
    Other × FC × High                                 -0.005**           -0.006**               -0.004**          -0.006**
                                                       (0.002)            (0.003)                (0.002)           (0.003)
    Other × Non-FC × Low                                0.000              0.000                  0.000             0.000
                                                       (0.002)            (0.002)                (0.002)           (0.002)
    Other × Non-FC × High                               0.000             -0.001                  0.000            -0.001
                                                       (0.002)            (0.001)                (0.002)           (0.001)

    Other × FC × Low versus Other × FC × High
    F-statistic                                         3.61*              3.40*                  2.80*             3.59*
                                                       (0.057)            (0.065)                (0.094)           (0.058)


    Panel (B): Employment


                                                               Travel Time                       Geographical Distance

                                                      KZ-Index          WW-Index               KZ-Index          WW-Index
                                                         [1]                 [2]                   [3]               [4]

    Other × FC × Low                                    0.000               0.004                 0.002              0.004
                                                       (0.006)             (0.009)               (0.006)            (0.009)
    Other × FC × High                                 -0.011**            -0.015*               -0.012**           -0.015*
                                                       (0.006)             (0.008)               (0.006)            (0.008)
    Other × Non-FC × Low                                0.002               0.001                 0.001              0.001
                                                       (0.005)             (0.004)               (0.005)            (0.004)
    Other × Non-FC × High                               0.001              -0.001                 0.002             -0.001
                                                       (0.005)             (0.004)               (0.005)            (0.004)

    Other × FC × Low versus Other × FC × High
    F-statistic                                         3.31*              3.07*                  3.08*             3.27*
                                                       (0.069)            (0.080)                (0.079)           (0.071)
                                                        Table 11
                                               Main Firm-Level Regressions

Investment is the ratio of total capital expenditures to total capital stock, where total capital expenditures (total capital stock) is
the sum of capital expenditures (capital stock) across all of the firm’s plants. Employment is the natural logarithm of the total
number of employees across all of the firm’s plants. “Treatment” is a dummy variable that equals one if a plant of the firm has
been treated, i.e., if a new airline route has been introduced that reduces the travel time between headquarters and one of the
firm’s plants. FC (Non-FC) is a dummy variable that equals one if the firm’s measure of financing constraints lies above (below)
the median across all firms in the year prior to the treatment. In columns [2] and [5], financing constraints are measured using the
KZ-index of Kaplan and Zingales (1997). In columns [3] and [6], financing constraints are measured using the WW-index of
Whited and Wu (2006). Control variables include firm size and firm age. Firm size is the natural logarithm of total shipments
across all of the firm’s plants. Age is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of years the firm has been in the LBD.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 1977 to 2005. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **,
and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




    Dependent Variable:                         Investment                                          Employment

                                                 KZ-Index        WW-Index                            KZ-Index        WW-Index
                                     [1]             [2]             [3]                 [4]             [5]             [6]


    Treatment                    0.002***                                             0.004**
                                  (0.001)                                              (0.002)
    Treatment × FC                                 0.000            0.000                               -0.000          0.001
                                                  (0.001)          (0.001)                             (0.002)         (0.003)
    Treatment × Non-FC                           0.004***         0.003***                            0.009***        0.006***
                                                  (0.001)          (0.001)                             (0.002)         (0.002)

    Control Variables               Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes             Yes
    Firm Fixed Effects              Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes             Yes
    Year Fixed Effects              Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes             Yes

    Observations                   33,695          33,695          33,695              33,695          33,695           33,695
    R-squared                       0.41            0.41            0.41                0.88            0.88             0.88
                                                                                          Table 12
                                                                          Is the Resource Reallocation Beneficial?

This table presents variants of the firm-level regressions in Table 11 using different dependent variables. Firm-level total factor productivity (TFP) is the capital-weighted average of individual
plant-level TFPs across all of the firm’s plants, where plant-level TFP is defined in Table 5. Firm-level return on capital (ROC) is the ratio of total profits—i.e., the sum of shipments minus labor
and material costs across all of the firm’s plants—to total capital stock. Firm-level operating margin (OM) is defined analogously, except that the denominator is total shipments (i.e., the sum of
shipments across all of the firm’s plants). Control variables include firm size and firm age. Firm size is the natural logarithm of total capital stock across all of the firm’s plants. Age is the natural
logarithm of one plus the number of years the firm has been in the LBD. All other variables are described in Table 11. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from
1977 to 2005. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                     Dependent Variable:                         TFP                                           ROC                                            OM

                                                              KZ-Index WW-Index                             KZ-Index WW-Index                              KZ-Index WW-Index
                                                   [1]            [2]           [3]               [4]           [5]            [6]              [7]            [8]           [9]


                     Treatment                 0.003***                                       0.004***                                      0.003***
                                                (0.001)                                        (0.001)                                       (0.001)
                     Treatment × FC                           0.002**        0.002**                          0.003**       0.003**                         0.002**        0.002*
                                                               (0.001)        (0.001)                         (0.001)       (0.001)                         (0.001)        (0.001)
                     Treatment × Non-FC                       0.005***       0.004***                        0.006***      0.005***                        0.004***       0.004***
                                                               (0.001)        (0.001)                         (0.001)       (0.001)                         (0.001)        (0.001)

                     Control Variables            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
                     Firm Fixed Effects           Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
                     Year Fixed Effects           Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes

                     Observations                33,695        33,695         33,695           33,695         33,695         33,695           33,695         33,695        33,695
                     R-squared                    0.51          0.51           0.51             0.61           0.61           0.61             0.65           0.65          0.65
