NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CARBON TAXES, PATH DEPENDENCY AND DIRECTED TECHNICAL CHANGE:
EVIDENCE FROM THE AUTO INDUSTRY
Philippe Aghion
Antoine Dechezleprêtre
David Hemous
Ralf Martin
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 18596
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18596

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

We would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Robin Burgess, Michael Greenstone, John Hassler, Ken
Judd, Rebecca Henderson, Per Krusell, Ed Lazear, Torsten Persson, Estaban Rossi-Hansberg, NickStern
and Scott Stern for many helpful comments. Participants at seminars in the AEA, Arizona, Birmingham,
Cambridge, CIAR, Imperial, INSEAD, LSE, Manchester, Mannheim, NBER, Paris, Stanford, Stirling,
Stockholm and Venice have all improved the paper. Financial support has come from the British Academy
and the ESRC through the Centre for Economic Performance and the Centre for Climate Change Economics
and Policy. Antoine Dechezleprêtre gratefully acknowledges the support of the ESRC under the ESRC
Postdoctoral Fellowship Scheme (award no: PTA-026-27- 2756). The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Philippe Aghion, Antoine Dechezleprêtre, David Hemous, Ralf Martin, and John Van Reenen.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Carbon Taxes, Path Dependency and Directed Technical Change: Evidence from the Auto
Industry
Philippe Aghion, Antoine Dechezleprêtre, David Hemous, Ralf Martin, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 18596
December 2012
JEL No. L62,O13,O3
ABSTRACT
Can directed technical change be used to combat climate change? We construct new firm-level panel
data on auto industry innovation distinguishing between "dirty" (internal combustion engine) and "clean"
(e.g. electric and hybrid) patents across 80 countries over several decades. We show that firms tend to
innovate relatively more in clean technologies when they face higher tax-inclusive fuel prices. Furthermore,
there is path dependence in the type of innovation both from aggregate spillovers and from the firm's
own innovation history. Using our model we simulate the increases in carbon taxes needed to allow
clean to overtake dirty technologies.
Philippe Aghion
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
paghion@fas.harvard.edu
Antoine Dechezleprêtre
Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and
the Environment & Centre for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
A.Dechezlepretre@lse.ac.uk
David Hemous
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau, France
david.hemous@insead.edu

Ralf Martin
Imperial College Business School
London SW7 2AZ, UK
and Centre for Economic Performance,
London School of Economics
R.Martin@lse.ac.uk
John Van Reenen
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
and NBER
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk

1

Introduction

With increasing concern over climate change there is much interest in how new technologies can help reduce greenhouse gas emissions like carbon dioxide (CO2 ). Many climate
change models assume exogenous technological change (e.g. Stern, 2006), but dealing
with the challenge of global warming almost certainly requires more climate change related innovation (e.g. Henderson and Newell, 2011). But what policies can be used to
achieve this?
Recent models of climate change with endogenous technical progress suggest that the
market will generate insufficient innovation to reduce climate change and too much R&D
investment directed at “dirty” technologies. For example, in Acemoglu et al. (2012a)
there is path-dependence in the direction of technical change. Firms in economies that
have innovated a lot in dirty technologies in the past will find it more profitable to innovate in dirty technologies in the future. This path dependency feature when combined
with the environmental externality (whereby firms do not factor in the loss in aggregate
productivity or consumer utility induced by environmental degradation) will induce a
laissez-faire economy to produce and innovate too much in dirty technologies compared
to the social optimum. This in turn calls for government intervention to “redirect” technical change. For path dependance to occur, however, the associated clean products need
to be perceived as substitutes for dirty products by consumers. Autos are a good example
of this as electric and hybrid vehicles are potential substitutes for vehicles based on internal combustion engines (another example would be renewable energy plants vs. fossil
fuel plants). Furthermore, vehicles are major contributors to greenhouse gas emission.
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA) in 2009 road transport accounted
for 4.88 GT of CO2 , which represented 16.5% of global CO2 emissions (transport as a
whole was responsible for 22.1%). Consequently, the automobile sector is the focus of our
paper. Note that even with such substitutable products as autos, however, there may be
decreasing returns to dirty innovation in which case the market would do part of the job
of redirecting technical change towards clean technologies. Thus, estimating the effects of

2

a firm or country’s history of innovation on future innovation trajectories has to be part
of the dynamic evaluation of different climate change policies.
In this paper, we construct a new panel dataset on auto innovations to examine
whether firms redirect technical change in response to fuel prices (our proxy for a carbon
tax) in the context of path dependent innovation. Our main data are drawn from the European Patent Office’s (EPO) World Patent Statistical database (PATSTAT). These data
cover close to the population of all worldwide patents since the mid 1960s. To mitigate
the well-known problem that many patents are of very low value, our outcome measure
focuses on “triadic” patents which are those that have been taken out in all three of the
world’s major patents offices: the European Patent Office, the Japanese Patent Office
(JPO) and the United States Patents and Trademark Office (USPTO). We treat multiple
filings of an invention (a patent family) as one innovation.1 We show that our results are
robust to alternative ways to controlling for heterogeneous patent values such as using
wider categories of patents like “biadics”(US and EPO) or weighting by future citations.
Since 1978 when the EPO began there have been around 6,500 triadic patents filed in
“clean” auto technologies (electric vehicles, hybrid vehicles, fuel cells for hydrogen vehicles, etc.) compared to about 18,500 triadic patents in “dirty” auto technologies, namely
those that affect internal combustion engines. Our database reports the name of patent
applicants which in turn allows us to match clean and dirty patents with distinct patent
holders each of whom has her own history of clean versus dirty patenting.2 We also know
the geographical location of the inventors listed on the patent so we can examine location
based knowledge spillovers.
Our main results can be summarized as follows. First, higher fuel prices induce firms to
redirect technical change towards clean innovation and away from dirty innovation. Fuel
prices vary across countries and time primarily due to changes in fuel taxes and will have
a differential impact across auto firms because of firm-specific profile of market shares due
1

Triadic patents have been used extensively as a way to focus on high-value patents (Grupp et al.,
1996; Grupp, 1998; Dernis, Guellec and van Pottelsberghe, 2001; Dernis and Khan, 2004; Guellec and
van Pottelsberghe, 2004).
2
We do not consider radical innovations in upstream industries such as biofuels, for instance. To
explore this is beyond the scope of the current paper which takes the more positive approach of exploring
the determinants of clean innovation in vehicles.

3

to national tastes for home brands, etc. Second, a firm’s propensity to innovate in clean
technologies appears to be stimulated by its exposure to past clean technologies (and vice
versa for dirty technologies) consistent with the path-dependency hypothesis. We measure
this past exposure by (i) aggregate spillovers based on the initial (pre-regression sample)
location of the firm’s inventors across different countries combined with the changes over
time in the country-specific stocks of clean and dirty auto patents; and (ii) the firm’s own
lagged stocks of clean and dirty innovations. Using econometric models that include the
fuel price and both individual and aggregate spillover variables we find evidence in favor
of firm-specific and aggregate path dependency.
Our paper focuses primarily on radically clean innovations (electric, hydrogen and hybrid cars) rather than on innovations in fuel efficiency (which we label “grey”innovation).
While the latter can also contribute to curbing climate change, our focus is motivated
by several considerations. First, innovations in fuel efficiency may be partly offset by the
resulting increase in driving (the “rebound effect”discussed in West, 2004, for example).
Second, there are technological limits on how energy efficient an internal combustion car
can be. Third, perfectly separating purely dirty innovations from these energy efficient
grey inventions is difficult. Nevertheless, we present regressions where we separate out
the grey innovations from the clean and purely dirty and find results that support our
model. The effect of higher fuel prices is positive on clean, negative on the purely dirty
with the effect on grey innovation in the middle.
Our paper relates to three main strands of the literature. First, in the climate change
literature Nordhaus (1994) developed a dynamic Ramsey based model of climate change
(the DICE model), which added equations linking production to emissions. Subsequent
contributions examined the implications of risk and discounting for the optimal design of
environmental policy3 or have looked at the choice between taxes and quotas, building
on Weitzman (1974). Recently Golosov, Hassler, Krusell and Tsyvinski (2011) have extended this literature by solving for the optimal policy in a full dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium framework.
3

In particular see Stern (2006), Weitzman (2007, 2009), Dasgupta (2008), Nordhaus (2007), von Below
and Persson (2008), Mendelsohn et al (2008), and Yohe, Tol and Anthoff (2009).

4

Second, our paper relates to the literature on directed technical change, in particular
Acemoglu (1998, 2002; 2008) which itself was inspired by early contributions by Hicks
(1932) and Habakkuk (1962).4 An application of this idea is the empirical literature linking environmental policy and directed technical change (surveyed in Popp, Newell and
Jaffe, 2009). In particular, Popp (2002) uses aggregate U.S. patent data from 1970 to
1994 to study the effect of energy prices on energy-efficient innovations. He finds a significant impact from both energy prices and past knowledge stocks on directed innovation.
However, since Popp uses aggregate data a concern is that his regressions also capture
macro-economic shocks correlated with both innovation and the energy price. Our work
uses international firm-level panel data which allows us to exploit differences in the extent
to which firms in different countries are affected by policy-induced shocks to the energy
price (e.g. from fuel taxes). We control for global macro shocks with a full set of time
dummies. Further evidence of directed technical change in the context of energy-saving
can be found in Newell, Jaffe and Stavins (1999) which focuses on the air-conditioning
industry, or in Crabb and Johnson (2010) who also look at energy-efficient automotive
technology. However, neither of these papers use multi-country data nor analyze whether
there is path dependency in the direction of technical change. Hassler, Krussell and Olovsson (2011) find evidence for a trend increase in energy saving technologies following oil
price shocks. They measure the energy-saving bias of technology as essentially a residual
which is attractive as it side-steps the need to classify patents into distinct classes. The
advantage of our technology variables is that they are more directly related to the innovation we want to measure. Finally, Acemoglu, Akcigit, Hanley and Kerr (2012) calibrate
a microeconomic model of directed technical change to derive quantitative estimates of
the optimal climate change policy.
Third, we draw on the extensive literature in industrial organization that estimates the
4

The theoretical literature on directed technical change is well developed. See for example Messner
(1997), Grubler and Messner, (1998), Goulder and Schneider (1999), Manne and Richels (2002), Nordhaus
(2002), Van der Zwaan et al. (2002); Buonanno et al (2003), Nordhaus (2002), Sue Wing (2003), Gerlagh
(2008) and Gerlagh et al (2009). In contrast, directed technical change has rarely been empirically tested.
However, see Acemoglu and Linn (2004), Acemoglu and Finkelstein (2008), Hascic et al (2008) and more
recently Hanlon (2012) who shows how relative price changes induced by the Union blockade during the
American Civil War induced British textile innovation in machines using Indian cotton.

5

demand for vehicles (energy efficient and otherwise) as a function of fuel prices and other
factors. For example, using around 86 million transactions Alcott and Wozny (2011) find
that fuel prices reduce demand for autos, but by less than an equivalent increase in the
vehicle price.5 Busse, Knittel and Zettelmeyer (2011) use similar data in a more reduced
form approach but, by contrast, find a much larger impact of fuel price on auto demand.
Although the magnitude of the fuel price effect on demand differs between studies, it is
generally accepted that there is an important effect of fuel prices on vehicle demand.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops a simple model to guide our
empirical analysis and Section 3 presents the econometric methodology. The data is
presented in Section 4 with some descriptive statistics. Section 5 presents the results,
discusses their robustness and some extensions. In Section 6 we explore the implications
of our results by simulating the aggregate evolution of future clean and dirty knowledge
stocks and analyzing how this evolution would be affected by changes in carbon taxes.
Section 7 concludes.

2

Theoretical Model

In this section we present a simple model to guide our empirical analysis. This model
rationalizes path dependence in firms’ own knowledge stock as well as the impact of a
change in the price of fuel on clean and dirty innovation. We then show how one can
add knowledge spillovers and energy efficiency innovations (“grey innovations”) to our
framework.

2.1

Basic framework

We consider a one-period model of an economy where consumers derive utility from an
outside good and from motor vehicle services. Utility is quasi-linear with respect to the
outside good C0 (chosen as the numeraire) and β is the elasticity of consumption of motor
vehicle services with respect to its index price. This parameter measures the degree of
substitutability between motor vehicle services and the outside good.
5

They argue that this is a behavioral bias causing consumers to undervalue fuel price changes. Readers
are referred to this paper for an extensive review of the literature on fuel prices and the demand for autos.

6

To consume motor vehicle services, consumers need to buy cars and fuel (call it a
“dirty car bundle”) or cars and electricity (call it a “clean car bundle ”). Utility is then
given by:

U = C0 +

β
β−1

Z

1

σ−1
σ

Yci

σ ε−1
 σ−1
ε

di

Z

1

+

σ−1
σ

Ydi

0

ε
σ ε−1 ! ε−1
 σ−1
ε

di

β−1
β

,

0

where the consumption of variety i of clean cars together with the corresponding clean
energy (electricity) is:6
Yci = min (yci , ξc eci ) ;
the consumption of variety i of dirty cars together with the corresponding dirty energy
(fuel) is:
Ydi = min (ydi , ξd edi ) ;
where ezi is the amount of energy consumed for variety i of type-z car where z = c, d,
i.e. z = Clean, Dirty; ε is the elasticity of substitution between the clean and dirty cars
and σ is the elasticity of substitution among varieties within each type of car. Finally, ξc
(respectively ξd ) is the energy efficiency of clean (respectively dirty) cars.
We assume that 1 < ε ≤ σ, so that clean cars are more substitutable with each other
than with dirty cars, and that ε > β: the elasticity of substitution between clean and
dirty cars is larger than the price elasticity for motor vehicle services.
We denote by fc the price of electricity and fd the price of fuel. In the first part of
the analysis innovation will be cost saving for producers, but later we investigate energy
saving innovation. Cars are produced by local monopolists, and each monopolistic firm
i produces a fixed number of clean and/or dirty varieties. The monopoly producer of
variety i of a type-z car produces Azi cars using one unit of outside good as input.
To complete the description of the model, we need to specify the innovation technology.
We assume that at the beginning of the period, by incurring total R&D cost 12 ψx2zi in the
6

The analysis can be easily extended to the case where we allow a less stark form of complementarity.
For example, consider a CES instead of Leontief form:
ρ−1

Yzi = (yziρ + (ξz ezi )

7

ρ−1
ρ

ρ

) ρ−1 , ρ < 1.

outside good the producer of variety i of type-z car can increase productivity according
to:
Azi = (1 + xzi ) Azi0 for z ∈ {c, d} ,

(1)

where Azi0 is the initial productivity for producing that type of cars.7
The timing is very simple: at the beginning of the period producers invest in R&D
and innovate; at the end of the period, given their productivities resulting from R&D
activities, producers make production decisions to maximize profits.

2.2

Solving the model

2.2.1

Equilibrium profits

Define the price indexes for dirty and clean car bundles as:
Z
Pz =
0

1



fz
pzi +
ξz

1
1−σ ! 1−σ

, for z ∈ {c, d} .

The inverse demand curves for clean and dirty cars, which simply result from utility
maximization subject to budget constraint, are given by:

−σ
 ε−β
fz
yzi = pzi +
Pzσ−ε Pc1−ε + Pd1−ε 1−ε for z ∈ {c, d} .
ξz

(2)

For given (end-of-period) productivity Azi , the producer of variety i of type-z car
solves:
πzi = max{pzi yzi −
yzi

1
yzi }
Azi

where yzi for z ∈ {c, d} is given by (2).
This yields the following expression for the equilibrium profit of the corresponding car
producer:
(σ − 1)σ−1
πzi =
σσ



1
fz
+
Azi ξz

1−σ

Pzσ−ε Pc1−ε + Pd1−ε

 ε−β
1−ε

for z ∈ {c, d} .

(3)

In particular an increase in the firm’s productivity Azi or a reduction in the price of
energy fz increases the equilibrium profit πzi since we assumed σ > 1.
7
Innovation in dirty technologies as modeled here is not directed at improving energy efficiency.
Efficiency-enhancing innovations will be introduced in subsection 2.3 below.

8

2.2.2

Equilibrium innovation efforts and path-dependence

Moving back to the beginning of period the equilibrium innovation intensities xzi solve
1
max{πzi − ψx2zi }
xzi
2
where πzi is given by equation (3) and Azi satisfies the growth equation (1). For ψ
sufficiently large the solution to this maximization problem is uniquely given by the first
order condition. The resulting xzi satisfies:

−σ
1
fz
1
+
xzi ∝
.
Azi0 (1 + xzi )2 Azi0 (1 + xzi ) ξz

(4)

In particular, the equilibrium innovation intensities xzi increases in the firm’s corresponding technology stocks Azi0 as long as the elasticity of substitution σ is sufficiently
large or if the price of fuel fz represents a sufficiently small share of the total costs of a
car.8 Then, there is path dependence with respect to the firm’s own innovation history.
The ambiguity of the effect of the firm’s own technology stock Azi0 on the firm’s
innovation incentives reflects two counteracting forces of a higher Azi0 . On the one hand,
1
Azi0 (1+xzi )2

reflects the negative marginal effect this has on the price charged
−σ

fz
1
by the producer; on the other hand, the term Azi0 (1+x
+
reflects the positive
ξz
zi )
the term

marginal effect of a higher Azi0 on the demand for bundle (i, z). This latter effect is
strongest when the price of fuel fz represents a sufficiently small share of the total costs
of a car or when the elasticity of substitution σ between variety (i, z) and other varieties
of the z-type cars is sufficiently large, which in turn implies that a lower price allows
producer (i, z) to capture more market share from other (j, z) producers.
fz
The precise condition is Azi0(σ−1)
(1+zci ) > ξz . A back of the envelope calculation shows that this
condition is likely to be satisfied in practice. In our set-up the price of a new car is given by
σ
1
1 fz
pzi = σ−1
+ σ−1
the price ratio between fuel expenditure and a new car is equal
A
ξz , so that
zi

σ
1
1 fz
to x = fξzz / σ−1
Azi + σ−1 ξz . The average price of a new car in the US is $26,850 with a fuel
efficiency of 33.8 miles per gallon and Americans drive on average 14,500 miles per year (source:
http://www.bts.gov/publications/national transportation statistics/). Assuming that fuel costs $4 a gallon (with a price increasing at the Hotelling rate), and that a car lasts for 10 years, we obtain a price
σ
ratio of x = 0.64. Simple algebra gives that fξzz / (σ−1)
Azi = (σ−1)( σ−1 −1) which is equal to 0.70, so that
x
fz
σ−1
ξz < Azi , when the elasticity of substitution σ is equal to 3. An elasticity of substitution of 3 seems
to be a low value: in the model the elasticity of substitution is the same as the price elasticity for car
varieties, which Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995) estimated to lie between 5.05 and 37.49 (depending
on the car variety).
8

9

2.2.3

Redirecting innovation through changes in the fuel price

We now investigate the impact of a change in the fuel price on clean and dirty innovations.
Totally differentiating equation (4) for z = c with respect to the fuel price, and then using
b=
the notation X

dX
,we
X

obtain:


Pc1−ε
Pd1−ε
bc + (ε − β)
cd ,
(1 − ω) xc
σ − ε + (ε − β) 1−ε
P
P
ci =
Pc + Pd1−ε
Pc1−ε + Pd1−ε


−σ 
fz
1
d
1
< 1.9
where ω ≡ dxzi ln (1+x )2 Aci0 (1+xci ) + ξz


(5)

zi

For sufficiently small innovation intensities, one can neglect the indirect impact of an
increase in fuel price via the innovation response of other firms, so that Pbc ≈ 0.10 Then
we approximately have:
Pd1−ε
cd .
xc
P
ci ∝ (ε − β)
Pc1−ε + Pd1−ε
This in turn implies that the equilibrium intensity of clean innovation increases with
fuel price since we assumed ε ≥ β. Intuitively, a higher fuel price makes dirty car bundles
more expensive; this in turn might favor the demand either for clean car bundles or for
the outside good. It will boost the demand for clean car bundles if the elasticity of
substitution between dirty and clean car bundles is higher than the price elasticity of
motor-vehicle services as a whole, as we assumed.
Similarly, we get:
c
(1 − ω) xc
di ≈ σ Pd −

fd
ξd
1
Adi

+

!
fb
fd d
ξd

P 1−ε
P 1−ε
− ε 1−ε c 1−ε + β 1−ε d 1−ε
P c + Pd
Pc + P d



cd
P

(6)

once we neglect the indirect impact of a change in fuel price on the price indexes working
through the innovation response.
The first term captures a reallocation effect among varieties of dirty cars, from most
to least productive dirty car producers. This term is indeed equal to zero if all firms had
the same dirty technologies, otherwise it has the sign of fbd for the least productive dirty
firms and the opposite sign for the most productive dirty firms.
9

That ω be less than 1 follows from the fact that at the equilibrium the left-hand side of (4) crosses
the right-hand side from below.
10
Another reason to neglect this indirect impact is that firms typically operate in several markets, with
different exposures to each market for each firm. Therefore the allocation of innovation of the competitors
does not depend only on the fuel price in a given country but also on the fuel price in other countries.

10

The second term captures a substitution effect between clean and dirty car producers.
This term has the opposite sign from that of fbd : namely, an increase in fuel price reduces
the benefit of dirty innovation both because it induces substitution towards clean cars
and because it reduces the overall consumption of cars.
Overall, an increase in fuel price should decrease dirty innovation intensity (as long
as the firm’s initial productivity in dirty technologies is not too low compared to that of
other firms) and it should increase clean innovation intensity.

2.3

Extensions

Knowledge spillovers. In the empirical part of the paper we investigate not only the
effects of firms’ own past knowledge but also the effects of aggregate knowledge spillovers
across firms in the country where innovation occurs. To introduce the possibility of such
aggregate spillovers in our model, suppose the existence for each firm i of knowledge
spillovers from a set Ωi of neighboring varieties of cars of the same type z = c, d, so that
abstracting from innovation firm i’s initial productivity is:
ezi0 = Azi0 (1 + η(Azi0 ))
A
where
Z
Azi0 =

Azj0 dj
Ωi

and η is an increasing function.

11

Equilibrium innovation xzi is now given by:
xzi ∝

1
ezi0 (1 + xzi )2
A

1

fz
+
ezi0 (1 + xzi ) ξz
A

!−σ
(7)

which again is increasing in the aggregate initial knowledge variable Azi0 if σ is sufficiently
large.
“Grey” innovation. Innovations in the car industry may also involve improvements
in energy efficiency. Innovations that increase energy efficiency for clean cars would not
react differently to an increase in fuel price than cost reducing innovations.
11

Our modeling of knowledge spillovers is dictated by our empirical estimation strategy, whereby for
each patenting firms we compute the stock of patents generated by scientists who are geographically
close.

11

Now, let us analyze innovations that improve dirty energy efficiency. More specifically,
suppose that at the beginning of every period, a firm can increase its energy efficiency
from ξdi0 to
ξdi = (1 + xξi ) ξdi0
if it spends 21 ψx2ξi units of the outside good in R&D. We refer to this type of innovations
as “grey” innovations.
For sufficiently high ψ, i.e for small innovation intensity the solution to the maximization problem is uniquely defined by the first order condition, totally differentiating the
latter with respect to the fuel price leads to:
! 

fd
1−ε
1−ε
P
P
ξ
c
di
d
c
cd + fbd .
xc
fb − ε 1−ε
P
ξi ∝ σ Pd − 1
1−ε + β 1−ε
1−ε
fd d
P
+
P
P
+
P
+
c
c
d
d
Adi
ξdi
This expression is similar to equation (6) except for the last term which captures a
direct positive effect of an increase in the fuel price on energy efficiency innovation. The
overall impact of an increase in the fuel price on grey innovation is therefore ambiguous,
whereas we saw that it is unambiguously positive on clean innovation. The reason for the
ambiguous effect is that on the one hand an increase in fuel price both, reduces the demand
for dirty cars and therefore the profitability of producing (and therefore innovating) in
the dirty sector altogether, but on the other hand it induces dirty firms to save more on
fuel energy by improving dirty energy efficiency.
We use the expression “grey” as the impact of these innovations on the environment is
also ambiguous.12 On the one hand these innovations increase energy efficiency and therefore reduce the amount of fuel consumption per car; on the other hand these innovations
make fossil fuel cars cheaper, thereby increasing total consumption of these cars.13
12

Formally, one obtains
edi

σ 1
ydi
=
=
ξdi
σ − 1 ξdi



1
fd
+
Adi
ξdi

−σ

Pdσ−ε Pc1−ε + Pd1−ε

 ε−β
1−ε

,

so that replacing gi with edi



−σ−1
 ε−β
dgi
fd
1
1
1
fd
σ
= (σ − 1)
−
+
Pdσ−ε Pc1−ε + Pd1−ε 1−ε ,
2
dξdi
ξdi
Adi ξdi Adi
ξdi
σ−1
which is ambiguously signed. The expression is negative if the price of fuel is sufficiently low relative to
other costs, but it is positive if the elasticity of substitution across cars is sufficiently large.
13
Empirically, this latter “rebound effect” is estimated at around 20 - 25% (see for instance Small and

12

2.4

Summarizing our main predictions

We have presented a simple model of clean versus dirty innovation, in which we predict
that:
1. producers have a higher propensity to innovate in clean relative to dirty technologies
the larger the fuel price fd .
2. for σ sufficiently high or the price of fuel fd sufficiently small, producers have a
higher propensity to innovate in clean technologies:
(i) the higher A0c and the lower A0d , i.e. the higher their initial stock of clean
compared to dirty technologies (lagged own innovation stocks);
(ii) the higher the aggregate level of clean (or the lower the aggregate level of dirty)
technology in neighboring varieties (spillovers).
We now confront these three predictions with our panel data on clean and dirty innovation in the auto industry.

3
3.1

Econometrics
General approach

Consider the following Poisson specification for the determination of firm innovation in
clean technologies:

14

P ATClean,it = exp(βC,P ln F Pit−1 + AC,it−1 ) + uC,it

(8)

where P ATClean,it is the number of patents applied for in clean technologies by firm i in
year t; ACit is the firm’s knowledge stock relevant for clean innovation, which depends both
upon its own stocks of past clean and dirty innovation and the aggregate spillovers from
other firms (discussed below); uC,it is an error term; exp(.) is the exponential operator;
and F Pit is fuel price (the empirical equivalent of fd in the theory section). We lag prices
Van Dender, 2007), however some studies have estimated much larger rebound effects (87% in West,
2004).
14
In our regressions we use an equivalent equation for dirty technologies. We initially discuss only one
of these equations to simplify the notation.

13

and knowledge by a year to reflect delayed response and also mitigate contemporaneous
feedback effects.15 In the robustness section we show this form is reasonable comparing
it to alternative dynamic representations using other lag structures and the Popp (2002)
approach.
The fuel price has independent variation across time and countries primarily because of
country-specific taxes and we show the robustness of our results to using fuel taxes instead
of prices. The profile of car sales across countries differs across auto firms. For example,
GM has some “home bias” towards the US market whereas Toyota has a “home bias”
towards the Japanese market, i.e. they sell more in these countries than one would expect
from country observables alone. Thus, different firms are likely to be differently exposed
to tax changes in different countries and the fuel price has a firm-specific component. This
firm-specific difference in market shares could be because of product differentiation and
heterogeneous tastes or it may be because of government policies to promote domestic
firms (e.g. trade barriers). To take this heterogeneity into account we use the firm’s (presample) history of patent filing to assess the relative importance of the various markets the
firm is operating in and construct firm-specific weights on fuel prices for the corresponding
market. Simply put, an unexpected increase in Japanese fuel taxes will have a more
salient impact on car makers with a bigger market share in Japan than those with a
smaller market share. We discuss this in more detail in Section 4.
We parameterize the firm’s total knowledge stock as:
ACit = βC,1 ln SP ILLC,it + βC,2 ln SP ILLD,it + βC,3 ln KC,it + βC,4 ln KD,it

(9)

The firm’s knowledge will likely depend on its own past history of innovation and we
denote this as KClean,it (own stock of clean innovation) and KDirty,it (own stock of dirty
innovation).16 In addition to building on its own past innovations firms will also “stand on
15

In principle, the price should be the firm’s expectation of the future evolution of the fuel price based
on the information set at time of making the innovation investment decision. Fuel prices appear to be
well approximated by a random walk process (e.g. Anderson et al, 2011a,b), so given our assumption that
decisions are made on t − 1 information, lagged prices should be a sufficient statistic for this expectation.
16
We construct stocks using the perpetual inventory method, but show robustness to using patent
flows and to considering alternative assumptions over knowledge depreciation rates. Some firms have
zero lagged knowledge stock in some periods, so we also add in three dummy indicator variables for when
lagged clean stock is zero, lagged dirty stock is zero or both are zero.

14

the shoulders of giants”, so we allow their knowledge stock to depend on spillovers from
other firms both in clean (SP ILLC,it ) and dirty technologies (SP ILLD,it ). We use stocks
of economy wide patents to construct these country-specific spillover measures. Drawing
on the evidence that knowledge has a local component (e.g. Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson, 1993) we use the firm’s distribution of inventors across countries to weight the
country spillover stocks. In other words, if the firm has many inventors in the US regardless of whether the headquarters of the firm is in Tokyo or Detroit, then the knowledge
stock in the US is given a higher weight (see Section 4).
There are of course other factors that may influence innovation in addition to fuel prices
and the past history of innovation. These include policy measures such as government
R&D subsidies for clean innovation and regulations over emissions and the size and wealth
of the countries a firm is expecting to sell to (proxied by GDP per capita and GDP) which
we denote by the vector wC,it . We also allow for unobservable factors by introducing a
firm fixed effect (ηC,i ), a full set of time dummies (TCt ) and an error term (uC,it ) that is
uncorrelated with the right hand side variables. Adding these extra terms and substituting
equation (9) into (8) gives us our main empirical equation for clean innovation:
P ATClean,it = exp(βC,P ln F Pit−1 + βC,1 ln SP ILLC,it−1 + βC,2 ln SP ILLD,it−1
+ βC,3 ln KC,it−1 + βC,4 ln KD,it−1
+ βC,w wit + TC,t )ηC,i + uC,it

(10)

Symmetrically, we can derive an equation for dirty innovation:
P ATDirty,it = exp(βD,P ln F Pit−1 + βD,1 ln SP ILLC,it−1 + βD,2 ln SP ILLD,it−1
+ βD,3 ln KC,it−1 + βD,4 ln KD,it−1
+ βD,w wit + TD,t )ηD,i + uD,it

(11)

The theory yields predictions on the signs of the coefficients in these two equations. If
higher fuel prices induces more clean than dirty innovation then the marginal effect of the
fuel price must be larger on clean innovation than on dirty innovation: βC,P > βD,P and we
would expect that βC,P > 0 and βD,P < 0.17 Next, for there to be path dependence in the
17

Note that these two stronger second conditions are not necessary for induced (redirected) technical

15

direction of innovation it should be the case that (ceteris paribus) firms that are exposed
to more dirty spillovers become more prone to conduct dirty innovation in the future:
i.e. βD,2 > 0 and βD,2 > βC,2 . In the clean innovation equation we have βC,1 > 0 and
βC,1 > βD,1 . And path dependence should involve similar effects working through a firm’s
own accumulated knowledge: βD,4 > 0 and βD,4 > βC,4 . (βC,3 > 0 and βC,3 > βD,3 .) Also,
we would expect that the positive effect of dirty spillovers and dirty knowledge stocks
on dirty innovation be larger than the effects of clean spillovers and clean knowledge
stocks: βD,2 > βD,1 and βD,4 > βD,3 . The reverse predictions should all apply for the clean
equation: βC,2 < βC,1 and βC,3 > βC,4

3.2

Dynamic count data models with fixed effects

To estimate equation (10) and (11) we use:
P ATzit = exp (xit βz ) ηzi + uzit

(12)

where z ∈ {Dirty, Clean} and xit is the vector of regressors. We compare a number of
econometric techniques to account for firm level fixed effects ηzi in these Poisson models.
Our baseline is an econometric model we label CFX, the Control Function Fixed Effect
estimator. It builds on the pre-sample mean scaling estimator proposed in Blundell,
Griffith and Van Reenen (1999), henceforth BGVR.18 BGVR suggest conditioning on
the pre-sample average of the dependent variable to proxy out the fixed effect. Like
BGVR, CFX uses a control function approach to deal with the fixed effect but rather than
using information from the pre-sample period in the control function, we simultaneously
estimate the main regression equation and a second equation allowing us to identify the
control function from future data (similar to the idea of taking orthogonal deviations in
the linear panel data literature, see Arellano, 2003). The full details on this are provided
in Appendix A, but in a nutshell, we use CFX to deal with a potential concern with
the BGVR approach, namely that it requires long pre-sample history of realizations of
the dependant variable. However, in our data - particularly for clean - patenting is
change as the absolute sign of the price effects will depend on the elasticity of substitution between cars
and other goods.
18
See also Blundell, Griffith and Windmeijer (2002) and Blundell, Griffith and Van Reenen (1995).

16

concentrated towards the end of our sample period. Below, we provide results using both
the CFX and BGVR method as well as two other common approaches. First, we use
the Hausman, Hall and Griliches (1984) method (the count data equivalent to the within
groups estimator) even though this requires strict exogeneity, which is inconsistent with
models including functions of the lagged dependent variable as we have in equations (10)
and (11). Second, we implement some simple linear within groups models adding an
arbitrary constant to the dependent variable before taking logarithms. We show that
all these approaches deliver similar qualitative results, although CFX provides the best
overall fit.

4

Data

4.1

Main dataset

Our main data are drawn from the World Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT) maintained by the European Patent Office.19 Patent documents are categorized using the
International Patent Classification (IPC) and national classification systems. We extract
all the patents relating to “clean” and “dirty” technologies in the automotive industry.
Clean is identified by patents whose technology class is specifically related to electric,
hybrid and hydrogen vehicles. Our selection of relevant IPC codes for clean technologies
relies heavily on previous work by the OECD.20 The precise description of the IPC codes
used to identify relevant patents can be found in Table 1 Panel A. Some typical IPC
classification codes included in the clean category are B60L11 (”Electric propulsion with
power supplied within the vehicle”) and B60K6 (”Arrangement or mounting of hybrid
propulsion systems comprising electric motors and internal combustion engines”.) US
patent #645604121 is an example of a clean patent from our dataset: it describes a
”Power supply system for electric vehicle”. It was first filed by Yamaha Motor in Japan
in 1998 and was then filed at the European Patent Office and at the USPTO in 1999.
The front page and technical diagram of the patent is shown in Appendix Figure A1.
19
PATSTAT can be ordered from EPO at http://www.epo.org/searching/subscription/raw/product14-24.html
20
See www.oecd.org/environment/innovation, Vollebergh (2010) and Hasčič et al (2008).
21
We use the publication numbers in this and the following patent examples.

17

“Dirty” includes patents with an IPC that is related to the internal combustion engine.
These can be found in various sub-categories of the F02 group, for example F02B (”Combustion engines in general”), F02F (”Cylinders, pistons or casings for combustion engines)
or F02N (”Starting of combustion engines”). The full list of IPC codes used to identify
dirty patents is in Table 1 Panel B. Each of these groups includes several dozen sub-classes
and an example of the full list of sub-classes for the F02F group is shown in Appendix
Figure A2. The dirty category typically includes patents covering the various parts that
make up an internal combustion engine. For example, EPO patent #0967381 protects a
”Cylinder head of an internal-combustion engine” and USPTO patent #5844336 protects
a ”Starter for an internal combustion engine”.
As noted above, an important feature of the dirty category is that some patents
included in this group aim at improving the fuel efficiency of internal combustion engines,
making the dirty technology less dirty. We refer to these fuel-efficiency patents as “Grey”
patents. In our baseline results, grey patents are included in the dirty category, but we
also disaggregate the category to estimate models separately for grey and “Pure Dirty”
innovations separately (as well as splitting up the knowledge stocks along these lines on
the right hand side of the regressions). To select IPC codes for grey technologies, we use
recent work at the European Patent Office related to the new climate change mitigation
patent classification (see Veefkind et al. 2012). We complement this with information
from interviews with engineers working in the automobile industry.22 The list of IPC
codes is shown in Panel C of Table 1. An example of a grey patent is EPO patent
#0979940, which protects a ”Method and device for controlling fuel injection into an
internal combustion engine” Electronic fuel injection technologies constantly monitor and
control the amount of fuel burnt in the engine, with a view to reduce the amount of fuel
unnecessarily burnt, thus optimizing fuel consumption. Appendix Figure A3 has the front
page and technical diagram of this patent.
Alongside the grey fuel efficiency innovations there are many purely dirty patents,
such as EPO patent #0402091, which covers a ”Four-cycle twelve cylinder engine” (see
22

We are especially indebted to Christian Hue de la Colombe for many extremely helpful discussions.

18

Appendix Figure A4). Fuel consumption is proportional to the number and the volume
of cylinders: the average car sold in Europe has four cylinders whereas it is six in the US.
A twelve cylinder engine is much more powerful than a four or six cylinders engine, but
this comes at the cost of increased fuel consumption. Twelve cylinder engines are used by
many car makers for their top-range models, including Aston Martin, Audi, BMW and
Rolls Royce. These cars typically run about 15 miles/gallon, while the average new car
sold in the US in 2011 obtains 33.8 miles/gallon.23
To measure innovation, we use a count of patents by application/filing date. The
advantages and limitations of patenting as a measure of innovation have been extensively
discussed.24 For our purposes, there are three advantages of using patents. First, they are
available at a highly technologically disaggregated level. We can distinguish innovations
in the auto industry according to specific technologies whereas R&D investment cannot
be easily disaggregated. Second, R&D is not reported for small and medium sized firms
in Europe nor for privately listed firms in the US (they are exempt from the accounting
requirement to report R&D). Third, the auto sector is innovation intensive where patents
are perceived as an effective means of protection against imitation, something which is not
true in all sectors (Cohen et al., 2000).25 These considerations make patents a reasonably
good indicator of innovative activity in the auto sector.
Patents do suffer from a number of limitations. Patents are not the only way to protect
innovations, although a large fraction of the most economically significant innovations
appear to have been patented (Dernis et al., 2001). Another problem is that patent values
are highly heterogeneous with most patents having a very low valuation. Finally, the
number of patents that are granted for a given innovation varies significantly across patent
23

See http://www.fueleconomy.gov for details on car consumption and
http://www.bts.gov/publications/national transportation statistics/html/table 04 23.html for US average. Note grey technical change appears to account for a minority of innovation in the internal combustion engines. For example, between 1980 and 2004 the fuel efficiency of passenger cars increased by
only 6.5%, while horsepower increased by 80% (Knittel, 2011).
24
See Griliches (1990) and for a recent overview, OECD (2009). Dating by application is conventional
in the empirical innovation literature as it is much more closely timed with when the R&D was performed
than the grant date.
25
Cohen et al. (2000) conducted a survey questionnaire administered to 1,478 R&D labs in the U.S.
manufacturing sector. They rank sectors according to how effective patents are considered as a means of
protection against imitation, and find that the top three industries according to this criterion are medical
equipment and drugs, special purpose machinery and automobile.

19

offices with concerns over increasing laxity in recent years particularly in the USPTO (e.g.
Jaffe and Lerner, 2004).
To mitigate these problems, we focus on “triadic” patents

26

which are those patents

that have been taken out in all three of the world’s major patents offices in the US,
Europe and Japan (USPTO, EPO and JPO).27 Focusing on triadic patents has a number
of advantages. First, triadic patents provide us with a common measure of innovation
worldwide, which is robust to administrative idiosyncracies of the various patent offices.
For example, if the same invention is covered by one patent in the US and by two patents in
Japan, all of which are part of the same triadic patent family, we will count it as one single
invention. Secondly, triadic patents cover only the most valuable inventions which explains
why they have been used so extensively to capture high-quality patents.28 Thirdly, triadic
patents typically protect inventions that have a potential worldwide application so these
patents are thus relatively independent of the countries in which they are filed.
Our data set includes 6,419 “clean” and 18,652 “dirty” triadic patents.29 Since the
EPO was created in 1978 our triadic patent data only starts in that year. The last year
of fully comprehensive triadic data is 2005, so this is our end year.30 Our basic dataset
consists of all those applicants (both firms and individuals) who applied for at least one of
these clean or dirty auto patents. We identify 3,423 distinct patent holders, which breaks
down into 2,427 companies and 996 individuals. For every patent holder we subsequently
identify all the patents they filed. We also extract other pieces of information based on
26

To identify triadic patents we use the INPADOC dataset in PATSTAT. For details on the construction
of patent families see Martinez, 2010.
27
Following standard practice we use all patents filed at the EPO and JPO and granted by the USPTO.
This is because the USPTO only published patent applications that were subsequently granted until 2001
(when they changed policy in line with the other major patent offices). For consistency we thus consider
only triadic patents granted by the USPTO both before and after 2001. For the official definition of triadic
patents and how triadic patent families are constructed, see Dernis and Kahn, 2004, and Martinez, 2010.
28
It has been empirically demonstrated that the number of countries in which a patent is filed is
correlated with other indicators of patent value. See, for example, Lanjouw et al, 1998, Harhoff et al,
2003). Grupp et al. (1996); Grupp (1998); Dernis, Guellec and van Pottelsberghe (2001); Dernis and
Khan (2004); Guellec and van Pottelsberghe, (2004)
29
In total, the PATSTAT data set includes 213,668 “clean” and 762,708 “dirty” patent applications
across all 80 patents offices. Thus by using triadic patents we focus on the high end of the quality
distribution.
30
The number of triadic patent in all technologies (i.e. including patents that are neither clean nor
dirty) starts falling in 2006. This is because of time lags between application and grant date at the
USPTO.

20

this sample which we use to construct weights for prices and spillovers. For example, we
identify all the other patents filed by holders of at least one clean or dirty triadic patent,
which represents a total of 4,467,362 patent applications.

4.2

Tax-inclusive fuel prices

To estimate the impact of a carbon tax on innovation in clean and dirty technologies, we
use information on fuel prices (F Pct ) and fuel taxes. Data on tax-inclusive fuel prices are
available from the International Energy Agency (IEA) for 25 major countries from 1978
onwards.31 We construct a time-varying country-level fuel price defined as the average
of diesel and gasoline prices. The average fuel price across countries for our regression
sample period 1986-2005 is shown in Panel A of Figure 1. Prices fell from the mid to late
1980s then rose peaking just before the Dot-Com bust of 2000-01.Prices then fell before
recovering after 2003. Average fuel taxes have followed a broadly similar pattern falling
in late 1980s, rising throughout the 1990s and falling back in the 2000s (Panel B of Figure
1). What is more striking, however, is the high variability across countries of changes
in the fuel price over time, much of it being driven by cross-country differences in tax
policies (see Figures 2 and 3).
Fuel prices are available only at the country-year level, whereas our dependent variable
has firm level variation that we would like to exploit. A related issue is that the auto
market is global and government policies abroad might be at least as important for firms’
innovation decisions as domestic policies in the company’s headquarter country. We allow
fuel prices to have a different effect across firms by noting that some geographical markets
matter more than others for reasons that are idiosyncratic to an auto firm. Firstly, auto
manufacturers have different styles of vehicles reflecting their heterogenous capabilities
and branding that are differentially popular depending on local tastes (e.g. Berry et al,
1995; Goldberg, 1995; Verboven, 1999). Second, there is typically some home bias towards
“national champions” auto manufacturers in national tastes and government policies. For
example, the recent auto bailouts in Detroit where paid for by US taxpayers whereas the
bailout of Peugeot has been shouldered by the French. The upshot of this is that auto
31

The IEA reports some incomplete data for an additional 13 countries.

21

firms display heterogeneous current and expected market shares across nations and their
R&D decisions will be more influenced by prices and policies in some countries than in
others.
To operationalize this idea we construct a fuel price variable for each firm as a weighted
average of fuel prices across countries based on a proxy of where the firm expects its future
market to be. Our price index for firm i at time t is defined as:
ln F Pit =

X

FP
ln F Pct
wic0

(13)

c
FP
is a firm-specific weight
where F Pct is the tax-inclusive fuel price discussed above and wic0

(this is time invariant and uses information only prior to the regression sample period).
The weight is determined by the importance of county c as a market outlet for firm i, so
FP
we define wic0
as the fraction of firm i’s patents taken out in country c. The rationale for

doing this is that a firm will seek intellectual property protection in jurisdictions where
it believes it will need to sell in the future (even if it licenses the technology, the value of
license will depend on whether it has obtained intellectual property protection in relevant
growth markets). For every patent applied for, we know that the patenting firm has paid
the cost of legal protection in a discrete number of countries. For example, a firm may
choose to enforce its rights in all EU countries or only in a subset of EU countries, say
Germany and the UK. Similarly, the firm may decide to apply for patent protection in the
US but not in smaller markets. Assuming that the country distribution of a firm’s patent
portfolio is a good indicator of the firm’s expectation of where its markets will be in the
future, we can use this distribution to construct a firm-specific fuel price, F Pit , whose
value is computed as the weighted mean of the ln(fuel prices) in the relevant markets,
FP
with weights wic0
equal to the shares of the corresponding countries in the firm’s patent

portfolio. For example, if a firm had filed 30 patents, 20 in the US and 10 in Japan, the
price changes in the US would get a weight of two-thirds and the Japanese price changes
a weight of one third. In order to reflect the greater importance of larger countries, we
also weight by each country’s average GDP.
We calculate the weights using the patent portfolio of each company averaged over
the 1965-1985 “pre-sample” period, whereas we run regressions over the period 1986-2005.
22

This is to make sure that the weights are weakly exogenous as patent location could be
influenced by shocks to innovation. Choosing 1985 as the cut-off is to ensure there is
enough time pre-sample to construct the weights. We perform robustness tests using
different pre-sample periods to check that nothing is driven by the precise year of cutoff (e.g. use 1965-1990 as the pre-sample period and estimate the regressions from 1991
onwards).32
Why not use an alternative weighting scheme which simply reflects where firms currently sell their products (e.g. as in Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen, 2012)? First,
we believe that the information on where firms choose to take patent protection is a potentially better measure because it reflects their expectations of where their future markets
will be. Second, there is a data constraint: although sales distributions by geographic
area are available for larger firms they are not available for smaller firms - and there are
many patents from these smaller firms. We show our weights compared to sales weights
for some of the largest car firms in Appendix Table A1 - Toyota, VW, Ford, Honda and
Peugeot. The correlation is generally high suggesting that the weights we choose do a
reasonable job at reflecting market shares.33

4.3

Firm lagged Patent stocks and spillovers

Firm patent stocks are calculated in a straightforward manner using the patent flows
(P ATz,it ) described above. Following Cockburn and Griliches (1988) and Peri (2005), the
patent stock is calculated using the perpetual inventory method:
Kz,it = P ATz,it + (1 − δ)Kz,it−1

(14)

where z ∈ {Dirty, Clean}. We take δ, the depreciation of R&D capital, to be 20%, as is
often assumed in the literature, but we check the robustness of our results to other values
of the depreciation parameter.
To construct aggregate spillovers for a firm, we use information on the geographical
32

Our approach to weighting is conservative and may cause us to underestimate the importance of fuel
prices for innovation decisions. If firms reduce patent protection in countries where fuel taxes rise, this
will generate a measurement error biasing the estimated coefficients towards zero.
33
One exception is that VW appears to have a much higher patent share in Germany (its home country)
than its sales would suggest.

23

location of the various inventors in that firm. These are geographically located regardless
of nationality of the firm’s headquarters or the location of the office where the patent was
filed (e.g. the patents of Toyota’s scientists working in US research labs are part of this
US spillover pool). Implicit in our approach is the view that the geographical location
of an inventor is likely to be a key determinant of knowledge spillovers rather than the
jurisdiction over which the patent is taken out (which matters more as a signal of where
the market for sales is likely to be). Many papers have documented the importance of
the geographical component of knowledge spillovers in patents and other indicators (e.g.
Henderson, Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 1993, 2005 and Griffith, Lee and Van Reenen, 2011).
To construct a firm-specific spillover pool we use an analogous empirical strategy to
S
that for the fuel price. The spillover weight wic0
is the share of all firm i’s inventors (i.e.

where the inventor worked) in country c between 1965 and 1985. This weight is distinct
P
from wic0
in equation (13) as it is based on the location of inventors who are more likely

to benefit from research conducted locally. Importantly, the distribution of the patent
portfolio across countries and the distribution of inventors vary considerably across firms.
This is illustrated for the US in Appendix Figure A5.
The spillover for firm i is:
SP ILLz,it =

X

S
wic0
SP ILLz,ct

(15)

c

where SP ILLz,ct is the spillover pool in country c at time t. This is defined as:
SP ILLz,ct =

X

S
wjc0
Kz,jt

(16)

j6=i

The spillover pool of a country is the sum of all other firms’ patent stocks with a weight
that depends on how many inventors the other firm has in that country.34
As noted above, a common problem with patent data is that the value of patents is
highly heterogeneous. We mitigate this problem by conditioning on triadic patents, which
34

An alternative approach would be to define the country level spillover as
X
SP ILLz,ct =
Kz,jct

(17)

j

where Kz,jct = P ATz,jct + (1 − δ)Kz,jct−1 and P ATz,jct is the number of patents filed by inventors of
company j located in country c at year t. Empirically these two methods give very similar results.

24

screen out the very low value patents. But we also perform two other checks. First, we
weight patents by the number of future citations. Second, we use “biadic” patents filed
at the EPO and at the USPTO, following Henderson and Cockburn (1993) who argued
that patents were important if they had been applied in at least two of the three major
economic regions. Our results are robust to these two variants.

4.4

Descriptive statistics

Figure 4 shows that aggregate triadic clean and dirty patents have been rising over time.
Dirty patents increased steadily between 1978 and 1988 and then again between 1992 and
2000, but have been decreasing during the last five years of our dataset. The number of
clean patents was low for a decade until 1992, then began rising particularly after 1995
(at an average annual growth rate of 23%), peaking at 724 in 2002 alone, before falling
back slightly. Consequently, while the number of clean patents represented only 10% of
the number of dirty patents filed annually during the 1980s this reached 60% by 2005.
Descriptive statistics for our dataset used in the regressions are shown in Table 2. In any
given year, the average number of dirty patents is 0.22 and the average number of clean
patents is 0.08.
Appendix B discusses more descriptives showing more of the cross-country distribution
of patent filing (Table A2) and citation patterns (Table A3) which are consistent with
spillovers being much stronger within the two categories (clean or dirty) than between
them.
Table A4 displays the top 10 patenters in clean technologies between 1978 and 2005 and
Table A5 shows the equivalent for dirty technologies. Japanese and German companies
predominate although most top companies’ portfolios include both clean and dirty (the
only exception is Samsung SDI, a battery specialist). Recall that this is based on triadic
patents and US companies tend to file disproportionately more patents in the US than
in Europe and Japan. Tables A6 to A9 report top clean and dirty patenters at the EPO
and at the USPTO separately. General Motors is the third largest patenter of clean
technologies at the USPTO whereas it is not even in the top 10 at the EPO.
35

35

While it is clear that there a number of big companies active in both clean and dirty automotive

25

5

Results

5.1

Main Results

Our main results are shown in Table 3. The first three columns use the number of clean
patents (a flow) in a firm as the dependent variable and the last three columns uses the
flow of dirty patents. All estimates include firm fixed effects using the Control Function
Fixed Effect (CFX) approach (described in Section 3), year dummies and GDP per capita.
Column (1) shows that the coefficient on the (tax inclusive) fuel price is positive and
significant. The elasticity of 0.97 implies that a 10% higher fuel price is associated with
about 10% more clean patents. The coefficients on spillovers and lagged patent stocks
take signs consistent with the path dependency hypothesis. Firms who are more exposed
to larger stocks of clean innovation by other firms’ (“clean spillovers”, SP ILLC,it−1 ) are
significantly more likely to produce clean patents, whereas those benefiting more from
dirty spillovers (SP ILLD,it−1 ) are significantly less likely to innovate in clean technologies.
If the coefficients can be interpreted causally, increasing the clean spillover stock by 10%
increases a firm’s clean innovation by 2.7%. By contrast, an increase in the exposure to
dirty spillovers by 10% reduces clean innovation by 1.7%.
In addition to path dependency at the economy level through spillovers, there is also
path dependency at the firm level. Column (1) of Table 3 suggests that firms which have
innovated in clean innovation in the past (KC,it−1 ) are much more likely to continue to
innovate in clean technologies in the future, with a significant elasticity of 0.306. Interestingly, a firm’s own history of dirty innovation (KD,it−1 ) is also associated with more
clean innovation with an elasticity of 0.139. This coefficient is, however, much smaller
than the corresponding coefficient on past dirty innovation stocks in the dirty innovation
equation (column (4)) which is four times as large (0.557). In other words, firms with
a history of dirty innovation are more likely to innovate in the future in either clean or
dirty (compared to those with little innovation), but this effect is much stronger for dirty
patenting, computing a Herfindahl Index for patenting over 1978 to 2005 for clean innovation we find a
Herfindahl of 0.023 and for dirty we find a HHI of 0.038, implying low concentration. The top 10 patent
holders in clean account for 35.6% of patents over 1978 to 2005 whereas the corresponding figure is 46.6%
for dirty.

26

innovations than for clean innovation leading to path dependence. Moreover, note that
in column (1) the coefficient on a firm’s past dirty innovation stock on future clean innovation (0.139) is much smaller than the effect of past clean innovations on future clean
innovation (0.306).36
Columns (2) and (3) of Table 3 include a measure of R&D subsidies for clean technologies and a control for emission regulations. R&D subsidies are from the IEA’s Energy
Technology Research Database and the emissions regulations index are from Dechezlepretre, Perkins and Neumayer (2010) with details in Appendix B. In contrast to the proxy
for carbon taxes (fuel prices) neither of these additional policy variables is statistically
significant and the coefficients on the other variables do not change much. The absence
of an R&D subsidy effect is surprising, but we suggest why in Table 4.
Columns (4)-(6) of Table 3 repeat the specification in the first three columns but use
dirty patents as the dependent variable instead of clean. The coefficient on fuel prices
is negative and significant in all columns. In column (4) a 10% increase in fuel prices
is associated with about a 6% decrease in dirty innovation. The estimates on spillovers
and knowledge stocks are symmetric to those in the clean equation. Exposure to dirty
spillovers fosters future dirty innovation, whereas clean spillovers reduces dirty patenting.
The coefficients suggest that a firm’s own history of either dirty of clean patenting has a
positive effect on further dirty patenting, but the effect of past dirty patenting is stronger
on future dirty innovation than past clean.
In summary, Table 3 offers considerable support for our model. First, higher fuel
prices significantly encourage clean innovation and significantly discourage dirty innovation. Second there is path dependency in the direction of technical change: countries and
firms that have a history of relatively more clean (dirty) innovation are more likely to
innovate in clean (dirty) technologies in the future.
36

This effect is not predicted by the theory but could arise from cross-technology knowledge spillovers
(the cost coefficient ψ could depend on the amount of accumulated knowledge in clean and in dirty).

27

5.2

Grey Innovations
Our dirty category includes innovations relating to improvements in the energy effi-

ciency of internal combustion engines. We labeled these “grey” innovations and consider
disaggregating the dirty category into these grey and purely dirty innovations. As noted
in the theory Section the effect of fuel prices are more ambiguous in this middle grey
category. On the one hand, there are incentives to substitute research away from purely
dirty into grey innovation when the fuel price rises. On the other hand, there is also
an incentive to switch away from the internal combustion engines completely (including
grey) towards alternative clean vehicles.
Table 4 presents the results and shows that, as expected, the coefficient on the fuel
price for grey innovation in the second column (0.282) lies between the coefficients on clean
(positive at 0.848 in column (1)) and purely dirty (very negative at -0.832 in column (3)).
This is consistent with fuel prices having a positive effect on energy efficient innovation,
although smaller and insignificant when compared to the effect of fuel prices on purely
clean innovations. Another interesting feature of the results is that the coefficient on R&D
subsidies is positive and significant in the grey innovation equation whereas it continues
to be insignificant in the clean and purely dirty equations. This is consistent with the fact
that the majority of these government subsidies are for energy efficiency (see Appendix
B) rather than more radical clean technologies.
Since we have also disaggregated the spillover stocks and the firm’s own past innovation
stocks into the three categories now we have six variables reflecting path dependency on
the right hand side of the regression. The coefficients on these variables take a broadly
sensible pattern, but precision has fallen as there is likely to be some collinearity issues
with a large number of highly correlated variables.
Given how demanding this specification is we find the overall results from Table 4
encouraging and consistent with the theory.

28

5.3

Extensions and robustness

Table 5 considers the alternative econometric approaches for dynamic count data models
with firm fixed effects discussed in Section 3. First, we follow Hausman, Hall and Griliches
(“HHG”) in column (1) for clean patents and column (3) for dirty patents. The signs of
coefficients are generally the same as in our baseline model of Table 3, but the marginal
effect of fuel price is much greater in absolute magnitude for dirty innovation and smaller
(and insignificant) for clean. Indeed the magnitude of the estimated elasticity for dirty
patents seems unreasonably large (-2.457). We suspect that the assumption of strict
exogeneity underlying HHG is problematic in our context, as we have a highly dynamic
specification. Columns (2) and (4) implement the Blundell et al (1999, BGVR) estimator.
The pattern of the spillover effects and dynamics remain similar to the baseline regression,
and we still obtain a positive and significant effect of fuel prices on clean innovation
and a negative and significant effect on dirty innovation. The fuel price coefficients are
comparable to the baseline case.37
The final two columns of Table 5 uses relative patenting ln(1 + P ATClean,it ) - ln(1 +
P ATDirty,it ) as the dependent variable in an OLS regression with firm dummies (i.e. the
linear within groups estimator). Column (5) shows that there is a significant and positive
effect of fuel prices on relative innovation. Column (6) shows that this result is robust to
including a full set of country by year fixed effects to absorb any potential country specific
time varying policy variables.38
Could the results somehow be driven by firms who were not patenting prior to 1986?
Table 6 repeats the baseline regressions for our three count data models (BGVR, HHG
and CFX) restricting the sample to firms with at least one patent before 1986. This leads
to only small changes in the coefficients and no change in the overall qualitative patterns.
Oil prices are broadly global, so most of the country-specific variation over time in
37

However, notice that we find larger values for the effects of clean knowledge stocks on clean patenting
and dirty knowledge stocks on dirty patenting than in both the baseline CFX and the HHG specification.
This could mean that the BGVR approach is not fully controlling for all the fixed effects by relying on
pre-sample patenting only.
38
The country here is based on the headquarters whereas the previous country variables like fuel price
with weighted averages using patent weights. Note that it is computationally infeasible to include the
full set of country by time dummies in the non-linear count data models.

29

fuel prices comes from differential taxation. Consequently, Table 7 substitutes fuel taxes
for fuel prices showing again a similar pattern of results. One difference is that the
point estimates of the fuel price response are smaller in absolute terms for both types of
innovation. This is to be expected as demand is driven by the final price the consumer
pays rather than the fuel tax itself.
We experimented with changing the cut-off year to 1990 and ran the regressions 19912005 using data from 1965-1990 to construct the weights. The results in Table 8 are quite
comparable to our baseline, although standard errors are a little larger as we would expect
from using a smaller sample for the regressions.
Table 9 reports alternative dynamic specifications for fuel prices. The first five columns
are for clean and use fuel prices dated in the current year in column (1), lagged one year
in our (baseline) of column (2), lagged two years in column (3) and lagged three years
in column (4). In column (5) we construct a geometrically weighted average of past fuel
price levels as proposed by Popp(2002).39 We repeat these specifications in the last five
columns but use dirty patents instead. With all these approaches we find price coefficients
that are very similar to our earlier estimates with a positive elasticity of clean patents
with respect to fuel price of around unity and a negative elasticity of dirty patents of
around -0.6.

40

We conducted other robustness tests reported in Appendix A. First, our outcome
variable is Triadic patents, those filed at all three main patent offices in the world (USPTO,
EPO and JPO). A concern is that this screens out too many of the lower value patents.
To address this we ran our regressions based on biadic rather than triadic patents; i.e. we
included all patents into the construction of the innovation and knowledge stock variables
that are filed at the EPO and the USPTO but not necessarily the JPO. Table A10
shows that the results are robust to this experiment. Second, we constructed the patent
39

Popp (2002) uses an adaptive expectations model
Pn of prices, in which the expected future price of
energy is a weighted average of past prices: Pit∗ = k=0 λk Pi,t−k . The parameter λ captures the speed at
which agents adjust their expectations based on the gap between the predicted and the realized values.
For comparison purposes we use the same adjustment factor of λ = 0.83 as in Popp (2002).
40
We tried to pin down more precisely the dynamic response structure by including multiple lags of
price simultaneously but autocorrelation in prices made it difficult as all coefficients tended to be zero,
as in Popp (2002).

30

stock variables - including the spillover variables - using citation weighted counts from all
worldwide patents (Table A11). This led to qualitatively similarly results, e.g. the fuel
price response is larger for clean patents than for dirty patents.41 Third, we experimented
with a wide range of other country specific variables and report that the results are robust
to these additional covariates.42 For example, in Table A12 we included total GDP in
addition to GDP per capita. The coefficient on GDP is insignificant and the basic pattern
of our results is robust to this extra control (see Table A12).

6

Simulation results
To obtain a better sense of the aggregate magnitude of the results we report a number

of counterfactual experiments. We explore the implications of our econometric models for
the evolution of future clean and dirty knowledge stocks and how this is affected by an
increase in the fuel price (generated, for example, by an international carbon tax). We
recursively compute values of expected patenting under different policy scenarios, use
those to update the knowledge stock variables (including the spillover variables) and feed
these into the next iteration. Hence if we split the right hand side variables xit into
variables that are functions of the lagged knowledge stock (kit ) and other variables such
as the fuel price (pit ), we can write xit = [kit , pit ] and a particular iteration in period T
greater than t as defined by:

P[
AT z,it+T = exp kit+T −1 βkz + pCF
i,t+T βpz ηz,i

d Clean,it+T , PAT
d Dirty,it+T
ki,t+T = f ki,t+T −1 , PAT

(18)

d Clean,it+T and PAT
d Dirty,it+T are vectors of predicted patent flows for firms in
where PAT
the sample and pCF
it+T are potentially counterfactual values of the policy and other control
variables. Our results imply that there is path dependence in the type of innovation
pursued, both through internal knowledge stock effects as well as external spillovers.
Here we explore how important this path dependence is in quantitative terms by studying
the evolution of both clean and dirty knowledge stock implied by our fitted models into
41

If anything, the results are generally stronger with elasticities that are larger in magnitude.
Other country-level variables matched in across all the locations a firm expects to sell in like population did not appear to be robustly significant in our empirical models.
42

31

the future. We do this for every firm in the dataset and then aggregate across the world
economy in each period.
More specifically, we are looking for conditions under which the clean knowledge stock
for the aggregate economy exceeds the dirty knowledge stock. In line with Acemoglu et al.
(2012a) this would be a requirement for clean technologies to be able to compete with
dirty ones, even without policy intervention. Our projections should be considered as a
rough exploration into the importance of carbon taxes and path dependency rather than
precise forecasts of future innovation.
We focus on the period up to 2030 with 2020 as a focal point. This is somewhat
arbitrary but in line with scenarios of the International Energy Agency (IEA)43 suggesting
that globally fossil fuel use must peak by 2020 to avoid highly risky climate change. It is
also consistent with the European Commission’s 2020 targets.44
We first check the within sample performance of the model by implementing simulation
runs providing recursively generated knowledge stocks over the regression sample period
(1986-2005) in Appendix Figure A6.45 Clean and dirty patent stocks are reported on the
y-axis. Comparing predicted aggregate patents to the actual values suggests that our
preferred CFX model does a reasonably good job at tracking the aggregate changes in
clean and dirty patenting (Panel A). The alternative BGVR and HHG estimates are not
terrible but do less well in later years (Panels B and C).
Figure 5 reports simulations based on the regressions from Table 6 columns (1) and
(4) for years through to 2030. In Panel A we report the baseline case keeping fuel prices
(and time dummies) at their 2005 values.46 The regressions imply a strong enough path
dependency for the gap between dirty and clean knowledge stocks to remain far apart
for a considerable period of time. Clean innovation catches up with dirty only well after
2030.47 To what extent can carbon taxes speed up this convergence process? We examine
43

http://blogs.ft.com/energy-source/2009/11/10/fossil-fuel-use-must-peak-by-2020-warnsiea/#axzz1tQmZyLoy
44
See http://ec.europa.eu/news/economy/100303 en.htm
45
For the simulations we restrict the sample to the firms where we have pre sample information. In this
way we do not have to make further assumptions as to how changes in the spillover and policy variables
would affect firms where these variables are essentially missing.
46
We assume per capita GDP grows at 1.5% p.a., but report alternative assumptions in Figure 6.
47
Catch up occurs because of delayed reaction to fuel price hikes leading up to 2005 and GDP per

32

the effects of a permanent worldwide increase in fuel prices in 2006 (and fixed at this
level thereafter) of 10%, 20%, 30%, 40% and 50% in Panels B through F respectively. In
Panel B we see that the gap between clean and dirty becomes smaller with a fuel price
increase of 10% both because there is more clean innovation and because there is less
dirty innovation. However, parity is achieved between clean and dirty only after 2030. It
would take an increase of 40% in fuel prices in order to achieve parity in 2020 according
to our model (Panel E). This is a pretty large increase - comparable with the increase
that took place in the 1990s in Figure 1.
One criticism of the simulation is that we would expect such a large increase in the fuel
prices to have a negative effect on GDP per capita due to deadweight costs of taxation,
adjustment costs and so on. This in turn could slow down the growth of clean innovation
(e.g. Gans, 2012). To obtain some insight into the magnitude of these effects, Figure 6
considers the 40% fuel tax hike scenario coupled with a negative effect on GDP per capita
growth. Panel A reproduces the baseline case where there is no effect on GDP (as in
Figure 5 Panel E). Panel B considers a fall in the growth rate by 0.25 percentage point
(e.g. from 1.5% to 1.25%). This postpones the crossover year because income growth has
a stronger positive effect on clean innovation than dirty innovation in our estimates. But
the effect is rather small, moving the crossover year from 2020 to 2022, only two years.
Larger tax-driven falls in GDP per capita growth postpone things further, but it would
take a full one percentage point a year fall in the growth rate to postpone the crossover
year beyond 2030. We view it as unlikely that fuel taxes would knock a percentage point
off annual growth for 15 years or more and this also ignores the damaging effects of
global warming itself on economic growth over the medium run. We therefore take some
comfort from Figure 6 that incorporating output effects would not dramatically change
the conclusions from Figure 5.
In Figure 7 we explore the importance of path dependence for the simulations. First
we repeat the baseline specifications allowing for all dynamic adjustments in the cases
of no fuel price change (Panel A) and of a 40% increase (Panel B). In panels C and D
capita growth which relatively favors clean innovation.

33

we repeat this exercise while fixing all innovation stock variables - i.e. both spillovers
and own knowledge stocks - at their 2005 levels. As a consequence both clean and dirty
innovation and thus the growth rate of knowledge stocks reduces markedly as firms no
longer benefit from standing on the shoulders of either their own or others’ past innovation
success. Also note that in Panel C where we keep prices fixed the gap between clean and
dirty is now much narrower than in the equivalent Panel A. Despite this, the 40% increase
in fuel prices in Panel D is much less effective than in Panel B where the dynamic effects
from knowledge stocks are switched on. This illustrates that path dependency is a double
edged sword as pointed out by Acemoglu et al (2012a). In the absence of effective policies
it creates a kind of lock-in for dirty innovation. But if effective policies are introduced
like a carbon tax or R&D subsidy, path dependency can help reinforce the growth of
clean innovation as the economy accumulates clean knowledge more rapidly. Hence, if we
switch off the two path dependency channel, innovation trends become less responsive to
tax policy.

7

Conclusion

In this paper we have combined several patent datasets to analyze directed technical
change in the auto sector, which is a key industry of concern for climate change. We use
patenting data from 3,423 firms and individuals between 1965 and 2005 across 80 patent
offices. Consistent with what theory predicts we find that “clean” innovation is stimulated
by increases in the tax-inclusive fuel prices (our proxy for a carbon tax) whereas dirty
innovation is depressed. We exploit the fact that prices evolve differentially across time
in countries in our dataset and that firms are differentially exposed to these price changes
because of their heterogeneous expected sales in geographic markets.
Our second key result is that there is strong evidence for “path dependency” in the
sense that firms more exposed to clean innovation are more likely to direct their research
energies to clean innovation in the future (a directed knowledge spillover effect). Similarly,
firms with a history of dirty innovation in the past are more likely to focus on dirty
innovation in the future. The fact that such path dependency holds for clean (as well as

34

dirty) innovation highlights the desirability of acting sooner to shift incentives for climate
change innovation. Since the stock of dirty innovation is greater than clean, the path
dependency effect will tend to lock economies into high carbon emissions, even after the
introduction of a mild carbon tax or R&D subsidies for clean. So this may make the case
for stronger action now, which could be relaxed in the future as the economy’s stock of
knowledge shifts in more of a clean direction. Increases to carbon prices can bring about
a change in direction. For example, our baseline results suggest an increase of 40% of fuel
prices with respect to the 2005 fuel price will allow clean innovation stocks to overtake
dirty stocks after fifteen years.
Our analysis could be extended in several ways. First, we could extend the analysis
of output effects beyond the macro adjustments in the simulations of Table 6 to examine
the firm-level effects. This would require a large extension in terms of using data on
sales, however. Second, we could use our framework to simulate other policies, such as
country specific changes in carbon taxes (or R&D subsidies) to see how this would affect
the innovation profiles in specific countries rather than just globally. Third, the same
basic approach could be taken to look at other sectors than automobiles such as the
energy sector as in Acemoglu et al (2012b). Finally, we could use micro data to estimate
the relative efficiency of R&D investments in clean versus dirty innovation, and also the
elasticity of substitution between the two types of production technologies. As argued in
Acemoglu et al (2012a), these parameters play as important a role as the discount rate
in characterizing the optimal environmental policy.

References
Acemoglu, D. (1998). Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical
Change and Wage Inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113:1055–1089.
Acemoglu, D. (2002). Directed Technical Change. Review of Economic Studies, 69(4):781–
810.
Acemoglu, D. (2007). Equilibrium Bias of Technology. Econometrica, 75(5):1371–1410.
Acemoglu, D., Aghion, P., Bursztyn, L., and Hémous, D. (2012a). The Environment and
Directed Technical Change. The American Economic Review, 102 (1):131–166.
Acemoglu, D., Akcigit, U., Hanley, D., and Kerr, W. (2012b). The Transition to Clean
Technology.
35

Acemoglu, D. and Finkelstein, A. (2008). Input and Technology Choices in Regulated
Industries: Evidence from the Health Care Sector. Journal of Political Economy,
116(5):837–880.
Acemoglu, D. and Linn, J. (2004). Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from
the Pharmaceutical Industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3):1049–1090.
Alcott, H. and Wozny, N. (2011). Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox.
mimeo NYU.
Anderson, S. T., Kellogg, R., and Sallee, J. M. (2011a). What Do Consumers Believe
About Future Gasoline Prices? NBER Working Papers 16974, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.
Anderson, S. T., Kellogg, R., Sallee, J. M., and Curtin, R. T. (2011b). Forecasting
Gasoline Prices Using Consumer Surveys. American Economic Review, 101(3):110–14.
Arellano, M. (2003). Panel Data Econometrics. Number 9780199245291 in OUP Catalogue. Oxford University Press.
Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., and Pakes, A. (1995). Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium.
Econometrica, 63(4):841–90.
Bloom, N., Schankerman, M., and Reenen, J. V. (2012). Identifying Technology Spillovers
and Product Market Rivalry. Technical Report dp0675, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.
Blundell, R., Griffith, R., and Van Reenen, J. (1995). Dynamic Count Data Models of
Technological Innovation. The Economic Journal, 105(429).
Blundell, R., Griffith, R., and Van Reenen, J. (1999). Market Share, Market Value and
Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms. The Review of Economic Studies,
66(3):529–554.
Blundell, R., Griffith, R., and Windmeijer, F. (2002). Individual effects and dynamics in
count data models. Journal of Econometrics, 108(1):113–131.
Buonanno, P., Carraro, C., and Galeotti, M. (2003). Endogenous Induced Technical
Change and the Costs of Kyoto. Resource and Energy Economics, 25(1):11–34.
Busse, M. R., Knittel, C. R., and Zettelmeyer, F. (2011). Pain at the Pump: The
Effect of Gasoline Prices on New and Used Automobile Markets. mimeo Northwestern
University.
Cockburn, I. and Griliches, Z. (1988). Industry Effects and Appropriability Measures
in the Stock Market’s Valuation of R&D and Patents. American Economic Review,
78(2):419–23.
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., and Walsh, J. P. (2000). Protecting Their Intellectual
Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or
Not). Working Paper 7552, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Crabb, J. M. and Johnson, D. K. N. (2010). Fueling Innovation: The Impact of Oil
Prices and CAFE Standards on Energy-Efficient Automotive Technology. The Energy
Journal, Volume 31(Number 1):199–216.
36

Dasgupta, P. (2008). Discounting climate change. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 37(2).
Dechezleprêtre, A., Perkins, R., and Neumayer, E. (2012). Regulatory Distance and the
Transfer of New Environmentally Sound Technologies: Evidence from the Automobile
Sector. Working Papers 2012.33, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei.
Dernis, H., Guellec, D., and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B. (2001). Using patent
counts for cross-country comparisons of technology output, pages 129–146.
Dernis, H. and Khan, M. (2004). Triadic Patent Families Methodology. OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers 2004/2, OECD, Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry.
Gans, J. (2012). Innovation and Climate Change Policy. American Economic Journal:
Policy (forthcoming).
Gerlagh, R. (2008). A climate-change policy induced shift from innovations in carbonenergy production to carbon-energy savings. Energy Economics, 30(2):425–448.
Gerlagh, R., Kverndokk, S., and Rosendahl, K. E. (2009). Optimal Timing of Climate
Change Policy: Interaction Between Carbon Taxes and Innovation Externalities. Environmental and Resource Economics, 43(3):369–390.
Goldberg, P. K. (1995). Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets:
The Case of the U.S. Automobile Industry. Econometrica, 63(4):891–951.
Golosov, M., Hassler, J., Krusell, P., and Tsyvinski, A. (2011). Optimal Taxes on Fossil
Fuel in General Equilibrium. Technical Report 17348, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Goulder, L. H. and Schneider, S. H. (1999). Induced Technological Change and the
Attractiveness of C$O 2$ Abatement Policies. Resource and Energy Economics, 21(34):211–253.
Griffith, R., Lee, S., and Van Reenen, J. (2011). Is distance dying at last? Falling home
bias in fixedeffects models of patent citations. Quantitative Economics, 2(2):211–249.
Griliches, Z. (1990). Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey. Journal of
Economic Literature, 28(4):1661–1707.
Grübler, A. and Messner, S. (1998). Technological Change and the Timing of Mitigation
Measures. Energy Economics, 20(5-6):495–512.
Grupp, H. (1998). Foundations of the Economics of Innovation: Theory, Measurement
and Practice. Elgar, Cheltenham.
Grupp, H., Mnt, G., and Schmoch, U. (1996). Assessing Different Types of Patent Data
for Describing High-Technology Export Performance.
Guellec, D. and Van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B. (2004). From R&D to Productivity
Growth: Do the Institutional Settings and the Source of Funds of R&D Matter? Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 66(3):353–378.
Habakkuk, H. J. (1962). American and British technology in the nineteenth century: The
search for labour-saving inventions. University Press.
37

Hanlon, W. (2011). Necessity is the mother of invention: Input supplies and Directed
Technical Change. http://www.columbia.edu/˜wwh2104/hanlon dtc.pdf.
Harhoff, D., Scherer, F. M., and Vopel, K. (2003). Citations, family size, opposition and
the value of patent rights. Research Policy, 32(8):1343–1363.
Haščič, I., De Vries, F., Johnstone, N., and Medhi, N. (2008). Effects of Environmental
Policy on the Type of Innovation: The Case of Automotive Emissions Control Technologies. OECD Journal: Economic Studies, 2009(1).
Hassler, J., Krussell, J., and Olovsson, C. (2011). Energy saving technical Change. IIES,
Stockholm University.
Hausman, J., Hall, B. H., and Griliches, Z. (1984). Econometric models for count data
with an application to the patents-R&D relationship. Econometrica, 52(4):909–938.
Henderson, R., Jaffe, A., and Trajtenberg, M. (2005). Patent Citations and the Geography
of Knowledge Spillovers: A Reassessment: Comment. The American Economic Review,
95(1).
Henderson, R. and Newell, R. G., editors (2011). Accelerating Energy Innovation: Insights
from Multiple Sectors. University of Chicago Press.
Hicks, J. R. (1932). The Theory of Wages.
Jaffe, A. B. and Lerner, J. (2004). Innovation and its discontents: How our broken patent
system is endangering innovation and progress, and what to do about it. Princeton
University Press.
Jaffe, A. B. and Trajtenberg, M. (2002). Patents, citations, and innovations a window on
the knowledge economy.
Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., and Henderson, R. (1993). Geographic Localization of
Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108(3):577–98.
Knittel, C. R. (2011). Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-Offs and Technological Progress in the Automobile Sector. American Economic Review, 101(7):3368–
99.
Knittel, C. R. (2012). Reducing Petroleum Consumption from Transportation. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, pages 93–118.
Lanjouw, J. O., Pakes, A., and Putnam, J. (1998). How to Count Patents and Value
Intellectual Property:The Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data. The Journal
of Industrial Economics, 46(4).
Manne, A. and Richels, R. (2004). The impact of learning-by-doing on the timing and
costs of CO2 abatement. Energy Economics, 26(4):603–619.
Martinez, C. (2010). Insight into Different Types of Patent Families. OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers 2010/2, OECD Publishing.

38

Mendelsohn, R., Sterner, T., Persson, U. M., and Weyant, J. P. (2008). Comments on
Simon Dietz and Nicholas Stern’s Why Economic Analysis Supports Strong Action on
Climate Change: A Response to the Stern Review’s Critics. Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy, 2(2):309–313.
Messner, S. (1997). Endogenized technological learning in an energy systems model.
Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 7(3):291–313.
Newell, R. G., Jaffe, A. B., and Stavins, R. N. (1999). The Induced Innovation Hypothesis and Energy-Saving Technological Change. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114(3):941–975.
Nordhaus, W. D. (1994). Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of Climate
Change. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2002). Modeling Induced Innovation in Climage Change Policy. In
Techological Change and the Environment. Resources for the Future Press, Washington,
DC.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2007). A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change. Journal of Economic Literature, 45(3):686–702.
OECD (2009). OECD patent statistics manual. Technical report, OECD.
OECD (2011). Patent Search Strategies for the identification of selected environment
related technologies.
Peri, G. (2005). Determinants of Knowledge Flows and their Effects on Innovation. Review
of Economics and Statistics, 87 (2):308–322.
Perkins, R. and Neumayer, E. (2010). Does the ’California Effect’ Operate Across Borders? Trading- and Investing-Up in Automobile Emission Standards. Social Science
Research Network Working Paper Series.
Popp, D. (2002). Induced Innovation and Energy Prices. The American Economic Review,
92(1):160–180.
Popp, D., Newell, R. G., and Jaffe, A. B. (2009). Energy, the Environment, and Technological Change. NBER Working Papers 14832, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Small, K. A. and Van Dender, K. (2007). Long Run Trends in Transport Demand, Fuel
Price Elasticities and Implications of the Oil Outlook for Transport Policy. Technical
Report 2007/16, OECD Publishing.
Stern, N. (2006). The Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change. HM Treasury,
London, UK.
Sue Wing, I. (2003). Induced Technical Change and the Cost of Climate Policy. Technical
report, MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change.
van der Zwaan, B. C. C., Gerlagh, R., Klaassen, G., and Schrattenholzer, L. (2002).
Endogenous Technological Change in Climate Change Modelling. Energy Economics,
24(1):1–19.
39

Veefkind, V., Hurtado-Albir, J., Angelucci, S., Karachalios, K., and Thumm, N. (2012).
A new EPO classification scheme for climate change mitigation technologies. World
Patent Information, 34(2):106–111.
Verboven, F. (1999). The Markets for Gasoline and Diesel Cars in Europe. CEPR discussion paper, 2069.
Vollebergh, H. (2010). Fuel Taxes, Motor Vehicle Emission Standards and Patents Related
to the Fuel Efficiency and Emissions of Motor Vehicles.
von Below, D. and Persson, T. (2008). Uncertainty, Climate Change and the Global
Economy. Working Paper 14426, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Weitzman, M. L. (1974).
41(4):477–491.

Prices vs. Quantities.

The Review of Economic Studies,

Weitzman, M. L. (2007). A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change. Journal of Economic Literature, 45(3):703–724.
Weitzman, M. L. (2009). On Modelling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic
Climate Change. Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1):1–19.
West, S. E. (2004). Distributional effects of alternative vehicle pollution control policies.
Journal of Public Economics, 88(3â 4):735–757.
Yohe, G. W., Tol, R. S. J., and Anthoff, D. (2009). Discounting for Climate Change.
Economics - The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 3(24):1–22.

40

Web Appendix (not intended for publication
unless requested)
A

Econometric Models

We separately examine clean and dirty patent counts using a standard Poisson model
P ATzit = exp (xit βz ) ηzi + uzit

(19)

where z∈ {Dirty, Clean} and xit is a vector of regressors including functions of the lagged
dependent variable. For identification we assume E(uzit |xit ) = 0.48 We consider four
alternative estimation techniques that allow for the possibility of firm level fixed effects
ηzit in the propensity to patent. The standard approach is Hausman, Hall and Griliches
(1984, HHG) who suggest a transformation akin to the within groups estimator in the
linear panel data context. In GMM terms, their estimator can be expressed as relying
on the following moment condition for identification (e.g. Blundell, Griffith, Windmeijer,
2002):


¯ zi 
P AT
E
P ATzit − µzit
xkit = 0
µ̄zi
for all variable in xit where µzit = exp (xit βz ) and a bar represents the average of a
variable over time for a specific firm. Note that
P ATzit − µzit

¯ zi
P AT
µzit
= uzit −
ūzit
µ̄zi
µ̄zi

implying that we require strict exogeneity, i.e. the shock uzit must be uncorrelated with
xit not only contemporaneously, but in all periods; i.e. E {uzit |xiτ } = 0 for all t and τ .
When using regressors that depend on past realizations of the dependent variable such as
the knowledge capital stocks, this assumption is violated.
Blundell, Griffith and Van Reenen (1999, BGVR) proposed an alternative estimator
which is robust to relaxing the strict exogeneity assumption. It relies on introducing
a control function term for the fixed effects, which is identified from realizations of the
dependent variable in a pre-sample period. Hence, the idea is to think of the fixed effect
as the combination of a control term φ (·) and an error, ωi .


¯ zi0 , I P AT
¯ zi0 = 0 + ωi
ηzi = φ ln P AT
¯ zi0 is the average amount of patenting by firm i in the pre-sample period.
where P AT


¯ zi0 + φz2 I P AT
¯ zi0 = 0 , pre-determined
BGVR show that with φ (·) = exp φzl ln P AT
xit 49 and stationarity in the dynamic system implied by equation (19) estimates of βz are
48

Note that we can equivalently represent the model in terms of a multiplicative shock νzit with
E(νzit |xit ) = 1. We would have
uzit
νzit = 1 +
exp (xit βz ) ηzi
and our assumptions concerning uzit imply E(νzit |xit ) = 1.
i.e. E {uiτ |xit } = 0 f or τ ≥ t.

49

41

unbiased as the duration of the pre-sample period becomes large. Thus, effectively we
estimate the following model:


¯ zi0 + φz2 I P AT
¯ zi0 = 0 + uzit
P ATzit = exp xit β + φzl ln P AT
The BGVR approach requires the realizations of the dependent variable in the pre-sample
period to be representative of a firm’s behavior over the sample period. Formally, the series
must be mean stationary (conditionally on the time dummies). It is easy to see why this
might be violated in particular for clean patents, whose realizations are concentrated
towards the end of our sample period. Consequently, for many firms we do not observe
any clean patenting in the pre-sample period which could inform us about variations in
their fixed propensity to patent in clean.
To address this problem we propose a new estimator in the same spirit of using a control
function as in BGVR. However, rather than using information from the pre-sample period
to calibrate the control function, we simultaneously exploit future data. We estimate the
main regression equation as well as a second equation allowing us to identify the control
function from future data. The key idea is the following. In general, a control term
φ̆zit (·) will lead to consistent estimates, if the resulting error term ω̌zit = ηzit − φ̆zit (·) is
orthogonal to xit ; i.e. E {ω̌zit |xit } = 0. Note, that given a parameter vector β we can
obtain such an estimate by regressing50
P ATziT
uziT
= ηzi +
= φ̆z (xit ) + ω̆zit
µziT
µziT

(20)

with T > t, provided that the variables in xit are pre-determined because then


uziT
E
|xit = 0
µziT

(21)

and we can interpret φ̆zit (xit ) as the expectation of the fixed effects given xit :
φ̆z (xit ) = E {ηi |xit }
As in the standard case we parameterize φ̆z (xit ) as an exponential function,51
φ̆z (xit ) = exp (xzit γ)
.
Notice, that given this control function we can transform our main regression equation
as

P ATzit
φ̆z (xit )

= exp (xit βz ) + exp (xit βz )

ω̆zit
φ̆z (xit )

+

uzit
φ̆z (xit )

(22)

where we replaced ηi by φ̆zit (xit ) + ω̆zit and divided by φ̆zit (xit ). Because the xit are
pre-determined, given the definition of ω̆zit and recalling the definition µzit = exp (xit βz )
we have that
50

For notational simplicity we write the following equation with just one
term. In practice we can
PTfuture
P ATziτ
1
improve efficiency by regressing on an average of future values T −t+1
. In our regressions
τ =t µ ziτ
reported above we identify the control function from averages over the current and one future period; i.e.
T =t+1
51
In theory we can even allow a more flexible specification where the conditional expectation varies
over time; i.e. φ̆zt (xit ) = Et {ηi |xit }. This could reflect firms learning more about their fixed effect
over time for instance. In practice this increases the number of parameters to be estimated greatly and
becomes computationally very burdensome. In our baseline results we therefore fix φ̆z (·) over time.

42

(
E

µzit

ω̆zit
φ̆z (xit )

+

uzit
φ̆z (xit )

!

)
|xit

=0

(23)

Hence, we have two equations that depend on each other as well as two sets of moment
conditions. We can consequently estimate equations (20) and (22) as a system of two
simultaneous equations using the sample analog of the following moments
(
!
)
P ATzit
−
µ
zit
φ̆z (xit )
E
|xit = 0
P ATziT
− φ̆z (xit )
µziT
We refer to this approach below as the control function fixed effects estimator (CFX).
In addition to these three dynamic count data approaches we also explore the common
practice of implementing equation (19) as a linear panel data estimator by taking logs of
the dependent variable after simply adding the value of unity (an arbitrary constant); i.e.
the regression equation becomes:
ln (1 + P ATzit ) = xit βz + αzi + εzit
Although this model has undesirable features like generating negative predicted values
of patenting it is attractive because it is straightforward to estimate a relative clean vs.
dirty regression; i.e.
ln (1 + P ATClean,it ) − ln (1 + P ATDirty,it ) = xit (βClean − βDirty )

(24)

+ (αClean,i − αDirty,i ) + (εClean,it − εDirty,it )
(25)
We show in the results section that the results are qualitatively similar no matter
which precise estimation technique we use.

B
B.1

Data Appendix
Basic dataset

As described in the main text we draw from PATSTAT data all patent filings relating to
IPC classes over clean and dirty auto innovation as defined in Table 1 and illustrated in
Appendix Figure A1-A4.52 Our patent data is drawn from the World Patent Statistical
Database (PATSTAT) maintained by the European Patent Office. We use the September
2009 version of PATSTAT. The innovation outcomes we use as the dependent variable and
in the construction of the spillovers and own lagged innovation stocks are triadic patents
(filed in all three of USPTO, EPO or JPO). For the weights (see below) we use a wider
definition to patenting.
If a single patent filing has multiple IPC codes we include it so long as at least one of
the IPC codes relates to clean or dirty innovation.53 Patents are coded by whichever firm
52

To identify clean and dirty innovations filed at the US patent office we use the same IPC codes as
the ones used for EPO and JPO patents. However, the USPTO has only recently adopted the IPC
classification so a few older US patents do not have IPC codes. We therefore complement IPC codes with
their US equivalents using the IPC/US concordance table available on the USPTO website
53
In the small number of cases where a patent had both a dirty and a clean IPC code we coded the
patent to be clean, but nothing hinges on this.

43

first applied so we ignore traded patents, but these are rare: less than 3% of triadic patents
are traded. As is standard in the literature, patents are dated by their application/filing
date as this is close to the time when the R&D was performed.

B.2

Identifying unique patent holders

The PATSTAT database reports the name of patent applicants, but a common problem
with patent data is that the name of patentees often varies, because of spelling mistakes, typographical errors and name variants. To identify unique patent holders we
use the ECOOM-EUROSTAT-EPO PATSTAT Person Augmented Table (EEE-PPAT)
database, available at http://www.ecoom.be/nl/eee-ppat, which provides a dictionary of
harmonized patent applicants’ names produced through a computer algorithm followed
by visual inspection. We then manually check the name match, which allows us to put
together companies that a typical computer algorithm would consider distinct. For example we match Ford Motor Company with Ford Werke, its German subsidiary. As a result,
we are able to reduce the number of distinct patent holders of clean and dirty patents
from 20,916 to 3,423; 2,427 of which are companies and 996 are individuals.

B.3
B.3.1

Firm-level weights
Weights based on patent portfolios

As explained above in the main text, the firm-specific fuel price is computed as the
weighted geometric mean of the fuel prices across countries with weights reflecting the
shares of the corresponding countries in the firm’s patent portfolio. Our price variable is
thus defined as:
X
FP
wic0
ln F P ct
(26)
ln F P it =
c
FP
is the firm-specific
where F P ct is the tax-inclusive fuel price in country c at time t and wic0
weight for country c. In order to make sure that the computed exposures are an exogenous
source of variation across firms, the weights are calculated using the patent portfolio of
each company over the 1965-1985 “pre-sample” period (with the regressions performed
on the 1986-2005 period). We cross check the 1985 cut-off in the robustness section using
1965-1990 as the pre-sample period for weights and 1991-2005 for the regression sample.
To make matters concrete consider the example of Hitachi, a large Japanese car parts
manufacturer, who filed 90,381 patents between 1965 and 1985. 63,175 of these filings
were in Japan, 8,315 in the US and 3,498 in Germany. The rest were in a large number of
other patent offices. Note that there are a larger number of filings than there are patents,
as one invention can be filed in multiple patent offices. For example, Hitachi’s patent
11464997 (this is the DOCDB family number) was developed by a Japanese inventor and
filed in 1980 both in Japan and in the US. This patent enters twice in the patent-portfolio
weight: once for Japan and once for US, since it indicates that both the US and Japan
matter for Hitachi. Hitachi’s 90,381 patents filed between 1965 and 1985 correspond
to only 70,526 distinct inventions (or patent families), some of which were patented in
several countries even though almost all of Hitachi’s R&D activities are conducted in
Japan (we use inventor location below for spillovers - see next section). In order to reflect
the greater importance of larger countries when constructing fuel price weights, we take
each country’s average GDP over 1965-1985 into account (although nothing hinges on this
for the results). The firm-specific weight for country c is thus equal to:

44

sF P GDPc
FP
wic0
= P ic0F P
c sic0 GDPc

(27)

where sFic0P is the share of country c in Hitachi’s patent portfolio between 1965 and 1985
and GDPc is the share of country c in the world’s GDP over 1965-1985. The weights
used for Hitachi are 68.8% for Japan, 23.9% for US and 2.7% for Germany. The weights
summed across all other countries was 4.6% so the total weights sum to 100
FP
, to construct the fuel price, fuel tax, GDP
We use the patent-portfolio weights, wic
per capita and emission regulations variables. Note that in constructing the weights we
use all patent filings from applicant firms who have filed at least one auto-related patent.
These are all applicants who have filed a dirty or clean patent as defined by Table 1 from
the OECD or in an IPC class defined as autos according to the OECD’s cross walk. We
could have also included patent filings by applicants who were part of the auto-related
firms who had never filed for a clean or dirty auto patent according to our definitions.
This would have increased our sample of patent filings from 4.5m to about 16m. We chose
not to do this as many of these patents are only distantly related to autos and so would
not be relevant for tracking the demand for cars. Going in the other direction, we could
narrow our definition to include only patents in IPC classes we deem as clean or dirty and
exclude all other patents by the same applicants. Building weights from this narrower
pool led to similar results to those presented in the main text.
Although we have filings in 80 patent offices, the 25 countries we use for the fuel
price data are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Portugal, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK and the USA.
B.3.2

Weights based on location of inventors

To construct the firm-specific spillover pools in clean and dirty knowledge we use an
analogous empirical strategy to that for the fuel price. The firm-specific spillover pool is
computed as the weighted geometric mean of the knowledge pools across countries with
weights reflecting the shares of the corresponding countries in the firm’s pool of inventors.
The spillover pool for firm i is calculated as:
X
S
wic0
SP ILLzct
(28)
SP ILLzit =
c

where z ∈ {Dirty, Clean} and SP ILLzct is the spillover pool in country c at time t,
S
which can be firm specific (see below). The spillover weight wic0
is the share of all firm i’s
inventors (i.e. where the inventors worked when they discovered the invention) in country
c between 1965 and 1985.
FP
This weight differs from the patent-portfolio weight wic0
described above in two ways.
First, instead of using information on where each patent was filed (for example, the
USPTO) we use the location of the patent inventors (who are more likely to benefit from
other research conducted locally). Inventor countries are counted fractionally, so if a
patent is filed by two inventors, one from Germany and one from the US, each country
will receive one half.54 Note that we use information on the country of residence of the
inventor, not on his nationality. This seems natural because the geographical location of
the inventor is likely to be the critical issue for knowledge spillovers.
54

We do this in order to avoid giving an artificially higher weight to a patent with multiple inventors
compared to one with just a single named inventor

45

The second difference with respect to patent-portfolio weight is that each invention is
only counted once, no matter in how many patent offices it has been filed. This is to avoid
double counting. Returning to Hitachi’s patent 11464997 filed in 1980 both in Japan and
in the US, this patent enters twice in the patent-portfolio weight but only once in the
FP
inventor location weight, as a Japan-developed invention. So although wHitachi,Japan
=
S
0.688 as above, wHitachi,Japan = 0.99. This indicates that although almost all Hitachi’s
R&D is based in Japan, it sells car parts to a much wider geographical market.
The spillover pool SP ILLz,ct is defined as:
X
S
SP ILLz,ct =
Kz,jt
(29)
wjc
j6=i

i.e. the spillover pool of a country is the sum of all other firms’ patent stocks with a weight
that depends on how many inventors the other firm has in that country. The aggregate
stocks in equation (29) are thus entirely based on firm level stocks. This allows us to
make out of sample simulations of aggregate stocks below using firm level equations only.
As an alternative strategy we constructed country level spillover stocks by aggregating
over all patents of inventors based in that country:
X
Kz,cjt
(30)
SP ILLz,ct =
j∈Inventors based in c

where Kz,jct = P ATz,it + (1 − δ)Kz,jt−1 and P ATz,jt are the patents filed that associated
with inventor j in year t. Empirically, both methods give very similar results. For consistency with our simulation results we use the first method (Equation (29)) throughout
the paper.
We also use the inventor weights to construct the amount of R&D in energy-efficient
transportation in country c at time t.

B.4

More descriptive statistics on patents filing and citations

For every patent in our data set, we know whether the invention has also been filed (prior
to or following the first filing of the patent at USPTO, EPO or JPO) at any other patent
office included in PATSTAT (over 80 offices). Table A2 provides information on the
geographical coverage of clean and dirty innovations for some of the main patent offices.
Interestingly, 31% of clean inventions are also patented in China. This is almost twice
the rate for dirty inventions (18%). Germany’s specialization in traditional combustion
engines is apparent from this table, with 61% of dirty patents protected in Germany but
only 41% of clean patents.
When a patent is filed, it must include citations to earlier patents that are related to the
new invention. Citations to earlier patents are indicative of the accumulated knowledge
used by the inventor to develop the new invention (e.g. Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2002).
There are 181,151 citations for all clean and dirty triadic patents included in our data set
(13.1 citations for the average patent). Among patents cited by clean patents, 47% are
clean, whereas 5% are dirty. The remaining 48% refer to other, neither clean nor dirty
(Table A3). If citations were not technology specific we would expect that the likelihood of
a citation to a dirty patent would be three times higher than towards a clean patent. The
likelihood of a clean on clean citations (47%) is almost as high as the likelihood of dirty
on dirty citations (59%). This suggests that within category spillovers are much higher
than between category spillovers. This is consistent with path-dependent innovation as
the theory suggests.
46

B.4.1

Other data

Fuel price and fuel tax come from the International Energy Agency’s Energy Prices and
Taxes database, available online at http://data.iea.org. We use Households End-Use
Prices in USD PPP/unit. Since data are available for both diesel and gasoline fuels, we
define fuel price as the average of diesel and gasoline prices.
Data on public R&D expenditures comes from the IEA’s Energy Technology Research
and Development database, available online at http://data.iea.org. We use Total R&D
in Million USD (2010 prices and exchange rates). We use the data on public R&D
expenditures in ”Energy efficiency - transportation” (Flow 13). This includes: electric
cars, hybrid cars and stirling motors; analysis and optimization of energy consumption in
the transport sector; efficiency improvements in light-duty vehicles, heavy-duty vehicles,
non-road vehicles; public transport systems; engine-fuel optimization; use of alternative
fuels (liquid, gaseous); fuel additives; diesel engines. Note that the IEA also reports R&D
on ”Hydrogen and fuel cells”, in particular ”fuel cells for mobile applications” but the
data only start to be available in 2004, at the very end of our sample.
Data for environmental standards governing maximum permissible levels of tailpipe
emissions for pollutants from new automobiles were sourced from a dataset originally
constructed by Perkins and Neumayer (2012). Countries’ regulatory stringency is coded
on a scale of 0 to 5. The basis of the classification scheme is the European Union’s (EU)
Euro emission standards which were originally implemented across member states in 1992
and have subsequently been tightened in a series of incremental steps. Countries are coded
0 if they had no national emissions standards in place for new vehicles, or if standards
were less stringent than the equivalent of Euro 1, during the year in question. Countries
where Euro 1 or its equivalent was legally enforceable are coded 1, and so on, with 5 for
countries having implemented the equivalent of the Euro 5 standard.
Data on GDP, GDP per capita and population are taken from the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators, available at http://data.worldbank.org/. GDP and GDP
per capita are PPP and constant 2005 USD.
Sales data used to compare the patent weights with sales distribution are from company accounts (see the URLs in notes to Table A1).

47

	  
	  
Figure	  1:	  Average	  fuel	  price	  and	  fuel	  tax	  1986-­‐2005	  
Panel	  A:	  Fuel	  price	  
Panel	  B:	  Fuel	  tax	  
.75
Fuel taxes ($ / liter)

Fuel price ($ / liter)

1.2

1.1

.7
.65
.6

1
.55
.9
1990

1995
Year

2000

2005

1990

1995
Year

Average fuel price

2000

2005

Average fuel tax

Note:	  this	  graph	  shows	  the	  average	  annual	  price	  of	  fuel	  for	  all	  
countries	  available	  in	  the	  IEA	  database.	  The	  fuel	  price	  is	  the	  
average	  between	  diesel	  and	  gasoline	  price.	  Prices	  are	  in	  2005	  
USD	  PPP.	  	  
Source:	  IEA.	  

	  

Note:	  this	  graph	  shows	  the	  average	  annual	  tax	  on	  fuel	  for	  all	  
countries	   available	   in	   the	   IEA	   database.	   The	   fuel	   tax	   is	   the	  
average	  between	  diesel	  and	  gasoline	  tax.	  Tax	  is	  in	  2005	  USD	  
PPP.	  	  
Source:	  IEA.	  

	  
	  
Figure	  2:	  Fuel	  price	  time	  series	  

Fuel price ($ / liter)

2.5

2

1.5

1

.5
1990

1995
Year
USA
UK

France
Germany

2000

2005
Japan

	  

Note:	  this	  graph	  shows	  the	  annual	  price	  of	  fuel	  for	  all	  countries	  available	  in	  the	  IEA	  database.	  The	  fuel	  price	  is	  the	  
average	  between	  diesel	  and	  gasoline	  price.	  Prices	  are	  in	  2005	  USD	  PPP.	  Source:	  IEA.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

	  48	  

	  

Figure	  3:	  Fuel	  Tax	  time	  series	  

1.4

Fuel taxes ($ / liter)

1.2
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
1990

1995
Year
USA
UK

2000

France
Germany

2005
Japan

	  

Note:	  this	  graph	  shows	  the	  average	  annual	  tax	  on	  fuel	  for	  all	  countries	  available	   in	   the	   IEA	   database.	   The	   fuel	   tax	  
is	  the	  average	  between	  diesel	  and	  gasoline	  tax.	  Taxes	  are	  in	  2005	  USD	  PPP.	  	  
Source:	  IEA.	  

	  
	  
Figure	  4:	  Number	  of	  clean	  and	  dirty	  triadic	  patents	  1978-­‐2005	  

1200

Number of patents

1000
800
600
400
200
0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year
Clean

Dirty

	  

Note:	  this	  graph	  shows	  the	  number	  of	  annual	  triadic	  patents	  filed	  worldwide	  between	  1978	  and	  2005	  in	  clean	  
and	  dirty	  technologies.	  	  
Source:	  authors'	  calculations	  based	  on	  the	  PATSTAT	  database.	  

	  

	  49	  

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000
4000
2000

2000

4000

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

Figure	  5:	  Simulations	  over	  time	  of	  the	  effects	  of	  increases	  in	  fuel	  price	  
A:	  No	  change	  in	  fuel	  price	  
B:	  10%	  increase	  in	  fuel	  prices	  

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2005

2010

2015

year

2020

2025

2030

year

Clean Knowledge

Dirty knowledge

Clean Knowledge

Price increase of 0%

	  

	  

4000

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

D:	  30%	  increase	  in	  fuel	  prices	  

2000

2000

4000

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

C:	  20%	  increase	  in	  fuel	  prices	  

Dirty knowledge

Price increase of 10%

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2005

2010

2015

year

2020

2025

2030

year

Clean Knowledge

Dirty knowledge

Clean Knowledge

Price increase of 20%

	  

	  

4000

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

F:	  50%	  increase	  in	  fuel	  prices

2000

2000

4000

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

E:	  40%	  increase	  in	  fuel	  prices

Dirty knowledge

Price increase of 30%

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2005

2010

year
Clean Knowledge
Price increase of 40%

2015

2020

2025

2030

year
Dirty knowledge

Clean Knowledge

	  

Dirty knowledge

Price increase of 50%

Notes:	   these	   graphs	   show	   the	   simulated	   evolution	   of	   the	   aggregate	   clean	   and	   dirty	   knowledge	   stocks	   between	  
2005	   and	   2030	   depending	   on	   the	   variation	   in	   fuel	   prices.	   The	   knowledge	   stock	   is	   the	   discounted	   sum	   of	   past	  
patents.	   Fuel	   prices	   are	   assumed	   to	   increase	   at	   once	   in	   2005	   and	   remain	   constant	   thereafter.	   Simulations	   are	  
based	  on	  CFX	  estimations	  presented	  in	  Table	  6	  columns	  (1)	  and	  (4).	  	  

	  

	  

	  50	  

	  

2000

4000

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

Figure	  6:	  Simulations	  over	  time	  of	  the	  effect	  of	  a	  40%	  increase	  in	  fuel	  prices	  allowing	  for	  a	  
negative	  effect	  of	  the	  carbon	  tax	  on	  GDP	  per	  capita	  growth	  
A:	  Baseline	  case	  :	  No	  effect	  of	  carbon	  tax	  on	  GDP	  per	  capita	  growth	  	  

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

year
Clean Knowledge
Price increase of 40%

Dirty knowledge

	  
C:	  Tax	  reduces	  GDP	  per	  capita	  growth	  by	  0.50	  
percentage	  points	  
Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000
4000
2000

2000

4000

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

B:	  Tax	  reduces	  GDP	  per	  capita	  growth	  by	  0.25	  
percentage	  points	  

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2005

2010

2015

year

2020

2025

2030

year

Clean Knowledge

Dirty knowledge

Clean Knowledge

Price increase of 40%

E:	  Tax	  reduces	  GDP	  per	  capita	  growth	  by	  1.0	  
percentage	  points	  

4000
2000

4000
2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2005

2010

year
Clean Knowledge
Price increase of 40%

2015

2020

2025

2030

year
Dirty knowledge

Clean Knowledge

	  

Dirty knowledge

Price increase of 40%

Notes:	  These	  graphs	  show	  the	  simulated	  evolution	  of	  the	  aggregate	  clean	  and	  dirty	  knowledge	  stocks	  between	  
2005	  and	  2030	  after	  a	  fuel	  price	  increase	  of	  40%	  using	  the	  model	  in	  Table	  6	  columns	  (1)	  and	  (4).	  	  We	  consider	  a	  
negative	   effect	   on	   per	   capita	   GDP	   growth	   of	   the	   carbon	   tax	   of	   between	   zero	   as	   in	   the	   baseline	   case	   (Panel	   A	  
replicates	  Panel	  E	  of	  Figure	  5)	  and	  one	  percentage	  point	  (in	  Panel	  E).	  	  

	  

	  

	  

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

	  

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

D:	  Tax	  reduces	  GDP	  per	  capita	  growth	  by	  0.75	  
percentage	  points	  

Dirty knowledge

Price increase of 40%

	  51	  

	  

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000
4000
2000

2000

4000

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

Figure	  7:	  Simulations	  over	  time	  based	  on	  partial	  updating	  of	  innovation	  stock	  variables	  
	  
A:	  No	  change	  in	  fuel	  price	  
B:	  40%	  increase	  in	  fuel	  prices	  

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2005

2010

2015

2020

year

2025

2030

year

Clean Knowledge

Dirty knowledge

Clean Knowledge

Price increase of 0%

	  

	  

4000

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

D:	  40%	  increase	  in	  fuel	  prices,	  no	  change	  in	  
own	  stocks	  and	  no	  change	  in	  spillovers	  

2000

2000

4000

Knowledge Stocks
6000 8000 10000 12000

C	  :	  No	  change	  fuel	  price,	  no	  change	  in	  own	  
stocks	  and	  no	  change	  in	  spillovers	  

Dirty knowledge

Price increase of 40%

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2005

2010

year
Clean Knowledge
Price increase of 0%

2015

2020

2025

2030

year
Dirty knowledge

Clean Knowledge

	  

Price increase of 40%

Dirty knowledge

	  

	  
Notes:	   these	   graphs	   show	   the	   simulated	   evolution	   of	   the	   aggregate	   clean	   and	   dirty	   knowledge	   stocks	   between	  
2005	   and	   2030.	   The	   knowledge	   stock	   is	   the	   discounted	   sum	   of	   past	   patents.	   Fuel	   prices	   are	   assumed	   to	   increase	  
at	   once	   in	   2005	   and	   remain	   constant	   thereafter.	   In	   Panels	   A	   and	   B	   knowledge	   stocks	   and	   spillover	   stocks	   are	  
recursively	  updated	  using	  the	  estimates	  from	  Table	  6	  columns	  (1)	  and	  (4).	  In	  panels	  C	  and	  D	  we	  switch	  off	  the	  
effects	  of	  past	  innovation	  stocks	  by	  the	  firm	  itself	  and	  of	  spillovers.	   In	  all	  figures	  we	  assume	  a	  1.5%	  growth	  rate	  
of	  per	  capita	  GDP.	  	  

	  
	  

	  

	  52	  

Table	  1:	  Definition	  of	  IPC	  patent	  classes	  for	  clean	  and	  dirty	  patents	  
	  
Panel	  A-­‐	  Clean	  patents	  

Description

IPC code

Electric vehicles
Electric propulsion with power supplied within the vehicle
Electric devices on electrically-propelled vehicles for safety
purposes; Monitoring operating variables, e.g. speed, deceleration,
power consumption
Methods, circuits, or devices for controlling the traction- motor
speed of electrically-propelled vehicles
Arrangement or mounting of electrical propulsion units
Conjoint control of vehicle sub-units of different type or different
function / including control of electric propulsion units, e.g. motors
or generators / including control of energy storage means / for
electrical energy, e.g. batteries or capacitors
Hybrid vehicles
Arrangement or mounting of plural diverse prime-movers for
mutual or common propulsion, e.g. hybrid propulsion systems
comprising electric motors and internal combustion engines
Control systems specially adapted for hybrid vehicles, i.e. vehicles
having two or more prime movers of more than one type, e.g.
electrical and internal combustion motors, all used for propulsion
of the vehicle
Regenerative braking
Dynamic electric regenerative braking
Braking by supplying regenerated power to the prime mover of
vehicles comprising engine -driven generators
Hydrogen vehicles / fuel cells
Conjoint control of vehicle sub-units of different type or different
function; including control of fuel cells
Electric propulsion with power supplied within the vehicle - using
power supplied from primary cells, secondary cells, or fuel cells
Fuel cells; Manufacture thereof

	  

	  

B60L 11
B60L 3
B60L 15
B60K 1
B60W 10/08, 24,
26

B60K 6

B60W 20

B60L 7/1
B60L 7/20

B60W 10/28
B60L 11/18
H01M 8
	  

	  

	  53	  

Panel	  B-­‐	  Dirty	  patents	  

Description
Internal combustion engine
Internal-combustion piston engines; combustion engines in general
Controlling combustion engines
Cylinders, pistons, or casings for combustion engines; arrangement
of sealings in combusion engines
Suplying combusion engines with combustible mixtures or
constituents thereof
Starting of combusion engines
Ignition (other than compression ignition) for internal-combustion
engines

IPC code
F02B
F02D
F02F
F02M
F02N
F02P
	  

	  
Panel	  C-­‐	  Grey	  patents	  

Description
Fuel efficiency of internal combustion engines
Fuel injection apparatus
Idling devices for carburettors preventing flow of idling fuel
Apparatus for adding secondary air to fuel-air mixture
Engine-pertinent apparatus for adding non-fuel substances or small
quantities of secondary fuel to combustion-air, main fuel, or fuel-air
mixture
Electrical control of supply of combustible mixture or its constituents
Methods of operating engines involving adding non-fuel substances
or anti-knock agents to combustion air, fuel, or fuel-air mixtures of
engines, the substances including non-airborne oxygen

	  

	  

	  54	  

IPC code
F02M39-71
F02M3/02-05
F02M23
F02M25
F02D41
F02B47/06

	  

	  

	  
Table	  2:	  Descriptive	  statistics	  	  
Variable	  

Mean	  

SD	  

Min	  

Max	  

Clean	  Patents	  (𝑃𝐴𝑇!"#$% )	  

0.081	  

1.231	  

0	  

125	  

Dirty	  Patents	  (𝑃𝐴𝑇!"#$% )	  

0.227	  

3.424	  

0	  

355	  

Fuel	  Price	  (ln 𝐹𝑃)	  

-0.276	  

0.251	  

-1.053	  

0.438	  

Government	  R&D	  subsidies	  	  (ln R&𝐷)	  

3.885	  

1.447	  

0	  

5.725	  

Emission  Regulations	  Index	  

1.573	  

1.334	  

0	  

5	  

Clean  Spillover  (ln 𝑆𝑃𝐼𝐿𝐿! )	  

3.774

1.258

-9.864

7.071

5.401

0.991

-5.509

7.677

Own	  Stock	  Clean	  innovation	  (ln 𝐾! )	  

-0.174	  

0.790	  

-6.718	  

5.740	  

Own	  Stock	  Dirty	  innovation	  (ln 𝐾! )	  

-0.910	  

1.618	  

-7.593	  

6.958	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

Dirty  Spillover  (ln 𝑆𝑃𝐼𝐿𝐿! )

	  

Notes:	  These	  are	  the	  values	  from	  our	  regression	  sample	  of	  68,240	  observations	  across	  3,412	  firms	  between	  1986	  and	  2005.	  
Emission	  Regulations	  for	  maximum	  level	  of	  tailpipe	  emissions	  for	  pollutants	  for	  new	  automobiles	  are	  coded	  between	  0	  and	  5	  
following	  Dechezlepretre,	  Perkins	  and	  Neumayer	  (2012).	  Government	  R&D	  subsidies	  on	  clean	  transportation	  is	  from	  the	  IEA.	  
See	  Appendix	  B	  for	  exact	  definitions	  

	  
	  
Table	  3:	  	  Regressions	  of	  clean	  and	  dirty	  patents	  	  

	  
	  
Dependent	  Variable	  

(1)	  

(3)	  

(4)	  

Clean	  Patents	  

	  

Fuel	  Price	  	  
ln(FP)	  
R&D	  subsidies	  
ln(R&D)	  
Emission	  Regulation	  

(2)	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
0.268***	  
(0.076)	  
-0.168**	  
(0.085)	  
0.306***	  
(0.026)	  
0.139***	  
(0.017)	  

0.962**	  
(0.379)	  
-0.005	  
(0.025)	  
	  
	  
0.301***	  
(0.087)	  
-0.207**	  
(0.098)	  
0.320***	  
(0.027)	  
0.135***	  
(0.017)	  

0.886**	  
(0.362)	  
-0.001	  
(0.024)	  
0.055	  
(0.276)	  
0.266***	  
(0.087)	  
-0.160*	  
(0.097)	  
0.303***	  
(0.026)	  
0.139***	  
(0.017)	  

-0.565***	  
(0.146)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
-0.093*	  
(0.048)	  
0.151**	  
(0.064)	  
-0.002	  
(0.022)	  
0.557***	  
(0.031)	  

	  
	  
Observations	  

	  
68240	  

	  
68240	  

	  
68240	  

Firms	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

	  
Clean	  
Spillover	  
	  
Dirty	  
Spillover	  
	  
Own	  
Stock	  Clean	  
	  Own	  Stock	  Dirty	  

(6)	  

Dirty	  Patents	  

	  

0.970***	  
(0.374)	  

(5)	  

-0.553***	  
(0.205)	  
-0.006	  
(0.021)	  
	  
	  
-0.078	  
(0.067)	  
0.132	  
(0.082)	  
-0.004	  
(0.022)	  
0.549***	  
(0.022)	  

-0.644***	  
(0.143)	  
-0.014	  
(0.021)	  
0.046	  
(0.197)	  
-0.058	  
(0.066)	  
0.114	  
(0.081)	  
0.016	  
(0.026)	  
0.542***	  
(0.020)	  

	  
68240	  

	  
68240	  

	  
68240	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

	  
Notes:	   *,**,***=	   significant	   at	   10,%	   5%,	   1%.	   Standard	   errors	   are	   clustered	   at	   the	   firm	   level.	   	   Estimation	   is	   by	   the	   CFX	   method.	  
All	  regressions	  include	  controls	  for	  GDP	  per	  capita,	  year	  dummies,	  fixed	  effects	  and	  three	  dummies	  for	  no	  clean	  knowledge,	  
no	   dirty	   knowledge	   and	   no	   dirty	   or	   clean	   knowledge	   (in	   the	   previous	   year).	   Fuel	   price	   is	   the	   tax-­‐fuel	   price	   faced.	   .	   R&D	  
subsidies	   are	   public	   R&D	   expenditures	   in	   energy	   efficient	   transportation.	   Emissions	   Regulations	   are	   maximum	   levels	   of	  
tailpipe	  emissions	  for	  pollutants	  from	  new	  automobiles.	  	  The	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  clean	  patents	  in	  columns	  (1)-­‐
(3)	  and	  the	  flow	  of	  dirty	  patents	  in	  columns	  (4)-­‐(6).	  

	  

	  

	  55	  

	  

Table	  4:	  	  Disaggregating	  dirty	  patents	  into	  fuel	  efficiency	  for	  internal	  combustion	  engine	  (grey)	  
and	  purely	  dirty	  
	  
Dependent	  variable:	  
	  Fuel	  Price	  
	  
R&D	  subsidies	  
	  
Clean	  Spillover	  
	  
Grey	  
Spillover	  
	  
Purely	  
Dirty	  Spillover	  
	  
Own	  Stock	  Clean	  
	  
Own	  
Stock	  Grey	  

(1)	  
Clean	  
Patents	  
0.848*	  
(0.461)	  
0.031
(0.047)
0.333**	  
(0.165)	  
0.215	  
(0.228)	  
-0.509	  
(0.377)	  
0.379***	  
(0.090)	  
0.185*	  
(0.106)	  
-0.011	  
(0.066)	  
	  

(2)	  
Grey	  
Patents	  
0.282	  
(0.398)	  
0.081**
(0.034)
-0.171*	  
(0.098)	  
0.173	  
(0.112)	  
0.045	  
(0.136)	  
-0.005	  
(0.035)	  
0.418***	  
(0.035)	  
0.192***	  
(0.038)	  
	  

(3)	  
Purely	  	  Dirty	  
Patents	  
-0.832***	  
(0.214)	  
-0.02
(0.030)
-0.014	  
(0.094)	  
0.235**	  
(0.102)	  
-0.208	  
(0.161)	  
0.047	  
(0.035)	  
-0.141***	  
(0.025)	  
0.544***	  
(0.026)	  
	  

	  Own	  Stock	  Purely	  Dirty	  
	  
	  
Observations	  
68240	  
68240	  
68240	  
Firms	  
3412	  
3412	  
3412	  
	  
Notes:	  *,**,**=	  significant	  at	  10,%	  5%,	  1%.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  firm	  level.	  	  Estimation	  is	  by	  the	  CFX	  method.	  
This	  table	  disaggregates	  the	  dirty	  patents	  into	  those	  that	  are	  “grey”	  (related	  to	  fuel	  efficiency)	  and	  those	  that	  are	  not	  (“purely	  
dirty”).	   We	   construct	   all	   spillovers	   and	   own	   past	   stocks	   based	   on	   this	   disaggregation	   and	   include	   on	   the	   right	   hand	   side	  
(hence	   two	   extra	   terms	   compared	   to	   Table	   3).	   We	   estimate	   two	   dirty	   equations,	   one	   where	   grey	   innovations	   are	   the	  
dependent	  variable	  (in	  column	  (2))	  and	  one	  for	  the	  purely	  dirty	  in	  column	  (3).	  All	  regressions	  include	  controls	  for	  GDP	  per	  
capita,	  year	  dummies,	  fixed	  effects	  and	  4	  dummies	  for	  no	  own	  innovations	  in	  (i)	  clean,	  (ii)	  grey	  (iii)	  dirty	  and	  (iv)	  	  no	  clean,	  
grey	   nor	   purely	   dirty	   in	   the	   previous	   year.	   Fuel	   price	   is	   the	   tax-­‐inclusive	   fuel	   price	   faced.	   R&D	   subsidies	   are	   public	   R&D	  
expenditures	  in	  energy	  efficient	  transportation.	  
	  

	  

	  

	  56	  

	  

	  
Table	  5:	  Alternative	  Econometric	  Models	  
(1)	  

(2)	  

(3)	  

(4)	  

(5)	  

	  
Clean	  Patents	  
Dependent	  Variable	  
Model	  
Fuel	  Price	  
	  Clean	  Spillover	  
	  
Dirty	  
Spillover	  
	  Own	  Stock	  Clean	  
	  
Own	  
Stock	  Dirty	  
	  
	  
Country	  X	  year	  effects	  

Firm	  fixed	  effects	  
Observations	  
Firms	  

HHG	  
0.295	  
(1.062)	  
0.495**	  
(0.236)	  
-­‐0.409	  
(0.484)	  
0.424***	  
(0.051)	  
0.133	  
(0.087)	  
	  

no	  

Difference	  between	  Clean	  and	  Dirty	  
ln 1 + PAT!"#$% −	  
ln  (1 + PAT!"#$% )	  
Quasi	  Linear	  Within	  Groups	  
0.141**	  
0.143**	  
(0.061)	  
(0.061)	  
-­‐0.007	  
-­‐0.009	  
(0.007)	  
(0.007)	  
0.015	  
0.010	  
(0.014)	  
(0.014)	  
0.048***	  
0.059***	  
(0.007)	  
(0.011)	  
-­‐0.016***	  
-­‐0.010	  
(0.004)	  
(0.008)	  

Dirty	  Patents	  

BGVR	  
0.672**	  
(0.332)	  
0.294***	  
(0.077)	  
-­‐0.277***	  
(0.084)	  
0.883***	  
(0.031)	  
0.091***	  
(0.029)	  

HHG	  
-­‐2.457***	  
(0.897)	  
0.393**	  
(0.197)	  
0.254	  
(0.300)	  
0.042	  
(0.036)	  
0.648***	  
(0.042)	  

	  

	  

no	  

no	  

(6)	  

BGVR	  
-­‐0.614***	  
(0.192)	  
-­‐0.136**	  
(0.054)	  
0.198***	  
(0.065)	  
-­‐0.003	  
(0.021)	  
1.069***	  
(0.022)	  
	  

	  

no	  

	  

no	  

Yes	  

yes	  

yes	  

yes	  

yes	  

yes	  

Yes	  

22420	  
1121	  

68240	  

42300	  

68240	  

68240	  

68240	  

3412	  

2115	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

Notes:	   *,**,**=	   significant	   at	   10,%	   5%,	   1%.	   Standard	   errors	   are	   clustered	   at	   the	   firm	   level.	   	   Regressions	   are	   same	  
specifications	  as	  Table	  3,	  i.e.	  column	  (3)	  for	  clean	  and	  column	  (6)	  for	  dirty.	  Fuel	  price	  is	  the	  tax-­‐	  inclusive	  fuel	  price	  faced	  by	  
the	  firm.	  The	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  clean	  patents	  in	  columns	  (1)-­‐(2),	  the	  flow	  of	  dirty	  patents	  in	  columns	  (3)-­‐(4)	  
and	  the	  log-­‐ratio	  of	  clean	  to	  dirty	  patents	  in	  columns	  (5)	  and	  (6).	  Different	  columns	  control	  for	  fixed	  effects	  in	  different	  ways:	  
HHG	  is	  the	  Hausman,	  Hall	  and	  Griliches	  (1984),	  BGVR	  is	  Blundell,	  Griffith	  and	  Van	  Reenen	  (1999)	  and	  last	  two	  columns	  are	  
Within	  Groups	  (i.e.	  adding	  a	  dummy	  variable	  for	  each	  firm).	  

	  
Table	  6:	  Regressions	  for	  sample	  of	  firms	  with	  at	  least	  one	  pre-­‐sample	  clean	  or	  dirty	  patent	  
	  
Dependent	  variable	  

(1)	  

Model	  

CFX	  

Fuel	  Price	  
	  
Clean	  Spillover	  
	  
Dirty	  Spillover	  
	  
Own	  Stock	  Clean	  
	  
Own	  Stock	  Dirty	  
	  
	  
Observations	  
Firms	  

(2)	  
Clean	  Patents	  

(3)	  

(4)	  

(5)	  
Dirty	  Patents	  

(6)	  

HHG	  

BGVR	  

CFX	  

HHG	  

BGVR	  

0.632**	  
(0.296)	  
0.240***	  
(0.068)	  
-0.152**	  
(0.074)	  
0.300***	  
(0.025)	  
0.142***	  
(0.017)	  
	  
25400	  

-0.293	  
(1.091)	  
0.451*	  
(0.247)	  
-0.223	  
(0.473)	  
0.403***	  
(0.060)	  
0.13	  
(0.089)	  
	  
7900	  

0.825**	  
(0.331)	  
0.317***	  
(0.076)	  
-0.281***	  
(0.085)	  
0.834***	  
(0.038)	  
0.098***	  
(0.032)	  
	  
25400	  

-0.580***	  
(0.147)	  
-0.07	  
(0.051)	  
0.139**	  
(0.068)	  
-0.001	  
(0.027)	  
0.523***	  
(0.018)	  
	  
25400	  

-2.194***	  
(0.738)	  
0.358	  
(0.230)	  
0.395	  
(0.280)	  
0.126***	  
(0.037)	  
0.467***	  
(0.045)	  
	  
13340	  

-0.488***	  
(0.171)	  
-0.126**	  
(0.057)	  
0.197***	  
(0.069)	  
0.002	  
(0.021)	  
1.040***	  
(0.022)	  
	  
25400	  

1270	  

395	  

1270	  

1270	  

667	  

1270	  

Notes:	   *,**,**=	   significant	   at	   10,%	   5%,	   1%.	   Standard	   errors	   are	   clustered	   at	   the	   firm	   level.	   	  This	  is	  a	  sub-­‐sample	   of	   the	   data	   in	  
Table	  3	  where	  we	  condition	  on	  firms	  having	  at	  least	  one	  patent	  in	  the	  pre-­‐sample	  period.	  is	  All	  regressions	  include	  controls	  
for	  GDP	  per	  capita,	  fixed	  effects,	  year	  dummies,	  three	  dummies	  for	  no	  clean	  knowledge,	  no	  dirty	  knowledge	  and	  no	  dirty	  or	  
clean	   knowledge	   (in	   the	   previous	   year).	   Fuel	   price	   is	   the	   tax-­‐	   inclusive	   fuel	   price	   faced	   by	   the	   firm.	   The	   dependent	   variable	   is	  
the	  flow	  of	  clean	  patents	  in	  columns	  (1)-­‐(3)	  and	  the	  flow	  of	  dirty	  patents	  in	  columns	  (4)-­‐(6).	  HHG	  is	  the	  Hausman	  et	  al	  (1984)	  
method;	  BGVR	  is	  the	  Blundell	  et	  al	  (1999)	  method	  and	  CFX	  is	  the	  Control	  Function	  Fixed	  Effect	  method.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  57	  

Table	  7:	  Regressions	  with	  fuel	  taxes	  instead	  of	  fuel	  price	  
	  
Dependent	  variable	  
Model	  
Fuel	  Tax	  
	  Clean	  Spillover	  
	  
Dirty	  Spillover	  
	  
Own	  Stock	  Clean	  
	  Own	  Stock	  Dirty	  
	  	  
Observations	  
Firms	  

(1)	  

(2)	  
Clean	  Patents	  

(3)	  

(4)	  

(5)	  
Dirty	  Patents	  

(6)	  

CFX	  

HHG	  

BGVR	  

CFX	  

HHG	  

BGVR	  

0.400**	  
(0.167)	  
0.284***	  
(0.075)	  
-0.193**	  
(0.084)	  
0.327***	  
(0.027)	  
0.134***	  
(0.017)	  
	  
68240	  

-0.969	  
(0.901)	  
0.442*	  
(0.228)	  
-0.433	  
(0.487)	  
0.430***	  
(0.052)	  
0.126	  
(0.087)	  
	  
22420	  
1121	  

0.227	  
(0.203)	  
0.286***	  
(0.077)	  
-0.275***	  
(0.077)	  
0.884***	  
(0.032)	  
0.091***	  
(0.029)	  
	  
68240	  

-0.229***	  
(0.069)	  
-0.085*	  
(0.047)	  
0.141**	  
(0.061)	  
-0.008	  
(0.021)	  
0.546***	  
(0.028)	  
	  
68240	  

-2.643***	  
(0.850)	  
0.394	  
(0.257)	  
0.093	  
(0.288)	  
0.051	  
(0.036)	  
0.645***	  
(0.041)	  
	  
42300	  

-0.301***	  
(0.091)	  
-0.142***	  
(0.049)	  
0.204***	  
(0.063)	  
-0.005	  
(0.021)	  
1.071***	  
(0.022)	  
	  
68240	  

3412	  

3412	  

2115	  

3412	  

3412	  

Notes:	  *,**,**=	  significant	  at	  10,%	  5%,	  1%.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  firm	  level.	  	  All	  regressions	  include	  controls	  for	  
GDP	   per	   capita,	   year	   dummies,	   and	   three	   dummies	   for	   no	   clean	   knowledge,	   no	   dirty	   knowledge	   and	   no	   dirty	   or	   clean	  
knowledge	  in	  the	  previous	  year.	  The	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  clean	  patents	  in	  columns	  (1)-­‐(3)	  and	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  dirty	  
patents	  in	  columns	  (4)-­‐(6).	  HHG	  is	  the	  Hausman	  et	  al	  (1984)	  method	  and	  BGVR	  is	  the	  Blundell	  et	  al	  (1999)	  method.	  
	  

Table	  8:	  Alternative	  sample	  period	  	  
(pre-­‐sample	  period	  for	  weights	  from	  1990	  and	  before,	  regressions	  run	  on	  data	  1991-­‐2005)	  
(1)	  
(2)	  
(3)	  
	  	  	  
(4)	  
(5)	  
(6)	  
	  
Clean	  Patents	  
	  
	  	  	  
	  
Dirty	  Patents	  
	  
CFX	  
HHG	  
BGVR	  
	  	  	  
CFX	  
HHG	  
BGVR	  
-­‐0.742	  
-­‐0.038	  
	  	  	  
-­‐2.547***	   -­‐0.602**	  
0.806**	  
-0.235	  
(1.110)	  
(0.315)	   	  	  	  
(0.904)	  
(0.273)	  
(0.341)	  
(0.233)	  
	  Clean	  Spillover	  
0.177**	  
0.684*	  
0.390***	   	  	  	  
-0.05	  
0.763*	  
-­‐0.066	  
(0.077)	  
(0.381)	  
(0.111)	   	  	  	  
(0.066)	  
(0.397)	  
(0.093)	  
	  
-0.106	  
-­‐0.31	  
-­‐0.367***	   	  	  	  
0.136*	  
0.024	  
0.134	  
Dirty	  
Spillover	  
(0.084)	  
(0.549)	  
(0.138)	   	  	  	  
(0.075)	  
(0.334)	  
(0.094)	  
	  Own	  Stock	  Clean	  
0.258***	  
0.892***	   	  	  	  
0.128**	  
0.024	  
0.349***	  
0.009	  
(0.069)	  
(0.035)	   	  	  	  
(0.051)	  
(0.022)	  
(0.023)	  
(0.032)	  
	  Own	  Stock	  Dirty	  
0.153	  
0.138***	   	  	  	   0.519***	  
0.318***	  
1.098***	  
0.136***	  
(0.097)	  
(0.042)	   	  	  	  
(0.060)	  
(0.032)	  
(0.018)	  
(0.053)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  
Observations	  
50820	  
15105	  
50820	  
	  	  	  
50820	  
23985	  
50820	  
Firms	  
3388	  
1007	  
3388	  
	  	  	  
3388	  
1599	  
3388	  
Notes:	  *,**,**=	  significant	  at	  10,%	  5%,	  1%.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  firm	  level.	  	  All	  regressions	  include	  controls	  for	  
GDP	   per	   capita,	   year	   dummies,	   and	   three	   dummies	   for	   no	   clean	   knowledge,	   no	   dirty	   knowledge	   and	   no	   dirty	   or	   clean	  
knowledge	   in	   the	   previous	   year.	   Fuel	   price	   is	   the	   tax-­‐	   inclusive	   fuel	   price	   faced	   by	   the	   firm	   (using	   pre-­‐sample	   patent	  
portfolios	   as	   weights).	   The	   dependent	   variable	   is	   the	   flow	   of	   clean	   patents	   in	   columns	   (1)-­‐(3)	   and	   the	   flow	   of	   dirty	   patents	   in	  
columns	  (4)-­‐(6).	  HHG	  is	  the	  Hausman	  et	  al	  (1984)	  method	  and	  BGVR	  is	  the	  Blundell	  et	  al	  (1999)	  method.	  
	  
Dependent	  variable	  
Model	  
Fuel	  Price	  

	  

	  

	  58	  

Table	  9:	  	  Alternative	  dynamic	  specifications	  on	  fuel	  price	  
	  
Dependent	  Variable	  

(1)	  

(2)	  
(3)	  
(4)	  
Clean	  Patents	  

	  

	  

(5)	  

	  

	  

(6)	  

(7)	  

	  

	  

(8)	  
(9)	  
Dirty	  Patents	  

(10)	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
0.882**
-0.550***
Fuel	  Price	  in	  t	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
(0.354)
(0.152)
ln(FPt)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
0.970***
-0.565***
Fuel	  Price	  in	  t-­‐1	  
(0.374)
	  
	  
(0.146)
	  
	  
ln(FPt-­‐1)	  
1.102***	  
	  
	  
-0.568***	  
	  
	  
Fuel	  Price	  in	  t-­‐2	  
(0.390)	  
	  
	  
(0.140)	  
	  
	  
ln(FPt-­‐2)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
1.081***	  
	  
	  
-0.571***	  
	  
Fuel	  Price	  in	  t-­‐3	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
(0.401)	  
(0.138)	  
ln(FPt-­‐3)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
1.047***	  
-0.591***	  
Fuel	  Price	  (Popp,	  2002)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
(0.403)	  
(0.157)	  
ln(FPPopp)	  

	  
Observations	  
Firms	  

	  

	  
	  
68240	  

	  
68240	  

	  

68240	  

	  
68240	  

	  

68240	  

68240	  

68240	  

	  
68240	  

	  
68240	  

	  
68240	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

3412	  

	  
Notes:	   *,**,***=	   significant	   at	   10,%	   5%,	   1%.	   Standard	   errors	   are	   clustered	   at	   the	   firm	   level.	   	   Estimation	   is	   by	   the	   CFX	   method.	  
All	   regressions	   include	   controls	   for	   GDP	   per	   capita,	   year	   dummies,	   fixed	   effects	   (BGV	   method)	   and	   three	   dummies	   for	   no	  
clean	  knowledge,	  no	  dirty	  knowledge	  and	  no	  dirty	  or	  clean	  knowledge	  in	  the	  previous	  year.	  Fuel	  price	  is	  the	  tax-­‐inclusive	  fuel	  
price.	   FPPopp	  is	   the	   geometrically	   weighted	   average	   fuel	   price	   from	   1978	   until	   current	   year	   with	   a	   discount	   factor	   of	   0.829	  
(following	  Popp,	  2002).	  The	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  clean	  patents	  in	  columns	  (1)-­‐(5)	  and	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  dirty	  patents	  
in	  columns	  (6)-­‐(10).	  HHG	  is	  the	  Hausman	  et	  al	  (1984)	  method	  and	  BGVR	  is	  the	  Blundell	  et	  al	  (1999)	  method.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

	  59	  

WEB	  APPENDIX:	  NOT	  INTENDED	  FOR	  PUBLICATION	  UNLESS	  REQUESTED	  
	  

	  
Figure	  A1:	  Front	  page	  of	  patent	  US	  6456041	  B1	  

	  

	  

	  60	  

F02F

F02

COMBUSTION ENGINES;
HOT-GAS
OR COMBUSTION-PRODUCT
Figure	  
A2:	  Disaggregation	  
of	  F02F	  group	   ENGINE PLANTS

	  
XXXX
F02F
F02F
XXXX

F02F

CYLINDERS, PISTONS, OR CASINGS FOR COMBUSTION ENGINES; ARRANGEMENTS OF SEALINGS IN
COMBUSTION ENGINES (specially adapted for rotary-piston or oscillating-piston internal-combustion engines F02B; specially
adapted for gas-turbine plants F02C; specially adapted for jet-propulsion plants F02K) [2]

(1)
(2)

Attention is drawn to the Notes preceding class F01.
Class F16 takes precedence over this subclass, except for subject matter specific to combustion engines.

1 / 00
1 / 02
1 / 04
1 / 06
1 / 08
1 / 10
1 / 12
1 / 14
1 / 16
1 / 18
1 / 20
1 / 22
1 / 24
1 / 26
1 / 28
1 / 30
1 / 32
1 / 34

1 / 36
1 / 38

Cylinders; Cylinder heads (in general F16J)
. having cooling means (cylinder heads F02F 1/26)
. . for air cooling
. . . Shape or arrangement of cooling fins; Finned
cylinders
. . . . running-liner and cooling-part of cylinder
being different parts or of different material
. . for liquid cooling
. . . Preventing corrosion of liquid-swept surfaces
. . . Cylinders with means for directing, guiding, or
distributing liquid stream
. . . Cylinder liners of wet type
. Other cylinders
. . characterised by constructional features providing
for lubrication
. . characterised by having ports in cylinder wall for
scavenging or charging
. Cylinder heads
. . having cooling means
. . . for air cooling
. . . . Finned cylinder heads
. . . . . the cylinder heads being of overheadvalve type
. . . . . with means for directing or distributing
cooling medium (F02F 1/32 takes
precedence)
. . . for liquid cooling
. . . . the cylinder heads being of overhead-valve
type

1 / 40

1 / 42
3 / 00
3 / 02

3 / 28

Pistons (in general F16J)
. having means for accommodating or controlling heat
expansion
. . having expansion-controlling inserts
. . . the inserts having bimetallic effect
. . . the inserts being ring-shaped
. having surface coverings (F02F 3/02 takes
precedence)
. . on piston heads
. . . within combustion chambers
. having cooling means
. . the means being a liquid or solid coolant,
e.g. sodium, in a closed chamber in piston
. . the means being a fluid flowing through or along
piston
. . . the fluid being liquid
. having means for guiding gases in cylinders, e.g. for
guiding scavenging charge in two-stroke engines
. having combustion chamber in piston head (the
surface thereof being covered F02F 3/14)
. Other pistons with specially-shaped head

5 / 00

Piston rings, e.g. associated with piston crown

7 / 00

Casings, e.g. crankcases (engine casings in general
F16M)

11 / 00

Arrangements of sealings in combustion engines
(piston rings F02F 5/00; sealings per se F16J)

3 / 04
3 / 06
3 / 08
3 / 10
3 / 12
3 / 14
3 / 16
3 / 18
3 / 20
3 / 22
3 / 24
3 / 26

	  

	  

	  

	  

(2012.01), F

	  

. . . . cylinder heads with means for directing,
guiding, or distributing liquid stream
(F02F 1/38 takes precedence)
. . Shape or arrangement of intake or exhaust
channels in cylinder heads

1

	  61	  

Figure	  A3:	  Front	  page	  and	  diagram	  for	  patent	  EP	  0979940	  B1	  
	  
European Patent Office

*EP000979940B1*

Office européen des brevets

(11)

Europäisches Patentamt

(19)

EP 0 979 940 B1

EUROPEAN PATENT SPECIFICATION

(12)

(45) Date of publication and mention

(51) Int Cl.7: F02M 59/44, F02M 59/36,

of the grant of the patent:
17.11.2004 Bulletin 2004/47

F02M 63/02, F02M 39/00,
F02D 41/06, F02D 41/38,
F02M 69/34, F02M 39/02

(21) Application number: 99115753.8
(22) Date of filing: 10.08.1999

(54) Method and device for controlling fuel injection into an internal combustion engine
Verfahren und Vorrichtung zum Steuern der Kraftstoffeinspritzung in einer Brenkraftmaschine
Procédé et dispositif de commande de l’injection de carburant dans un moteur à combustion interne
(84) Designated Contracting States:

• Suzui, Kosuke, c/o Toyota Jidosha K. K.
Toyota-shi, Aichi-ken, 471-8571 (JP)

DE ES FR GB IT SE

(30) Priority: 11.08.1998 JP 22690898

(74) Representative:
Leson, Thomas Johannes Alois, Dipl.-Ing. et al
TBK-Patent,
P.O. Box 20 19 18
80019 München (DE)

(43) Date of publication of application:
16.02.2000 Bulletin 2000/07

(73) Proprietor: TOYOTA JIDOSHA KABUSHIKI
(56) References cited:

KAISHA
Aichi-ken 471-8571 (JP)

EP-A- 0 481 964
US-A- 5 063 900

EP-A- 0 677 655
US-A- 5 605 133

(72) Inventors:
• PATENT ABSTRACTS OF JAPAN vol. 1998, no.
01, 30 January 1998 (1998-01-30) & JP 09 250426
A (TOYOTA MOTOR CORP), 22 September 1997
(1997-09-22)

EP 0 979 940 B1

• Koga, Nobuhiko, c/o Toyota Jidosha K. K.
Toyota-shi, Aichi-ken, 471-8571 (JP)
• Kojima, Susumu, c/o Toyota Jidosha K. K.
Toyota-shi, Aichi-ken, 471-8571 (JP)
• Takeda, Keiso, c/o Toyota Jidosha K. K.
Toyota-shi, Aichi-ken, 471-8571 (JP)

Note: Within nine months from the publication of the mention of the grant of the European patent, any person may give
notice to the European Patent Office of opposition to the European patent granted. Notice of opposition shall be filed in
a written reasoned statement. It shall not be deemed to have been filed until the opposition fee has been paid. (Art.
99(1) European Patent Convention).
Printed by Jouve, 75001 PARIS (FR)

	  

	  

	  

	  62	  

	  

Figure	  A3:	  Front	  page	  and	  diagram	  for	  patent	  EP	  0979940	  B1	  –	  cont.	  

	  

	  

	  

11

	  

	  63	  

	  
Figure	  A4:	  Front	  page	  and	  diagram	  for	  patent	  EP	  0402091	  B1	  
	  	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  64	  

	  
Figure	  A4:	  Front	  page	  and	  diagram	  for	  patent	  EP	  0402091	  B1	  –	  cont.	  

	  

	  

	  
	  

	  65	  

	  

0

.2

Patent weight
.4
.6

.8

1

Figure	  A5:	  Patent	  weights	  vs	  inventor	  weights	  for	  US	  

0

.2

.4
.6
Inventor weight

.8

1

	  

Notes:	  this	  graph	  shows	  the	  share	  of	  companies'	  patent	  portfolio	  at	  the	  USPTO	  (on	  the	  y-­‐axis)	  together	  with	  the	  
share	   of	   inventors	   located	   in	   the	   US	   for	   the	   same	   companies	   (on	   the	   x-­‐axis).	   The	   patent	   weight	   is	   used	   to	  
calculate	  the	  firm-­‐level	  fuel	  price	  and	  the	  inventor	  weight	  is	  used	  to	  calculate	  the	  firm-­‐level	  spillover	  variables.	  
Each	  point	  corresponds	  to	  a	  combination	  of	  patent	  weight	  and	  inventor	  weight	  for	  the	  US	  for	  a	  given	  company.	  	  
We	  see	  (along	  the	  y-­‐axis)	  that	  many	  companies	  file	  patent	  in	  the	  US	  but	  do	  not	  carry	  out	  R&D	  in	  this	  country.	  
There	  are	  also	  a	  few	  companies	  (along	  the	  x-­‐axis),	  which	  have	  R&D	  labs	  in	  the	  US	  but	  file	  their	  patents	  only	  in	  
foreign	  countries.	  	  

	  

	  

	  66	  

0

1000

Knowledge Stocks
2000 3000 4000

5000

	  
Figure	  A6:	  Simulations	  over	  sample	  period	  
A:	  CFX	  

1985

1990

1995
year

2000

Clean simulated
Clean actual

2005

Dirty simulated
Dirty actual

Price increase of 0%

	  

	  

	  

Knowledge Stocks
2000
4000
0

0

Knowledge Stocks
2000
4000

6000

C:	  BGVR	  

6000

B:	  HHG	  

1985

1990

1995
year

Clean simulated
Clean actual
Price increase of 0%

2000

2005

1985

Dirty simulated
Dirty actual

1990

1995
year

Clean simulated
Clean actual

2000

2005

Dirty simulated
Dirty actual

Price increase of 0%

	  

Notes:	   These	   graphs	   show	   the	   simulated	   evolution	   of	   annual	   clean	   and	   dirty	   patents	   stocks	   from	   1986	   onwards.	  
Prices	   and	   other	   exogenous	   variables	   (including	   time	   dummies,	   controls	   for	   GDP	   per	   capita)	   are	   set	   at	   their	  
actual	   values.	   Own	   knowledge	   stocks	   as	   well	   as	   spillover	   effects	   are	   simulated.	   The	   simulated	   series	   are	  
therefore	   directly	   comparable	   to	   the	   actual	   knowledge	   stocks	   over	   time,	   which	   are	   also	   plotted	   in	   the	   graphs.	  
Estimation	  taken	  from	  the	  relevant	  columns	  of	  Table	  6.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

	  67	  

	  

Table	  A1:	  Car	  sales	  and	  patent	  portfolios	  across	  countries	  for	  selected	  large	  auto	  firms	  
Company	  and	  markets	  
TOYOTA (2003-2005)	  
Japan	  
North America	  
Europe	  
VW (2002-2005)	  
Germany	  
UK	  
Spain	  
Italy	  
France	  
USA	  
Mexico	  
Canada	  
Japan	  
FORD (1992-2002)	  
USA	  
Canada	  
Mexico	  
Britain	  
Germany	  
Italy	  
Spain	  
France	  
Australia	  
Japan	  
Peugeot (2001-2005)	  
Western Europe	  
France	  
Other countries	  
The Americas	  
Asia-Pacific	  
Honda (2004-2005)	  
Japan	  
North America	  
Europe	  
	  

Car	  sales	  

Patent	  weights	  

	  
0.34	  
0.31	  
0.13	  

	  
0.42	  
0.34	  
0.23	  

	  
0.19	  
0.07	  
0.06	  
0.05	  
0.05	  
0.07	  
0.03	  
0.02	  
0.01	  

	  
0.52	  
0.07	  
0.03	  
0.05	  
0.08	  
0.14	  
0.00	  
0.00	  
0.02	  

	  
0.59	  
0.04	  
0.02	  
0.08	  
0.06	  
0.03	  
0.02	  
0.02	  
0.02	  
0.01	  

	  
0.59	  
0.01	  
0.00	  
0.08	  
0.15	  
0.03	  
0.02	  
0.04	  
0.00	  
0.05	  

	  
0.75	  
0.25	  
0.50	  
0.04	  
0.12	  

	  
0.83	  
0.31	  
0.52	  
0.13	  
0.04	  

	  
0.23	  
0.50	  
0.08	  

	  
0.31	  
0.48	  
0.20	  

	  

	  

	  
Notes:	  Car	  sales	  are	  taken	  from	  company	  annual	  reports	  from	  the	  years	  as	  noted.	  Patent	  weights	  are	  constructed	  
from	  filings	  in	  each	  country	  across	  patent	  offices	  for	  the	  same	  years	  as	  noted.	  Sources	  for	  sales	  data	  are	  the	  
following	  (last	  accessed	  25th	  November	  2012):	  
TOYOTA:	  http://www.toyota-­‐global.com/investors/ir_library/annual/pdf/2005/pdf/04.pdf	  	  
VW	  (VolksWagen):	  
http://www.volkswagen.co.uk/assets/common/content/volkswagen-­‐world/annual-­‐report-­‐2003.pdf;	  	  
http://www.volkswagen.co.uk/assets/common/content/volkswagen-­‐world/annual-­‐report-­‐2004.pdf;	  
http://www.volkswagen.co.uk/assets/common/content/volkswagen-­‐world/annual-­‐report-­‐2005.pdf;	  
FORD:	  http://corporate.ford.com/doc/2002_full.pdf	  	  
PEUGEOT:	  http://www.psa-­‐peugeot-­‐citroen.com/en/publications	  	  
HONDA:	  http://world.honda.com/investors/library/annual_report/2006/ar2006.pdf	  	  

	  

	  

	  68	  

	  
Table	  A2:	  Geographical	  coverage	  of	  patent	  protection	  
Type of technology:

Share of inventions
also patented in:

Clean

Dirty

Germany

40.9%

61.0%

China

31.1%

18.3%

Canada

30.4%

12.6%

Korea

16.6%

11.2%

Australia

15.8%

11.0%

Brazil

7.3%

10.7%

Spain

7.0%

10.6%

Austria

9.6%

9.0%

France

3.8%

3.9%

UK

3.4%

3.8%

	  

Note:	  the	  patents	  in	  our	  data	  set	  are	  triadic	  patents,	  filed	  in	  USA,	  Japan	  and	  at	  the	  European	  Patent	  Office.	  The	  
table	   reports	   the	   share	   of	   patents	   that	   are	   also	   filed	   in	   Germany,	   China,	   Canada,	   Korea	   Australia,	   Brazil,	   Spain,	  
Austria,	  France	  and	  the	  UK	  for	  each	  category.	  	  
	  
Source:	  authors'	  calculations	  based	  on	  the	  PATSTAT	  database.	  
	  

	  
Table	  A3:	  Citation	  patterns	  

	  
Citing patent

Cited patent
Clean

Dirty

Other

Clean

46.8%

5.2%

48.0%

Dirty

1.5%

59.6%

38.9%

Other

0.2%

0.5%

99.3%

	  

	  
Note:	  the	  table	  shows	  the	  type	  of	  patents	  cited	  by	  triadic	  patents	  in	  clean,	  dirty	  and	  other	  (ie,	  neither	  clean	  nor	  
dirty)	   technologies.	   For	   example,	   46.8%	   of	   patents	   cited	   by	   clean	   patents	   are	   clean,	   5.2%	   are	   dirty	   and	   48.0%	  
pertain	  to	  other	  technologies	  (ie,	  neither	  clean	  nor	  dirty).	  	  
	  
Source:	  authors'	  calculations	  based	  on	  the	  PATSTAT	  database.	  

	  
	  

	  

	  69	  

Table	  A4:	  Main	  clean	  patent	  holders	  1978-­‐2005	  –	  Triadic	  patents	  
Company
Toyota
Nissan
Honda
Hitachi
Robert Bosch
Siemens
Mitsubishi
Daimler-Benz
Samsung
NGK Spark Pulg

Clean patents Dirty patents Other patents Total patents
568
1238
3500
5306
472
811
1735
3018
374
904
1871
3149
169
746
6987
7902
111
2734
4534
7379
105
426
6786
7317
95
445
8138
8678
87
295
1421
1803
75
3
5123
5201
74
195
1611
1880

	  

Note:	   the	   table	   reports	   the	   top	   10	   clean	   triadic	   patent	   holders	   between	   1978	   and	   2005.	   We	   also	   report	   the	  
number	   of	   dirty	   patents	   and	   the	   number	   of	   total	   patents	   (including	   clean,	   dirty	   and	   other	   patents)	   held	   by	   these	  
applicants.	  	  
	  
Source:	  authors'	  calculations	  based	  on	  the	  PATSTAT	  database.	  

	  
Table	  A5:	  Main	  dirty	  patent	  holders	  1978-­‐2005	  –	  Triadic	  patents	  
Company
Robert Bosch
Toyota
Honda
Nissan
Hitachi
Denso
Mitsubishi
Siemens
Isuzu
Yamaha

Dirty patents Clean patents Other patents Total patents
2734
111
4534
7379
1238
568
3500
5306
904
374
1871
3149
811
472
1735
3018
746
169
6987
7902
454
38
947
1439
445
95
8138
8678
426
105
6786
7317
336
28
236
600
312
48
869
1229

	  

Note:	   the	   table	   reports	   the	   top	   10	   dirty	   triadic	   patent	   holders	   between	   1978	   and	   2005.	   We	   also	   report	   the	  
number	   of	   clean	   patents	   and	   the	   number	   of	   total	   patents	   (including	   clean,	   dirty	   and	   other	   patents)	   held	   by	   these	  
applicants.	  	  
	  
Source:	  authors'	  calculations	  based	  on	  the	  PATSTAT	  database.	  
	  

	  

	  70	  

Table	  A6:	  Main	  clean	  patent	  holders	  1978-­‐2005	  –	  EPO	  
Company
Toyota
Nissan
Honda
Siemens
Daimler-Benz
Hitachi
Ballard Power Systems
International Fuel Cells
Panasonic
Robert Bosch

Clean patents Dirty patents Other patents Total patents
473
1280
4272
6025
423
730
2465
3618
378
886
2726
3990
313
1612
32454
34379
201
844
4910
5955
162
784
9838
10784
155
0
46
201
153
31
1957
2141
135
2
6078
6215
132
4109
11627
15868

	  

Note:	  the	  table	  reports	  the	  top	  10	  clean	  patent	  holders	  at	  the	  EPO	  between	  1978	  and	  2005.	  We	  also	  report	  the	  
number	   of	   dirty	   patents	   and	   the	   number	  of	   total	   patents	   (including	   clean,	   dirty	   and	   other	   patents)	   held	   by	   these	  
applicants.	  	  
	  
Source:	  authors'	  calculations	  based	  on	  the	  PATSTAT	  database.	  

	  
	  
Table	  A7:	  Main	  dirty	  patent	  holders	  1978-­‐2005	  –	  EPO	  
Company
Robert Bosch
Siemens
Toyota
Honda
Daimler-Benz
Ford
Hitachi
Nissan
Audi
BMW

Dirty patents Clean patents Other patents Total patents
4109
132
11627
15868
1612
313
32454
34379
1280
473
4272
6025
886
378
2726
3990
844
201
4910
5955
825
72
2849
3746
784
162
9838
10784
730
423
2465
3618
697
103
2821
3621
542
86
2626
3254

	  

Note:	  the	  table	  reports	  the	  top	  10	  dirty	  patent	  holders	  at	  the	  EPO	  between	  1978	  and	  2005.	  We	  also	  report	  the	  
number	   of	   clean	   patents	   and	   the	   number	   of	   total	   patents	   (including	   clean,	   dirty	   and	   other	   patents)	   held	   by	   these	  
applicants.	  	  
	  
Source:	  authors'	  calculations	  based	  on	  the	  PATSTAT	  database.	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  71	  

Table	  A8:	  Main	  clean	  patent	  holders	  1978-­‐2005	  –	  USPTO	  
Company
Honda
Toyota
General Motors
Nissan
International Fuel Cells
Hitachi
Ford
Ballard Power Systems
Daimler-Benz
Mitsubishi

Clean patents Dirty patents Other patents Total patents
909
3107
7767
11783
735
2832
8753
12320
532
1587
7923
10042
474
2180
5508
8162
429
75
4556
5060
360
1819
31719
33898
325
2112
5862
8299
255
2
84
341
249
1571
6134
7954
228
2138
27985
30351

	  

Note:	  the	  table	  reports	  the	  top	  10	  clean	  patent	  holders	  at	  the	  USPTO	  between	  1978	  and	  2005.	  We	  also	  report	  the	  
number	   of	   dirty	   patents	   and	   the	   number	   of	   total	   patents	   (including	   clean,	   dirty	   and	   other	   patents)	   held	   by	   these	  
applicants.	  	  
	  
Source:	  authors'	  calculations	  based	  on	  the	  PATSTAT	  database.	  

	  
	  
Table	  A9:	  Main	  dirty	  patent	  holders	  1978-­‐2005	  –	  USPTO	  
Company
Robert Bosch
Honda
Toyota
Nissan
Mitsubishi
Ford
Denso
Hitachi
General Motors
Daimler-Benz

Dirty patents Clean patents Other patents Total patents
4476
165
7774
12415
3107
909
7767
11783
2832
735
8753
12320
2180
474
5508
8162
2138
228
27985
30351
2112
325
5862
8299
1954
143
6149
8246
1819
360
31719
33898
1587
532
7923
10042
1571
249
6134
7954

	  

Note:	  the	  table	  reports	  the	  top	  10	  dirty	  patent	  holders	  at	  the	  USPTO	  between	  1978	  and	  2005.	  We	  also	  report	  the	  
number	   of	   clean	   patents	   and	   the	   number	   of	   total	   patents	   (including	   clean,	   dirty	   and	   other	   patents)	   held	   by	   these	  
applicants.	  	  
	  
Source:	  authors'	  calculations	  based	  on	  the	  PATSTAT	  database.	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

	  72	  

Table	  A10:	  Using	  the	  biadic	  patents	  
(1)	  
(2)	  
(3)	  
	  	  	  
(4)	  
(5)	  
(6)	  
	  
Clean	  Patents	  
	  
	  	  	  
	  
Dirty	  Patents	  
	  
CFX	  
HHG	  
BGVR	  
	  	  	  
CFX	  
HHG	  
BGVR	  
0.980**	  
0.425	  
0.845**	   	  	  	   -0.516***	  
-1.960**	  
-0.368*	  
(0.395)	  
(0.999)	  
(0.332)	   	  	  	   (0.187)	  
(0.791)	  
(0.207)	  
	  
0.233***	  
0.657***	  
0.314***	   	  	  	   -0.058	  
0.277*	  
-0.044	  
Clean	  
Spillover	  
(0.079)	  
(0.185)	  
(0.077)	   	  	  	   (0.047)	  
(0.168)	  
(0.059)	  
	  
-0.162*	  
-0.955**	  
-0.334***	   	  	  	  
0.101	  
-0.042	  
0.088	  
Dirty	  
Spillover	  
	  	  	  
(0.090)	  
(0.467)	  
(0.080)	  
(0.067)	  
(0.265)	  
(0.073)	  
	  Own	  Stock	  Clean	  
0.385***	  
0.424***	  
0.888***	   	  	  	  
0.024	  
0.017	  
-0.017	  
(0.035)	  
(0.046)	  
(0.030)	   	  	  	   (0.022)	  
(0.034)	  
(0.021)	  
	  
0.124***	  
0.107	  
0.106***	   	  	  	   0.517***	  
0.683***	  
1.090***	  
Own	  
Stock	  Dirty	  
(0.019)	  
(0.078)	  
(0.024)	   	  	  	   (0.013)	  
(0.041)	  
(0.023)	  
	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
Observations	  
92700	  
92700	  
	  	  	   92700	  
92700	  
29480	  
57500	  
Firms	  
4635	  
4635	  
	  	  	  
4635	  
4635	  
1474	  
2875	  
Notes:	  *,**,**=	  significant	  at	  10,%	  5%,	  1%.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  firm	  level.	  	   Sample	  includes	  all	  patents	  taken	  
out	  at	  both	  EPO	  and	  USPTO	  (Triadic	  patents	  used	  in	  the	  main	  paper	  are	  a	  sub-­‐sample	  of	  these	  who	  were	  also	  filed	  in	  the	  JPO).	  
All	   regressions	   include	   controls	   for	   GDP	   per	   capita,	   year	   dummies,	   three	   dummies	   for	   no	   clean	   knowledge,	   no	   dirty	  
knowledge	   and	   no	   dirty	   or	   clean	   knowledge	   in	   the	   previous	   year.	   Fuel	   price	   is	   the	   tax-­‐inclusive	   fuel	   price	   faced.	   The	  
dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  clean	  patents	  in	  columns	  (1)-­‐(3)	  and	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  dirty	  patents	  in	  columns	  (4)-­‐(6).	  HHG	  is	  
the	  Hausman	  et	  al	  (1984)	  method,	  BGVR	  is	  the	  Blundell	  et	  al	  (1999)	  method,	  CFX	  is	  Control	  Function	  Fixed	  Effect	  method.	  	  
	  
	  
Dependent	  variable	  
Model	  
Fuel	  Price	  

Table	  A11:	  Using	  citation	  weighted	  knowledge	  stocks	  
(1)	  
(2)	  
(3)	  
(4)	  
(5)	  
(6)	  
	  
Clean	  Patents	  
	  
	  
Dirty	  Patents	  
	  
CFX	  
HHG	  
BGVR	  
CFX	  
HHG	  
BGVR	  
1.972***	  
1.59	  
2.909***	  
-0.817***	  
-1.004	  
0.960**	  
(0.585)	  
(1.318)	  
(0.714)	  
(0.167)	  
(1.258)	  
(0.462)	  
0.957***	  
0.859**	  
0.628***	  
-0.066	  
0.914***	  
-0.103	  
(0.203)	  
(0.360)	  
(0.179)	  
(0.088)	  
(0.281)	  
(0.120)	  
	  Dirty	  Spillover	  
-0.674***	  
-0.67	  
-0.333	  
0.186*	  
0.168	  
0.232*	  
(0.211)	  
(0.549)	  
(0.210)	  
(0.098)	  
(0.599)	  
(0.133)	  
	  
0.330***	  
0.412***	  
0.657***	  
0.073**	  
0.225***	  
0.061	  
Own	  
Stock	  Clean	  
(0.047)	  
(0.086)	  
(0.046)	  
(0.037)	  
(0.056)	  
(0.045)	  
	  Own	  Stock	  Dirty	  
0.064	  
0.163*	  
0.086*	  
0.300***	  
0.259***	  
0.697***	  
(0.043)	  
(0.088)	  
(0.052)	  
(0.020)	  
(0.060)	  
(0.051)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  
22420	  
Observations	  
68240	  
68240	  
68240	  
68240	  
42300	  
1121	  
Firms	  
3412	  
3412	  
3412	  
3412	  
2115	  
Notes:	  *,**,**=	  significant	  at	  10,%	  5%,	  1%.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  firm	  level.	  	  All	  regressions	  include	  controls	  for	  
GDP	   per	   capita,	   year	   dummies,	   and	   three	   dummies	   for	   no	   clean	   knowledge,	   no	   dirty	   knowledge	   and	   no	   dirty	   or	   clean	  
knowledge	  in	  the	  previous	  year.	  Fuel	  price	  is	  the	  tax-­‐inclusive	  fuel	  price	  faced.	  The	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  clean	  
patents	  in	  columns	  (1)-­‐(3)	  and	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  dirty	  patents	  in	  columns	  (4)-­‐(6).	  HHG	  is	  the	  Hausman	  et	  al	  (1984)	  method,	  BGVR	  
is	  the	  Blundell	  et	  al	  (1999)	  method,	  and	  CFX	  is	  Control	  Function	  Fixed	  Effect	  method.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
Dependent	  variable	  
Model	  
Fuel	  Price	  
	  
Clean	  Spillover	  

	  

	  73	  

	  

	  
Table	  A12:	  Controlling	  for	  GDP	  	  
(1)	  
(2)	  
(3)	  
(4)	  
(5)	  
(6)	  
	  
Clean	  Patents	  
	  
	  
Dirty	  Patents	  
	  
CFX	  
HHG	  
BGVR	  
CFX	  
HHG	  
BGVR	  
0.857**	  
0.203	  
0.618*	  
-0.408	  
-2.521***	  
-0.410*	  
(0.334)	  
(1.162)	  
(0.321)	  
(0.356)	  
(0.878)	  
(0.214)	  
0.219
0.138
0.021
0.248
0.896
0.212
(0.201)
(1.809)
(0.190)
(0.217)
(2.802)
(0.163)
1.650
-2.174
2.342**
-0.765
-3.178
-0.826*
(1.500)
(3.260)
(1.071)
(0.578)
(2.326)
(0.455)
0.308***	  
0.478**	  
0.296***	  
-0.107	  
0.405*	  
-0.124**	  
Clean	  Spillover	  
(0.078)	  
(0.231)	  
(0.074)	  
(0.080)	  
(0.224)	  
(0.052)	  
	  
-0.201**	  
-0.438	  
-0.280***	  
0.164*	  
0.238	  
0.188***	  
Dirty	  
Spillover	  
(0.086)	  
(0.488)	  
(0.090)	  
(0.085)	  
(0.284)	  
(0.064)	  
	  Own	  Stock	  Clean	  
0.302***	  
0.426***	  
0.883***	  
0.039	  
0.044	  
0.000	  
(0.032)	  
(0.052)	  
(0.032)	  
(0.033)	  
(0.037)	  
(0.023)	  
	  
0.134***	  
0.131	  
0.091***	  
0.519***	  
0.648***	  
1.065***	  
Own	  
Stock	  Dirty	  
(0.019)	  
(0.087)	  
(0.029)	  
(0.023)	  
(0.042)	  
(0.023)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  
22420	  
Observations	  
68240	  
68240	  
68240	  
68240	  
42300	  
1121	  
Firms	  
3412	  
3412	  
3412	  
3412	  
2115	  
Notes:	   *,**,**=	   significant	   at	   10,%	   5%,	   1%.	   Standard	   errors	   are	   clustered	   at	   the	   firm	   level.	   	   Estimation	   is	   by	   the	   various	  
methods	   described	   in	   the	   Econometrics	   Section.	   All	   regressions	   include	   controls	   for	   GDP	   per	   capita,	   GDP,	   year	   dummies,	  
three	   dummies	   for	   no	   clean	   knowledge,	   no	   dirty	   knowledge	   and	   no	   dirty	   or	   clean	   knowledge	   in	   the	   previous	   year.	   The	  
dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  clean	  patents	  in	  columns	  (1)-­‐(3)	  and	  is	  the	  flow	  of	  dirty	  patents	  in	  columns	  (4)-­‐(6).	  HHG	  is	  
the	  Hausman	  et	  al	  (1984)	  method,	  BGVR	  is	  the	  Blundell	  et	  al	  (1999)	  method,	  and	  CFX	  is	  Control	  Function	  Fixed	  Effect	  method.	  
	  
Dependent	  variable	  
Model	  
Fuel	  Price	  
	  
GDP	  
	  
GDP	  per	  capita	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

	  74	  

