NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ARRA: SOME UNPLEASANT WELFARE ARITHMETIC
Casey B. Mulligan
Working Paper 18591
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18591
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

I appreciate conversations with, and comments from, Robert Barro, Jared Bernstein, Gary Burtless,
Shannon Mok, Rob Shimer, Timothy Smeeding, and three anonymous referees, and the financial support
of the George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The ARRA: Some Unpleasant Welfare Arithmetic
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 18591
December 2012, Revised February 2013
JEL No. E24,H31,I38
ABSTRACT
Distributions of tax rates on job acceptance and layoff margins are estimated for unemployed household
heads and spouses under three benefit and tax rule scenarios: actual rules under the American Reinvestment
and Recovery Act, rules as they would have been if they had not been changed since 2007, and rules
as they might have been with a bigger fiscal stimulus. Two or three million unemployed household
heads and spouses, with a variety of tax situations, had as much disposable income while unemployed
as they would have by accepting a job that paid 80-100 percent of their previous one. The number
would have been less than one million under 2007 rules, and about nine million under a bigger stimulus.
Tax obligations and foregone unemployment insurance about equally erode the rewards from retaining
a job, or starting a new one.
Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

Food stamps, unemployment insurance, and other subsidies to persons who are
unemployed and otherwise with low incomes, have recently been made more generous and
available in more situations. Did extra transfers help prevent a deeper recession, or did they
amplify and prolong it? Complete answers to these questions must consider the incentives of
persons receiving the transfers. The purpose of this paper is to quantify the number of people
who recently had essentially no short-term financial reward from working, and how that number
might have been different if safety net program rules had been made more generous, or if they
had remained what they were in 2007.
American economists often discuss the unemployment insurance (hereafter, UI) system
and its moral hazards as if the penalty for accepting a new job were about 50 percent of
compensation,1 which would suggest that the financial reward to working would be positive and
significant in all but a few rare circumstances. At the same time it is commonly noted that the
average weekly unemployment benefit of about $300 barely exceeds the compensation from a
full-time minimum wage job, and for this reason alone UI is almost always inferior to a real
paycheck. These claims are incorrect because they ignore payroll taxes, income taxes, and other
safety net programs. The tax arithmetic suggests that many UI participants would, even under
2007 rules and even ignoring all safety net programs aside from UI and the personal income tax,
keep about 30 percent – and maybe as little as ten percent – of the compensation generated by
accepting a new above-minimum-wage job because taxes typically took as much of the reward
from working as foregone unemployment benefits did.

These thin margins essentially

disappeared under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (hereafter, ARRA).
Even when helping the poor is a primary policy motivation and the wage elasticity of
labor supply is low, optimal tax theory frowns on labor income tax rates that equal or exceed one
hundred percent (as long as work is not socially harmful) because at a one hundred percent rate
there is no longer a tradeoff between efficiency and government revenue. From a positive point
1

Chetty (2008) estimates the U.S. UI replacement rate as 50 percent for the purposes of demonstrating that it might
be slightly less than optimal. See also Fujita (2010). Hall and Milgrom (2008) estimate the UI replacement rate as
only 25 percent.

of view, economists expect that employment rates will be low, if not zero, in groups of people
who are aware that they receive no financial reward from working. These are a couple of more
reasons to quantify the prevalence of marginal tax rates that are near or exceed one hundred
percent.2
The paper begins with a brief overview of the major safety net programs affecting the
financial reward to working.

The first quantitative results are 2009 marginal tax or “job

acceptance penalty” rates and their components for some of the more common tax situations
encountered by American workers and their families.

The rates are calculated for three

scenarios: actual benefit and tax rules, benefit and tax rules as they would have been if they had
not been changed since 2007, and benefit and tax rules as they might have been in a bigger
stimulus. The following section considers the rich and complicated variety of possible tax
situations in order to arrive at estimates of the number of household heads and spouses with little
or no financial reward to accepting a new job. A “demand shocks and job search gambles”
section shows how job acceptance rewards are nonlinear in the amount of a job offer, and the
final section concludes.

An Overview of the Major Tax and Subsidy Rules Affecting the Returns to
Job Acceptance

Households pay three types of personal income taxes. The first type I refer to as regular
federal personal income taxes, by which I mean the taxes on line 44 of federal form 1040, before
various credits.3 The second type is federal personal income tax credits (awarded on form 1040,
2

Behavior in the neighborhood of 100 percent tax rates would be especially interesting if it were true that (a) when
tax rates are lower and more typical of their historical values, the amount of unemployment were insensitive to the
amount of the UI benefits and (b) unemployment would be high if unemployment paid better than working. To see
this, try drawing a graph of the relationship between unemployment and the size of UI benefits that satisfies the
properties (a) and (b): it must turn or jump sharply toward high unemployment as the benefit approaches the amount
of pay from working.
3
As noted below, I assume that households take the standard deduction and do not have much asset income, so the
alternative minimum tax (AMT) is not relevant. Because my analysis focuses on lower and middle income
households that have marginal tax rates exceeding 70 percent, and the AMT applies at income thresholds well above
the median, this assumption is accurate.

2

but after its line 44), of which I consider the major ones: the Earned Income Tax Credit, the
Child Tax Credit, the Additional Child Tax Credit, and the Making Work Pay Tax Credit. The
third is state (and/or local) personal income tax. These taxes vary with household calendar year
income, household composition, and income composition.
The unemployment insurance (UI) program offers weekly cash benefits to people who
have lost their jobs and have as yet been unable to find and start a new one. Each week they
receive a portion of their prior job’s pay until they start working again, or they stop looking for
work, or their benefits are exhausted. That portion is about 50 percent (plus bonuses discussed
below), up to a cap of about $415 per week.4 UI benefits are subject to personal income taxes,
but not payroll taxes.
Any time that an unemployed person starts a new job, some of the compensation from
that job goes to the treasury due to the employment-related taxes and due to the person’s
dropping off unemployment compensation and welfare rolls.

The remainder of the

compensation is available to enhance disposable income for the worker and his family. The part
of compensation that goes to treasury revenue is a “tax” or job-acceptance penalty in the sense
that it is not available to enhance the worker’s disposable income. Sometimes this paper refers
to job-acceptance penalty rates, which express the job acceptance penalty as a percentage of
compensation of the job being accepted or, when noted accordingly, as a percentage of another
measure of pay for the job being accepted.5
In some cases, the treasuries’ combined gain from job acceptance exceeds the
compensation from that job, in which case job acceptance reduces disposable income and the
job-acceptance penalty rate exceeds one hundred percent.

4

Appendix Table 3 of Council of Economic Advisers (2011) reports an average replacement rate of 46 percent for
September 2010, but their average appears to include UI recipients whose benefit was capped (thereby reducing the
average replacement rate below what it is for uncapped participants) and includes federal additional compensation
(thereby increasing the replacement rate above its normal level). The United States Department of Labor (2007, 38) concludes that “States replace, on average, 50% of workers’ lost wages up to a certain limit ...,” although their
Table 3-5 suggests that about 20 states replaced somewhat more than 50 percent, and only one (Illinois) replaced
less, at least if “replacement” refers to replacing the worker’s historical earnings pattern. Due to these and other
benefit computation provisions (e.g., add-ons for dependents), I understand 50 percent to be a slightly conservative
estimate of the fraction of earnings that would be replaced, below the cap, for program participants.
5
This paper makes no distinction between accepting a new job and starting a new job.

3

A number of studies, such as Kotlikoff and Rapson (2007), Congressional Budget Office
(2012), and Maag et al. (2012) have examined single-dollar marginal tax rates from taxes and
transfer programs without considering unemployment compensation.

Their single-dollar

marginal tax rates may be appropriate for quantifying long-term incentives, incentives for
supplying hours per week, or job acceptance incentives for persons ineligible for unemployment
compensation. However, unemployment compensation, the job acceptance margin, and the
layoff margin must also be considered for business cycle purposes, especially the recent business
cycle during which most unemployment insurance benefits were not financed by the employers
making the layoffs.

Thin Margins Before the Recession: Examples from Common Tax Situations
When an unemployed person is presented with an opportunity to work, the short-term
financial gain from accepting that opportunity depends on the degree to which compensation on
the new job net of taxes and work expenses exceeds unemployment compensation net of taxes.
Table 1 illustrates some of the arithmetic. The first column displays the additional payroll taxes
(employer and employee) owed as a consequence of accepting the job, expressed as a fraction of
the pre-tax, after fringes, compensation (hereafter PTAF) from that job.6
Hundreds of federal personal income tax situations are possible, and their rich variety is
considered later in the paper. In order to help the reader appreciate the quantitatively important
factors, Table 1 begins with three common situations. The first two have the same regular
personal income tax rate: 15 percent federal bracket plus three percent state and local income
tax.7 The relevant rate here is a marginal rate in the sense of comparing taxes paid when
accepting the job with taxes paid when remaining unemployed.
Table 1’s second column records personal income taxes, leaving the Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC) and taxes on UI benefits until later columns. The third column displays possible
implicit tax rates from EITC rules. The EITC is a federal income tax credit of a few thousand
6

Employer FICA contributions are not included in PTAF.
A three percent state and local income tax rate can be interpreted as someone in a 3 percent state bracket and
taking the standard deduction on his federal return, or someone in a somewhat higher state bracket and taking a
federal income tax deduction for his state taxes.
7

4

dollars per year paid to families with positive earned income (that is, wages or salaries) but low
total income for a calendar year. Holding constant family composition, the EITC specifies a
schedule relating the credit amount to family earnings for the year. As annual earnings increase
from zero to about $9,000,8 the credit increases. Above that, there is a range of incomes over
which the credit is constant. For still higher incomes (above the maximum earnings cited above),
the credit is phased out: more earnings means less credit. The maximum amount of the credit
depends on family size and composition.
Depending on his earned income for the remainder of the year, and the earned income of
his spouse, an unemployed person can have one of three single-dollar marginal tax rates from the
EITC: zero from the plateau or fully-phased-out portions, 21 percent for the phase-out portion,
and minus 34 percent for the phase-in portion.9 These three possibilities are shown separately as
panels in Table 1. The final expense column reflects out-of-employee-pocket costs of full-time
employment, such as costs of commuting to work, assumed equal to $50 per week (e.g., $5 per
one-way trip).10
The next three columns display foregone UI and related benefits. Suppose for the
moment that an unemployed person has the opportunity to return to work on a job that pays as
well as his previous job, which paid no more than $800 per week (so that UI benefits are below
the cap). Before the ARRA, accepting the job would stop his unemployment benefits, which
amount to 41 percent of PTAF after personal income taxes (for someone in the 18 percent
bracket).
The combination of taxes, employment expenses, and foregone after-tax UI amounts to
83 percent of PTAF in 2007 for someone with a zero marginal EITC. Another possibility is that
the unemployed person’s household was on the phase-out portion of the Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC), so that his combined penalty was 93 percent of PTAF, under 2007 tax and UI
rules. Arguably the tax code provided more help to unemployed people than the unemployment
8

In tax year 2009, the maximum credit was reached at annual earnings of about $6,000, $9,000, and $12,600 for
families with zero, one, or 2+ children, respectively (United States Internal Revenue Service various issues),
depending also on filing status. Adjusting for inflation, we find these amounts are about $300 greater than they were
in 2007.
9
A few other brackets are possible, such as 16 for households with one child. A work decision may also span
multiple single-dollar tax brackets; all of these possibilities are considered below.
10
For the moment, I assume that childcare costs are zero.

5

insurance system itself. A possibility shown in the third panel is that the unemployed person’s
household was on the phase-in portion of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), in which case
they must be in the zero percent personal income tax bracket, so that its combined penalty was
40 percent of PTAF under 2007 tax and UI rules.
All of this assumes that the new job offer has the same PTAF as the previous job did, but
presumably a significant fraction of persons laid off are not offered new jobs that pay as well. If
instead the previous job paid 20 percent more (but still less than $900 per week), then the
combined penalties would be 91 percent rather than the 83 percent shown in the table for a
person in the zero marginal EITC range.
Work has long-term costs and benefits that are not considered here.

For example,

workers may forgo schooling as a result of working, or obtain training on the job. Some of the
payroll taxes paid while working may, in effect, be returned in old age as a consequence of
public pension benefit formulae.11 Workers sometimes sustain long-term injuries while at work.

For Many, the ARRA Erased the Financial Rewards from Going Back to Work
Even without these wage cut or EITC phase-out scenarios, the UI and related bonuses
provided by the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act were enough to essentially
erase the financial reward to working for millions of unemployed people. The Act’s Federal
Additional Compensation (FAC) provision paid a $25 weekly bonus to UI beneficiaries ($21
after taxes in the 18 percent bracket), and guaranteed that the bonus would not make them
ineligible for Medicaid.

At $600 PTAF, FAC by itself is another 3% of PTAF.12

For

unemployed persons who had health insurance on their previous job and were continuing it
through the COBRA provision, the ARRA had the federal government pick up 65 percent of the
11

Feldstein and Samwick (1992) examine this effect and find that the youngest age group, which make up the bulk
of my 100-percent-plus penalty rate groups, obtains an expected benefit of working ranging from 0.7 to 1.7 percent
of PTAF in the form of additional social security wealth (6 percent annual discount rate). If their study were
updated to the present to reflect future policy uncertainty (Holst 2012) and the increasingly likely possibility of
future means-tests of Social Security and Medicare, this benefit would be even less, and perhaps negative, which is
why my calculations treat it as zero.
12
In 2007 (before the recession began), the $600 PTAF was at the 43rd percentile of weekly earnings among
household heads and spouses with positive earnings during the survey week. Note that unemployment is more
common among less skilled groups, and that alternative weekly earnings amounts are considered later in the paper
according to their prevalence.

6

tab, which is about 27 percent of PTAF. The “2009, actual” rows of Table 1 show how the
combined penalties under the ARRA could exceed 100 percent of PTAF.
PTAF – compensation before taxes but after fringes – is a familiar salary benchmark but
has limited economic meaning because it is neither employer cost nor the employee benefit of
working. The final two columns of the Table convert PTAF percentages into percentages of total
worker compensation under two alternative assumptions. The 1.077 column assumes that the
only fringe is employer FICA equal to 7.65 percent of PTAF. In order to consider the financial
rewards to accepting a job that offers health insurance, the final column adds employer
contributions for health insurance (assumed to be 65 percent of the total weekly cost of $251) to
get total compensation.13
Thanks to these two ARRA provisions on top of previous UI rules, an unemployed
person whose new job opportunities did not offer health insurance might well determine that
continuing unemployment provides more disposable income. As suggested by the 91 percent
entry in the final column, even someone offered a job with the same pay and health insurance as
his previous job, and not receiving any means-tested subsidies, may nonetheless find essentially
no short-term financial gain to starting it as long as the UI and ARRA add-ons continued.

Bigger Stimulus, No Incentives
Christina Romer (one of the architects of the ARRA), Joseph Stiglitz, Paul Krugman,
Ken Rogoff, Mark Zandi, and other noted economists have said that the ARRA was not
ambitious enough to get the recovery going and thought it should have been bigger.14 We will
never know exactly what provisions would have been included in a hypothetical “bigger
stimulus,” but it is clear that the ARRA’s architects thought that protecting the most vulnerable
also served as an “automatic stabilizer,” increasing employment and GDP. Thus, it is worth

13

Note that, when expressed as a share of total compensation, my penalty rates reflect the combined effect of taxes
and subsidies on incentives as measured by the slope of the household budget constraint between non-work time and
disposable income. For the purposes of analyzing the value of insurance, one might want to express penalty rates as
a ratio to the disposable income when working (rather than total compensation when working), because this ratio
would better reflect the relative consumption of the unemployed (OECD 2007). For either purpose, the value of
fringe benefits should be included.
14
See Summers (2008) and Romer (2012).

7

considering how a bigger stimulus with more protection for the poor and vulnerable might have
affected their incentives.15
Table 2 lists the additional safety net expansions included in my model of bigger
stimulus. The ARRA exempted $2,400 of UI from 2009 federal personal income tax; my
hypothetical stimulus exempts $7,400. The ARRA’s Federal Additional Compensation (FAC)
paid a weekly $25 bonus to UI recipients and exempts the FAC from Medicaid eligibility tests;
my hypothetical stimulus adds another $50 per week and exempts all UI from SNAP and
Medicaid income formulas. The ARRA subsidized 65 percent of COBRA payments by UI
recipients; my hypothetical stimulus subsidizes 90 percent. The ARRA increased the SNAP
maximum benefit 13.6 percent, on top of a 8.5 percent increase that went into effect six months
earlier; my hypothetical stimulus increases it another 20 percent.
Some of the results are shown in Table 1, but recall that the table assumes no Medicaid or
SNAP participation. The bigger stimulus fully erases the short-term financial reward from
accepting a $600 weekly job – even one providing health insurance – except for a slim reward
that remains for unemployed persons on the phase-in part of the EITC (see the last row of the
table).
Program eligibility rule changes between 2007 and 2009 need to be considered for the
purpose of calculating changes in marginal tax rates over time. However, this paper’s purpose is
merely to estimate the number of persons with large marginal tax rate levels in 2009, so for
simplicity all of the calculations pertain to 2009 program eligibility rules.

Job Acceptance Penalties and Layoff Subsidies
Because Table 1 is based on comparisons of disposable income when unemployed to
disposable income when employed, its job acceptance penalties are also layoff subsidies for
persons working at firms that do not accrue UI tax liabilities on their next layoff. Ratner (2012,
27) estimates that 24.3 percent of employers are in that position because they pay either the
15

Paul Krugman has been explicit about the role of safety net expansions in a bigger stimulus “…one more channel
through which government spending could provide a fairly quick boost to the economy: more aid to distressed
individuals, by means of a temporary increase in the generosity of unemployment insurance and other safety net
programs. There was some of this in the original stimulus, but not enough ….” (Krugman 2012, 216)

8

minimum or maximum UI tax rate.16 Table 1 tells us that, for employees with health insurance
in such firms who are in the 15 percent federal personal income tax bracket, governments plus
forgone employment expense would replace 113 percent of the PTAF lost due to a layoff, which
is 84 percent of the job’s total compensation.17 Under 2007 rules, the 2009 layoff subsidy rate
would have been 83 percent of PTAF rather than the actual 113 percent. Under a bigger
stimulus, a layoff would increase the joint after-tax income of employer and employee.
UI benefits are financed by payroll taxes on employers that are sometimes “experience
rated” in the sense that a former employee’s regular state UI claims add to his former employer’s
tax liability. Assuming that 24 percent of employers (employment-weighted) could lay off any
employee without affecting the employer UI payroll tax rate because that rate was already at the
minimum or maximum, the other 76 percent (hereafter, experience-rated firms) would, on
average, pay for 79 percent of the regular state UI benefits claimed by the next employee laid
off.18 52 percent of total UI benefits paid in 2009 and 2010 were regular state benefits, so I
assume that 41 percent (= 60*0.52/0.76) of the UI benefits that would be received (after layoff)
by the estimated 76 percent of employees whose layoff would accrue as an additional UI tax
liability for their former employer. When the employer liability is subtracted from the former
employee’s UI benefit, the entries in the “UI” and “Combined” columns of Table 1 are reduced
by 21 percentage points.19 In the top panel, for example, the combined penalties are reduced to
62, 92, and 121 percent of PTAF from 83, 113, and 142 percent, respectively.20 Thus, among
employees at experience-rated firms and not on the phase-out portion of the EITC, the 2009
layoff subsidies are large under actual or 2007 rules, but somewhat less than one hundred
percent.
16

His percentage is probably an underestimate, because he assumes that UI tax rates are uniform within state-byindustries.
17
If someone is receiving the COBRA subsidy, then he must have been laid off from a job providing health
insurance, which is why the text refers to the last column of Table 1, rather than the second-to-last.
18
Ratner’s (2012) overall marginal tax cost is about 60 percent (79=60/0.76): see his Table 1.
19
0.21 = 0.50*0.41. Federal Additional Compensation was federally funded and therefore did not create a liability
for former employers. In order to calculate the adjustment to the final column of the table (the second-to-last
column is not relevant for layoff penalties because the job before layoff is assumed to have health insurance), scale
the 21 percentage points by the factor at the top of the column to get a subtraction of 15 percentage points.
20
In subtracting 21 percentage points from all of Table 1’s rows, we are holding constant the duration of
unemployment benefits. The ARRA did not affect the duration of benefits, but, between 2007 and 2009, other
legislation increased the maximum duration of benefits from 26 weeks to up to 99 weeks. One way to examine the
effect of benefit duration on the layoff subsidy for an employee at an experience-rated firm would be to estimate the
fraction of the “UI” column of Table 1’s “2007, actual” rows that reflect benefits received pursuant to the added
benefit durations.

9

Estimates of the Number of People with Incentives Erased
Table 1 helps illustrate the relative quantitative importance of tax, credit, and subsidy
provisions to the financial rewards to working, but it does not contain all of the possible
scenarios faced by unemployed persons in 2007 or in 2009. Among other things, the 2009 rows
of Table 1 apply to persons with a $600 weekly job offer, and consider only the 0 and 15 percent
federal personal income tax brackets.
We know that recently unemployed household heads and spouses are unlikely to be on
the phase-in portion of the EITC because, with the exception of persons laid off near January 1,
their calendar year income includes earnings from the previous job. Moreover, among the
general population of tax return filers, it is much more common to be on the zero marginal EITC
or phase-out portions of the EITC schedule than on the phase-in portion (Meyer 2007). The top
two panels of Table 1 therefore deserve the most weight, but still it would be nice to have
quantitative estimates of the numbers of households in these different situations.
In order to estimate the distribution of what people in 2009 might have earned if they had
been working full-time, I began with the March 2008 Current Population Survey Annual
Demographic File. I selected non-elderly household heads and spouses who work full-time in
2007, and calculated their PTAF average weekly earnings during the weeks at work in 2007,
rounded to the nearest $100.
For each PTAF weekly earnings amount 300 through 2,000, married versus unmarried,
number of children (truncated at 2), with and without employer health insurance, and alternative
assumptions about the ratio between the offer wage and previous wage, I calculated three
incentive-related parameters: (a) total compensation from accepting a job offer, including the
value of employer-provided health insurance and (as a negative) $50 of weekly employment
costs, (b) the net weekly gain or loss of disposable income from working including taxes and
subsidies, and (c) the replacement rate as one minus the net gain as the ratio to total
compensation.

10

Subsidies include UI, FAC, the COBRA subsidy, SNAP, and Medicaid using, unless
otherwise noted, the benefit and eligibility formulas in place in 2009 after the ARRA was in
place.21 See also Table 3. The dollar value of Medicaid participation is taken as one-half the
amount the program spends on medical care per non-elderly non-disabled participant, times the
number of family members who are calculated to be Medicaid eligible on the basis of weekly
income. The dollar value of employer-provided health insurance is taken to be $63 per week per
family member, of which 65 percent is paid by employer or, for unemployed people on COBRA,
by the federal government pursuant to the ARRA.22 Taxes include the federal EITC, Child Tax
Credit (CTC), Additional Child Tax Credit (ACTC), and Making Work Pay Tax Credit
(MWPTC). In order to calculate personal taxes and credits, I use the actual personal income tax
schedules for a household taking its standard deduction and assume that: the work decision
interval is 16 weeks, the person was unemployed six weeks and employed 30 weeks during the
remainder of the calendar year, employees with health insurance pay 35 percent of the premiums
and those payments are excluded from the payroll and personal income tax bases, and the spouse
(if any) earns $600 weekly PTAF throughout the calendar year.23 For example, this scenario
might represent a person who worked during the first part of 2009, was laid off July 31, and
received his first job offer to start working September 14, at which point he considered accepting
the job or remaining unemployed for the last 16 weeks of the calendar year.24 Appendix I
displays the calculation details for two example tax situations.

21

I assume a single adult Medicaid income-eligibility threshold for the entire nation of 84% of the federal poverty
line, which is the cross-state average of state-specific thresholds, weighted by each state’s population in 2010. I
assume a single Medicaid income-eligibility threshold for all children (age 18 and under) of 141% of the federal
poverty line, which is the cross-state average of state-specific thresholds for children aged 1-5 (many states have
different thresholds for infants and for older children), weighted by each state’s population in 2010.
22
Crimmel (2010) finds that the average family health insurance plan purchased through employers cost $13,027 per
year.
23
State personal income taxes are taken as three percent of federal taxable income. Note that, for simplicity, Table 1
did not exclude health insurance premiums paid by employee from taxable income (the rest of the paper does
account for the exclusion). The exclusion has no effect on rates for persons considering a job that does not offer
health insurance. Otherwise, at $600 weekly PTAF plus family health insurance coverage, the payroll, PIT, and
EITC percentages in Table 1 are reduced by a factor of 0.85 (e.g., from 15.3 percent to 13.1 percent) because the
employee health insurance contributions permit 15 percent of the PTAF to be excluded from the payroll and income
tax bases.
24
Because the mean (median) duration of unemployment during the recession peaked 23 (13) weeks higher than it
was when the recession began, respectively (Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 2012), it is worth considering a work
decision interval somewhere in the 13-23 week range. My 16 week decision interval fits in that range, and
represents unemployment spells in excess of 16 weeks because: (a) I assume that at least 6 weeks of unemployment
occurs during the calendar year regardless of the work decision, and (b) the unemployment spell experienced during
the calendar year may have stretched into either the previous or subsequent calendar year.

11

For a person with a $600 weekly job offer and living in a household with weekly income
above 141 percent of the poverty line even when not working and in the 15 percent federal
personal income tax bracket, the results are already shown in Table 1 because the table excludes
SNAP and Medicaid and his household is ineligible for those programs. But I also made the
calculations for other hypothetical households and then matched the results on PTAF weekly
earnings, marital status, etc., with the March 2008 CPS respondents (employed during 2007)
noted above. For the CPS respondents without health insurance from their employer (e.g., they
participated in a spouse’s plan), zero COBRA subsidy benefits were assigned. Unless otherwise
noted, I assume that all households passing the income-eligibility test for SNAP or Medicaid also
pass the asset test for that program and thereby participate in the program.

Distributions of Job Acceptance Penalty Rates
Table 4 shows the distribution of job acceptance penalty rates conditional on layoff and
program participation for each of the three scenarios.25 Entries in top half of the table show how
many non-elderly people who, if they held the same job as they did in 2007 and then were laid
off in 2009, would find that the revenue for public treasuries resulting from their accepting a job
like their previous one be 0-69 percent of the total compensation from the new position, 70-79
percent, 80-89 percent, 90-99 percent, and 100+ percent, respectively.26

For example, 4.8

million would see that 90-99 percent of the compensation from their new job would enhance
treasury revenue by adding to treasury revenue or subtracting from safety net program
expenditures. The other 1-10 percent of compensation would add to the worker’s disposable
income. Of that 4.8 million, only 1.5 million would have had job-acceptance penalties in the 9099 range if the 2007 tax and subsidy rules had been in place.
Many people do not find the same job as they had prior to layoff. Studies of displaced
workers find that a few find higher-paying jobs, but that on average the new job pays about 17

25

Appendix II discusses empirical participation rates and presents sensitivity analysis.
Sample respondents with average weekly earnings greater than or equal to 2,050 were assigned to the 0-69 percent
category without calculating an exact value for their penalty rate. They were less than 8 percent of the sample, and
even less when weighted by their propensity to experience unemployment in 2009.
26

12

percent less than the prior one.27 The bottom half of Table 4 therefore considers penalties for
accepting a job paying 17 percent less than the previous one (but with the same health insurance
status). For example, under actual tax and benefit rules, 5.8 million workers were in a position
that a layoff would give them more net income while unemployed than they would get by
accepting a position paying 17 percent less.
Many people were never presented with these job acceptance incentives because they
were not laid off during the recession. According to JOLTS, 40.4 million layoffs occurred in
2009 and the second half of 2008, although many of these layoffs were not household heads and
spouses. I multiplied the monthly JOLTS layoffs by monthly CPS data on the fraction of
persons unemployed 0-4 weeks who were non-elderly heads or spouses to calculate a monthly
estimate of the number of heads and spouses laid off.28 The total of those layoffs for 2009 and
the second half of 2008 was 23.3 million.
The heads and spouses represented on the various rows of Table 4 are not equally likely
to experience unemployment during the recession.

In order to quantify this likelihood, I

estimated a probit model using the March 2010 CPS respondents who were non-elderly
household heads and spouses and worked full-time in the prior year. The dependent variable was
whether the respondent experienced any unemployment during 2009 and the independent
variables were indicator variables for having employer health insurance, being married with
spouse present, having 0, 1, or 2+ children, and for weekly cash earnings (rounded to the nearest
100 and, to keep cell sizes nonzero, truncated below at 300 and above at 2,100).
The probit estimates were used to predict unemployment probabilities for each of the
respondents in my March 2008 CPS sample cited above. Those likelihoods varied across the
penalty rate groups shown in Table 4: the lowest penalty group’s likelihood was 70 or 80 percent
of the overall average likelihood (depending on the year and the assumed ratio of offer to prior
earnings) while the 100+ group’s likelihood was almost triple the average. In order to allocate
the 23.3 million layoffs among the penalty rate groups, I multiplied these likelihoods by the
absolute numbers shown in Table 4 and show the results in Table 5.

27

Ruhm (1991), Schoeni and Dardia (1996), and Topel (1990) each find average percentage wage changes of about
-17. Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993) find the average percentage to be a bit more negative: -25.
28
The JOLT layoffs for month t are merged with the CPS fraction for month t+1.

13

Table 5’s entries are interpreted as the number of times that household heads and spouses
experienced the various penalty rates, or would have experienced them under alternative
scenarios. Table 5 estimates that 1.9 million non-elderly heads and spouses actually laid off
from their jobs in 2009 or late 2008 had 90-99 percent penalties for accepting a job with the
same wage as on the prior job (top panel), and accepting job that paid 17 percent less would have
a penalty rate in that range for 4.3 million (middle panel).29 An estimated 3.6 million had
penalties of at least 90 percent for accepting a job with the same wage as on the prior job.
The 3.6 million result would have been only 1.4 million if 2007 tax and subsidy rules had
been in place: the new tax and subsidy rules between 2007 and 2009 increased by 2.2 million the
number of non-elderly household heads and spouses facing penalty rates of at least 90 percent.
Those are 2.2 million people with essentially all of the reward to working erased by the new tax
and benefit rules.30
The middle panel of Table 5 categorizes unemployed household heads and spouses by
their penalties for accepting a job that paid 17 percent less than the previous job and had the
same health insurance offering. The actual 2009 tax and benefit rules pushed penalty rates above
90 percent for 4.0 million household heads and spouses for whom penalties would have been less
than 90 percent under the 2007 rules. With millions household heads and spouses having their
work incentives essentially eliminated by the ARRA, perhaps it is surprising that “only” 4.6
million household heads and spouses were added to the unemployed between 2007 and 2010
(Mulligan 2012).
The bottom panel of Table 5 categorizes unemployed non-elderly household heads and
spouses by their penalties for accepting a job that paid the same as the previous job, but did not
offer health insurance.

The scenario is relevant because more employers dropped health

insurance during the recession than initiated it, and some of the changes in the industry
composition of employment were in the direction of industries without employer-provided health
29

The job offers considered in the top and middle panels are assumed to have the same health insurance offering as
the previous job did. Recall that the previous job’s health insurance offering determines eligibility for the COBRA
subsidy.
30
The differences between any two scenarios shown in the table are net differences and in principle do not reflect
the number of people who would have the tax rate under one scenario but do not have it under the other. However,
less than 8 percent of the CPS respondents had a larger penalty rate under 2007 rules, so essentially everyone either
stays in the same penalty rate category under the two scenarios or are in a lower one under 2007 rules.

14

insurance (White and Reschovsky 2012). For respondents that received health insurance on their
previous job, the penalty rates in the bottom panel are different than they are in the top panel
because total compensation includes the value of the health insurance offer.

4.4 million

unemployed would be penalized at least 100 percent for accepting such a job, 3.2 million of
which were in that situation because of the ARRA’s new tax and benefit rules.
The final column of Table 5 shows how many household heads and spouses would have
had their work incentives erased by a bigger stimulus, in addition to those whose incentives were
erased by the actual stimulus.

An additional 6.2 million would have had incentives (for

accepting a job with the same wage) fully erased. An additional 7.1 million would have their
incentives largely erased – that is, acceptance penalties pushed to at least 90 percent of total
compensation. Thus, to the degree that the actual ARRA had some depressing effect on the labor
market by erasing incentives, the breadth of that effect would have been two or three times larger
with a bigger stimulus.
Tables 1-5 include a full-time employment-related expense of only $50 per week, which
can be interpreted as a commuting cost ($5 for each one-way trip). But workers with young
children have significantly greater employment-related expenses, and are also especially likely to
have job acceptance penalty rates (as calculated above) between 90 and 99 percent. Because 90
percent of workers with children in the 90-99 percent penalty rate bracket have a net short-term
financial gain from working of less than $60 per week (all of them have less than $100), any
reasonable estimate of their childcare costs would push penalty rate estimates for most of these
families over 100 percent.
Estimating childcare costs for each family type is beyond the scope of this paper, but it is
easy to show how the results vary with assumed values for childcare costs. For example the
OECD estimated that out-of-pocket childcare costs in the United States were about $80 per week
per young child in 2005.31 If I assume that costs for older children are $8 per week, and include
childcare costs among the employment expenses, then 3.1 million household heads and spouses
had a penalty rate of at least 100 percent for accepting a job with the same pay as the previous

31

As part of their estimates for families with two small children, OECD (2007, Figure 4.2B) shows out-of-pocket
costs of 27 percent of the average wage, which they take to be $593 per week (80 = 0.27*593/2).

15

one (compare to 1.8 million in Table 5, which assumes zero childcare costs). 4.9 million had a
penalty rate of at least 100 percent for accepting a job that pays 17 percent less.

Characteristics of the Unemployed with Penalty Rates Near 100 Percent
Table 6 displays characteristics of unemployed persons with job acceptance penalty rates
of at least 90 percent under the three scenarios. The top row shows that 14 percent of all nonelderly household heads and spouses receiving UI in 2009 had job-acceptance penalty rates of at
least 90 percent. The top row also shows that 5 (50) percent of the same population would have
had job-acceptance penalty rates of at least 90 percent under 2007 (bigger stimulus) tax and
subsidy rules, respectively.
Persons moving between lower-paying jobs are more likely to have job-acceptance
penalty rates of 100 percent or more.32 At or above median weekly earnings (about $700), the
likelihood is quite low, even under bigger stimulus. Young persons, persons with less schooling,
non-whites, and persons with more children are more likely to be in the top penalty-rate group.
Women and unmarried people are also more likely to be in the top penalty-rate group.
Table 7 displays the twenty tax situations represented among the unemployed for whom I
estimate a penalty rate of 90 percent or more relative to accepting a job in 2009 with the same
pay as the previous one, under actual tax and subsidy rules. Twelve of them receive Medicaid
when unemployed and, among those, some of them also receive Medicaid for their children
when working (in which case the Medicaid does not contribute to the job acceptance penalty).
Nevertheless, penalty rates would still be close to one hundred percent even without Medicaid
because Medicaid is not all that valuable as compared to the total compensation from going back
to work.
In seven of the twenty tax situations, food stamps (SNAP) are received when not
working. However, the amount of the benefit is low because UI income counts as household

32

The propensity for 100+ percent penalty rates is not always monotone in income because, in some ranges, more
income pushes a household onto the phase-out range for the EITC, SNAP, and/or Medicaid, and the additional
marginal taxes are enough to put the total over 100 percent.

16

income for the purposes of calculating the SNAP benefit. SNAP would contribute more to
penalty rates for unemployed persons not receiving UI.
Most of the tax situations shown in Table 7 feature low personal income tax rates because
the household would be in the zero percent bracket if it remained unemployed. Thus, part of the
income from accepting a new job goes untaxed by the personal income tax. However, accepting
a job can reduce a household’s earning income tax credit (EITC), as it does for sixteen of the
twenty tax situations shown in Table 7, because the some of the earned income from the prior job
was received during calendar year 2009 and was enough to put the household on or near the
phase-out range for the EITC. Ironically, the earned income tax credit can contribute to the
penalty for earning additional income by way of accepting a new job.
Fifteen of the twenty tax situations involve a previous job, and a job offer, that does not
offer health insurance.

In those situations, the COBRA subsidy is not received and total

compensation is simply PTAF (that is, income before taxes and after fringes) plus employer
payroll taxes.
Because a number of the tax situations involve persons laid off from a job paying $250349 per week (more than three-quarters of persons earning in that category have penalty rates of
90+ percent for accepting a job with the same pay), my quantitative results depend on estimates
of the number of non-elderly household heads and spouses in that situation.33 The 2008 CPS
Annual Demographic file used in my analysis says that 6.4 percent of non-elderly household
heads and spouses employed some time during 2007 had average weekly earnings in that range,
and those persons worked 6.1 percent of the aggregate weeks in 2007. By comparison, the 2007
monthly CPS Merged Outgoing Rotation Group (CPS-MORG) files, which in combination
measure earnings during twelve weeks of 2007 (one in each month), shows that 8.2 percent of
employed non-elderly household heads and spouses were earning $250-349 during the survey

33

Under the ARRA, someone laid off from a $300 per week full-time job ($323 including employer payroll taxes)
would forgo $175 of UI per week, pay $46 in payroll taxes (employer and employee), and pay $50 in commuting
costs, which is already 84 percent of the total compensation of the job without even counting personal income taxes,
childcare costs, forgone Medicaid, forgone SNAP, or any other forgone poverty program participation. As shown in
Table 7, a little bit of personal income taxation, or EITC phase-out, or forgone program participation is enough to
push the penalty rate from 84% to beyond 90 or 100 percent. A few childcare expenses would also push the rate
higher.

17

week. Thus, the CPS-MORG estimates do not suggest that I have overestimated the number of
persons earning in that range.34

Distributions of Layoff Subsidy Rates
As above, I consider two layoff subsidy scenarios. In one scenario, representing 24
percent of the 2007 workforce, the layoff subsidy is identical to the job acceptance penalty
calculated for the top panel of Table 4 because the layoff does not create an additional UI tax
liability for the employer. The second scenario applies to employees at experience-rated firms:
their layoffs create an additional UI tax liability equal to 41 percent of their pre-tax UI benefit
(not including FAC). For the second scenario, the layoff subsidy rate is calculated by reducing
the numerator of the job acceptance penalty rate by the amount of the additional UI tax liability.
As noted above, the adjustment for persons with $800 or less weekly PTAF amounts to a
subtraction of 21 percentage points from the job acceptance penalty rate expressed as a
percentage of PTAF.35
I estimate the distribution of layoff subsidy rates by taking the respondents appearing in
Table 4’s distribution and randomly assigning them one of the two scenarios with probability
0.24 and 0.76, respectively.36 The results are shown in Table 8. Under 2007 tax and subsidy
rules, about 600,000 employed household heads would have their layoff subsidized ninety
percent or more – that is, a layoff would hardly reduce (and might increase) the employee’s
income after subsidies and taxes (both employer and employee).37 2009 tax and benefit rules
34

Weekly earnings can vary during the calendar year, so that the distribution of point-in-time weekly earnings can
be wider than the distribution of calendar year average weekly earnings. Both earnings concepts are relevant for
estimating job acceptance penalty rates: the point-in-time measure may better reflect the amount of a job offer
whereas the annual average better reflects income for personal income tax purposes.
35
Those with PTAF greater than $800 per week receive the $415 maximum UI benefit and the subtraction is $170
from the subsidy rate’s numerator.
36
The random assignment assumes that a person’s job acceptance penalty rate is uncorrelated with the fraction of
his UI benefits that add to his former employer’s UI tax liability. The correlation could be positive to the extent that
high skill workers (they tend to have lower job acceptance penalty rates) are more likely to work at firms paying the
minimum or maximum UI tax rate. On the other hand, the correlation could be negative to the extent that high job
acceptance penalty rates are associated with longer unemployment spells and thereby greater receipt of federally
funded UI benefits (federally funded benefits are not charged back to former employers, and begin after the first 26
weeks of unemployment).
37
Note that layoff subsidy rates typically vary among employees at the same employer because employees have
unique tax situations. To the extent that layoffs are affected by layoff subsidy rates, they may depend more on the
average subsidy rate among employees rather than a specific employee’s rate.

18

increased that number to 2.3 million, and the bigger stimulus would have increased it to almost
twenty million.38
It is sometimes argued that workers are ignorant, or perhaps slow to learn, about the
incentives they face, in which case they may not have known if their job acceptance penalty rate
exceeded one hundred percent. Measuring worker knowledge is beyond the scope of this paper,
but layoff subsidy rates are informative about this knowledge because workers during the
recession often experienced a layoff before they faced a decision to accept a new job. Assuming
that people notice whether their living standards rise, fall, or stay constant, workers with layoff
subsidy rates near 100 percent would, as unemployed people who had recently experienced a
layoff, have noticed that fact and may find it easier to guess that their job acceptance penalty rate
would also be in the neighborhood of 100 percent.

Demand Shocks and Job Search Gambles
For a person who formerly earned $600 per week without health insurance, Figure 1
displays the short-term impact on disposable income – net of taxes and subsidies – from
accepting a job (also without health insurance) as a function of the amount of the job offer and
household composition.39 Not surprisingly, a better job offer usually adds more to disposable
income than lesser offers do – notice that the schedules shown in Figure 1’s usually slope up.
More important is the fact that the schedules cross the horizontal axis. By definition, rejecting a
job offer has zero impact on disposable income, so that the disposable income maximizing
choices form a hockey-stick-shaped envelope in Figure 1: beginning at the left with the
horizontal axis and following the relevant schedule as it rises above the horizontal axis.
Demand shocks to the person’s occupation, industry, or nation would cause movements
along the relevant schedule in Figure 1, as an adverse demand shock would reduce offer wages.

38

Although the fraction of layoff subsidy rates above 90 percent (Table 8) is less than the fraction of job acceptance
penalty rates above 90 percent (Table 5), the absolute numbers in Table 8 can be larger because of the large number
of household heads and spouses who were employed and thereby potentially laid off.
39
For the purposes of these calculations, a married person obtaining health insurance through her spouse’s employer
is without health insurance, because any health insurance offered by a job is not valued. Figure 2 shows results for a
person whose prior job and offer job both provide health insurance.

19

Changes in the generosity of safety net programs cause the schedules to shift: the ARRA shifted
them down, and make unemployment less unattractive relative to work at a given offer wage.
ARRA and demand shocks thereby interact to affect unemployment: unemployment is a more
likely result of an adverse demand shock if experienced under the ARRA than if the same
demand shock were experienced under 2007 tax and subsidy rules (see also Sargent and
Ljungqvist (1998)).
Assuming for the moment that people maximize disposable income, the convex shape of
the hockey stick indicates a possible demand for gambles with respect to job offers. Consider
the schedule for an unmarried person with two children. Obtaining and accepting a job offer no
better than the previous one – $600 per week without health insurance – would reduce disposable
income and could thereby be truncated at zero loss by rejecting it. As a result, even a 10 percent
chance of getting a job that pays $200 more than the previous one has more expected disposable
income than a 100 percent chance of getting a $600 job.
People do not generally maximize disposable income, as many of them value their time
and might choose a situation in which they had more free time and less disposable income. This
possibility can be illustrated in a diagram like Figure 1’s by comparing any of its financial
reward schedules to a horizontal schedule representing the value of non-financial benefits of not
working (relative to working).40 Worker choice can be modeled as the maximum of the financial
reward schedule and the horizontal non-financial benefit schedule, which is again a convex
hockey-stick-shaped enveloped that suggests a possible demand for gambles with respect to job
offers.
The amount of the subsidy to gambles with respect to job offers depends on where the
financial reward schedule crosses the horizontal non-financial benefits schedule. If they crossed
far outside the reasonable range of job offers, the demand for job-offer gambles would likely be
minimal. Thus, the fact that the stimulus law changed the (horizontal axis) crossing point from
quite a low wage to wages much closer to what the unemployed earned on their previous job
suggests that the stimulus law may have increased the demand for job-offer gambles and might

40

This schedule could in principle be negative to the degree that people obtain non-financial benefits from working.
Job training is one such possibility. However, when the learning benefits from working become large enough that
the employee pays the employer, that is usually measured as “school attendance” rather than “employment.”

20

thereby help explain why many job vacancies had multiple job applicants. In other words, the
stimulus law subsidized the job search practice of applying for jobs that have many applicants.

Conclusions
Before the recession began, going from unemployment back to work did not pay that well
for someone eligible for unemployment benefits, but almost always paid a little something, with
at least twenty percent of compensation from a job going toward enhancing the new employee’s
disposable income above what it was during the spell. Despite its inclusion of a “making work
pay” tax credit and its expansion of the “earned income tax credit,” the ARRA increased
marginal tax or “job acceptance penalty” rates for the vast majority of the unemployed and
essentially erased the short-term financial benefits from working for about three million nonelderly and unemployed household heads and spouses.

About five million had their job

acceptance penalty rates increased above 80 percent by the ARRA.
Figure 3 shows the average components of the job acceptance penalty rates for the 3.6
million layoff events with rates of at least 90 percent (with respect to a job with the same pay and
fringes as the previous job – see the middle columns of Table 5’s top panel). The left bar in
Figure 3 shows that the combined penalty rate under the ARRA, averaged for these 3.6 million
events, exceeded 100 percent. Foregone UI is the single largest component, but still a minority
of the overall penalty.41 The right bar shows what the total penalty rate and its components
would have been for the same 3.6 million layoff events if 2007 tax and subsidy rules had
remained in place. The ARRA increased almost every component of the job acceptance penalty
with the exception of Medicaid, employment expenses, and a tiny reduction in the payroll tax
component. The net result was for the ARRA to eliminate a small but significant reward to
accepting a new job.

41

For the purposes of preparing Figure 3, the income tax owed on UI is reflected as a reduction in the size of the
regular personal income tax component of the job acceptance penalty.

21

Layoffs have also long been subsidized by unemployment insurance and other safety net
programs, but again typically public treasuries would pay for less than 90 percent of the
compensation lost from a layoff, while employer and employee had to absorb the rest. When the
ARRA was in full force, over two million workers could be laid off with a subsidy of 90 percent
or more, and another eight million with a subsidy rate of 80 to 89 percent. A bigger stimulus
would have put as many as 35 million (sic) workers in that situation.
To the degree that unemployment responds to the financial incentives for working, the
ARRA and other programs assisting the unemployed interact with demand shocks in determining
the number unemployed: an adverse demand shock increases unemployment more under the
ARRA than it would if the same demand shock were experienced under 2007 tax and subsidy
rules.
None of the job acceptance rate results hinge on the increase of the duration of
unemployment benefits from 26 to 99 weeks, which was achieved by legislation separate from
the ARRA (United States Department of Labor 2011). I count each unemployed person only
when they are laid off; the results here reflect the level of benefits delivered by tax and subsidy
programs to unemployed persons beginning to receive UI. UI and other program eligibility rule
changes are not considered in this paper but are important for quantifying changes in marginal
tax rates between 2007 and 2009, and comparing such changes across demographic groups.42
My findings of large, even confiscatory, job acceptance penalty and layoff subsidy rates
are not the result of “cliffs” in transfer program formulas in which many dollars of benefits are
lost for earning a single marginal dollar (Yelowitz 1995) because I look at the consequence of
more “discrete” decisions of accepting a job, or initiating a layoff, that change calendar year
income by thousands of dollars. Instead, my large rates reflect the combination of tax and
subsidy rules, especially unemployment insurance. Not surprisingly, my rate estimates exceed
those of previous studies of transfer program marginal tax rates that omit unemployment
insurance (Holt and Romich 2007) and exceed those of previous studies of unemployment
insurance that ignored taxes (Chetty 2008). But taxes, unemployment insurance, and other
transfer programs have recently contributed significantly to the living standards of the poor and

42

See Mulligan (2012) and Mulligan (2013).

22

unemployed (Sherman 2011), so we cannot have a full understanding of the magnitude of
marginal tax rates without considering the safety net broadly.
I have likely somewhat under-estimated the number of people with job acceptance
penalty and layoff subsidy rates in excess of ninety percent because I have omitted a number of
other possible sources of implicit taxes.

They include other means-tested cash assistance

programs such as Disability Insurance, TANF and Supplemental Security Income; means-tested
housing subsidies and mortgage assistance; means-tested tuition assistance; and means-tested
energy assistance programs. They also include court-enforced wage garnishment associated with
the collection of delinquent consumer, tax, and child support debts.
At the same time that incentives to retain and accept jobs were erased for millions,
millions were laid off from their jobs and remained unemployed for an extended duration. I
estimate that 2.3 million additional non-elderly household heads and spouses were laid off in
2009 than would have been laid off if the 2000-2007 average number of layoffs had persisted
through 2009. The number of unemployed household heads and spouses were about 5 million
greater than normal.

In other words, the extraordinary numbers of persons laid off and

unemployed are of roughly the same magnitude as the numbers of persons having their
incentives essentially erased by the ARRA.

The fact that more persons would have had

incentives erased if the ARRA had been more generous to the unemployed suggests that it is
possible that a bigger stimulus would have resulted in more unemployment than the actual
stimulus did.
It is beyond the scope of this paper to quantify the impacts that the large penalties for
work from the ARRA (or other legislation) had on the labor market for people laid off during the
recent recession. Nor do I attempt to determine whether increasing job acceptance penalty rates
beyond 100 percent matters more or less than increasing them beyond, say, 70 percent. But even
before obtaining such estimates we should not expect that a labor market would function
normally while the private benefit to working was zero or negative. For this reason, transfer
programs with one hundred percent marginal tax rates have often been criticized in the past. For
example, in arguing for welfare reform, James Tobin noted in 1965 that,

23

“[A 100 percent tax rate] does just that, causing needless waste and demoralization. …It
is almost as if our present programs of public assistance had been consciously contrived
to perpetuate the conditions they are supposed to alleviate.” (Tobin 1965, 890)

24

Appendix I: Sample Incentive Calculations
When household heads and spouses (employed some time during 2007) are stratified by
their average weekly earnings (rounded to the nearest $100), marital status, number of children,
and receipt of health insurance from their employer, the most common situation (representing 1.9
percent of the sample) is married with no children earning $750-849 per week plus health
insurance. I take health insurance costs to be $3,257 per family member per year, which is $125
per week for this person’s family.43 I assume that, when employed, the employee pays 35
percent of that cost, which is $44 per week, and the employer the other 65 percent. I take such a
person’s weekly total compensation to be $939, which is $800 PTAF plus employer
contributions for health insurance (65 percent of the $125 = $81) and social security (7.65
percent of the $800, excluding the $44 employee health insurance premium from the payroll tax
base).

Employee payroll taxes are taken as 7.65 percent of the $800, excluding the $44

employee health insurance premium, for a total of $58 per week.
Because of spousal earnings (assumed to be $600 per week throughout the year), this
person’s household does not qualify for Medicaid or SNAP even when the person is
unemployed. He does qualify for the COBRA subsidy when unemployed, which is worth $81
per week. Unemployment insurance is 50 percent of the $800 PTAF plus the $25 FAC, which is
$425 per week. Holding constant personal income taxes and credits for the moment, this
person’s weekly penalty for working is $672, which is a $50 employment expense plus $58
employee payroll taxes plus $58 employer payroll taxes plus $425 foregone UI plus $81
foregone COBRA subsidy. His total compensation (including employer contributions of health
insurance and social security) is $939, so his penalty rate is 72 percent plus personal income
taxes and credits. If in a personal income tax (federal and state combined) bracket of 10 percent
of total compensation, that would put his combined penalty rate at about 82 percent.

43

Crimmel (2010) reports the average annual cost of a family plan provided through employers to be $13,027,
which I divide by four to estimate per-person costs. Note that I count families with more than two children as
having just two children, which means that no family in my sample is assigned an annual health insurance cost of
more than $13,027.

25

With the exception of Table 1, my results are based on “exact” calculations of personal
income taxes and credits under alternative job acceptance decisions, rather than assuming a
particular tax bracket. For the example person discussed above, his 2009 family income is
$63,235 (net of contributions for health insurance) if working 30 weeks during the year, as
compared to $68,534 if working 46 weeks during the year.44 In 2009, the first $2,400 of UI
income is excluded for the purpose of calculating the regular personal income tax and federal tax
credits. The family has a $11,400 standard deduction plus two personal exemptions of $3,650
each. Using the tax tables for IRS form 1040 and adding the assumed state tax (of 3% of federal
taxable income), this household’s 2009 regular personal income tax is $7,703 ($6,749) when the
example person works 46 (30) weeks, respectively.45 Its EITC is zero either way.46 Its Making
Work Pay Tax Credit (MWPTC) is $800 either way. Thus, the 16 week work decision adds
$954 to total personal income tax and credits, which is $60 per week or 6 percent of total
compensation.47 This person’s total penalty rate is therefore 78 percent: the 6 personal income
tax penalty plus the 72 percent combined penalty noted above.
As a second example, take a married person earning $300 a week with two children and a
spouse earning $600 per week. The former spouse does not receive health insurance on the job,
and has a $175 weekly unemployment benefit while unemployed (50 percent of $300 plus the
$25 FAC). Even when this person is out of work, family income is $775 per week and thereby
well above the poverty line: the family is not eligible for Medicaid or SNAP. When the person is
employed, his reward relative to unemployment is his $300 PTAF minus $23 payroll taxes minus
his $50 employment expense minus his forgone $175 UI benefit: a net of $52 per week before
personal income taxes and credits.

44

The spouse is assumed to earn $31,200 for the year, and the person’s annual UI income is a minimum of $2,550
because he is unemployed a minimum of 6 weeks. Under the 30-weeks-worked scenario, an additional $6,800 of UI
is received plus the $22,685 earnings after HI for the 30 weeks. With 46 weeks worked, the person’s annual
earnings is $34,784. Due to rounding, these do not add to the amounts in the text.
45
State personal income tax is taken to be three percent of federal taxable income, which is the subtraction of the
standard deduction, personal exemptions, and the UI exclusion from total income PTAF net of employee health
insurance contributions. The federal income tax and credits can also be calculated using the 2009 calculator
available at http://users.nber.org/~taxsim/taxsim-calc9/index.html.
46
The EITC is a function of income and family status, where “income” is either earned income or adjusted gross
income: whichever yields the lesser credit.
47
The household is in the 15 percent federal PIT bracket, but about half of the PTAF it generates by the work
decision goes untaxed: its health insurance contributions and the part of earnings that is less than or equal to its UI
benefit.

26

Family taxable income is $15,650 when the person works 30 weeks during the year, as
compared to $19,000 when working 46 weeks.48 The family straddles the 10 percent and 15
percent federal tax bracket: as noted in Table 7 the average dollar of taxable income resulting
from the 16 week work decision adds about $0.12 dollars to the regular personal income tax
liability (state and federal), or a total of $551. Regardless of whether the person works 30 or 46
weeks, the family gets the full MWPTC, CTC, and ACTC.
Family annual earned income is $40,200 and $45,000 when the person works 30 or 46
weeks, respectively. The EITC for a married household with two children is phased out at a 21
percent rate between family earned income of $21,450 and $45,300: every dollar of family
income generated by the person’s work decision is implicitly taxed $0.211 by the EITC for a
total of $706.49 When combined with the regular personal income tax, the work decision adds
$1,257 to the family’s annual personal income taxes, or $79 per extra week worked. These extra
taxes exceed the extra $52 pre-personal-income-tax cash flow generated by working: his net-oftax reward for working is -$26 per week. This person’s weekly total compensation is $323, so
his job acceptance penalty rate is 108 percent (= 1 – (–26/323)), as shown in Table 7.

Appendix II: Interpreting and Estimating Imperfect Take‐up
The purpose of this paper is to estimate the number of non-elderly household heads and
spouses who experienced job acceptance penalty rates and layoff subsidy rates near 100 percent
of the compensation from the job, separate from the decisions people made in reaction to those
rates. Some people may have experienced those rates but preferred to work anyway – perhaps
because they like work or highly value its long-term benefits or because they dislike program
participation – but arguably work and program participation are decisions to be considered in a

48

The spouse is assumed to earn $31,200 for the year, and the person’s annual UI income is a minimum of $1050
because he is unemployed a minimum of 6 weeks (none of this UI is taxable due to the 2,400 exclusion). Under the
30-weeks-worked scenario, an additional $2,800 of UI is received ($1,450 of this is taxable) plus the $9,000
earnings for the 30 weeks. With 46 weeks worked, the person’s annual earnings is $13,800. The exemptions and
standard deduction total $26,000 (the family has a $11,400 standard deduction plus four personal exemptions of
$3,650 each).
49
Even if the person were unemployed for the entire calendar year, the family would still be on the phase-out range
because the spouse earns $31,200 for the year.

27

later analysis. From this perspective, my estimates at this stage should not be reduced by the
number of persons who chose not to participate in one of more public programs.
Alternatively, some of the people I counted as experiencing high penalty rates were not
aware of the programs available to them, in which case it is not helpful to consider the programs
as creating incentives to which they might react. This is one of the reasons why one might
reduce my estimates by the number of those persons who were unaware that the programs were
available.
It is also possible that failing to participate in a program is a choice that enhances
disposable income when not working. In this case I have under-estimated the number of persons
experiencing high penalty rates because I assume that people participate in UI, the EITC, SNAP,
and Medicaid whenever they were eligible – even when that participation reduces their
disposable income when not working. UI participation is a primary example: a number of
households with high marginal tax rates on their labor income also have confiscatory marginal
tax rates on their UI income. I have not attempted to quantify the frequency of marginal tax rates
on UI income that are near or exceeding 100 percent, but it appears to have been common
enough that the ARRA explicitly provided that its UI bonus (Federal Additional Compensation)
would not cause beneficiaries to lose their Medicaid eligibility.50
For a couple of reasons, an alternative treatment of program take-up may not significantly
reduce my estimates of the number of persons experiencing penalty rates near 100 percent. First,
I have set participation rates to zero for a number of programs, such as TANF, Section 8 housing,
disability insurance, education subsidies, etc., and a fuller analysis of program take-up would
have to recognize that those program take-up rates are greater than zero, especially when not
participating in UI. Second, I have already given a heavy discount to Medicaid benefits, and part
of that discount might be interpreted as an adjustment for less than perfect Medicaid take-up.
Third, I explained above how many of the persons I put in the 90+ penalty rate category would
have penalty rates near or exceeding 90 percent from UI, payroll taxes, and work expenses by
themselves, without any participation in the EITC, SNAP, Medicaid, or the COBRA subsidy.

50

See Section 2002(h) of the ARRA.

28

Fourth, EITC and UI take-up rates appear to be high among household heads and
spouses, although more work is needed to measure and interpret take-up rates among the
subpopulation that faces the highest job acceptance penalty rates. Scholz (1994) finds that 80-86
percent of persons eligible for the EITC in 1990 received it, Blumenthal, Erard and Ho (2005)
find 89 percent in 1988, and take-up rates are presumed to have increased after 1990 as the EITC
has become more generous. In order to estimate a 2009 UI recipiency rate among persons aged
25-64 laid off from their jobs, I compared the average weekly report by the United States
Department of Labor’s (2011b) of number of persons aged 25-64 claiming regular
unemployment insurance (5.1 million) by the average weekly number of persons in the 12
monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) files for 2009 who reported that they were: (a) aged
25-64, (b) unemployed during the survey week due to layoff, and (c) unemployed for a duration
of 26 weeks or less (5.0 million), and found them to be essentially equal.51 The 5.1 million
might need to be adjusted downward for a gap between UI receipt and UI claims (depending on
the reasons for the discrepancy), and the CPS information on the reasons for and duration of
unemployment may not be a reliable indicator for regular state UI eligibility, but still the UI
take-up rate among household heads and spouses could be near 90 percent. Tax return data also
suggest that at least 15 million people received UI income in calendar year 2010 and more than
11 million people received more than $2400 in UI income in calendar year 2009.52
Previous studies have found lower UI take-up rates among high school dropouts than
among the rest of the population (Gould-Werth and Shaefer 2012). However, high school
dropouts are less than one quarter of my 90+ penalty rate group. Moreover, UI participation may
have recently increased among high school dropouts due to the “modernization” of UI eligibility
criteria encouraged by the ARRA.
My results also include the COBRA subsidy for persons on UI who chose to stay on their
former employer’s plan. The estimates above, based on perfect take-up, imply that 40 percent of
unemployed household heads and spouses would be receiving that subsidy because they had
been receiving health insurance on their prior job rather than receiving it through a spouse, the
51

I projected CPS respondents to the U.S. population using the CPS household weight. If instead the final
composited weight were used, the total would be 5.1 million rather than 5.0 million.
52
United States Internal Revenue Service (2012), tabulating total returns, some of which represent multiple adults.
Also note that some UI receipt may not be reported to the IRS, because aggregate IRS UI income is about 13 percent
less than UI income shown in the national income accounts.

29

government, or another source. United States Treasury data suggest that only 20-25 percent of
those receiving UI received the COBRA subsidy in 2009 (Mulligan 2012, 81). Table 9 therefore
repeats the calculations for Table 5 except that a random half of those in the March 2008 CPS
sample receiving health insurance from their employer are assumed (a) not to participate in
COBRA if and when they are laid off and (b) be offered a job that does not provide health
insurance (or if it has the insurance, the employee does not value it because he can obtain
coverage through his spouse).
The non-participation adjustments have an ambiguous effect on the number of
unemployed with high job acceptance penalty rates, which are ratios of penalty amounts to total
compensation. On one hand, persons with health insurance from a former job forgo a benefit,
appearing in the numerator, by not taking the COBRA subsidy. On the other hand, nonparticipation suggests that health insurance is not a valued part of total compensation, which
appears in the denominator.53 These two exactly cancel for the purpose of determining whose
penalty rate exceeds 100 percent – that is persons whose acceptance rate numerator exceeds its
denominator – because non-participation subtracts the same amount from both numerator and
denominator, unless Medicaid is an alternative to COBRA in which case the subtraction from the
denominator is greater. Also recall from Tables 6 and 7 that almost all of the unemployed for
whom I estimate a penalty rate of 100 percent or greater would not receive the COBRA subsidy
even with perfect take-up because they did not receive health insurance on the previous job. In
any case, the results in Tables 5 and 9 are similar.

53

Also note that persons with health insurance from a former job are more likely to have had higher paying jobs and
thereby appear in Table 5’s lower penalty rate categories.

30

Table 1. Short-Term Financial Penalties for Accepting a New Job
UI participants who are heads of household or spouse, offered $600 weekly on new job
Without participation in any other subsidy program. Rates are also layoff subsidies from an employee's point of view.

Tax &
UI Rules
2007, actual
2009, actual
2009, bigger

EITC position
fully phased out
fully phased out
fully phased out

Penalties as Percentages of PTAF
Taxes and Expenses
foregone (after tax):
Empl.
COBRA
Payroll PIT EITC Exp.
UI FAC subsidy
15% 18%
0
8%
41%
0
0
15% 18%
0
8%
41%
3%
27%
15% 18%
0
8%
50% 13%
38%

2007, actual phase-out range
2009, actual phase-out range
2009, bigger phase-out range

15%
15%
15%

2007, actual phase-in range
2009, actual phase-in range
2009, bigger phase-in range

15%
15%
15%

18%
18%
18%

Combined Penalty as % of Comp.

Combined
83%
113%
142%

Compensation/PTAF
1.077
1.348
77%
61%
105%
84%
132%
105%

21%
21%
21%

8%
8%
8%

30%
30%
50%

0
3%
13%

0
27%
38%

93%
123%
163%

87%
114%
151%

69%
91%
121%

0% -34%
0% -34%
0% -34%

8%
8%
8%

50%
50%
50%

0
4%
13%

0
27%
38%

40%
71%
90%

37%
66%
83%

29%
53%
67%

Notes: PTAF = compensation before taxes but after fringes, which include employer FICA
PIT = personal inc. tax federal and state combined, including federal tax credits. State personal inc. tax assumed to contribute 3 percentage points
EITC = Earned Income Tax Credit
Empl. Exp. = Full-time employment expense such as commutting cost, assumed to be $50 per week
FAC = Federal Additional Compensation
Weekly COBRA expense assumed to be $251, assuming that health insurance was obtained from the prior job.
Tax and UI percentages apply to any weekly earnings level less than or equal to $800; the others refer to $600/week.
If health insurance is also part of the offered job, Compensation/PTAF is 1.348, otherwise 1.077

Table 2. Helping the Poor and Vulnerable with a Bigger Stimulus
Increase UI's exclusion from personal income tax
Increase Federal Additional Compensation from $25 to $75
Increase COBRA subsidy rate from 65% to 90%
Increase SNAP maximum benefit by an additional 20 percent
Exclude UI from SNAP and Medicaid income tests

Table 3. Tax and Subsidy Programs Included in Distribution Estimates
Program Name
Unemployment Insurance (UI)

Benefit modeling
50 percent of prior weekly earnings PTAF up to $415 cap (population-weighted average of state caps)

Federal Additional Compensation (FAC)

ARRA $25 weekly UI bonus

COBRA subsidy

Participants must be unemployed persons who had health insurance on prior job. ARRA pays 65 percent
of COBRA cost.

SNAP

Benefit based on household income during the unemployment spell. Maximum benefit depends on family
size and calendar time and is phased out at 30 percent rate.

Medicaid

Benefit based on household income during the unemployment spell: children are eligible at 141% of FPL
and adults at 84% (population-weighted average of state thresholds). Benefit is valued at $41 per week per
eligible family member.

Regular federal personal income tax

Standard deduction and exemptions are taken based on calendar year, family size, and marital status (head
of household or married filing jointly). Form 1040 tax tables are used to calculate the tax on line 44. UI
exclusion is taken when applicable.

Federal personal income tax credits

Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), Child Tax Credit (CTC), Additional Child Tax Credit (ACTC), and
Making Work Pay Tax Credit (MWPTC) calculated when applicable.

State and local personal income tax

Assumed to be three percent of income that is taxable for regular federal income tax purposes.

Payroll taxes

Both employer and employee pay 7.65 percent of PTAF

Notes: For all benefit models, family income is taken to be the sum of labor income of both spouses and UI income.
FPL = Federal Poverty Line, based on family size.
PTAF = Earnings before taxes but excluding fringes (and thereby excluding employer payroll tax).

Table 4. 2009 Job-Acceptance Penalty Rates that would Follow a Layoff
millions of non-elderly household heads and spouses employed full-time in 2007 with weekly earnings >=$250
Three different tax & subsidy rules

tax & subs. rules:
Penalty Rate
00-69
70-79
80-89
90-99
100+

tax & subs. rules:
Penalty Rate
00-69
70-79
80-89
90-99
100+

2007, actual
number
cum.
62.2
96.0
23.8
33.8
7.6
10.0
1.5
2.4
0.9
0.9

Accepting a job paying as much as the prior job
2009, actual
2009, bigger stimulus
number
cum. cum. vs 2007
number
cum. cum. vs 2009
37.6
96.0
0.0
22.0
96.0
0.0
25.4
58.4
24.6
15.3
73.9
15.6
25.1
33.0
23.0
14.1
58.6
25.7
4.8
7.8
5.5
21.5
44.6
36.7
3.0
3.0
2.2
23.0
23.0
20.0

2007, actual
number
cum.
55.6
96.0
19.4
40.4
14.8
21.0
4.9
6.2
1.3
1.3

Accepting a job paying 17 percent less than prior job
2009, actual
2009, bigger stimulus
number
cum. cum. vs 2007
number
cum. cum. vs 2009
36.9
96.0
0.0
14.3
96.0
0.0
18.2
59.1
18.7
22.7
81.6
22.6
21.0
40.8
19.9
12.4
59.0
18.1
14.0
19.8
13.7
10.3
46.5
26.7
5.8
5.8
4.5
36.2
36.2
30.4

Note: Cum. refers to the cumulative number of people with that tax rate or higher.

Table 5. 2009 Job-Acceptance Penalty Rates among Persons Actually Laid Off
millions of non-elderly household heads and spouses
Three different tax & subsidy rules

2007, actual
number
cum.
10.8
23.3
7.5
12.5
3.6
5.0
0.9
1.4
0.5
0.5

Accepting a job paying as much as the prior job
2009, actual
2009, bigger stimulus
number
cum. cum. vs 2007
number
cum. cum. vs 2009
7.6
23.3
0.0
4.8
23.3
0.0
5.0
15.7
3.2
2.6
18.4
2.7
7.0
10.7
5.6
3.1
15.8
5.1
1.9
3.6
2.2
4.7
12.7
9.0
1.8
1.8
1.3
8.0
8.0
6.2

tax & subs. rules:
Penalty Rate
00-69
70-79
80-89
90-99
100+

2007, actual
number
cum.
9.8
23.3
4.5
13.5
5.6
9.0
2.6
3.4
0.8
0.8

Accepting a job paying 17 percent less than prior job
2009, actual
2009, bigger stimulus
number
cum. cum. vs 2007
number
cum. cum. vs 2009
7.1
23.3
0.0
3.3
23.3
0.0
3.7
16.1
2.7
3.9
20.0
3.9
5.0
12.4
3.4
2.9
16.1
3.6
4.3
7.5
4.0
2.2
13.2
5.7
3.1
3.1
2.3
10.9
10.9
7.8

tax & subs. rules:
Penalty Rate
00-69
70-79
80-89
90-99
100+

Accepting a job with the same cash pay, but no health insurance
2007, actual
2009, actual
2009, bigger stimulus
number
cum.
number
cum. cum. vs 2007
number
cum. cum. vs 2009
7.0
23.3
5.9
23.3
0.0
3.6
23.3
0.0
8.0
16.2
4.0
17.4
1.1
2.7
19.7
2.3
5.4
8.2
6.1
13.3
5.1
2.6
17.0
3.6
1.6
2.8
2.9
7.3
4.4
3.8
14.4
7.1
1.2
1.2
4.4
4.4
3.2
10.6
10.6
6.2

tax & subs rules:
Penalty Rate
00-69
70-79
80-89
90-99
100+

Note: Penalties rates are percentages of total compensation, including fringes. Table entries are millions of persons.
Addendum: 4.6 million = 2007-2010 aggregate increase in number of unemployed non-elderly household heads and spouses.

Table 6. Fraction with Job Acceptance Penalty at Least 90%, by Demographic Characteristics
among non-elderly household heads and spouses receiving UI in 2009
tax & subsidy rules
2007
2009 bigger stimulus
All
5%
14%
50%
Weekly earnings when working
250-349
27%
85%
88%
350-449
12%
14%
98%
450-549
6%
11%
100%
650+
0%
1%
19%
Schooling
less than HSG
11%
28%
66%
HS grad
7%
18%
60%
more than HS
4%
10%
41%
Age in 2008
18-34
9%
19%
58%
35-49
4%
13%
48%
50-64
3%
11%
44%
Gender
Male
4%
11%
44%
Female
7%
18%
56%
Marital Status
No spouse present
14%
19%
52%
Spouse present
0%
11%
48%
Children
0
5%
11%
49%
1
7%
18%
54%
2+
6%
17%
49%
Health Ins. on prior job
No
9%
20%
54%
Yes
0%
6%
44%
Race
Non-white
8%
18%
54%
White
5%
13%
49%
Entries are the percentage of the demographic group having a penalty rate of at least 90%.

Table 7. Tax Situations Having 90+% Penalty Rates
UI participants who are heads of household or spouse. Actual 2009 tax rules
Without participation in any other subsidy program. Rates are also layoff subsidies from an employee's point of view.
Penalties as Percentages of PTAF
Taxes and Expenses
foregone:
Empl.
COBRA
PTAF
UI FAC Medicaid SNAP subsidy
Payroll PIT EITC Exp.
Unmarried, no children
300
15%
5%
5% 17%
50%
8%
14%
300
14%
2%
5% 17%
50%
8%
14%
Unmarried, 1 child
300
15%
400
15%
500
15%
600
15%
700
15%

Combined Penalty as % of Comp.

Combined

No HI Employer HI

114%
110%

106%
91%

-2%
6%
7%
7%
8%

0%
5%
9%
8%
8%

17%
13%
10%
8%
7%

50%
50%
50%
50%
50%

8%
6%
5%
4%
4%

14%
21%
8%
7%
6%

11%
4%
0%

113%
119%
105%
99%
98%

105%
111%
97%
92%
91%

Unmarried, 2 children
400
15% -10%
500
15%
4%
600
15%
7%
700
15%
7%
800
15%
8%
900
15%
9%

3%
11%
11%
10%
10%
9%

13%
10%
8%
7%
6%
6%

50%
50%
50%
50%
50%
46%

6%
5%
4%
4%
3%
3%

10%
25%
14%
12%
10%
9%

13%
8%
4%
1%

100%
128%
113%
106%
103%
97%

93%
119%
105%
98%
96%
90%

103%
125%

96%

27%

96%

41%

103%
139%

Married, no children
300
15%
300
13%

13%
10%

0%
0%

17%
17%

50%
50%

8%
8%

Married, 1 child
300
15%
300
12%

13%
9%

0%
3%

17%
17%

50%
50%

8%
8%

(table and notes continue on the next page)

94%

95%

Table 7. Tax Situations Having 90+% Penalty Rates, continued
Penalties as Percentages of PTAF
Taxes and Expenses
foregone:
Empl.
PTAF
Payroll PIT EITC Exp.
UI FAC Medicaid SNAP
Married, 2 children
300
15% 12% 15% 17%
50%
8%
300
11%
5%
9% 17%
50%
8%
400
12%
7%
7% 13%
50%
6%

Combined Penalty as % of Comp.
COBRA
subsidy

Combined

54%
41%

117%
154%
135%

No HI Employer HI
108%
96%
92%

Notes: PTAF = compensation before taxes but after fringes, which include employer FICA
PIT = personal inc. tax federal and state combined, including federal tax credits
EITC = Earned Income Tax Credit
Empl. Exp. = Full-time employment expense such as commutting cost, assumed to be $50 per week
FAC = Federal Additional Compensation
Taxpayers are assumed to take UI when eligible; some of the situations would have greater disposible income and penalty rate if, holding
unemployment constant, UI were claimed to maximized disposable income.

Table 8. 2009 Layoff Subsidy Rates
millions of non-elderly household heads and spouses employed full-time in 2007 with weekly earnings >=$250
Three different tax & subsidy rules

tax & subs. rules:
Penalty Rate
00-69
70-79
80-89
90-99
100+

2007, actual
number
cum.
85.6
96.0
7.2
10.3
2.6
3.1
0.3
0.6
0.2
0.2

number
74.1
11.1
8.4
1.6
0.7

2009, actual
cum. cum. vs 2007
96.0
0.0
21.8
11.5
10.7
7.6
2.3
1.8
0.7
0.5

2009, bigger stimulus
number
cum. cum. vs 2009
41.2
96.0
0.0
19.0
54.7
32.9
16.0
35.7
25.0
9.2
19.7
17.4
10.5
10.5
9.8

Notes: Cum. refers to the cumulative number of people with that subsidy rate or higher.
All three tax and subsidy scenarios assume the actual duration of UI benefits (that is, up to 99 weeks).

Table 9. 2009 Job-Acceptance Penalty Rates among Persons Actually Laid Off
millions of non-elderly household heads and spouses
Three different tax & subsidy rules. Only half of COBRA-eligible taxpayers take up.

2007, actual
number
cum.
9.2
23.3
8.5
14.1
3.9
5.6
1.1
1.7
0.5
0.5

Accepting a job paying as much as the prior job
2009, actual
2009, bigger stimulus
number
cum. cum. vs 2007
number
cum. cum. vs 2009
7.8
23.3
0.0
5.2
23.3
0.0
4.8
15.5
1.4
2.6
18.1
2.6
6.8
10.7
5.1
3.1
15.5
4.8
1.8
3.9
2.2
4.5
12.4
8.6
2.1
2.1
1.5
7.9
7.9
5.9

tax & subs. rules:
Penalty Rate
00-69
70-79
80-89
90-99
100+

2007, actual
number
cum.
8.7
23.3
3.9
14.6
6.8
10.7
2.9
3.9
1.0
1.0

Accepting a job paying 17 percent less than prior job
2009, actual
2009, bigger stimulus
number
cum. cum. vs 2007
number
cum. cum. vs 2009
7.3
23.3
0.0
3.6
23.3
0.0
3.5
15.9
1.3
3.8
19.7
3.8
4.8
12.4
1.7
3.0
15.8
3.4
4.1
7.6
3.7
2.1
12.9
5.2
3.5
3.5
2.5
10.7
10.7
7.3

tax & subs. rules:
Penalty Rate
00-69
70-79
80-89
90-99
100+

Accepting a job with the same cash pay, but no health insurance
2007, actual
2009, actual
2009, bigger stimulus
number
cum.
number
cum. cum. vs 2007
number
cum. cum. vs 2009
7.3
23.3
7.0
23.3
0.0
4.6
23.3
0.0
8.8
15.9
4.3
16.3
0.4
2.6
18.7
2.4
4.8
7.2
6.3
12.0
4.9
2.8
16.1
4.1
1.5
2.4
2.3
5.7
3.3
4.1
13.3
7.6
0.9
0.9
3.3
3.3
2.4
9.2
9.2
5.9

tax & subs rules:
Penalty Rate
00-69
70-79
80-89
90-99
100+

Note: Penalties rates are percentages of total compensation, including fringes. Table entries are millions of persons.
Addendum: 4.6 million = 2007-2010 aggregate increase in number of unemployed non-elderly household heads and spouses.

Figure 1. The Financial Reward for Job Acceptance
as a function of family composition
(Prior and offer job do not provide health insurance. Prior job paid $600/week)

$/week after taxes, subsidies, and $50 emp. expense

300

250

Married, 0 children
Married, 1 child

200

Married, 2 children
Unmarried, 0 children
Unmarried, 1 child

150

Unmarried, 2 children

100

50

0
-250

-200

-150

-100

-50

0

50

-50

-100

Job offer's weekly pay (PTAF) minus previous job's pay

100

150

Figure 2. The Financial Reward for Job Acceptance
as a function of family composition
(Prior and offer job provide health insurance. Prior job paid $600/week)

300

$/week after taxes, subsidies, and $50 emp. expense

250

Married, 0 children
Married, 1 child

200

Married, 2 children
Unmarried, 0 children

150

Unmarried, 1 child
Unmarried, 2 children

100

50

0
-250

-200

-150

-100

-50

0

50

-50

-100

Job offer's weekly pay (PTAF) minus previous job's pay

100

150

Figure 3. Job-Acceptance Penalty Rate Components

Percentage of compensation withheld from job accepter

with and without the ARRA. Average of 4 million layoff events

100%

COBRA subsidy foregone
Medicaid foregone (discounted 50%)
SNAP foregone
FAC foregone
UI foregone
Employment expense
EITC foregone
Regular pers. inc. tax
Payroll tax

0%

with ARRA

without ARRA

Bibliography
Blumenthal, Marsha, Brian Erard, and Chih-Chin Ho. "Participation and Compliance with the
Earned Income Tax Credit." National Tax Journal 58, no. 2 (June 2005): 189-213.
Chetty, Raj. "Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance." Journal of
Political Economy 116, no. 2 (April 2008): 173-234.
Congressional Budget Office. Effective Marginal Tax Rates for Low- and Moderate-Income
Workers. Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office, 2012.
Council of Economic Advisers. Unemployment Insurance Extensions and Reforms in the
American Jobs Act. Executive Office of the President, 2011.
Crimmel, Beth Levin. "Employer-Sponsored Single, Employee-Plus-One, and Family Health."
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. July 2010.
http://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_files/publications/st285/stat285.pdf (accessed
November 10, 2011).
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. "Series UEMPMEAN, UEMPMED." Federal Reserve
Economic Data. 2012. http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/ (accessed November 24,
2012).
Feldstein, Martin, and Andrew Samwick. "Social Security Rules and Marginal Tax Rates."
National Tax Journal 45, no. 1 (March 1992): 1-22.
Fujita, Shigeru. "Economic Effects of the Unemployment Insurance Benefit." Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia Business Review, Q4 2010: 20-27.
Gould-Werth, Alix, and H. Luke Shaefer. "Unemployment Insurance Participation by Education
and by Race and Ethnicity." Montly Labor Review 135, no. 10 (October 2012): 28-41.
Hall, Robert E., and Paul R. Milgrom. "The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage
Bargain." American Economic Review 98, no. 4 (2008): 1653-74.
Holst, Roland. Social Security and Policy Risk: Evidence of its Effects on Welfare Costs and
Savings. Saarbrücken, Germany: AV Akademikerverlag, 2012.
Holt, Stephen D., and Jennifer L. Romich. "Marginal Tax Rates Facing Low - and Moderate Income Workers Who Participate in Means-tested Transfer Programs." National Tax
Journal 60, no. 2 (June 2007): 253-77.

31

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. "Earnings Losses of Displaced
Workers." American Economic Review 83, no. 4 (September 1993): 685-709.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and David Rapson. "Does it pay, at the margin, to work and save?" In Tax
Policy and the Economy, edited by James M. Poterba, 83-144. Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2007.
Krugman, Paul. End This Depression Now! New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2012.
Magg, Elaine, C. Eugene Steuerle, Ritadhi Chakravarti, and Caleb Quakenbush. "How Marginal
Tax Rates Affect Families at Various Levels of Poverty." National Tax Journal 65, no. 4
(December 2012): 759-82.
Meyer, Bruce D. "The U.S. Earned Income Tax Credit: its Effects and Possible Reforms."
Swedish Economic Policy Review 14, no. 2 (Fall 2007): 55-80.
Mulligan, Casey B. "Recent Marginal Labor Income Tax Changes by Skill and Marital Status."
Tax Policy and the Economy, 2013.
—. The Redistribution Recession. New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.
OECD. Benefits and Wages 2007. Paris: OECD Publishing, 2007.
Ratner, David. "Unemployment Insurance Experience Rating and Labor Market Dynamics."
manuscript, May 2012.
Romer, Christina D. "The Fiscal Stimulus, Flawed but Valuable." The New York Times, October
21, 2012: BU6.
Ruhm, Christopher J. "Are Workers Permanently Scarred by Job Displacements?" American
Economic Review 81, no. 1 (March 1991): 319-24.
Sargent, Thomas, and Lars Ljungqvist. "The European Unemployment Dilemma." Journal of
Political Economy 106, no. 3 (June 1998): 514-50.
Schoeni, Robert F., and Michael Dardia. "Wages Losses of Displaced Workers in the 1990s."
RAND working paper series 96-14, August 1996.
Scholz, John Karl. "The Earned Income Tax Credit: Participation, Compliance, and Anti-poverty
Effectiveness." National Tax Journal 47, no. 1 (March 1994): 63-87.
Sherman, Arloc. "Poverty and Financial Distress would have been Substantially Worse in 2010
without Government Action, New Census Data Show." Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities. November 7, 2011. http://www.cbpp.org/files/11-7-11pov.pdf (accessed
November 21, 2011).

32

Summers, Larry. Update on Economic Policy Work. Memo to President-Elect Obama, Obama
Administration Transition Team, 2008.
Tobin, James. "On Improving the Economic Status of the Negro." Daedalus 94, no. 4 (Fall
1965): 878-98.
Topel, Robert. "Specific Capital and Unemployment: Measuring the Costs and Consequences of
Job Loss." Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 33 (1990): 181-214.
United States Department of Labor. "Monetary Entitlements." Comparisons of State
Unemployment Laws. 2007.
http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/uilawcompar/2007/comparison2007.asp
(accessed November 2, 2011).
—. "Persons Claiming UI Benefits in Federal Programs." Unemployment Insurance Program
Statistics. October 7, 2011b. http://www.ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/docs/persons.xls
(accessed October 25, 2011).
—. "Unemployment Laws and Insurance." Chronology of Federal Unemployment Compensation
Laws. May 3, 2011. http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/pdf/chronfedlaws.pdf
(accessed October 28, 2011).
United States Internal Revenue Service. "Individual Complete Report (Publication 1304)."
irs.gov. 2012. http://www.irs.gov/uac/SOI-Tax-Stats-Individual-Time-Series-StatisticalTables (accessed January 31, 2013).
—. "Publication 596, Earned Income Credit." irs.gov. various issues. (accessed October 19,
2012).
White, Chapin, and James D. Reschovsky. Great Recession Accelerated Long-term Decline of
Employer Health Coverage. NICHR Research Brief No. 8, Washington, DC: National
Institute for Health Care Reform, 2012.
Yelowitz, Aaron S. "'The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation: Evidence
from Eligibility Expansions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 11, no. 4 (November
1995): 909-39.

33

