                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DO LABOR MARKET POLICIES HAVE DISPLACEMENT EFFECTS? EVIDENCE
              FROM A CLUSTERED RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENT

                                           Bruno Crépon
                                           Esther Duflo
                                           Marc Gurgand
                                          Roland Rathelot
                                          Philippe Zamora

                                       Working Paper 18597
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18597


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




During the time this study was conducted, Zamora and Rathelot were working at the DARES, the
research unit of the employment ministry, which funded this study. At the time of submission, they
were employed by CREST, an autonomous public research agency since January 2011. We would
like to Joshua Angrist, Amy Finkelstein, Larry Katz, Emmanuel Saez, as well as four anonymous referees
and many seminar participants for very useful comments. We thank Ben Feigenberg and Vestal McIntyre
for carefully reading and editing the paper. The DARES (French Ministry of Labor) provided access
to data and financial support for this study. Any opinions expressed here are those of the authors and
not of any institution or government entity. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Bruno Crépon, Esther Duflo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot, and Philippe Zamora. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Labor Market Policies Have Displacement Effects? Evidence from a Clustered Randomized
Experiment
Bruno Crépon, Esther Duflo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot, and Philippe Zamora
NBER Working Paper No. 18597
December 2012
JEL No. C93,J64,J68

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper reports the results from a randomized experiment designed to evaluate the direct and indirect
(displacement) impacts of job placement assistance on the labor market outcomes of young, educated
job seekers in France. We use a two-step design. In the first step, the proportions of job seekers to
be assigned to treatment (0%, 25%, 50%, 75% or100%) were randomly drawn for each of the 235
labor markets (e.g. cities) participating in the experiment. Then, in each labor market, eligible job
seekers were randomly assigned to the treatment, following this proportion. After eight months, eligible,
unemployed youths who were assigned to the program were significantly more likely to have found
a stable job than those who were not. But these gains are transitory, and they appear to have come
partly at the expense of eligible workers who did not benefit from the program, particularly in labor
markets where they compete mainly with other educated workers, and in weak labor markets. Overall,
the program seems to have had very little net benefits.


Bruno Crépon                                        Roland Rathelot
CREST                                               CREST
15, boulevard Gabriel Peri                          15 boulevard Gabriel Péri
92245 Malakoff Cedex                                92245 Malakoff Cedex
France                                              France
crepon@ensae.fr                                     roland.rathelot@ensae.fr

Esther Duflo                                        Philippe Zamora
Department of Economics                             CREST
MIT, E52-252G                                       15 Boulevard Gabriel Péri
50 Memorial Drive                                   92245 Malakoff Cedex
Cambridge, MA 02142                                 France
and NBER                                            philippe.zamora@ensae.fr
eduflo@mit.edu

Marc Gurgand
Paris School of Economics
48 bd Jourdan
75014 PARIS
FRANCE
gurgand@pse.ens.fr
1        Introduction

Job placement assistance programs are popular in many industrialized countries.1 In these
programs, a private intermediary (such as a temporary work agency or a nonproﬁt organization)
assists unemployed workers in their job search. These intermediaries are usually paid in full
only when the worker has found a stable job. Unlike other active labor market policies, whose
eﬀects have in general be found to be weak, most studies tend to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant and positive
impact of this form of counseling, especially for job seekers with a low risk of long-duration
unemployment (see reviews in Kluve, 2006; Card, Kluve, and Weber, 2010).
        This paper focuses on a large-scale job seeker assistance program targeted at young, educated
job seekers in France. Under the program, private agencies are contracted to provide intensive
placement services to young graduates (with at least a two-year college degree) who have been
unemployed for at least six months. The private provider is paid partially on delivery, i.e.
conditional on the individual ﬁnding a job with a contract of at least six months, and staying
employed for at least six months.
        Previous studies on similar programs are generally based on a comparison between the short-
run labor market outcomes of counseled versus non-counseled job seekers.2 Experimental studies
are still relatively rare, but they also tend to ﬁnd positive impacts of counseling (Rosholm, 2008;
Behaghel, Crépon, and Gurgand, 2012).3 However, an important criticism leveled against these
studies is that they do not take into account potential displacement eﬀects: job seekers who
beneﬁt from counseling may be more likely to get a job, but at the expense of other unemployed
workers with whom they compete in the labor market. This may be particularly true in the
short run, during which vacancies do not adjust: the unemployed who do not beneﬁt from the
program could be partially crowded out.
        Evaluating the magnitude of such displacement eﬀects is essential to a full understanding of
    1
        They are particularly developed in Northern Europe. For instance, in 2010, according to the OECD Labour
Market Program Database, they represented 0.34%, 0.19%, 0.21% of GDP in Denmark, Germany and Sweden,
respectively. In France, expenditures on employment placement services represent 0.25% of GDP.
    2
        See Blasco and Rosholm (2010) for a paper on long-run outcomes.
    3
        An exception is van den Berg and van der Klaauw (2006), which ﬁnds no impact in the Netherlands, but the
intervention they study had more to do with monitoring than with actual counseling.




                                                         1
the impact of any labor market policy. If all a policy does is to lead to a game of musical chairs
among unemployed workers, then the impacts estimated from a standard randomized or non-
randomized evaluation will overestimate its impact for two reasons. First, the treatment eﬀect
will be biased upwards when we compare a treated worker to a non-treated worker in a given
area. The employment rate among workers in the control group is lower than it would have been
absent the program, leading to a violation of the “Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption,” or
SUTVA (Rubin, 1980, 1990). At the extreme, we could (wrongly) deem a policy successful if it
only negatively aﬀected those in the control group. Second, the negative externalities themselves
must also be taken into account when judging the overall welfare impacts and cost eﬀectiveness
of any policy.
      More generally, learning whether and when such externalities arise can help shed light on
how labor markets function. We motivate our study with a simpliﬁed version of a search model
proposed by Michaillat (2012) and Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2012). This model has the
realistic feature that production technology exhibits diminishing returns to scale. As a result,
when an unemployed worker increases her search eﬀort, she imposes negative externalities on
other workers. In contrast, standard search models with a ﬂat labor demand (e.g. Pissarides,
2000) produce no such externalities. Our model also features the additional prediction that
externalities should be stronger when the labor market is slack, which we investigate in the
data.
      Although the possibility of such externalities has long been recognized4 , there are few studies
focusing speciﬁcally on externalities in the labor market, and the evidence is mixed. For instance,
in their evaluation of the UK’s New Deal for Young Unemployed, Blundell, Dias, Meghir, and
Van Reenen (2004) compare ineligible people in the areas aﬀected by the program to those in ar-
eas not aﬀected by the program. The authors do not ﬁnd signiﬁcant indirect eﬀects on untreated
youth of residing in treated areas. Likewise, Pallais (2010) estimates the market equilibrium ef-
fect of a short term employment opportunity given to workers in an online marketplace, and
ﬁnds little evidence of displacement. In contrast, Ferracci, Jolivet, and van den Berg (2010) ﬁnd
that, in France, the impact of a training program for young unemployed workers diminishes with
  4
      See Johnson (1979), Atkinson (1987), Meyer (1995), Davidson and Woodbury (1993), Lise, Seitz, and Smith
(2004), Van der Linden (2005), Cahuc and Le Barbanchon (2010) for previous work on the topic.



                                                      2
the fraction of treated workers in a labor market, which could be a sign of externalities. Gautier,
Muller, van der Klaauw, Rosholm, and Svarer (2011) analyze a Danish randomized evaluation
of a job search assistance program. Comparing control individuals in experimental counties to
job seekers in some similar non-participating counties, they ﬁnd hints of substantial negative
treatment externalities.5
      One potential issue with these studies is that, even when the individual treatment is randomly
assigned, or as good as randomly assigned, the number of people who are “treated” within a
market is not itself randomly assigned. The comparison across markets may thus lead to biased
estimates of the equilibrium eﬀects. To address this issue, we implement a two-step randomized
design, similar to Duﬂo and Saez (2003).
      In the ﬁrst step, each of 235 local employment areas are randomly assigned a proportion
P of job seekers to be assigned to treatment: either 0%, 25%, 50%, 75% or 100%. In the
second step, in each area, a fraction P of all the eligible job seekers is randomly selected to be
assigned to treatment. Those assigned to treatment are oﬀered the opportunity to enroll in the
job placement program (about one-third of those assigned to treatment actually enrolled). For
those who were assigned to the control group or refused the treatment, nothing changed: they
continued to be followed by the counselors of ANPE (French public employment agency), and
to receive the standard forms of assistance. This design allows us to test for externalities on
untreated workers, by comparing untreated workers in areas where some workers are treated to
those in areas with no treated workers.
      A ﬁrst comparison suggests, consistent with the prior literature, that the program has positive
impacts: after eight months, unemployed workers assigned to treatment are 1.7 percentage points
(11%) more likely to have a ﬁxed term contract with a length of more than six months than
the unassigned workers in all areas, and 2.3 percentage point more likely than the unassigned
workers in treatment areas. The results are almost identical for any stable job (1.5 and 2.5
percentage points, respectively).
      The evidence on externalities imposed on the unemployed eligible youths who were not
assigned to treatment is mixed for the full sample: the untreated workers in a treated area are
1.3 percentage point less likely to ﬁnd a long ﬁxed term contract than workers in control areas
  5
      See also Dahlberg and Forslund (2005) for an early attempt to estimate displacement eﬀects.



                                                        3
(insigniﬁcant), and 2.1 percentage point less likely to ﬁnd any kind of stable job (signiﬁcant at
the 10 percent level). We cannot reject that the impact on unassigned workers is the same in all
treatment areas, irrespective of the fraction of assigned among eligible workers, something we
would expect with externalities. This may reﬂect a lack of power.
   However, to the extent that the beneﬁciaries of the program took jobs that other workers
(who were, for example less educated, or unemployed for a shorter time) also competed for, the
externalities may not have been limited to the eligible youths: in fact, they may have been smaller
for eligible youths because they were distributed among a larger group of unemployed workers.
To shed light on this issue, we investigate how externalities vary with the nationwide share of
graduates among all job seekers searching in the same sector. We ﬁnd that the externalities
on eligible youth tend to be stronger when they compete mainly with other eligible workers.
This suggests that externalities aﬀect not only people in our sample, but many others as well,
although we do not have data allowing us to estimate externalities for ineligibleworkers.
   Furthermore, consistent with the theoretical framework, the externalities are strongest for
those who end up searching for a job in slack labor markets. They also were particularly
important in the most depressed areas during the last period of the experiment, when recession
sharply aﬀected the labor market.
   These estimates imply that the program’s beneﬁts would have been overstated in a standard
program evaluation with individuals randomly assigned within speciﬁc sites (for example, as
in Dolton and O’Neill (1996), van den Berg and van der Klaauw (2006), etc.). Taking into
account the externalities on both eligible and ineligible youth, the net number of jobs created
by the program appears to be negligible compared to its cost. These results also challenge the
conclusions of traditional equilibrium unemployment models, and suggest that it is important to
account for the possibility of job rationing when analyzing the impact of labor market policies
(like Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2012) for the design of unemployment insurance).
   The job placement assistance program and the institutional context are described in the next
section. Section 3 proposes a conceptual framework which clariﬁes when and why externalities on
untreated workers may be expected. Section 4 gives details regarding the experimental design
and the data. Section 5 presents the empirical strategy, Section 6 discusses the results, and
Section 7 concludes.


                                                4
2        Institutional context and description of the program

2.1        Background: Placement services in France

Until 2005, the French public employment agency ANPE (Agence Nationale Pour l’Emploi ) had,
from a legal point of view, a monopoly on job placement services. In particular, employers were
legally obligated to list their vacancies with ANPE.6 In 2005, the Social Cohesion Law broke
this virtual monopoly by permitting temporary work agencies to openly market their counseling
and placement services to job seekers. The public operator (which was renamed Pole Emploi in
2008) has remained an important agency because all unemployment insurance (UI) recipients
must meet their ANPE caseworkers at least once per month and follow their recommendations
in order to remain eligible for beneﬁts. Nevertheless, according to a quarterly survey conducted
by ANPE with those who left the unemployment rolls (“enquête sortants”), between 2002 and
2006, 16% of those who had found a job reported having done so thanks to a contact obtained
by a temp agency, while only 12% had found the contact through ANPE.
        In order to help fostering a vibrant private job placement market, the government and
unions decided to encourage partnerships between the public operator and private actors. Some
speciﬁc types of job seekers were targeted, starting with those that the ANPE was known to
have diﬃculty assisting. The idea of forming partnerships was adapted from the German Hartz
reforms (Jacobi and Kluve, 2007), in which each local employment oﬃce was required to contract
with a “Personal Service Agentur ” (PSA), often a temporary work agency. PSAs are responsible
for assisting a certain number of job seekers and receive a payment for each that ﬁnds a job.
        Three experiments were launched in France to evaluate the eﬀects of subcontracting place-
ment services to private providers.7 One was dedicated to job seekers at risk of long term un-
employment (Behaghel, Crépon, and Gurgand, 2012); another to welfare beneﬁciaries (Crépon,
Gurgand, Kamionka, and Lequien, 2011); and a third to young graduates who had been searching
for a job for six months or more. This paper analyzes the third experiment.
    6
        Some subpopulations of the unemployed were assisted by other agencies: for example, APEC (Agence Pour
l’Emploi des Cadres) specialized in placement for executives and managers, and Missions Locales assisted unskilled
youth.
    7
        See Krug and Stephan (2001) for a German example.




                                                        5
   The outlook for these young graduates has been bleak in recent years. In 2007, at the on-
set of this study, three years after one cohort of graduates had completed their studies, only
68%-75% had a stable job. Reports (Hetzel, 2006) emphasized the lack of job market experience
among young university graduates (internships and summer jobs are rare), and recommended
introducing specialized counseling services for them. In 2007, the Ministry of Labor decided to
experiment with subcontracting job placement services for young graduates who had been un-
employed or underemployed for six months or more to private providers. Due to their experience
in this particular segment of the market, private providers (temporary employment agencies in
particular) were believed to have the potential to be more eﬃcient than the ANPE at ﬁnding
jobs for young graduates.


2.2   Program description

The private providers’ intervention has two parts. Phase I aims to help job seekers ﬁnd work.
For the ﬁrst six months of the program, the private employment agency counsels the job seeker
and helps her to ﬁnd a durable job. The job must be on either a “CDI” (indeﬁnite term contract)
or a “CDD” (ﬁxed term contract) with a length of six months or more. Phase II aims to support
the former job seeker in her job. During the ﬁrst six months of the job, the client continued to
be followed and advised by the agency. The aim of this phase is to help the client keep her job
or ﬁnd a new job if she resigns.
   Although the speciﬁc content of the intervention can vary locally, it has three basic features.
First and foremost, a dedicated caseworker is assigned to the job seeker, who should meet her
in person at least once a week. Second, this caseworker has the responsibility to identify for
job oﬀers that can ﬁt the proﬁle of the job seekers he works with. Third, job seekers attend
workshops on various aspects of the search process. A survey of clients from another private
operator-run program –which covered the same period and involved some of the same operators
working with precisely the same mission– found that one-third of clients attended a professional
assessment program; two-thirds attended workshops on writing vitae and motivation letters;
and half attended workshops on job interviews, targeting ﬁrms, or searching the Internet for
jobs (Gratadour and Le Barbanchon, 2009). This turns out to be similar to the level of access
oﬀered by the public employment service program. Thus, rather than in these workshops, the


                                                6
added value of intensive counseling seem to lie in the frequent interviews with the dedicated
caseworker and the regular follow-up on search strategy and actions taken. The programs are
often organized around an individual action plan, the objective of which is periodically reviewed.
Although there is no formal monitoring element built into the program as such, counselors are
able to form personal relationships with the job seekers and informally encourage a more vigorous
search eﬀort (Divay, 2009).
    In each of the ten experimental regions, an invitation to tender was issued. The government
chose the providers on the basis of the services they oﬀered and the prices they charged. In six
regions, for-proﬁt operators were selected, and ﬁve of these six were subsidiaries of temporary
employment agencies. In four regions, not-for-proﬁt organizations were selected. One not-for-
proﬁt was a social and solidarity-oriented training center, and the others were local agencies
that are part of a larger not-for-proﬁt youth guidance organization.
    The program included an incentive scheme for the private job placement operators. Specif-
ically, for each enrolled job seeker, the provider got paid in three stages, with each payment
conditional on the fulﬁllment of a corresponding objective.

    • Enrollment: when a job seeker is enrolled in the program, the private agency receives the
       ﬁrst payment (25% of the maximum payment possible).

    • Finding (and accepting) a durable job: when, within six months of entry into the program,
       a job seeker signs a contract for a job lasting more than six months (or an indeﬁnite job),
       the second payment occurs (40%).

    • Remaining employed after six months: six months after the job is found, the third payment
       is made to the operator if the former job seeker is still employed (35%).

The maximum total payment ranged from 1600 to 2100 euros, depending on the ﬁrm’s initial
bid.


3      Conceptual framework

A model of search with decreasing returns to scale in the production function, which is a sim-
pliﬁed version of Michaillat (2012) and Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2012), helps clarify the

                                                 7
conditions under which a job search assistance program like this one might generate externali-
ties. In conventional models of equilibrium unemployment with frictions, if some workers increase
their job search eﬀort, this generates additional employment creation. The remaining workers
are not displaced from existing jobs because, in the process, the total pool of jobs increases
enough to absorb the extra labor supply. In the model we consider here, however, job creation
does not adjust fully in equilibrium, so untreated job seekers are at least partly displaced by
treated ones.
       We consider a model with one sector, and one type of workers.8 Jobs end randomly at rate
s. Individuals can be unemployed or employed. Let u and n denote the number of unemployed
and employed workers; we normalize the labor force to 1, so that n + u = 1.
       Unemployed people search for jobs and ﬁrms open vacancies to hire them. Denote total job
search eﬀort exercised by the unemployed as ue and total opened vacancies as v. The number
of matches resulting from the aggregated search eﬀort and available vacancies is given by the
matching function m(ue , v). Following the standard matching model as in Pissarides (2000),
we assume the m function is increasing and concave in both its arguments and homogenous of
degree one. The tightness of the labor market is deﬁned as θ = v/ue .
       Not all workers can ﬁnd a job, and not all vacancies are ﬁlled. The probability that a
vacancy is ﬁlled is m(ue , v)/v = m(ue /v, 1) = m(1/θ, 1) = q(θ), which is decreasing in θ.
The probability that an unemployed worker exercising one unit of search eﬀort ﬁnds a job is
m(ue , v)/ue = m(ue , v)/v × v/ue = θq(θ) = f (θ) which is both increasing and concave in θ,
given the assumptions on the matching function.
       To model the impact of the program, assume for simplicity that everyone exerts search eﬀort
1.9 When they become unemployed, a fraction π of job seekers are assigned to receive intensive
counseling services, which increases the productivity of their search eﬀort to e > 1.
       There are thus two types of unemployed job seekers: the treated, beneﬁting from the coun-
seling program, and those who are not treated. In steady state, there are u0 treated and u1
   8
       The model can easily be extended to include skilled and unskilled workers for instance, with varying degrees
of substitutability, and to allow diﬀerent types of workers to search either through the same channel or through
separate ones.
   9
       Search eﬀort can be endogenized as in Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2012), leading to the same results for
our purpose.


                                                          8
untreated job seekers. Total search eﬀort is thus ue = eu1 + u0 . These two groups have diﬀerent
exit rates that are derived from the matching function: counseled individuals account for a share
eu1 /ue of the search eﬀort, so that they receive eu1 m(v, ue )/ue = eu1 f (θ) job oﬀers. The exit
rate for counseled individuals is thus equal to ef (θ), while the exit rate for the untreated is f (θ).
       Displacement eﬀects will be observed if reinforced counseling services lead to a reduction in
the tightness of the labor market θ. We now examine the conditions under which the reinforced
counseling program leads to a change in θ.
       At the steady state, the inﬂows and outﬂows of treated and untreated individuals must
remain constant. Therefore, as the total inﬂow of unemployed people is sn, we have:

                                          u1 ef (θ) = πsn                                              (1)

                                           u0 f (θ) = (1 − π)sn                                        (2)

       Writing 1 − n = u = u1 + u0 , we can derive the labor supply curve as a mapping between θ
and the employment rate n:10


                                                      f (θ)
                                        n=                                                             (3)
                                             s (π/e + 1 − π) + f (θ)
       The resulting, θ = θB (n) is an increasing function of n. Figure 1 draws the labor supply
curve in the tightness/employment rate space (like ﬁgure 1 in Landais, Michaillat, and Saez
(2012)). This is the equivalent of the Beveridge curve, which is conventionally represented in
the unemployment-vacancy space. Note that the curve is fairly ﬂat for low levels of employment
(low θ) and steep when employment is high: since the function f (θ) = m(θ, 1) is concave due to
the constant returns to scale assumption for the matching function and increasing, the function
θB (n) is convex.
       To ﬁnd the labor market equilibrium, we now consider the ﬁrm’s decision. We assume that
the production technology exhibits decreasing return to scale. This can be justiﬁed by some
factor (management, ﬁxed capital, etc.) being ﬁxed in the short run. Consider for example the
technology is a simple Cobb-Douglas production function:

                                           y = anα , α ∈ (0, 1).
  10
       We simply use equations (1) and (2) to express u1 and u0 as a function of n, and then plug them into
1 − n = u1 + u0 .


                                                      9
       To simplify the argument, assume that the total operating cost for a job is ﬁxed w = w0 (for
example, because all entry-level workers are paid a binding minimum or negotiated wage).11 The
ﬁrm chooses employment to maximize the value of output, minus operating and hiring costs.
Let c be the per-period cost of an unﬁlled vacancy, and r the interest rate. Using the Bellman
equations for the value of having a vacancy and a ﬁlled job we can derive the following labor
demand equation:12
                                                             r+s
                                          αanα−1 − w0 − c         =0                                        (4)
                                                             q(θ)
       Frictions in the labor market can be interpreted as a marginal cost of hiring c(r + s)/q(θ).
This labor demand equation leads to a decreasing relationship between the employment rate
and θ: θ = θd (n). The two equations (3) and (4) together lead to the equilibrium values of θ
and n.
       The eﬀect of the policy is illustrated in ﬁgure 1, panel A. Starting from an initial situation
with π = 0 and e = 1, the policy amounts to providing part of job seekers on that market
(π > 0) with reinforced counseling scheme (e > 1). This leads to a decrease in (π/e + 1 − π) and
thus the Beveridge curve shifts to the right while the labor demand curve remains unchanged.
Clearly, this leads to an increase in employment and a decrease in θ in equilibrium. This induces
displacement eﬀects, because the exit rate of the untreated, f (θ), decreases. In the notation
used by Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2012), the size of the externality can be illustrated by
the diﬀerence between the “micro” elasticity of employment with respect to the shift in the
Beveridge curve (Em on the graph), which is the eﬀect on one individual and does not take into
account the slope of the demand curve, and the “macro” elasticity (EM ), which represents the
net increase in employment.
       Notice the key diﬀerence between this model and usual matching models such as Pissarides
(2000). In such models, where return to scale in the production function is constant, the labor
demand equation (4) is horizontal, so that θ must remain constant for any value of n. As the
  11
       We make this assumption to keep the exposition simple. Endogenous wages as determined by a bargaining
model, for example, would not lead to major changes. See footnote 13.
  12
       This equation is derived from: (1) the Bellman equations for the value of having a vacancy JV and a ﬁlled
job JE (rJV = −c + q(θ)(JE − JV ) and rJE = p − w + s(JV − JE ), where p = αanα−1 is the marginal product
related to a new hire; and (2) the entry condition requiring that the value of having a vacancy is zero.




                                                        10
ratio of vacancies to unemployment is ﬁxed, new vacancies open as new jobs are ﬁlled. Therefore,
the shift in the Beveridge curve does not lead to any displacement eﬀects. If there is decreasing
return to scale, however, marginal productivity decreases as employment n increases, and θ must
adjust.13 At the other extreme, if the labor demand curve was completely vertical, there would
be no aggregate employment eﬀect of a job placement policy (pure rat-race model). The gains
accruing to beneﬁciaries would be entirely undone by losses experienced by non-beneﬁciaries.
       In general, this model predicts that there will be direct employment eﬀects for the beneﬁ-
ciaries, but also externalities on the non-beneﬁciaries, as long as the labor demand curve is not
completely ﬂat (which will be the case as soon as there is a limiting factor, such as capital or
management).
       The model has two additional testable predictions that we will take to the data.
       First, the size of the externality directly depends on π: if very few workers are treated in a
particular market, very little changes for the untreated. In turn, π is a function of (1) the fraction
of people searching for a job in a particular occupation who are eligible for the program (in our
experiment, young, educated, unemployed for more than six months); and (2) the proportion
of them assigned to the program. Let κ be the share of eligible unemployed workers among all
unemployed workers who are likely close substitutes (in what follows, we compute the share of
eligible among those aged under 30). Assume also that eligible and ineligible individuals are
perfectly substitutable. The program varies the share of eligible unemployed workers that are
assigned to the program, which we denote σ. The share treated in that market is therefore
π = κσ.14 We should thus ﬁnd larger externalities on other educated workers in labor markets
  13
       If the wage was made endogenous, for example if it were the result of a bargaining model, we would obtain a
wage equation of the form w = w(n, θ). In that case substituting w(n, θ) for w0 in the labor demand still leads to
a decreasing relationship between n and θ (see equation (12) in Michaillat (2012)), and there could be employment
externalities through this channel. The mechanism would however be entirely diﬀerent: wages would increase due
to the improvement in the fallback position of the counseled workers, the deterioration of the untreated situation,
and the opening of fewer vacancies. This channel appears to be much less realistic in our context, and we show
in the empirical analysis that the program had no impact on wages.
  14
       If ineligible workers were imperfectly substitutable, it would change this expression, but not the qualitative
prediction that the strength of the externalities would depend on the fraction of substituable workers in each
occupation.




                                                          11
where more workers were assigned to the treatment, and also in professions where educated
workers form a larger part of the relevant labor market.
         The second prediction is based on the shape of the labor supply curve. This prediction is
explored in detail (and proved) in Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2012) and forms the core of
the authors’ argument that unemployment insurance should be higher during recessions. This
prediction is illustrated in ﬁgure 1, panel B. If labor demand is low (left part of the graph), a
shift in the labor supply curve will lead to a large gap between the micro and the macro elasticity
(i.e. a large externality) since the labor supply curve in this space is almost ﬂat. Employment
in this part of the graph is mainly constrained by demand, not by search productivity, so that
increasing the productivity of search has very little impact on total employment: the main
beneﬁt for the treated workers is that they move ahead in the rat race. If demand is high (right
part of the graph), an increase in search productivity has much larger net employment eﬀects
(and smaller associated externalities).


4         Experimental design and data

4.1         Experimental design

The randomization took place at both the labor market and individual level. It was organized
in the areas covered by 235 public unemployment agencies, scattered across 10 administrative
regions (about half of France). Each agency represents a small labor market, within which
we may observe treatment externalities. On the other hand, the agencies cover areas that are
suﬃciently large, and workers in France are suﬃciently immobile, that we can assume that no
spillovers take place across areas covered by diﬀerent agencies.15 Migration or spillover would
lead us to underestimate the magnitude of externalities. The results we present below are robust
to the exclusion of one region (Nord Pas de Calais), which is dominated by a large city (Lille),
where treatment and control areas are contiguous.
         In order to improve precision, we ﬁrst formed groups of ﬁve agencies that covered areas
similar in size and with comparable local populations; we obtained 47 such quintuplets. Within
    15
         According to the enquête sortants mentioned above, only 17% of eligible youth who found a job in a given
quarter had to move to get it.



                                                          12
each of these strata, we randomly selected one permutation assigning the ﬁve labor markets to
ﬁve fractions of treated workers: P ∈ {0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1}.
   Every month from September 2007 to October 2008, job seekers who met the criteria for
the target population (aged below 30, with at least a two-year college degree, and having spent
either 12 out of the last 18 months or six months continuously unemployed or underemployed)
were identiﬁed by the national ANPE oﬃce, using the oﬃcial unemployment registries.
   The list of job seekers was then transmitted to us and we randomly selected a fraction of
workers following the assigned proportion into treatment within each agency area. The list of
individuals that we selected to be potential beneﬁciaries of the program was then passed on to
the contracted counseling ﬁrm in the area, which was in charge of contacting the youth and
oﬀering them entry into the job placement program. Entry was voluntary, and the youth could
elect to continue receiving services from the local public unemployment agency instead, or no
service at all. No youth from the control group could be approached by the ﬁrm at any time,
and none of them were treated.


4.2   Data

There are three sources of data for this experiment. First, we use the administrative lists of job
seekers provided by ANPE to the Ministry of Labor. For each job seeker, these ﬁles provide the
individual’s age, postal address, the number of months spent unemployed during the current
unemployment spell, the type of job being sought, and the public employment agency in charge
of helping her. These registries are imperfect, because they are not updated in real time; as we
will see, a number of workers who were randomized into treatment were in fact already employed
at the time of randomization.
   A second dataset comes from private counseling ﬁrms’ administrative ﬁles. In order to claim
payment, these ﬁrms submitted lists of job seekers who actually entered the counseling scheme.
Payment was conditional upon a job seeker ﬁlling out and signing a form, and copies of the form
were reviewed to ensure that ﬁrms were not overstating the number of job seekers they were
actually counseling. We use this dataset to measure program take-up.
   Our third source of data are four follow-up surveys conducted 8 months, 12 months, 16
months and 20 months after random assignment. These surveys were necessary because existing


                                                 13
administrative data do not provide a good measure of the transition from unemployment to
employment; the information recorded reliably is whether someone is still registered as an oﬃcial
job seeker.16 A youth who stops being registered could either have become discouraged or
found a job. In addition, young job seekers do not have strong incentives to be registered with
the ANPE, in particular because they are often not eligible to receive unemployment beneﬁts.
Unfortunately, administrative data on employment and wages (from the tax authority or the
social security administration) cannot be linked to the experimental data for legal reasons related
to conﬁdentiality protections.
       The survey was conducted by DARES, the research department at the Ministry of Labor,
and was thus an oﬃcial survey; answering was not mandatory, but response rates to surveys
conducted by public agencies tend to be high in France. In order to limit data collection costs
and to increase the response rate, the survey was short (10 minutes for the ﬁrst wave, ﬁve
minutes for the others). Moreover, the survey combined three collection methods: internet,
telephone, and paper questionnaires. As a result, response rates were high: as shown in table 1,
79% answered the ﬁrst survey (the one administered after eight months).
       Participants were assigned to the experiment in 14 monthly cohorts, starting in September
2007. The study focuses on cohorts 3-11.17 In these cohorts, 29,636 individuals were randomly
  16
       The administrative data on exits from the unemployment registry are aﬀected by both imperfect updating
and “unknown exit” for a signiﬁcant share of unemployment leavers, i.e. when a worker leaves the ANPE registry,
it can be either because they have found a job or because they have stopped searching for one.
  17
       We faced a budget constraint that limited the overall size of the sample we could follow, so we made decisions
about where to draw the follow up sample from. Cohorts 1 and 2 were not followed because it took a couple
of weeks before the private operators were ready to actually oﬀer the treatment. Cohorts 12 to 14 are not used
because, in July 2008, one month before cohort 12 became eligible for the experiment, the Ministry issued a
separate, more proﬁtable, call for tender for job seeker counseling. Anecdotal evidence and data on the number
of beneﬁciaries from these cohorts suggest that private ﬁrms were more focused on this second operation and all
but stopped implementing the experimental program; indeed, youths from these cohorts were not enrolled even
when they were oﬃcially selected for treatment, and youth in the control groups started being enrolled in this
other program, particularly where the private operators were in place. This would have biased our estimates of
both direct eﬀects and externalities. In particular, if the private operators targeted the control group for the
second program in treatment regions because they had already an oﬃce there, this would make our estimates of
externalities appear positive. We did not collect data for cohorts 13 and 14; including cohort 12 in the analysis
leaves results qualitatively unchanged, but somewhat noisier.


                                                          14
selected to be surveyed and 21,431 were found eight months after assignment. Out of them,
most of our analysis focuses on the 11,806 who did not declare to be in employment at the time
of assignment.
   Table 1 also shows the response rates conditional on having been assigned to either the
treatment or control group. The response rate is above 70%, and the job seekers assigned to
treatment are only one percentage point more likely to answer than those assigned to control.
In all waves, the response rates remained very high and very similar in treatment and control
groups (results omitted to save space).
   The ﬁrst survey wave took place between August 2008 and May 2009; the last survey wave
took place between August 2009 and May 2010. The survey included questions about the cur-
rent respondent’s employment situation (wage, type of contract, part-time or not, occupation).
It also elicited some retrospective information about the respondent’s situation at the program
assignment date, highest degree obtained, family situation (marital status, number of children),
and nationality (or parents’ nationality). It asked how many times the respondent met a coun-
selor (public, or from the contracted private agency) and what type of help she got during her
job search. Finally, individuals assigned to treatment were asked the ways in which they thought
they would beneﬁt from entering the program (if they agreed to enter), while those who chose
not to participate were asked the reason why.
   Table 2 presents summary statistics for job seekers before program assignment (using ANPE
administrative ﬁle and, for the last row, our own survey), as well as balancing tests.
   Most individuals in the sample are in their twenties, which is not surprising given the age
requirement. Another eligibility condition involved length of unemployment spell; individuals
had to have been looking for a job for more than six months or to have been unemployed for
more than 12 of the last 18 months. Indeed, individuals who have been unemployed for seven
months or more are overrepresented in the sample. Nineteen percent of the sample has been
unemployed for 12 months or more. Because these job seekers are young and have often only had
jobs for limited lengths of time, most of them (67%) are not receiving unemployment beneﬁts.
Nearly two-thirds of job seekers are women. Finally, 41% of the sample has a two-year college
degree (“Bac+2”), and individuals with higher university degrees (“Bac+3” and more) represent
46% of the sample.


                                                15
   The last four columns in table 2 present balancing tests. The experimental design generates
eight experimental groups (untreated workers in control areas, three groups of untreated workers
in treated areas, and four groups of treated workers in treated areas). In the analysis below, we
will compare assigned and unassigned workers, unassigned workers across types of areas, and
assigned workers across types of areas. We thus present the p-values for four types of tests:
assigned versus unassigned, joint signiﬁcance of all the group dummies (with the “super-control”
group, in which there is zero probability of treatment assignment, as the omitted category),
and joint signiﬁcance on treated and control groups separately. Eight out of 72 contrasts are
signiﬁcant at the 10% level, which is expected under random assignment. Appendix table A.1
presents the same statistics for the sample of those who were initially unemployed (which form
the bulk of our analysis in what follows), with similar conclusions.
   The last three rows of table 2 presents summary statistics on employment status at the start
of the experiment for those who responded to the ﬁrst wave of the DARES survey. Importantly,
45% of the sample claimed to have been employed at the time of treatment assignment. There
are several possible reasons for this. First, respondents could have recently found a job, and
their status may not have been updated in the unemployment agency list used to generate the
randomization sample. Second, respondents may have been underemployed, i.e. holding a part-
time job but still looking for full-time employment, and so would have been eligible for treatment
(this employment status is known as “activité réduite,” or limited activity). In what follows, we
will focus on results for those who did not claim to be employed at baseline (i.e. those who
report that they were either unemployed or do not remember their status at baseline), because
they were the target of the intervention. While all those randomized remained eligible, and a
few took advantage of the treatment, with better data we would not have included them in the
randomization. Furthermore, our model helps us think about externalities of a more eﬀective job
search for some on other unemployed workers searching for a job. We have no strong prediction
for the impact on those who search on the job.




                                                16
5         Basic results: Program take-up and diﬀerence between treat-
          ment and control

5.1         Participation and services received

A ﬁrst step is to establish what types of help the beneﬁciaries of the program actually received.
We start by estimating the following equation with program take-up and measures of the services
received by the youth while unemployed as the dependent variables.

                                         yic = α1 + β1 Zic + Xic γ1 +    ic                                 (5)

yic is take-up of the program (enrolled or not), and measures of the types of help that individual
i in city c received. Zic is a dummy equal to 1 if the individual is assigned to the program. Xic
is a vector of control variables which includes a set of quintuplet dummies, a dummy for each
cohort of entry into the program, and individual-level control variables (age, gender, education,
past duration of unemployment and its square).18
         Panel A in table 3 presents the impact of assignment to treatment on program participation.
The randomization was adhered to, and participation in the control group was zero, but take-up
in the treatment group was far from universal: it was only 35% for the full sample of workers
assigned to treatment. Predictably, take-up was signiﬁcantly higher for unemployed workers
(43%) than for employed workers (25%). The follow-up survey asked why respondents did not
participate (if they did not). 46% of those assigned to treatment who did not participate reported
that they already had started, or were about to start a job, and 11% claimed that they were
studying. Only about 17% of respondents answered that they felt that the counseling program
was useless or time-consuming.
         Panel B in table 3 presents coeﬃcients β1 for a number of intermediate outcomes, indicating
the types of services received by job seekers (according to their self-reports from the endline
interview). Overall, assigned workers had more meetings with a job search advisor (over the
eight months after assignment), and received more help preparing their résumés and assessing
their skills. Participants were not signiﬁcantly more likely to have been put in touch with a
    18
         More ﬂexible control for past duration of unemployment makes no diﬀerence to the result whatsoever. The
results are not aﬀected either by including no control variables.


                                                         17
speciﬁc employer, nor did they receive help with transportation to interviews. Overall, it seems
that the program may have helped participants by motivating them to continue searching, rather
than directly helping them jump the queue for speciﬁc jobs.


5.2    Preliminary results: Labor market outcomes

In a second step, we present“naive”estimates of the program, comparing assigned and unassigned
workers, ignoring externalities. Throughout the paper, we consider two labor market outcomes:
ﬁxed term contract of six months or more (henceforth, LTFC), and any long term job (ﬁxed
term contract of more than six months or permanent contract, henceforth, LT). Both measures
are potentially interesting: LTFC was the cheapest way for the intermediaries to satisfy their
obligations, and hence the measure where we may expect the largest direct impact. LT is
what the government (and the employee) cares about, and to the extent the program led some
beneﬁciaries to get ﬁxed term contracts instead of indeﬁnite term contract, it would not be a
success.
    The results of estimating equation (5) with these two measures of employment outcome are
presented in panel C of table 3. In this speciﬁcation, all those assigned to treatment are pooled
and compared to those assigned to the control group.
    Overall, job seekers assigned to treatment are only 0.7 percentage points more likely to have
obtained a LTFC and 0.2 percentage points to have a LT, and these estimates are completely
insigniﬁcant. However, for those who were not employed at the beginning of the study, they
were 1.7 percentage points (11%) more likely to have a LTFC and 1.5 percentage points to have
a LT (4 %) if they were assigned to treatment than if they were not.


6     Estimating externalities

As we noted, the estimates in the previous section are potentially biased estimates of the true
eﬀects of the program on participants in the presence of externalities. We now turn to examining
externalities directly.




                                               18
6.1   Unconstrained reduced form

To estimate externalities, we take advantage of the fact that the fraction of treatment job seekers
varies by labor market (from 0% to 100%). In the absence of externalities, the outcomes both
for assigned and unassigned workers should be independent of the fraction of workers assigned
to the treatment in their areas. In contrast, negative externalities have two simple implications.
First, the probability that eligible youth in the control group ﬁnd a job should be lower in cities
where others were assigned to treatment, and the negative impact should increase with π, the
fraction of relevant workers who were treated.
   Second, the net impact of the treatment (compared to the super-control) should fall as the
fraction of workers assigned to the program rises (as the treated workers now compete among
themselves for jobs).
   We estimate a fully unconstrained reduced form model, and test whether the eﬀect of being
assigned to treatment or to control varies by assignment probability. The speciﬁcation we
consider is the following:



                  yic = β25 Zic P25c + β50 Zic P50c + β75 Zic P75c + β100 Zic P100c

                        + δ25 P25c + δ50 P50c + δ75 P75c

                        + Xic γ4 + uic                                                         (6)

where Zic is the assignment to treatment variable and Pxc is a dummy variable at the area level
indicating an assignment rate of x%. ZP25 is thus a dummy for being assigned to treatment
in a labor market with a rate of 25% assignment. As before, control variables are individual
characteristics (gender, education, etc.) and the set of 47 dummy variables for city quintuplets
(our randomization strata). Standard errors are clustered at the local area level. The parameter
βx measures the eﬀect of being assigned to treatment in an area where x% of the eligible
population was assigned to treatment, compared to being unassigned in an area of the same type
(or, for β100 , compared to the super-control). Coeﬃcient δx measures the eﬀect of being assigned
to the control group in an area where x% of the eligible population was assigned to treatment,
compared to being in the super-control group in which no one was assigned to treatment. Note
that there are four parameters β but only three parameters δ as there is no room to estimate

                                                 19
the eﬀect on those assigned to the control group when the whole eligible population is assigned
to receive the treatment.
   There are two tests that can be used to investigate the presence of externalities based on
estimates from the regression above: (1) whether all the δ coeﬃcients are jointly zero; (2)
whether they are equal to each other (the alternative of interest being that they are declining).
   Table 4 presents estimates of equation (6), and ﬁgure 2 is a graphical representation of these
results (all the ﬁgures are for unemployed job seekers).
   Figure 2A shows the average probability that a worker who was unemployed at baseline has
obtained a LTFC by the month-eight survey by city-level treatment group (0 to 100), both for
all workers pooled, and separately for assigned and non-assigned workers within each city. We
see that the mean for the treatment group is always above that for the control group, suggesting
that there is a direct treatment eﬀect. There is no clear evidence for externalities in this sample
as a whole, however the average employment in the control group seems to be unrelated to the
fraction of workers assigned to the treatment. Figure 2B shows that there may have been some
externalities for men: the control group average appears to be lower in all areas were some
workers were exposed to the treatment, and the pattern is generally decreasing.
   Table 4 presents the coeﬃcients with standard errors, and associated tests for LTFC (columns
1 to 4) and LT (columns 5 to 8). Column 2 indeed suggests a positive treatment eﬀect impact of
being assigned to treatment compared to not being assigned in a treated area (the β coeﬃcients
are jointly signiﬁcant), and insigniﬁcant externalities on untreated workers: the δ coeﬃcients
are neither signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero, nor signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other. For
men alone, we do see stronger evidence of externalities: in column 3, the δ coeﬃcients are all
negative and jointly signiﬁcant (two out of three are also individually signiﬁcant), although we
cannot reject that they are constant in magnitude with the fraction assigned to treatment. This
diﬀerence between men and women will remain throughout the paper. It was not something
we expected ex-ante, and we do not have any solid explanation for it, although we will discuss
below additional analysis we performed to shed light on this phenomenon.




                                                20
6.2   Pooled reduced form

Due to the relatively low take-up (and hence the relatively small direct reduced form impact
of program assignment on the probability to ﬁnd a job), and the fact that a sizable fraction
of the target sample was in fact already employed when the experiment started, the power of
the experiment to detect diﬀerence between cities with diﬀerent assignment is relatively low.
Moreover, the average κ (the share of eligible among all young job seekers) is only 19%, which
implies that the diﬀerence in share of treated between a zone treated at 75% and a zone treated
at 25% is only 19*75%-19*25%=9.5%. As a result, even for men alone (where we do ﬁnd
a signiﬁcant negative impact of being in a treated labor market, for example, and where the
pattern has generally the right shape) we cannot reject equality between the dummies indicating
diﬀerent assignment rules. Since our next tests involve subsamples, this will further aﬀect power.
   For this reason, we estimate a simpler regression, which exploits the presence of the super-
control (with zero probability of treatment assignment), and pools all those who were assigned
to control in an area in which some were treated on the one hand, and all those who were
assigned to treatment on the other hand. This regression does not allow us to estimate the slope
of program eﬀects with respect to the share treated, but has more power against the null that
there are no externalities.
   The reduced form speciﬁcation is:

                              yic = α2 + β2 Zic Pc + δ2 Pc + Xic γ2 + ωic                     (7)

where Pc is a dummy for being in any treatment area (i.e. an area with positive share treated).
In this speciﬁcation, β2 is the diﬀerence between those assigned to treatment (whether treated
or not), and those who are in treatment zones but are not themselves assigned to treatment. δ2
is the eﬀect of being untreated in a treated zone (compared to being untreated in an untreated
zone). The sum β2 + δ2 is the eﬀect of being assigned to treatment (compared to being in an
entirely unaﬀected labor market).
   Table 5 presents the estimates of equation (7). In each panel, the ﬁrst row presents the
estimate of β2 , the second row the estimate of δ2 and the third row the estimate of β2 + δ2 .
Columns 1 to 3 present the results for the full sample of those not employed at baseline, for
men, and for women, respectively. The results are consistent with those in table 4. For example,

                                                  21
column 1 panel A ﬁnds that those assigned to treatment are 2.3 percentage points more likely
to have a LTFC that those assigned to control in the treatment labor markets. This is roughly
the average of the coeﬃcients in the ﬁrst four rows of column (3), table 4 (0.021, 0.013, 0.007,
0.025), with a stronger weight given to the last number because there are more people assigned to
treatment in these zones. Those assigned to control in a treated labor market are 1.3 percentage
points less likely to have found ﬁxed term contract than those assigned to the super-control
(insigniﬁcant). This number corresponds roughly to the average of the number of the last three
rows of table 4 (-0.15, -0.14, -0.006). This time, more weight is given to the ﬁrst of these numbers
since there are more individuals who are untreated in these zones.
   Overall, the conclusions from columns 1 to 3 of table 5 are similar to those of table 4, with
signiﬁcant estimates of externalities for men, but not for women. The only diﬀerence is that
we ﬁnd some limited evidence (signiﬁcant at 10%) of negative externalities for men and women
combined for LT. One striking result in this table is that the net eﬀects of being assigned to
treatment are all insigniﬁcant, suggesting that when we take externalities into account, the
program is actually ineﬀective for those assigned to it.

   As mentioned above, the heterogeneity between both the impacts and the externalities for
men and women is a surprising result. The literature on labor market interventions (job search
assistance or monitoring) for women has not generally found this result: half the papers over
the period (1999-2006) ﬁnd larger impacts for women, and the other half ﬁnds little diﬀerence
(Bergemann and van den Berg, 2008). In a context similar to ours, Dolton and O’Neill (2002)
ﬁnd a larger impact for women than for men. In appendix table A.2, we shed more light on the
pattern, by disaggregating by education level (less than two years of higher education versus
more than two years). Interestingly, in the low education group, the pattern is exactly the
same for men and women. It is only in the high education group that the results are diﬀerent
for men and women, with large direct impacts and large externality for men, and nothing for
women. This helps reconcile our results with those in the literature, which are typically not
focused on college graduates. This stills leaves open the question of why this diﬀerence exists
at higher education levels. We explored two channels for the diﬀerence in externalities between
men and women in the high education group, marital status and type of occupation sought. The
results are not diﬀerent when breaking down by marital status (results omitted to save space).

                                                22
Appendix table A.3 accounts for the diﬀerent occupations sought by men and women in high
education group by reweighting the observations for each gender and in each occupation by the
share of individuals of the other gender who are searching in this occupation. This answers the
question: what would be the results for men (women) if their occupational pattern was the same
as women (men). This reweighting makes little diﬀerence for women. For men, however, the
externalities for LT disappear with the reweighting. This gives some hint that the diﬀerence
may be partly accounted for by diﬀerent occupations. This is very tentative, however, since the
results are unaﬀected for LTFC, and assigning the occupations of men to women does not aﬀect
the results for women.


6.3       Heterogeneity: sector and labor market conditions

The model suggests that the size of the externality imposed on any given worker depends on
the fraction of workers in the market that are not assigned to treatment. This share depends in
turn on the fraction of those who are eligible and are assigned and on the fraction of the overall
labor market that is eligible. This is because any labor market externalities due to the treatment
may aﬀect not only the eligible group, but may also aﬀect workers who are close substitutes for
them, although they are not themselves part of the experiment. For example, young, educated
individuals who have been unemployed for at least six months may be competing for jobs with
all young job seekers, or only with young, educated job seekers with a slightly shorter duration
of unemployment. Unfortunately, looking for externalities among the rest of the unemployed
population is not feasible due to data constraints.19
       However, this implies that the externalities should be larger in sectors where eligible workers
form a small part of the relevant labor market. Thus, to investigate the displacement issue, we
split the sample according to κ, the share of eligible workers in the sector where they are looking
for a job. We compute κ as follows: when they ﬁrst register at the ANPE, job seekers indicate
  19
       For reasons detailed in footnote 16, the unemployment registers are not considered to be a good measure
of unemployment, and national statistics on employment use the “enquête emploi,” a survey similar to the CPS.
However, the sample for enquête emploi is too small to have precise number of unemployment at a ﬁne geographic
level. Below, when we use the enquête emploi to construct indicators of unemployment rate in each labor market,
we assign each our labor market to the larger regions at which the data is representative.




                                                       23
the occupation in which they are looking for a job. There are 466 such occupation codes. Using
a nationwide database of job seekers, we compute the share of skilled job seekers among all job
seekers under 30 searching in this occupation. Column (1) in table 6 lists the 10 categories in
which the share of skilled workers is the highest (high κ) and the 10 categories in which the
share of skilled workers is the lowest (low κ), along with the corresponding shares. Column
(2) presents the same fractions for the same job, but keeps the long unemployment duration
requirement. Low values of κ are found for workers in industrial jobs that require vocational
education (often below the college level), such as construction workers (roofers, concrete workers,
and sheet ﬁtters). The highest concentration of young job seekers with at least two-year college
degrees is found for workers in tertiary occupations, such as lawyers, ﬁnancial oﬃcers, teachers
and dentists.20
       Figure 2B (and 2E for men only) presents the average fraction of control workers with a
LTFC in two types of labor markets: those with κ below the ﬁrst quartile (eligible workers are
a small fraction of the job seekers in the job they are looking for) and those with κ above the
third quartile. As expected, the slope is steeper for κ above the third quartile (and is completely
ﬂat for κ below the ﬁrst quartile). Thus, for control workers looking for job where they compete
mainly with eligible workers, the higher the fraction treated, the worst they fare. This is not
true for those who compete with a much larger pool.
       The last three columns of table 5 present the results of the pooled regression, restricting
the sample to those looking jobs where κ is above the third quartile. In panel A (LTFC), the
externality is about three times larger for high κ then for the whole sample, and is signiﬁcant in
the population as a whole. This is still driven by men, though there is a negative point estimate
for women (which is still insigniﬁcant). In panel B (LT), the externalities are twice as large for
men above the third quartile of κ than for the sample as a whole, but the number is positive
  20
       It is important to deﬁne the groups by the sectors in which those in our sample were initially looking for a
job, and to use administrative data from before the experiment, since the experiment could have aﬀected both
the decision of where to look and the reporting on what they were looking for. In practice, people tend to revise
their expectation downward as they look for a job. Nevertheless, there is a correlation between the κ in the job
initially sought and the κ in the job ﬁnally found: 22% (34%) of those who were looking for a job with κ above
the third quartile ultimately found a job with κ above the third quartile (median). For those who were initially
looking for a job with κ in the ﬁrst quartile, the numbers are respectively 1% and 10%.



                                                         24
(and insigniﬁcant) for women, which leads the point estimate for the whole sample to actually
be lower in column 4 (high κ) than in column 1 (all workers).21

       Finally, the model has the testable implication that externalities should be larger in weak
labor markets. We deﬁne a weak labor market by the interactions of being in a generally
depressed area (labor market area with unemployment rate above the median, as measured in
the “enquete emploi ”22 ), and being in one of the later cohort (entered program eligibility between
April and July 2008) who were looking for employment after the 2008 recession started. The
unemployment rate in these markets at the time our survey was conducted (eight months after
entry in the program) was 11.0%, versus 8.2% in the rest of the sample.
       Figures 2C (for all the unemployed) and 2F (for men only) plot average unemployment
rates for men among those unassigned to treatment by fraction assigned, separating the sample
between weak labor market and strong labor market. In normal conditions, there is no evidence
of externalities. However, in weak labor markets, the control group means are lower in all the
cities that have some workers assigned to the treatment than in super-control. For men, the
pattern is clearly declining in both graphs. For all workers together, there is a surprising blip
up in the 75% group (note that both for men and for all workers, the sample gets quite small).
       We build the regression framework around our pooled estimates:

                         yic = α3 + β3LL (Tic Pc ∗ LLDic ) + β3 (Tic Pc ∗ (1 − LLDic )

                             + δ3LL (Pc ∗ LLDic ) + δ3 (Pc ∗ (1 − LLDic )) + Xγ3 + νic                        (8)

where LLDic = LLDi ∗ LLDc , a dummy equal to 1 in towns with high unemployment rate
(LLDc = 1) and for the last cohorts (LLDi = 1), and zero otherwise.
       Externalities may vary across cohorts or regions for reasons that are not directly linked to
labor market conditions. For example, the eﬀectiveness of the program or the intensity of search
eﬀorts may have changed over time. Operators may have become better at assisting in job
searches or, on the contrary, may have lost interest. Alternatively, they may have transferred
  21
       The results for κ below the third quartile (omitted for brevity) are all insigniﬁcant.
  22
       As mentioned above, the enquete emploi only gives us more aggregated regional data, so we assign each labor
market to the corresponding region.




                                                           25
their knowledge on ineligible workers. Finally, operators who bid in weak labor markets may be
diﬀerent than those who bid in strong labor markets.23
       To test this, we estimate externalities separately in all combinations of cohorts and regions.



                 yic = α4 + β4LL (Tic Pc ∗ LLDi ∗ LLDc ) + β4HL (Tic Pc ∗ HLDi ∗ LLDc )

                    + β4LH (Tic Pc ∗ LLDi ∗ HLDc ) + β4HH (Tic Pc ∗ HLDi ∗ HLDc )

                    + δ4LL (Pc ∗ LLDi ∗ LLDc ) + δ4HL (Pc ∗ HLDi ∗ LLDc )

                    + δ4LH (Pc ∗ LLDi ∗ HLDc ) + δ4HH (Pc ∗ HLDi ∗ HLDc ) + Xγ4 + νic                         (9)

In this speciﬁcation, the testable implication of the theory is that δ4LL is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
(more negative) than all the other δ coeﬃcients. The identiﬁcation assumption is that, to the
extent that there are diﬀerences in externalities across regions and periods, the recession is the
only reason why they are particularly high in worst years in depressed regions, compared to
other times or places.

       The results are presented in table 7. In panel A, we compare externalities in weak labor
markets and in all the others. In panel B, we separately estimate all the coeﬃcients in all four
regions and cohort combinations. Consistent with the model, we observe in panel A signiﬁcant
externalities in the weakest markets and no externalities elsewhere. In panel B, we see that
the eﬀect of the interaction is not driven by the bad areas only or the bad cohorts only. In
both speciﬁcations, we can reject equality of the externalities in weak markets with the other
coeﬃcients for LT, but not for LTFC. These results make sense, as it seems sensible that the
externalities would be present, not only to ﬁxed term employment, but to all kinds of long term
contracts (ﬁxed term and indeﬁnite).


6.4       Other outcomes and longer term results

We have so far focused on the short term, and on the main outcomes of interest for the program,
LT and LTFC. Job placement agencies were contractually incentivized to help beneﬁciaries ﬁnd
  23
       In results we do not report here, we ﬁnd that the for-proﬁt operators appear to be more eﬀective at placing
the eligible workers than the not-for-proﬁt workers, and the externalities to be correspondingly larger in regions
where they won. They may also have been working in diﬀerent labor markets.


                                                         26
jobs within a maximum of six months, so the direct eﬀects of the program are expected to
disappear after 12 months. Since all the gains were in the form of ﬁxed term contracts, the gains
could well have been temporary. However, a key rationale for such job placement policies is the
idea that a young person’s ﬁrst job serves as a “stepping stone,” helping her to ﬁnd subsequent
employment after her ﬁrst contract ends (or to move from having a six-month contract with
a ﬁrm to a more permanent position). To investigate the persistence of program impacts, we
conducted surveys at 12, 16 and 20 months after treatment assignment.
      Columns 1 to 3 in table 8 show the impact of the program and the externalities on any form
of employment (including short term temporary contract), at 8, 12 and 20 months.24 Columns
4 to 6 show estimates of equation (7) for long term employment at 8, 12 and 20 months. In the
short term, the program gave a small advantage to those assigned in the probability of ﬁnding
any job (overall they are 1.9 percentage points – or 4% – more likely to ﬁnd a job than those
who were not assigned). The externalities are negative and of the same magnitude, though
insigniﬁcant, and there is no net positive impact of assignment to the program. Over time,
more and more of the control group workers ﬁnd a job (65.4% by 20 months), and the diﬀerence
between assigned and non-assigned disappears. Likewise, any diﬀerence between assigned and
non-assigned in the probability to ﬁnd stable employment disappears over time.
      Table 9 presents the impacts of the program on total earnings (including zero values for those
who earn nothing, and unemployment beneﬁts for those who receive them), at eight months and
beyond. The eﬀects on wages could theoretically be positive or negative, in the short or long run.
Although our model predicts no impacts on wages (and impact on earnings coming only from
impacts on wages), the impact could have been negative if treated workers were encouraged to
quickly accept low-quality jobs, rather than wait for something better. Alternatively, the eﬀect
could have been positive if programs helped individuals to ﬁnd better job matches. Overall,
however, there appears to have been no signiﬁcant treatment eﬀect (or externalities) on wages.
There is a positive eﬀect on earnings for just men at eight months (which is attributable to the
increase in the probability to be employed), and not beyond. Appendix table A.4 presents the
results for wages, to be taken with some caution since wages is a selected outcome.25
 24
      We omit 16 months to save space, as the results are exactly the same as for 12 or 20 months.
 25
      The absence of an eﬀect on wages also helps distinguishing the model we propose from an alternative model.



                                                        27
7    Instrumental variable estimates of program impact

The estimates presented above are of direct policy interest in our context, since the policy was
to oﬀer access to the reinforced program, not to constrain eligible youth to participate. The
reduced form estimates are also suﬃcient to estimate externalities. However, the impact of the
program on those actually participating is also be of interest. In particular, the parameter of
interest in the model is the relationship between the direct impact of program participation and
the externality.
    Since participation was endogenous, a natural strategy is to instrument program participa-
tion with assignment to the program, i.e. to estimate the following equation where program
participation (Tic ) is instrumented by assignment to the program (Zic ) and all the other variables
are treated as exogenous and included in the instruments set.


                                yic = α5 + β5 Tic Pc + δ5 Pc + Xγ5 + νic                                  (10)

where β5 in this equation compares treated to other untreated eligible workers in treated areas.
    To estimate the overall eﬀect of the treatment on the treated, the treated are compared
to those in the super-control group. We estimate the following IV equation using treatment
assignment as an instrument for program participation, and the other variables as instruments
for themselves:


                            yic = α6 + β6 Tic Pc + δ6 Pc (1 − Tic ) + Xγ6 + ξic                           (11)

    The presence of externalities, however, complicates the interpretation of β5 and β6 . Speciﬁ-
cally, we now show that, on top of the usual monotonicity and independence assumptions (there
is no direct eﬀect of program assignment on eligible youths’ behavior, other through any exter-
nality they may suﬀer and the fact that being assigned makes them more likely to receive the
treatment), another necessary assumption in this context is that the externality on an untreated

In a standard search model, wage bargaining can lead to employment externalities. Cahuc and Le Barbanchon
(2010) develop a model in which externalities on the non-treated arise from wage bargaining: a raise in treated
labor market prospects increases bargained wages and decreases overall job creation. However, if this mechanism
was at work, we would expect to observe impacts on both employment and wages for the treated.



                                                      28
worker is independent of his treatment status: in other words, we need to assume that the poten-
tial outcomes when untreated are on average the same for the compliers and the non compliers
of our experiments (the potential outcomes when treated are of course allowed to vary).
       To see this, consider the simple case in which areas are randomly assigned to a probability
of treatment P which is either positive or zero, and individuals in the “treatment” area are
randomly assigned to the treatment. Assume for simplicity, and as is the case in our context,
that individuals assigned to the control group are never treated (so, in the notation of Imbens
and Angrist (1994), T (0) = 0 and T = T (1)Z).
       There are three potential outcomes y(P, T ): y(0, 0) is the potential outcome when no treat-
ment takes place in the area, y(1, 0) is the potential outcome when untreated in a treatment
area, and y(1, 1) the potential outcome when treated.
       The observed outcome is then simply:

y = y(0, 0)(1−P )+y(1, 0)P (1−T )+y(1, 1)P T = y(0, 0)+(y(1, 0)−y(0, 0))P +(y(1, 1)−y(1, 0))P T

       Then, we have:

  E(y|P, Z) = E(y(0, 0)) + E(y(1, 0) − y(0, 0))P + E(y(1, 1) − y(1, 0)|T = 1)P (T = 1)|Z)P Z.

       What IV identiﬁes is (1) AE = E(y(1, 0) − y(0, 0)), which is the average externality over the
population, and (2) the “treated in treated zone” eﬀect, T T Z = E(y(1, 1) − y(1, 0)|T (1) = 1).26
Simple manipulations show that this parameter can be expressed as the diﬀerence between the
treatment on the treated parameter (TT) and the externality on the treated (ET):

           T T Z = E(y(1, 1) − y(0, 0)|T (1) = 1) − E(y(1, 0) − y(0, 0)|T (1) = 1) = T T − ET

       Meanwhile, the average externality can be expressed as:

AE = E(y(1, 0) − y(0, 0)|T (1) = 1)P (T (1) = 1) + E(y(1, 0) − y(0, 0)|T (1) = 0)P (T (1) = 0)

          = ET ∗ P (T (1) = 1) + EN T ∗ P (T (1) = 0)

       Under the assumption EN T = ET (= AE), the TT parameter is simply the sum of AE and
TTZ.
  26
       Note that the treatment eﬀect here subsumes any externality that the treated workers impose on each others.
The externality is deﬁned as the externality imposed on a non-treated worker in a treated area.


                                                         29
   A natural question is whether the assumption that the externality is the same for everybody
is reasonable. It could be violated if, for example, the compliers in the experiment chose to
be treated because they worried about externalities, or if compliers are the type of people who
search harder for a job, and would thus have suﬀered more strongly from the externalities if not
treated (since externalities are multiplicative in the search eﬀort).
   These caveats notwithstanding, table 10 presents the results, which suggest fairly large net
impacts of the program for people who actually take up the program. Compared to the su-
percontrol, the estimate suggest that it increased the probability that they get a LTFC by 4
percentage points (25%), and LT by 3.6 percentage points (9.8%). Compared to others in the
same labor markets, the program increases the chance that participants get a LTFC by 5.4 per-
centage points and that of getting a LT by 5. 7 percentage points. The estimates of externalities
are of course unaﬀected, so the treatment eﬀects are now quite a bit larger than the externalities,
which is exactly what we would expect.
   The reason why the net impact of program assignments are zero, while the net treatment
eﬀect is positive, is because the take-up is fairly low: those who are assigned but do not take up
suﬀer the same externalities as those who are not assigned. The impact on them is suﬃciently
negative to compensate for the positive impact on those who are treated.
   The diﬀerence between the IV and reduced from results has important implications: a study
where compliance rates were high due to intense follow up would greatly over-estimate the eﬀect
of a policy where the program is oﬀered, but compliance is not enforced for the target group if one
would then just scale down the eﬀect by the expected take up under a voluntary program. This
is because it would not take into account the potential negative externalities on the never-takers
in such a program.
   Table 11 presents the results of the estimation of externalities and the direct program eﬀects
in weak labor markets compared to other times (to save space we just report the speciﬁcation
corresponding to panel A in table 7). As in table 7, we ﬁnd larger externalities and larger
treatment eﬀect in weak labor markets. In weak labor market , the eﬀect of participation is 12
percentage points for LTFC and 14.5 percentage points for LT, and the externalities, as before,
are 4.2 percentage and 7.7 percentage points, respectively. In normal times, the externalities are




                                                30
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero, and the treatment eﬀects are 3.5 and 3.6 percentage points
respectively.


8    Conclusion

This evaluation of an assistance program for young, college-educated job seekers oﬀers a unique
opportunity to measure both the direct impact of counseling and the equilibrium eﬀects, in a
given market, of providing counseling to a proportion of the eligible population.
    We ﬁnd that the reinforced counseling program did indeed have a positive impact on the
employment status of young job seekers eight months after assignment into the treatment group,
compared to untreated job seekers. However, this eﬀect came partly at the expense of other
workers, especially in weak labor markets.
    The externalities we estimate suggest that part of the program eﬀects in the short run were
due to an improvement in the search ability of some workers, which reduced the relative job
search success of others. These results challenge conventional theories of equilibrium unem-
ployment (Hall, 1979; Pissarides, 2000) but they are consistent with a search model that takes
rationing into account (Michaillat, 2012; Landais, Michaillat, and Saez, 2012). This model has
an additional prediction that is also veriﬁed in the data: externalities are stronger in weaker
labor markets where competition for jobs is ﬁercer. This prediction allows us to distinguish it
from a pure rat-race model, where treatment places the worker at the front of the queue for a
ﬁxed supply of jobs.
    Additional evidence suggests that the main eﬀect of the program was to help those treated
to ﬁnd a job slightly faster, at the expense of others who subsequently took longer to ﬁnd
employment. In particular, after 12 months (and up to 20 months), the program eﬀects on
employment had entirely disappeared. In other words, there is no “stepping stone” eﬀect, where
a ﬁxed term job can lead to a permanent position.
    This has important consequences for estimating the welfare implication and cost beneﬁt of
this program. Indeed, in our setting, a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that taking
externalities into account radically changes the conclusion. Our IV point estimates imply that,
for 1,000 people who were eﬀectively treated by the program, 36 have found long term jobs



                                               31
within eight months because of it. However, for 1,000 treated workers, there were on average
2,300 non-treated in the same regions, and the externalities estimates imply that out of these
2,300, 48 were displaced. In other words, there were in fact more jobs lost than found. While
this negative point estimate should not be taken too seriously (zero is deﬁnitely part of the
conﬁdence interval), we cannot reject that the program had, on net, no positive eﬀect. If we had
ignored externalities and taken as point estimate the IV within treatment zone, we would have
found that, out of 1,000 treated workers, 57 found long term jobs within eight months because of
the program. The cost of the program was on average 1,160 euros per worker, 585 euros higher
than the cost of the regular employment services for the same duration.27 Ignoring externalities,
we would have thus concluded, for example, that 100,000 euros invested in the program would
lead 9.7 extra people to ﬁnd a job within eight months. Since the eﬀect disappears by 12 months,
this already appears to be quite expensive, at about 10,000 euros for a job found on average four
months earlier. But at least, it is not counterproductive. With externalities, investing 100,000
euros leads to no improvement at all.           28


       These results suggest that the current enthusiasm among policymakers in Europe for active
labor market programs should be tempered, since most available evidence in their favor does
not take equilibrium eﬀects into account. More broadly, our results also imply that there are
potentially important externalities associated with any increase in the search productivity of a
group of workers in the labor market, a ﬁnding that has repercussions for the optimal design of
unemployment insurance and other social protection policies. For example, (Landais, Michaillat,
and Saez, 2012) use the estimates in this paper (tables 10 and 11) to calibrate their model. They
show that, because of externalities, our estimate imply that the optimal unemployment insurance
replacement rate increases by 10 percentage points relative to the standard Baily formula. In
bad times, it further increases by ﬁve points. This underscores the importance of understanding
and measuring externalities for the design of optimal labor policies.




  27
       Detailed calculations on the cost-beneﬁt analysis are available upon request.
  28
       The program led to a net positive impact on the number of ﬁxed term contracts of six months or more, but
for welfare, we really need to consider durable jobs.


                                                          32
References

Atkinson, A. B. (1987): “Income Maintenance and Social Insurance,” in Handbook of Public
  Economics, ed. by A. Auerbach, and M. Feldstein. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Behaghel, L., B. Crépon, and M. Gurgand (2012): “Private and Public Provision of
  Counseling to Job-Seekers: Evidence from a Large Controlled Experiment,” IZA Discussion
  Papers 6518, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Bergemann, A., and G. van den Berg (2008): “Active Labor Market Policy Eﬀects for
  Women in Europe: A Survey,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 91-92, 385–408.

Blasco, S., and M. Rosholm (2010): “Long-Term Impact of Active Labour Market Policy:
  Evidence from a Social Experiment in Denmark,” Mimeo Aahrus School of Business.

Blundell, R., M. C. Dias, C. Meghir, and J. Van Reenen (2004): “Evaluating the
  Employment Impact of a Mandatory Job Search Program,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 2(4), 569–606.

Cahuc, P., and T. Le Barbanchon (2010): “Labor market policy evaluation in equilibrium:
  Some lessons of the job search and matching model,” Labour Economics, 17(1), 196–205.

Card, D., J. Kluve, and A. Weber (2010): “Active Labour Market Policy Evaluations: A
  Meta-Analysis,” Economic Journal, 120(548), F452–F477.

Crépon, B., M. Gurgand, T. Kamionka, and L. Lequien (2011): “Is Counseling Welfare
  Recipients Cost-Eﬀective? Lessons from a Random Experiment,” mimeo.

Dahlberg, M., and A. Forslund (2005): “Direct Displacement Eﬀects of Labour Market
  Programmes,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 107(3), 475–494.

Davidson, C., and S. A. Woodbury (1993): “The Displacement Eﬀects of Reemployment
  Bonus Programs,” Journal of Labor Economics, 11(4), 575–605.

Divay, S. (2009): “Nouveaux opérateurs privés du service public de l’emploi. Les pratiques des
  conseillers sont-elles novatrices?,” Travail et Emploi, 119, 37–49.


                                                33
Dolton, P., and D. O’Neill (1996): “Unemployment Duration and the Restart Eﬀect: Some
  Experimental Evidence,” Economic Journal, 106(435), pp. 387–400.

         (2002): “The Long-Run Eﬀects of Unemployment Monitoring and Work Search Pro-
  grams: Experimental Evidence from the United Kingdom,” Journal of Labor Economics, 20(2),
  pp. 381–403.

Duflo, E., and E. Saez (2003): “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement
  Plan Decisions: Evidence From a Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  118(August), 815–842.

Ferracci, M., G. Jolivet, and G. J. van den Berg (2010): “Treatment Evaluation in the
  Case of Interactions within Markets,” IZA Discussion Papers 4700, Institute for the Study of
  Labor (IZA).

Gautier, P., P. Muller, B. van der Klaauw, M. Rosholm, and Svarer (2011): “Esti-
  mating Equilibrium Eﬀects of Job Search Assistance,” mimeo University of Amsterdam.

Gratadour, C., and T. Le Barbanchon (2009): “Les expérimentations d’accompagnement
  renforcé de l’Unédic et de l’ANPE: contenu des accompagnements et opinion des bénéﬁciaires,”
  Dares Premières synthèses, 41.1.

Hall, R. E. (1979): “A theory of the natural unemployment rate and the duration of employ-
  ment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 5(2), 153–169.

Hetzel, P. (ed.) (2006): De l’Université à l’Emploi. Rapport ﬁnal de la commission du débat
  national Université-Emploi remis aux ministres de l’Education nationale et de la recherche.

Imbens, G. W., and J. D. Angrist (1994): “Identiﬁcation and Estimation of Local Average
  Treatment Eﬀects,” Econometrica, 62(2), 467–75.

Jacobi, L., and J. Kluve (2007): “Before and after the Hartz reforms: The performance of
  active labour market policy in Germany,” Zeitschrift für ArbeitsmarktForschung, 40(1), 45–64.

Johnson, G. E. (1979): “The Labor Market Displacement Eﬀect in the Analysis of the Net
  Impact of Manpower Training Programs,” in Evaluating manpower training programs, ed. by
  F. E. Bloch, pp. 227–254. Greenwich JAI Press.

                                               34
Kluve, J. (2006): “The Eﬀectiveness of European Active Labor Market Policy,” IZA Discussion
  Paper, 2018.

Krug, G., and G. Stephan (2001): “Is Contracting-out Intensiﬁed Placement Services More
  Eﬀective than In-House Production? Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment,” LASER
  Discussion Paper no. 51.

Landais, C., P. Michaillat, and E. Saez (2012): “Optimal Unemployment Insurance over
  the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Papers 16526, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc.

Lise, J., S. Seitz, and J. Smith (2004): “Equilibrium Policy Experiments and the Evaluation
  of Social Programs,” NBER Working Papers 10283, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc.

Meyer, B. D. (1995): “Lessons from the U.S. Unemployment Insurance Experiments,” Journal
  of Economic Literature, 33(1), 91–131.

Michaillat, P. (2012): “Do Matching Frictions Explain Unemployment? Not in Bad Times,”
  American Economic Review, 102(4), 1721–1750.

Pallais, A. (2010): “Ineﬃcient Hiring in Entry-level Labor Market,” MIT Working paper.

Pissarides, C. A. (2000): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. MIT Press.

Rosholm, M. (2008): “Experimental Evidence of the Nature of the Danish Employment Mira-
  cle,” IZA Discussion Paper 3620.

Rubin, D. (1980): “Discussion of ”Randomization Analysis of Experimental Data in the Fisher
  Randomization Test” by Basu,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 75, 591–593.

         (1990): “Comment: Neyman (1923) and Causal Inference in Experiments and Obser-
  vational Studies,” Statistical Science, 5, 472–480.

van den Berg, G., and B. van der Klaauw (2006): “The Eﬀectiveness of European Active
  Labor Market Policy,” International Economic Review, 47, 895–936.


                                                35
Van der Linden, B. (2005): “Equilibrium Evaluation of Active Labor Market Programmes
  Enhancing Matching Eﬀectiveness,” IZA Discussion Papers 1526, Institute for the Study of
  Labor (IZA).




                                           36
                        Figure 1: The impact of the policy
                                          Panel A


                                                 Labor supply
                    Labor demand
                                               (Beveridge curve)


                                                                   The policy moves the labor
                                                                    supply curve to the right
Tightness (θ)




                                                     Em



                                                    EM




                             Employment Rate (m)




                                          Panel B



                                                              Labor supply
                           High                             (Beveridge curve)
                       Labor demand
   Tightness (θ)




                       Low
                   Labor demand                                        H
                                                                   Em


                                                                   H
                                                L
                                                              EM
                                               Em

                                           L
                                         EM


                                   Employment Rate (m)




                                               37
                                                                                                                    Figure 2: Average employment rate, per group


                                                                                                                              "    
                                                                      
                     #



                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                       #                                                                                                    

                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                      !

                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                      

                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            "    
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                              


                                                                                                                    "    
                                                                                            
                                                    #




                                                                                             

                                                                                            #                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                            

                                                                                            

                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                  " 
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                              


                                                                                                                    "    
                                                             
            #




                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                              #                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                

                                                             
                                                                                   
                                                              #
                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                  " 
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                              




Note: These ﬁgures plot the (unadjusted) average fraction of workers who were employed in a long
term ﬁxed contract eight months after program assignment in the diﬀerent groups for several categories
of treatment and control groups. In ﬁgures 2B and 2C, only data on the unassigned worker are used.
In ﬁgure 2B, the low (high) kappa is for the occupations where the fraction of eligible workers among
job seekers in this occupation is in the bottom (top) quartile (see text for details. In ﬁgure 2C, “weak
labor markets” are later cohorts, in regions with unemployment rate above average for the period.
                                                                                                  ! 
                                                          

             "                     
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                          !                                                                                  

                                                                                                                                                
                                                          

                                                           #                                                                                  


                                                          

                                                                      
                                                                                                                             "    
                                                                                                                                            

                                                                                       ! 
                                                                    
                    "




                                                                     

                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                    #                                                                          


                                                                    

                                                                       
                                                                                                                                   " 
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                               


                                                                                       ! 
                                                                    
                               "




                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                    !                                                                          

                                                                                                                                                


                                                                    #

                                                                    

                                                                       
                                                                                                                                   " 
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                               




Note: See notes to ﬁgures 2A-2F


                                                                                                              39
                                    Table 1: Response rates
                                  (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)
                                                Response rate to 8 months survey

                              Number of       All        Treatment   Control   Diﬀerence
            status            responses

            All                 21,431      0.785          0.779      0.789     −0.010
                                                                                 (0.005)

            Not employed        11,806      0.713          0.703      0.722     −0.019
                                                                                 (0.007)

            Employed             9,625      0.894          0.896      0.893      0.003
                                                                                 (0.006)


Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: Column 1 reports the

total number of responses to the survey run 8 months after randomization (total number of individuals

sampled for the survey is 29,636) for cohorts 3-11. Columns 2-4, report response rates and column 5
shows the diﬀerence between columns 3 and 4 (standard error in parenthesis). The second line restricts

the sample to job seekers who did not report that they were employed at the time of randomization

(either unemployed or undecleared); the third line restricts the sample to those who did.




                                                    40
                                        Table 2: Summary statistics
                                       Proportions                           Balancing stats (p-values)

                               All     Treatment     Control   T-C     Across P    Across P (for T)   Across P (for C)

Age                           25.567     25.554      25.585    0.592    0.854           0.627              0.767
Seniority in unemployment
   0 to 5 months              0.163      0.163        0.162    0.799    0.503           0.153              0.618
   6 months                   0.115      0.117        0.112    0.279    0.825           0.462              0.553
   7 months                   0.301      0.306        0.295    0.211    0.729           0.764              0.434
   8 months                   0.089      0.089        0.09     0.816    0.805           0.378              0.982
   9 to 12 months             0.141      0.139        0.144    0.379    0.673           0.746              0.808
   more than 12               0.191      0.186        0.198    0.070    0.251           0.566              0.146
Receives UI                   0.328      0.337        0.316    0.028    0.906           0.896              0.274
Male                          0.354      0.361        0.347    0.15     0.469           0.851              0.029
Highest degree
   Bac + 5 and more           0.163      0.158        0.169    0.137    0.547           0.448              0.770
   Bac + 4                     0.11      0.115        0.104    0.042    0.333           0.248              0.709
   Bac + 3                    0.184      0.183        0.186    0.643    0.501           0.022              0.186
   Bac + 2                    0.409      0.412        0.404    0.449    0.593           0.519              0.546
   Less than Bac +2           0.134      0.131        0.137    0.275    0.077           0.010              0.480
   Not declared               0.001      0.001        0.001    0.392    0.909           0.603              0.891
Employed at randomization
   Employed                   0.449      0.445        0.455    0.223    0.543           0.276              0.929
   Not employed               0.426      0.430        0.422    0.326    0.274           0.100              0.927
   Did not answer             0.125      0.126        0.123    0.651    0.953           0.721              0.999
Number of observations        21431      12001        9430

      Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: These summary statistics
      are based on the respondants to the survey, from cohorts 3-11. Columns 1, 2 and 3 report the means
      of individual characteristics in the full sample, the treatment and control subsamples respectively.
      Column 4-7 report the p-values for: the diﬀerence between all assigned to treatment and assigned to
      control (col. 4), joint signiﬁcance of type of zone dummies on the whole sample (col. 5), among the
      assigned to treatment (col. 6) and among the assigned to control (col. 7).




                                                        41
                         Table 3: Take-up and intermediate variables
         Dependent variable                   All workers    Not employed        Employed
                                                   (1)                (2)           (3)

                                                    Panel A: Program participation
         Program participation                  0.350***        0.434***          0.246***
                                                 (0.008)         (0.009)          (0.008)


                                              Panel B : Change in search productivity
         Number of meeting with a               0.551***        0.601***          0.454***
         counselor                               (0.059)         (0.083)          (0.064)
         Control mean                             2.497           3.444            1.361


         Received help with CV, coaching        0.100***        0.113***          0.081***
         for interviews, etc.                    (0.007)         (0.009)          (0.009)
         Control mean                             0.213           0.285            0.126


         Help with matching (identify             0.009           0.008            0.010
         job oﬀers, help with transports)        (0.006)         (0.008)          (0.006)
         Control mean                             0.153           0.199            0.099


                                                   Panel C : Employment outcomes
         Long term ﬁxed contract                  0.007         0.017***           -0.003
                                                 (0.005)         (0.006)          (0.008)
         Control mean                              0.2            0.16             0.247


         Long term employment                     0.002           0.015            -0.012
                                                 (0.007)         (0.010)          (0.009)
         Control mean                             0.468           0.365            0.593


         Observations                            21431           11806              9625


Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: The table reports OLS
regressions of several variables on program assignment, controlling for gender, education, past duration
of unemployment and its square, cohort dummies and 47 dummies for local area quintuplets (see
equation 5). All individuals assigned to treatment and control are pooled, irrespective of their type
of area. In Panel C, the dependent variables are employment outcomes when surveyed 8 months after
the random assignment: Long term ﬁxed contracts are ﬁxed term contracts with a length of at least
six month; long term employment is either a Long term ﬁxed contract or an indeﬁnite term contract.
Column 2 restricts the sample to job seekers who did not report that they were employed at the time
of randomization; column 3 restricts the sample to those who did. Standard errors in parenthesis are
robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the local area level.

                                                   42
                                 Table 4: Reduced form: Impact of program assignment and assignment probability
                                                      Labor market outcome: Long term ﬁxed contract    Labor market outcome: Long term employment

                                                                              Not employed                                     Not employed

                                                      All workers     All       Men          Women     All workers     All       Men          Women
                                                          (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)           (8)

                Assigned to treatment in 25% areas       0.016       0.021      0.037         0.015      0.006       0.024      0.068**       0.002
                                                        (0.012)     (0.014)    (0.027)       (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.021)    (0.032)       (0.027)
                Assigned to treatment in 50% areas       0.009       0.013      0.021         0.008      -0.011      -0.005     -0.016        0.001
                                                        (0.012)     (0.013)    (0.021)       (0.020)     (0.016)     (0.022)    (0.038)       (0.028)
                Assigned to treatment in 75% areas       -0.015      0.007     0.061**       -0.016      0.025       0.039       0.059        0.026
                                                        (0.016)     (0.019)    (0.030)       (0.021)     (0.020)     (0.028)    (0.046)       (0.035)
                Assigned to treatment in 100% areas      0.010      0.025**     0.021        0.028**     0.001       0.020       0.000        0.034*
                                                        (0.009)     (0.010)    (0.014)       (0.014)     (0.011)     (0.014)    (0.023)       (0.018)
                25% areas                                -0.002      -0.015   -0.041**       -0.001      -0.003      -0.012    -0.063***      0.015
                                                        (0.010)     (0.011)    (0.019)       (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.015)    (0.024)       (0.020)
                50% areas                                -0.002      -0.014    -0.026        -0.005      -0.011      -0.026     -0.017        -0.032
                                                        (0.010)     (0.013)    (0.018)       (0.017)     (0.013)     (0.018)    (0.027)       (0.023)
                75% areas                                0.016       -0.006   -0.055**        0.014      -0.026      -0.039      -0.06        -0.027




43
                                                        (0.016)     (0.020)    (0.027)       (0.024)     (0.019)     (0.025)    (0.041)       (0.032)


                Control Mean                             0.199       0.167      0.150         0.178      0.473       0.376       0.396        0.364


                F-test for equality of all assigned       0.34        0.05      0.07          0.22        0.71        0.27       0.19          0.43
                to treatment coeﬃcients to zero
                F-test for equality of all areas          0.72        0.48      0.04          0.92        0.53        0.27       0.04          0.19
                coeﬃcients to zero
                F-test for equality of all areas          0.52        0.90      0.59          0.77        0.52        0.51       0.28          0.09
                coeﬃcients


                Number of observations                   21431       11806      4387          7419       21431       11806       4387          7419


     Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: The table reports OLS regressions of employment outcome variables on program
     assignment dummies interacted with area assignment probability dummies (see equation 6). Areas with 0% treatment are the reference. For the list of controls and
     the deﬁnition of the outcomes, see table 3. The dependent variables are measured when surveyed 8 months after the random assignment. Columns 2-4 and 6-7
     restrict the sample to job seekers who did not report that they were employed at the time of randomization. Only p-values for the F-tests are reported. Standard
     errors in parenthesis are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the local area level.
     Table 5: Reduced form: Impact of the program, accounting for externalities
                                     By job type: share of job seekers who are eligible for program

                                            Not employed             Not employed, above third quartile

                                    All         Men        Women          All     Men          Women
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)      (5)           (6)

                                                 Panel A: Long term ﬁxed contract
Assigned to program (β)          0.023***     0.043***     0.013     0.040**    0.072**         0.021
                                  (0.008)      (0.013)     (0.010)   (0.016)     (0.029)       (0.022)
In a Program area (δ)              -0.013     -0.036***    -0.001    -0.040*    -0.086**        -0.013
                                  (0.009)      (0.013)     (0.012)   (0.021)     (0.035)       (0.027)
Net eﬀect                          0.010        0.007      0.012      0.000      -0.014         0.008
of program assignment (β+δ)       (0.008)      (0.011)     (0.011)   (0.019)     (0.031)       (0.024)


Control Mean                        0.16        0.131      0.177       0.19       0.161         0.204


                                                  Panel B: Long term employment
Assigned to program (β)           0.025**      0.037**     0.019      0.019       0.059         0.000
                                  (0.012)      (0.018)     (0.014)   (0.021)     (0.039)       (0.028)
In a Program area (δ)             -0.021*     -0.043**     -0.010     -0.005     -0.081*        0.033
                                  (0.013)      (0.020)     (0.018)   (0.023)     (0.047)       (0.032)
Net eﬀect                          0.003       -0.006      0.009      0.014      -0.022         0.033
of program assignment (β+δ)       (0.011)      (0.018)     (0.016)   (0.019)     (0.037)       (0.026)


Control Mean                       0.365        0.372       0.36      0.403       0.408         0.401


Observations                      11,806        4,387      7,419      3,066       1,016         2,050

Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: The table reports OLS
regressions of employment outcome variables on a dummy for assigned to the program and a dummy
for being in a local area with positive assignment probability, (see equation 6). For the list of controls
and the deﬁnition of the outcomes, see table 3. The dependent variables are measured when surveyed
8 months after the random assignment. The sample is restricted to job seekers who did not report
that they were employed at the time of randomization. Columns 1-3 include job seekers searching for
all kinds of jobs; columns 4-6 include only job seekers searching for jobs in which the share of skilled
job seekers (κ) is above the third quartile in the distribution of jobs. Standard errors in parenthesis
are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the local area level.



                                                   44
              Table 6: Jobs with highest and lowest share of skilled job seekers

                                                        Share    of    eligible   Share    of     eligible
                                                        among all job seekers     among     all     long-
                                                        searching this job (κ)    duration job seekers
                                                                                  searching this job (κ)
                                                                 (1)                       (2)

 A. Jobs with low κ
    Textile care professional                           0.001                     0.002
    Food industry worker                                0.001                     0.003
    Auto body mechanic                                  0.001                     0.003
    Hairdresser assistant                               0.001                     0.005
    Sheet metal worker                                  0.002                     0.004
    Roofer                                              0.002                     0.006
    Hairdresser                                         0.002                     0.006
    Street sweeper                                      0.002                     0.006
    Cleaner                                             0.002                     0.006
    Motorcycle mechanic                                 0.002                     0.008
 B. Jobs with high κ
    Generalist teacher                                  0.386                     0.958
    Pedagogic manager                                   0.387                     0.886
    Research specialist in human sciences               0.403                     0.973
    Psychologist                                        0.429                     0.977
    Responsible for goods and human protection          0.437                     0.844
    Executive manager specialist of public resources    0.461                     1.000
    Dental surgeon                                      0.472                     0.933
    Lecturer/assistant professor                        0.482                     0.993
    High school director                                1.000                     1.000


Source: Exhaustive job seekers’ register 2007 (ANPE). Notes: Occupations in the register are deﬁned
in a nomenclature of 466 jobs. During their ﬁrst meeting with an ANPE caseworker, job seekers report
the job they are searching for. Column 1 reports the share of skilled job seekers searching for each job
as the ratio between the number of job seekers below 30 with at least a two-year college degree that
reported searching for that job and the total number of job seekers below 30 that reported searching
for that job. Column 2 reports the same ratio, but restricting both populations to those with long-term
unemployment.




                                                  45
                Table 7: Heterogeneity of program eﬀect by area and cohort
                                    LT               LT       LT               LT        LT            LT
                                    FC            Empl.       FC             Empl.      FC        Empl.

                                            All                       Men                  Women
                                    (1)              (2)      (3)              (4)       (5)           (6)

                                                               Panel A
    Assigned to program (β)      0.055***      0.066***     0.082***     0.110***      0.036          0.036
    bad area, bad cohort          (0.018)         (0.023)   (0.030)          (0.036)   (0.025)    (0.029)
    Assigned to program (β)       0.015*            0.015   0.033**          0.019     0.007          0.014
    good area or good cohort      (0.008)         (0.013)   (0.015)          (0.021)   (0.011)    (0.015)
    In a program area (δ1 )       -0.042*      -0.077**      -0.043     -0.144***      -0.041     -0.035
    bad area, bad cohort          (0.024)         (0.030)   (0.032)          (0.044)   (0.031)    (0.041)
    In a program area (δ2 )       -0.009          -0.009    -0.036**         -0.017    0.007      -0.006
    good area or good cohort      (0.010)         (0.014)   (0.015)          (0.024)   (0.014)    (0.020)


    test (δ1 = δ2 )                0.202            0.05     0.867           0.017     0.178          0.533


                                                               Panel B
    In a program area (δ1 )       -0.041*      -0.078***     -0.042     -0.146***      -0.039     -0.036
    bad area, bad cohort          (0.024)         (0.030)   (0.032)          (0.043)   (0.031)    (0.041)
    In a program area (δ2 )       -0.024            0.044    -0.047          0.010     -0.008     0.069*
    good area, bad cohort         (0.019)         (0.028)   (0.032)          (0.043)   (0.028)    (0.041)
    In a program area (δ3 )        0.011          -0.038     -0.027          -0.060    0.032      -0.025
    bad area, good cohort         (0.017)         (0.025)   (0.026)          (0.038)   (0.023)    (0.033)
    In a program area (δ4 )       -0.020          -0.015     -0.039          0.010     -0.011     -0.032
    good area, good cohort        (0.019)         (0.024)   (0.027)          (0.046)   (0.027)    (0.033)


    test (δ1 = δ2 = δ3 = δ4 )      0.303            0.022    0.965           0.024     0.337          0.185


    Mean super control             0.167            0.376     0.15           0.396     0.178          0.364


    Observations                           11,806                     4387                     7419

Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: The table reports OLS
regressions of employment outcome variables on a dummy for assigned to the program and a dummy
for being in a local area with positive assignment probability, interacted with bad/good area and
bad/good cohort dummies, (see equation 9). In Panel B, estimates related to program assignment
are not reported for concision. Bad areas are those with an average unemployment rate during ﬁrst
semester of 2007 that is above the median of our areas. Bad cohorts are cohorts 8-11, i.e. entering
the experiment in April to July 2008. For the list of controls and the deﬁnition of the outcomes, see
table 3. The dependent variables are measured when surveyed 8 months after the random assignment.
The sample is restricted to job seekers who did not report that they were employed at the time of
randomization. Only p-values for the equality tests are reported. Standard errors in parenthesis are
robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the local area level.
  Table 8: Long-term impact on employment outcomes, accounting for externalities
                                               Any employment            Long-term employment

                                         All       Men       Women       All      Men       Women
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)

                                                            Panel A: 8 months
      Assigned to program (β)          0.019*      0.026      0.017    0.025**   0.037**    0.019
                                       (0.011)    (0.017)    (0.014)   (0.012)   (0.018)    (0.014)
      In a Program area (δ)            -0.020      -0.013    -0.026    -0.021*   -0.043**   -0.010
                                       (0.013)    (0.021)    (0.018)   (0.013)   (0.020)    (0.018)
      Net eﬀect                        -0.001      0.014     -0.010     0.003     -0.006    0.009
      of program assignment (β + δ)    (0.011)    (0.019)    (0.015)   (0.011)   (0.018)    (0.016)


      Control Mean                      0.487      0.490      0.486     0.365     0.372     0.360


      Observations                     11,806      4,387      7,419    11,806     4,387     7,419


                                                            Panel B: 12 months
      Assigned to program (β)           0.015      0.020      0.012     0.010     0.021     0.004
                                       (0.012)    (0.020)    (0.014)   (0.012)   (0.019)    (0.015)
      In a Program area (δ)            -0.025*     -0.007   -0.036**   -0.001     0.006     -0.006
                                       (0.014)    (0.024)    (0.017)   (0.014)   (0.024)    (0.018)
      Net eﬀect                        -0.009      0.013     -0.024     0.009     0.027     -0.002
      of program assignment (β + δ)    (0.013)    (0.021)    (0.015)   (0.012)   (0.021)    (0.015)


      Control Mean                      0.560      0.556      0.563     0.454     0.447     0.458


      Observations                     10,263      3,792      6,471    10,263     3,792     6,471


                                                            Panel C: 20 months
      Assigned to program (β)          -0.010      -0.015    -0.007    -0.014     -0.022    -0.009
                                       (0.011)    (0.018)    (0.015)   (0.012)   (0.018)    (0.016)
      In a Program area (δ)             0.009      0.030     -0.002    -0.004     0.007     -0.010
                                       (0.012)    (0.020)    (0.016)   (0.013)   (0.022)    (0.017)
      Net eﬀect                        -0.001      0.015     -0.009    -0.018*    -0.014    -0.019
      of program assignment (β + δ)    (0.010)    (0.017)    (0.013)   (0.011)   (0.019)    (0.013)


      Control Mean                      0.654      0.643      0.660     0.576     0.567     0.580


      Observations                      9,809      3,619      6,190     9,809     3,619     6,190


Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and waves 2 to 4 of the follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: The
table reports OLS regressions of employment outcome variables on on a dummy for assigned to the
program and a dummy for being in a local area with positive assignment probability (see equation 6).
For the list of controls, see table 3. The dependent variable in columns 1-3 is any sort of employment
(including short term temporary contract); in columns 4-6 it is either a Long term ﬁxed contract or
an indeﬁnite term contract. In Panel A, outcomes are measured when surveyed 8 months after the
random assignment; in Panel B, 12 months, and in Panel C, 20 months. The sample is restricted to
job seekers who did not report that they were employed at the time of randomization. Standard errors
in parenthesis are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the local area level.
           Table 9: Long-term impact on earnings, accounting for externalities
                                                        All         Men        Women
                                                        (1)         (2)          (3)

                                                           Panel A: 8 months
                   Assigned to program (β)            20.354     132.289**     -37.278
                                                     (30.465)     (66.149)    (42.585)
                   In a Program area (δ)               7.509      -48.023      34.313
                                                     (34.640)     (66.342)    (42.490)
                   Net eﬀect                          27.862       84.265      -2.965
                   of program assignment (β + δ)     (29.957)     (71.066)    (21.326)
                   Control Mean                         914         947          896
                   Observations                       11,806       4,387        7,419


                                                          Panel B: 12 months
                   Assigned to program (β)            -13.493     -37.477       4.130
                                                     (42.149)     (88.484)    (42.995)
                   In a Program area (δ)              10.810       41.019      -3.929
                                                     (46.747)     (97.210)    (43.737)
                   Net eﬀect                          -2.683       3.542        0.200
                   of program assignment (β + δ)     (37.912)     (74.709)    (38.280)
                   Control Mean                         996         1073         952
                   Observations                       10,263       3,792        6,471


                                                          Panel C: 20 months
                   Assigned to program (β)            -12.070      13.060      -30.028
                                                     (31.494)     (62.019)    (34.207)
                   In a Program area (δ)              -28.488      53.386      -69.507
                                                     (45.083)     (71.864)    (57.588)
                   Net eﬀect                          -40.557      66.446     -99.535*
                   of program assignment (β + δ)     (42.335)     (73.690)    (52.295)
                   Control Mean                        1072         1103        1054
                   Observations                        9,809       3,619        6,190


Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and waves 2 to 4 of the follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: The
table reports OLS regressions of earnings on on a dummy for assigned to the program and a dummy for
being in a local area with positive assignment probability (see equation 6). Earnings are as declared in
the survey, including income from transfers. For the list of controls, see table 3. In Panel A, outcome is
measured when surveyed 8 months after the random assignment; in Panel B, 12 months, and in Panel
C, 20 months. The sample is restricted to job seekers who did not report that they were employed
at the time of randomization. Standard errors in parenthesis are robust to heteroskedasticity and
clustered at the local area level.
               Table 10: Eﬀect of the treatment, accounting for externalities
                                       By job type: share of job seekers who are eligible for program

                                              Not employed             Not employed, above third quartile

                                      All         Men        Women       All       Men          Women
                                      (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)           (6)

                                                   Panel A: Long term ﬁxed contract
Program participation (β)          0.054***     0.095***     0.030     0.094**   0.176**         0.048
                                    (0.018)      (0.030)     (0.023)   (0.039)    (0.074)       (0.052)
In a Program area (δ)                -0.014     -0.036***    -0.001    -0.041*   -0.088**       -0.014
                                    (0.009)      (0.014)     (0.012)   (0.021)    (0.036)       (0.028)
Net eﬀect                          0.040***     0.060***     0.029      0.053      0.088         0.035
of program participation (β + δ)    (0.014)      (0.023)     (0.019)   (0.033)    (0.062)       (0.042)


Control Mean                          0.16        0.131      0.177      0.19       0.161         0.204


                                                    Panel B: Long term employment
Program participation (β)           0.057**      0.083**     0.044      0.044      0.145         0.000
                                    (0.027)      (0.041)     (0.034)   (0.049)    (0.096)       (0.064)
In a Program area (δ)               -0.021*     -0.043**     -0.010    -0.005     -0.083*        0.033
                                    (0.013)      (0.020)     (0.018)   (0.024)    (0.048)       (0.033)
Net eﬀect                            0.036        0.040      0.034      0.039      0.063         0.033
of program participation (β + δ)    (0.022)      (0.034)     (0.029)   (0.038)    (0.075)       (0.049)


Control Mean                         0.365        0.372       0.36      0.403      0.408         0.401


Observations                        11,806        4,387      7,419      3,066      1,016         2,050

 Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: The table reports IV
 regressions of employment outcome variables on on a dummy for participation into the program and a
 dummy for being in a local area with positive assignment probability, (see equation 10). Participation
 into the program is instrumented by assignment to the program. For the list of controls and the
 deﬁnition of the outcomes, see table 3. The sample is restricted to job seekers who did not report that
 they were employed at the time of randomization. Columns 1-3 include job seekers searching for all
 kinds of jobs; columns 4-6 include only job seekers searching for jobs in which the share of skilled job
 seekers (κ) is above the third quartile in the distribution of jobs. Standard errors in parenthesis are
 robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the local area level.



                                                    49
  Table 11: Heterogeneity of the eﬀect of program participation, by area and cohort
                                       LT               LT       LT               LT        LT            LT
                                       FC            Empl.       FC             Empl.      FC        Empl.

                                               All                       Men                  Women
                                       (1)              (2)      (3)              (4)       (5)           (6)

   Program participation (β1 )       0.123***     0.145***     0.177***     0.239***      0.081          0.081
   bad area, bad cohort              (0.041)         (0.050)   (0.068)          (0.081)   (0.056)    (0.066)
   Program participation (β2 )        0.036*           0.035   0.073**          0.043     0.017          0.034
   good area or good cohort          (0.019)         (0.030)   (0.034)          (0.047)   (0.025)    (0.037)
   In a program area (δ1 )           -0.042*      -0.076**      -0.044     -0.146***      -0.041     -0.034
   bad area, bad cohort              (0.024)         (0.030)   (0.033)          (0.045)   (0.031)    (0.040)
   In a program area (δ2 )            -0.009         -0.009    -0.036**         -0.017    0.007      -0.006
   good area or good cohort          (0.010)         (0.014)   (0.015)          (0.024)   (0.014)    (0.021)


   test (δ1 = δ2 )                    0.205            0.05     0.844           0.017      0.18          0.541


   Mean super control                 0.167            0.376     0.15           0.396     0.178          0.364


   Observations                               11,806                     4387                     7419

Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: The table reports IV
regressions of employment outcome variables on a dummy for participation to the program and a
dummy for being in a local area with positive assignment probability, interacted with bad/good area
and bad/good cohort dummies. Participation into the program is instrumented by assignment to the
program. Bad areas are those with an average unemployment rate during ﬁrst semester of 2007 that
is above the median of our areas. Bad cohorts are cohorts 8-11, i.e. entering the experiment in April
to July 2008. For the list of controls and the deﬁnition of the outcomes, see table 3. The dependent
variables are measured when surveyed 8 months after the random assignment. The sample is restricted
to job seekers who did not report that they were employed at the time of randomization. Only p-values
for the equality tests are reported. Standard errors in parenthesis are robust to heteroskedasticity and
clustered at the local area level.




                                                         50
Appendix: Supplementary tables (not for publication)




                              51
   Table A.1: Summary statistics on initially unemployed individuals (or unknown status)
                                        Proportions                            Balancing stats (p-values)

                                All     Treatment     Control   T-C     Across P    Across P (for T)    Across P (for C)
Age                            25.734     25.737      25.729    0.896    0.791           0.251               0.869
Seniority in unemployment
   0 to 5 months               0.182      0.182        0.181    0.872    0.361           0.046               0.912
   6 months                    0.119      0.122        0.116    0.42     0.716           0.436               0.312
   7 months                     0.31      0.317        0.301    0.14     0.556           0.533               0.615
   8 months                    0.085      0.086        0.084    0.722    0.539            0.19               0.771
   9 to 12 months              0.141      0.136        0.148    0.088    0.498           0.517               0.816
   more than 12                0.162      0.157        0.17     0.08     0.847           0.382               0.917
Receives UI                    0.342      0.355        0.324    0.008    0.412           0.533                0.09
Male                           0.372       0.38        0.361    0.083    0.622           0.715               0.139
Highest degree
   Bac + 5 and more            0.179      0.176        0.183    0.471    0.287            0.07               0.736
   Bac + 4                     0.119      0.127        0.109    0.011    0.133           0.135               0.665
   Bac + 3                     0.182      0.182        0.182    0.974    0.576           0.037               0.016
   Bac + 2                     0.387      0.387        0.387    0.99     0.651           0.574               0.554
   Less than Bac +2            0.131      0.126        0.138    0.076    0.077           0.041               0.508
   Not declared                0.001      0.001        0.001    0.616    0.017           0.049               0.245
Employed at randomization
   Employed                      -          -            -        -        -                -                  -
   Not employed                0.774      0.774        0.774    0.985    0.723           0.372               0.996
   Did not answer              0.226      0.226        0.226    0.985    0.723           0.372               0.996
Number of observations         11806       6664        5142

      Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: These summary statis-
      tics are based on the respondants to the survey, from cohorts 3-11, who did not report that they were
      employed at the time of randomization. Columns 1, 2 and 3 report the means of individual character-
      istics in the full sample, the treatment and the control subsamples, respectively. Column 4-7 report
      the p-values for: the diﬀerence between all assigned to treatment and assigned to control (col. 4), joint
      signiﬁcance of type of zone dummies on the whole sample (col. 5), among the assigned to treatment
      (col. 6) and among the assigned to control (col. 7).




                                                         52
Table A.2: Reduced form: Impact of the program accounting for externalities, by education
level
                                                                          By education level

                                                           Higher level                        Lower level

                                                   All        Men         Women       All         Men        Women
                                                   (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)

                                                            Panel A: Outcome LT ﬁxed contract
           Assigned to program (β)               0.022*     0.050**       0.007     0.027**     0.038**       0.025*
                                                 (0.011)     (0.020)      (0.015)   (0.011)     (0.017)      (0.014)
           In a Program area (δ)                 -0.008     -0.049**      0.013      -0.022      -0.030       -0.022
                                                 (0.015)     (0.023)      (0.019)   (0.014)     (0.019)      (0.018)
           Net eﬀect                             0.014        0.002       0.020      0.005       0.007        0.002
           of program assignment (β + δ)         (0.013)     (0.019)      (0.017)   (0.012)     (0.017)      (0.016)


           Control Mean                          0.172        0.138       0.191       0.15       0.125        0.164
           Observations                          5,676        2,067       3,609      6,130       2,320        3,810


                                                             Panel B: Outcome LT employment
           Assigned to program (β)               0.006       0.044*       -0.013    0.042**      0.030       0.053***
                                                 (0.016)     (0.027)      (0.020)   (0.016)     (0.026)      (0.020)
           In a Program area (δ)                 0.001      -0.063**      0.031     -0.044**     -0.034      -0.052**
                                                 (0.019)     (0.031)      (0.025)   (0.017)     (0.028)      (0.023)
           Net eﬀect                             0.008       -0.018       0.018      -0.001      -0.004       0.001
           of program assignment (β + δ)         (0.016)     (0.026)      (0.023)   (0.015)     (0.024)      (0.021)


           Control Mean                          0.389        0.394       0.387      0.342       0.354        0.336
           Observations                          5,676        2,067       3,609      6,130       2,320        3,810


        Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: The table reports OLS
        regressions of employment outcome variables on a dummy for assigned to the program and a dummy
        for being in a local area with positive assignment probability, (see equation 6). For the list of controls
        and the deﬁnition of the outcomes, see table 3. The dependent variables are measured when surveyed
        8 months after the random assignment. The sample is restricted to job seekers who did not report that
        they were employed at the time of randomization. Higher level is more than two years of higher edu-
        cation; lower level is two years or less. Standard errors in parenthesis are robust to heteroskedasticity
        and clustered at the local area level.


                                                               53
Table A.3: Reduced form: Impact of the program accounting for externalities for highly educated
individuals, reweighting observations by the distribution of jobs sought by the other sex group
                                                      LT ﬁxed contract        LT employment

                                                        Men      Women        Men       Women
                                                         (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)

                 Assigned to program (β)               0.026      -0.002      -0.008     -0.006
                                                      (0.026)     (0.023)    (0.034)    (0.028)
                 In a Program area (δ)                 -0.047      0.010      -0.004     0.020
                                                      (0.031)     (0.026)    (0.040)    (0.034)
                 Net eﬀect                             -0.020      0.007      -0.012     0.014
                 of program assignment (β + δ)        (0.025)     (0.021)    (0.031)    (0.030)


                 Control Mean                          0.156       0.180      0.397      0.371
                 Observations                          2,051       3,594      2,051      3,594

    Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and follow-up survey (DARES). Notes: The table reports OLS
    regressions of employment outcome variables on a dummy for assigned to the program and a dummy
    for being in a local area with positive assignment probability, (see equation 6). For the list of controls
    and the deﬁnition of the outcomes, see table 3. The dependent variables are measured when surveyed
    8 months after the random assignment. The sample is restricted to job seekers who did not report that
    they were employed at the time of randomization, and with more than two years of higher education.
    Observations are reweighted so that, in the men regression, the distribution of jobs sought is that of
    women, and inversely. Standard errors in parenthesis are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at
    the local area level.




                                                       54
           Table A.4: Long-term impact on wages, accounting for externalities
                                                        All         Men       Women
                                                        (1)         (2)          (3)

                                                           Panel A: 8 months
                  Assigned to program (β)              3.799     199.728*     -108.526
                                                      (63.635)   (108.852)    (93.362)
                  In a Program area (δ)               58.277      -54.931     131.320
                                                      (63.934)   (108.266)    (91.231)
                  Net eﬀect                           62.075      144.797      22.794
                  of program assignment (β + δ)       (47.638)   (119.165)    (37.808)
                  Control Mean                         1320         1456        1244
                  Observations                         5,602       2,102        3,500


                                                          Panel B: 12 months
                  Assigned to program (β)             -55.551     -106.684     -27.470
                                                      (71.298)   (164.519)    (70.543)
                  In a Program area (δ)               86.490      131.416      75.714
                                                      (74.285)   (159.461)    (77.131)
                  Net eﬀect                           30.939       24.732      48.245
                  of program assignment (β + δ)       (59.486)   (103.355)    (67.589)
                  Control Mean                         1341         1529        1238
                  Observations                         5,563       2,048        3,515


                                                          Panel C: 20 months
                  Assigned to program (β)             -12.970      58.176      -57.706
                                                      (46.046)    (99.461)    (48.909)
                  In a Program area (δ)               -70.849     -48.979      -78.363
                                                      (68.179)   (109.512)    (92.822)
                  Net eﬀect                           -83.819      9.197      -136.070
                  of program assignment (β + δ)       (64.042)   (109.062)    (85.408)
                  Control Mean                         1376         1492        1312
                  Observations                         6,068       2,188        3,880


Source: Job seekers’ register (ANPE) and waves 2 to 4 of the follow-up survey (DARES).Notes: The
table reports OLS regressions of wages on on a dummy for assigned to the program and a dummy for
being in a local area with positive assignment probability (see equation 6). For the list of controls, see
table 3. In Panel A, outcome is measured when surveyed 8 months after the random assignment; in
Panel B, 12 months, and in Panel C, 20 months. The sample is restricted to job seekers with positive
wage who did not report that they were employed at the time of randomization. Standard errors in
parenthesis are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the local area level.
