                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE PROMISE OF POSITIVE OPTIMAL TAXATION:
             NORMATIVE DIVERSITY AND A ROLE FOR EQUAL SACRIFICE

                                         Matthew Weinzierl

                                        Working Paper 18599
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18599


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




Previously circulated as "The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation." This is the working paper version
of Weinzierl (2014), and it contains a set of material omitted from that published version. Portions
of this paper incorporate and build on material from Weinzierl (2012), which was entitled "Why do
we Redistribute so Much but Tag so Little?" I am grateful to Alan Auerbach, Felix Bierbrauer, Kim
Clausing, Raj Chetty, Mihir Desai, Rafael di Tella, Amy Finkelstein, Victor Fleischer, John Friedman,
Alex Gelber, Mikhail Golosov, Caroline Hoxby, Bas Jacobs, Louis Kaplow, Wojciech Kopczuk, Camille
Landais, Benjamin B. Lockwood, Greg Mankiw, Yoram Margalioth, Joe Mazor, Jean-Baptiste Michaud,
Jeff Miron, Dina Pomeranz, Alex Raskolnikov, Meg Rithmire, Julio Rotemberg, Emmanuel Saez,
Bernard Salanie, Larry Samuelson, Florian Scheuer, Eytan Sheshinski, Ali Shourideh, Stefanie Stantcheva,
Alain Trannoy, Aleh Tsyvinski, David Weisbach, Glen Weyl, John Weymark, Danny Yagan, and
several anonymous referees for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Matthew Weinzierl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation: Normative Diversity and a role for Equal Sacrifice
Matthew Weinzierl
NBER Working Paper No. 18599
December 2012, Revised November 2014
JEL No. D6,D63,H2,H21

                                                 ABSTRACT

A prominent assumption in modern optimal tax research is that the objective of taxation is Utilitarian.
I present new survey evidence that most people reject this assumptions implications for several prominent
features of tax policy, instead preferring tax policies based at least in part on a classic alternative objective:
the principle of Equal Sacrifice. I generalize the standard model to accommodate this preference for
a mixed objective, proposing a method by which to make disparate criteria commensurable while respecting
Pareto efficiency. Then, I show that optimal policy in this generalized model, calibrated to the survey
evidence and U.S. microdata, is capable of quantitatively matching several features of existing tax
policy that are incompatible in the conventional model but widely endorsed in the survey and reality,
including the coexistence of substantial redistribution and limited tagging. Together, these findings
demonstrate the potential of a positive theory of optimal taxation.


Matthew Weinzierl
Harvard Business School
277 Morgan
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mweinzierl@hbs.edu
Introduction
Modern tax theorists have a workhorse model. Created by Mirrlees (1971) more than four decades ago, that
model has been used to study countless aspects of tax policy. It provides the benchmark guidelines against
which policy proposals are often judged, and its recommendations form the basis of prominent policy advice.
    When this standard model has been used to generate quantitative lessons for policy, theorists commonly
have imposed a strong assumption: the objective of tax policy is Utilitarian, either in its simplest form as a
sum of individual utilities or in a more general form as the sum of a concave transformation of individual
utilities. Mirrlees himself introduced this assumption with little explanation, but virtually all optimal tax
research in the last four decades has adopted it.1 To the extent that this assumption has been relaxed, it
has usually been to allow for a more redistributive normative criterion, such as the Rawlsian priority on the
least advantaged.
    Some theorists have taken a more agnostic approach by examining only whether policies are optimal given
some set of weights on individuals’ welfares; that is, Pareto e¢ cient. An open question in that approach
is what weights to use when choosing between a wide range of Pareto-e¢ cient policy options; in practice,
Utilitarian (or Rawlsian) weights are typically the default assumption.2 The relatively little attention paid to
the Utilitarian assumption and its alternatives, as opposed to its policy implications, is especially surprising
given that optimal tax theory is one of few forthrightly normative …elds in economic research.
    The …rst contribution of this paper is to present evidence of wide disagreement with this core assumption,
at least in the United States. I design and implement a novel survey in which respondents are asked to choose
between sets of feasible and incentive compatible tax policies for a society with the income distribution of
the current United States. First, I ask them to choose between two policies: one based on the standard
(simple sum) Utilitarian criterion and the other based on the principle of Equal Sacri…ce, a less redistributive
and historically prominent alternative criterion for optimal tax design. In that case, nearly 60 percent of
respondents prefer the Equal Sacri…ce alternative over the conventional Utilitarian objective. Disagreement
with the conventional Utilitarian assumption is even more striking when I give respondents a range of choices,
including options that are based in part on Utilitarianism and in part on Equal Sacri…ce. I …nd that 81
percent of individuals prefer policies other than the pure Utilitarian or Rawlsian policies, and nearly half
most prefer policies based on a combination of Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce.3 Of course, these responses
may be due to a variety of factors other than an a¢ nity for Equal Sacri…ce, so I use additional questions in
the survey to test for more direct evidence on the relevance of Equal Sacri…ce. When asked explicitly how
"sacri…ce" from paying taxes should be distributed, respondents prefer a distribution between that implied
by Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce. And the more enthusiastic a respondent is about Equal Sacri…ce,
the more likely he or she is to reject tagging, the taxation of personal characteristics that is a feature of
Utilitarian-optimal tax policy but that is rejected by Equal Sacri…ce.
    This evidence is admittedly far from de…nitive. The survey respondents are not a random representative
   1 Economists in general and optimal tax theorists in particular have largely embraced the defense of Utilitarianism given

by Harsanyi (1953), that expected utility maximization applies just as well to uncertainty across one’s place in society as it
does to one’s risky economic choices. Mirrlees (1971) used a generalized Utiltarianism in which the planner may take concave
transformations of individual utilities before summing across them. In the limit, this generalized Utilitarianism resembles the
Rawlsian priority on the least well-o¤.
   2 See, e.g., Stiglitz 1987, Werning 2007, Rothschild and Scheuer 2012, and Saez and Stantcheva 2014. In addition, speci…c

normative limitations of the conventional model have been addressed directly. Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2006) allow for
considerations of fairness and responsibility with respect to preference heterogeneity. Besley and Coate (1992) allow for society
to place particular emphasis on poverty alleviation. I discuss some of these contributions in Section 1.4.
   3 A note on terminology: from this point on I will use "Utilitarian" to refer to the simple sum of individual utilities, not the

more general version in which transformations of those utilities are made prior to aggregation.



                                                                2
sample of Americans, and many variations in the survey’s design, framing, and implementation are possible
and could have large e¤ects (see McCa¤ery and Baron 2004, for example). Nevertheless, the results are robust
across subsamples, and the survey is designed to guard against a number of potential design concerns. In
the end, the survey evidence suggests that a number of features of tax policy implied by the Utilitarian
objective of conventional theory may not be, in the terminology of Diamond and Saez (2011), "socially
acceptable."4 That is, a large majority of individuals appear to place substantial value on an alternative
normative principle–Equal Sacri…ce–that rejects the conventional objective’s policy implications.
    While my …nding of a preference for a mixed objective is foreign to the optimal tax literature, it is
consistent with a large body of existing research showing that most individuals are not normative purists. In
that research, whether individuals are asked to evaluate income distributions, answer conceptual questions,
or participate in allocation games, few appear to use a single normative criterion. As Scott, Matland,
Michelbach, and Bornstein (2001) write: "Experimental research reveals that distributive justice judgments
usually involve several distinct allocation principles."
    How should we respond to this evidence? One possible response is to ignore it. We may decide that
a normative theory ought to choose its objective based on philosophical reasoning regardless of popular
opinion. An alternative approach is to incorporate as much evidence as possible on the way the agents
included in these models think about these very same issues. In their important synthesis of "empirical
social choice" research, Gaertner and Schokkaert (2012) make a strong argument for the value of eliciting
public attitudes toward such issues. In optimal tax research, incorporating key aspects of reality into the
conventional model has been a hallmark of major contributions such as Diamond (1998), Saez (2001, 2002),
Golosov and Tsyvinski (2006), and Farhi and Werning (2010), and often these e¤orts have improved the
match between the theory’s recommendations and real-world policy. Diamond and Saez (2011) suggest
a similar e¤ort with regard to the normative aspects of the model, advocating a requirement of "social
acceptability" under which real-world normative beliefs would constrain the set of relevant policy results.5
My paper falls in this tradition and proposes that we go one step further: it gathers formal evidence about
people’s views and interprets that evidence as motivation for constructing a positive optimal tax theory. The
broad aim of this positive optimal taxation project is, then, to pursue empirically-supported generalizations
of the standard optimal tax model to better match the way in which real societies appear to evaluate tax
policy. Speci…cally, this paper’s survey evidence, and a large body of prior work, suggests that we generalize
the standard model to include a mixed policy objective.
    The second main contribution of this paper is to formally develop a generalized model that can be used
for positive optimal tax analysis. The generalized model combines multiple normative criteria into a single
policy objective while retaining both Pareto e¢ ciency and the remainder of the familiar formal apparatus of
conventional optimal tax theory. In this way, I am following up on a suggestion made more than three decades
ago by Martin Feldstein (1976), that "optimal tax design involves a balancing of con‡icting criteria." This
generalization of the standard theory requires addressing long-standing concerns about commensurability of
di¤erent normative criteria.6 In keeping with the survey evidence, I develop in depth the speci…c case of an
   4 In a recent, in‡uential overview Diamond and Saez (2011) argue that to be "fruitfully used as part of forming a policy

recommendation," a result from theory "needs to be socially acceptable," by which they mean "there should not be very widely
held normative views that make such policies seem implausible and inappropriate at pretty much all times."
   5 Gaertner and Schokkaert (2012) provide a lucid and insightful discussion of the relationship between normative and positive

analyses of social preferences.
   6 An alternative approach to accommodating multiple objectives is to solve for each objective’s recommendations separately

and then consider how these recommendations interact. The approach in this paper has two advantages over this alternative.
First, perhaps the central challenge in combining objectives is to evaluate allocations that are optimal according to none of the
component criteria. The alternative approach fails to address this challenge, leaving it unclear how di¤erent criteria’s priorities



                                                                3
objective that combines Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce.
    A complementary approach to generalizing the conventional model’s objective–part of the Pareto-e¢ cient
optimal tax approach mentioned above–can be found in contemporaneous research by Saez and Stantcheva
(2014). They focus on the role of marginal social welfare weights in the aggregation of a given tax reform’s
e¤ects on individuals. By allowing these weights to take any non-negative values, they include the possibility
that they may be based in part on normative criteria other than Utilitarianism.7 Their approach and this
paper’s can be seen as two sides of the same coin: one might translate a mixed objective function into a
pro…le of marginal social welfare weights or vice versa. Each approach has applications for which it is more
naturally suited, and both contribute toward the broader goal of constructing a positive theory of optimal
taxation.
    One attractive feature of this paper’s approach is that it requires a clear statement of each component
of the set of criteria by which policy is judged. This requirement acts as a second test of the theory (in
addition to its ability to match observed policy features), in that criteria lacking intellectual coherence can
be rejected and we can avoid the risk that fully-‡exible welfare weights lose any explanatory power. More
generally, under the Pareto-e¢ cient optimal tax approach, assumptions on the welfare weights are often
made in the interests of deriving more powerful results. One way to interpret my contribution in the context
of that approach is that I look for evidence on the normative criteria that seem to hold in reality and that,
therefore, might inform the values of those weights that society would endorse. Speci…cally, I am able to
use the principle of Equal Sacri…ce as a disciplined way to give weight to a point on the Pareto frontier that
appears to matter to the public but has been largely ignored by modern tax theory.
    This paper’s approach has a number of limitations. Positive optimal tax theory as developed here is not
a positive tax theory, i.e., I have not modeled the political economy that translates the public’s preferences
into policy. While recognizing that establishing such a link is essential for a full understanding of how any
normative principles a¤ect real-world allocations, that task is outside the main objective of this paper. At
the same time, positive optimal tax theory is not normative optimal tax theory, and we may reject the
implications of the former if we believe the public is–at any given time–subject to biases or mistaken beliefs.
It is because of this very real and important risk that I emphasize the search for recognizable, and at least
arguably defensible, philosophical principles in the development of the model. Moreover, it is important to
clarify that positive optimal tax theory is not a substitute for traditional normative optimal tax theory based
on considered judgments of what society’s objective function ought to be.
    The third contribution of this paper is to show that this generalized model, when calibrated to this survey
evidence, can reconcile a number of features of tax policy that are incompatible in conventional theory but
endorsed in the survey evidence as well as in reality. In particular, I simulate optimal policy using the survey
respondents’ most-preferred normative objective, which combines Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce, and
U.S. microdata. That policy simultaneously rejects the use of height, gender, and race as tags; accepts the
use of blindness as a tag, endorsing a quantitatively realistic blindness bene…t; and provides redistribution
through a progressive schedule of average income tax rates that closely resembles actual policy. I also provide
would be integrated. Second, the interaction of criteria generates results that would be di¢ cult to obtain through an interaction
of their results. For example, this paper’s …nding that tagging may be limited while substantial redistribution persists would
not necessarily be obtained by combining the results of Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce, as the former endorses both tagging
and redistribution while the latter prohibits both. I am grateful to a referee for a comment prompting this discussion.
   7 Saez and Stantcheva also note that welfare weights could be derived from existing policies or survey evidence. Bourguignon

and Spadaro (2012) take the former approach to calibrating the welfare weights in a standard model, as do Amedeo Spadaro,
Lucia Mangiavacchi, and Luca Piccoli (2012); Olivier Bargain, Mathias Dolls, Dirk Neumann, Andreas Peichl, and Sebastian
Siegloch (2011, 2013); Floris Zoutman, Bas Jacobs, and Egbert L.W. Jongen (2013a, 2013b) ; Nathaniel Hendren (2014); and
Lockwood and Weinzierl (2014).



                                                                4
two other examples: it substantially reduces the extent of utility rank reversals in the …rst-best policy, and it
implies top marginal tax rates lower than what conventional theory would recommend and closer to reality.8
    The results on tagging are important because they provide evidence that Equal Sacri…ce’s explanatory
power is due to more than simply being a "less redistributive" criterion than Utilitarianism. While the
optimal extent of both tagging and redistribution decrease when Equal Sacri…ce is given more weight, tagging
is reduced much more dramatically. Intuitively, Equal Sacri…ce strongly rejects horizontal inequity in taxes
(conditional on income-earning ability) because a taxpayer’s sacri…ce is determined by his or her income-
earning ability only, while Equal Sacri…ce can accommodate a range of tax progressivity across ability levels.
Consistent with this indirect evidence, I …nd more direct evidence for Equal Sacri…ce’s role in explaining
limited tagging in the survey, where a greater share of survey respondents who oppose height and blindness
tags prefer policies based in part on Equal Sacri…ce.
    Taken together, the survey results, theoretical analysis, and calibrated simulations of this paper demon-
strate the potential of a positive optimal taxation research agenda. They show that we can rigorously capture
empirical evidence on what tax policies individuals …nd acceptable and, as one might hope, use the resulting
model to better understand how actual tax policy is and (arguably) ought to be designed.
    The support that I …nd for policies based in part on Equal Sacri…ce may seem surprising, but in fact
it ought not to be. Though Equal Sacri…ce has played only a minor role in tax research since 1971, it was
originally proposed by no less a Utilitarian than John Stuart Mill, and it avoids a prominent critique of
Utilitarianism put forward by John Rawls, among others. In the early years of modern optimal tax theory,
Martin Feldstein (1976) saw a connection between Equal Sacri…ce and Robert Nozick’s (1974) Libertarianism,
arguing that "...tax schedules that impose equal utility sacri…ce have an appeal that is clearly lacking in
the utilitarian framework." The pioneering work of H. Peyton Young (1987, 1988, 1990, 1994) and Berliant
and Gouviea (1993) showed that existing income tax rate schedules were consistent with the Equal Sacri…ce
principle by itself. In a sense, it would be surprising if Equal Sacri…ce did not feature at least somewhat in
the views of many, especially in the United States.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 reports the new survey evidence on normative preferences
and discusses similar …ndings in prior work. Section 2 generalizes the standard model to allow for a mixed
objective, discusses Equal Sacri…ce as an alternative to Utilitarianism, and applies the model to the case
of these two criteria. Section 3 shows that the parameterizations of that model most preferred by survey
respondents imply policies that resolve several disparities between conventional theory and real-world policy,
especially the puzzle of limited tagging. Section 4 concludes, and an Appendix contains supporting material.


1     New results on empirical normative preferences
In this section, I describe the design and results of a novel survey eliciting normative preferences over
realistic tax policies. I also provide a range of robustness checks, all of which con…rm the main …ndings:
few individuals prefer the pure Utilitarian criterion standard in conventional optimal tax theory or the
commonly-used Rawlsian alternative, and a plurality of individuals prefer tax policies re‡ecting a mixed
normative objective including both Utilitarianism and the classic alternative criterion of Equal Sacri…ce.
Despite those checks, of course these results are far from de…nitive. Future research could explore many
variations on the surveys I perform, including changes to the way the data are presented, the design of the
   8 This, the working paper version of Weinzierl (2014), contains much more detail on these applications than in that published

version.




                                                               5
survey itself, and the choice of the respondent sample.
    One important ambiguity in a subset of the survey results is that the in‡uence of the Equal Sacri…ce
criterion on the policy choices facing survey respondents is by no means unique to Equal Sacri…ce. Re-
spondents endorsing the less redistributive policies in the survey may be motivated by a variety of factors
other than an a¢ nity for Equal Sacri…ce. To clarify, this paper is not intended to show that Equal Sacri…ce
in‡uences preferences to the exclusion of other, similar factors. Nevertheless, to address this ambiguity and
bolster the case that Equal Sacri…ce does matter for preferences, later in the paper I show the results of
survey questions that explicitly gauge support for Equal Sacri…ce, and I show that Equal Sacri…ce can have
explanatory power along a dimension of policy–tagging–not directly tied to the extent of redistribution (in
Section 3).
    This paper’s survey makes a methodological contribution to empirical research on tax preferences by
having respondents face a task that mimics the conventional social planner’s optimal tax problem: that is,
policies are constrained by both feasibility (in the context of government spending) and incentive compata-
bility. This innovation over most prior work9 allows me to use the evidence on participant preferences to
calibrate a fully-speci…ed optimal policy model.


1.1         Survey design
The survey, shown in full in the Appendix, has three parts. The …rst part tests whether respondents
understand and can perform simple calculations related to the concepts of before-tax income, after-tax
income, and average tax rates. It de…nes each of these terms, shows a graphical illustration of them that
parallels the …gures used in the remainder of the survey, and then asks four multiple-choice questions to
test comprehension. The third part of the survey asks respondents about their opinions on aspects of tax
policy, political views, and personal traits, including economic status. To address any concerns that these
characteristics matter for the results, I examine my …ndings’robustness across all subgroups.
    The second part is the centerpiece of the survey. Respondents are shown a graphical gross income
distribution divided into eight types of households (based on CBO data as discussed below). These types
represent the four lower quintiles and a division of the top quintile into the next 10, 5, 4, and 1 percentiles.
We might worry that respondents attribute some of the variation in incomes to di¤erences in preferences
for which, in the in‡uential terminology of Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2006), individuals ought to be held
"responsible" and not taxed or subsidized. I try to minimize that risk by clarifying in the survey text that
di¤erences in earnings are not due to e¤ort as follows:10 "If there were no taxes, these households would all
work equally hard. But, type 2 would earn more than type 1, type 3 would earn more than type 2, and so
on."
    Respondents are then put in the position of objective policymakers facing a constrained optimal tax
problem. They are told "You are given the chance to choose taxes for this society. Please think of yourself as
a policymaker for this society." They are given information about the constraints a¤ecting their choices, as
the survey states the required level of exogenous government spending (i.e., feasibility) and emphasizes that
households’ labor supplies include responses to tax policy (i.e., incentive compatibility). Respondents are
reminded that taxes may serve a variety of purposes, from funding public goods to redistributing before-tax
   9 Therecent paper by Kuziemko et al. (2013) also presents respondents with realistic policy choices.
  1 0 See
        Lockwood and Weinzierl, 2012 on how greater preference heterogeneity lowers optimal redistribution in the standard
model. To the extent that heterogeneity in preferences exists in reality, the survey text to the contrary would be expected to
push respondents toward a more redistributive policy than they would endorse in reality.




                                                              6
income.11
    In a series of choices, respondents rank sets of tax policies. For each policy option, the survey displays
two overlapping income distributions (see Figure 1 below for an example). The pretax distribution is shown
as empty outlined columns while the aftertax distribution is shown as …lled-in green columns. The average
tax rate for each household type is shown in a text box above their columns. Respondents are asked to
rank the policies from "best" to "worst" by clicking on numbered radio buttons. By using the general terms
"best" and "worst" without further de…ning the criteria by which tax policies ought to be judged, the survey
leaves the respondent free to use his or her own de…nition of optimality.
    The survey was listed in November, 2012 as an available task to up to 400 members of the Amazon
Mechanical Turk worker population from the United States who demonstrated good past performance on
tasks.12 The title of the task was "We want your opinions on tax policy", the description was "Rank possible
tax policies and give us your opinions on taxes," and the survey requestor was identi…ed as "TaxSurvey."
Respondents had up to 30 minutes to complete the survey, and they were asked to enter their MTurk
identi…cation number as well as a completion code at the end of the survey for veri…cation purposes. The
respondents completed the survey in an average of 13 minutes and 6 seconds. They were paid $2.00 for the
task, implying an average hourly rate of $9.16.


1.2     Results
Respondents’ …rst rankings provide straightforward evidence that the Utilitarian criterion is less popular
than the conventional model implies. Figure 1 shows the two policies respondents rank, labeled A and B.


                        Tax system A                                                      Tax system B




            Figure 1: The choice between the Utilitarian policy A and the Equal Sacri…ce policy B

  1 1 I ran a followup survey, requested by a referee, that explicitly explained that transfers were made in kind. Though a

greater percentage of the survey respondents self-identi…ed as politically left-leaning, the main results highlighted below were
unchanged. In particular, a majority of respondents preferred policy B to policy A, and in the seven-policy choice three-quarters
preferred a policy other than Utilitarian or Rawlsian, with a plurality preferring one of the three intermediate policies.
  1 2 Speci…cally, only respondents registered as in the United States whose work had been accepted on 95 percent of previous

tasks could take the survey. Horton, Rand, and Zeckhauser (2010) study the use of online labor markets, and speci…cally of
Mechanical Turk, and …nd: "Online experiments, we show, can be just as valid— both internally and externally— as laboratory
and …eld experiments, while often requiring far less money and time to design and conduct."




                                                               7
In Section 2, I provide the details of how I calculated these (and all other) policy options in the survey. For
now, note that option A re‡ects a conventional, pure Utilitarian objective for tax policy, while option B
re‡ects an objective based entirely on the principle of Equal Sacri…ce (which sets the utility cost of taxation
equal for all individuals). Policy A is redistributive, while B is not.13
    The results of this …rst choice are strikingly at odds with the conventional model’s assumed objective.
The share of respondents preferring the Utilitarian policy A is 42 percent, with a standard error of 2 percent.
In other words, nearly three-…fths of respondents prefer the pure Equal Sacri…ce policy B to policy A.
    Respondents are then asked, over the course of two questions, to rank a wider range of seven policy
options. Table 1 summarizes these choices, decreasing in redistributiveness from left to right. For each
option, it shows the average tax rates levied on each household. In the second column of the table, before-
tax incomes in the no-tax scenario are shown.

            Table 1: Features of the tax systems among which respondents choose
                                                                                Tax system:
                                                          C           A      E      D      G      B             F
            HH type          No-tax earnings                           Average tax rates (in percent)
               1                   $6,205               -895        -731 -504 -345 -260           14            97
               2                  $24,314               -119         -94    -43    -8      11     14            33
               3                  $43,961                -14          -9    16     16      16     14            18
               4                  $70,254                 30          28    22     19      17     14            12
               5                  $99,114                 48          44    28     22      19     14             8
               6                 $127,252                 56          51    33     25      21     14             6
               7                 $177,199                 68          60    39     29      23     14             5
               8                 $476,167                 81          79    59     45      35     12             2

                                                                     Weight on Equal Sacri…ce: ES
                                                       Rawls        0:00 0:03 0:10 0:20 1:00 Poll tax

The middle …ve policies in Table 1 combine Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce, using a range of values for the
weight on Equal Sacri…ce, ES , discussed below. The value ES = 0:00 yields the conventional Utilitarian
policy, while ES = 1:00 yields the Equal Sacri…ce policy. In between these polar values, three values
generate intermediate policies: ES = f0:03; 0:10; 0:20g :
    I also generate the two "endpoint" policies shown in Table 1. The left-most policy, C, is a "Rawlsian"
policy that maximizes the utility of the lowest-ability household. The right-most policy is a "poll tax" that
splits the …nancial cost of government spending G evenly across households.14 Adding these endpoint policies
  1 3 Note that the incomes earned by the higher-ability types are greater under Tax System A than B, despite the former’s

greater progressivity. The reason is that the Utilitarian planner uses both the income and substitution e¤ects of taxation
to encourage work among the highest types. Of course, the highest type has much lower utility under policy A than B. To
the extent that optimal Utilitarian policy in reality would not be able to generate such large e¤orts among high earners, the
distortionary costs of policy A would be higher than shown in the survey, and the current survey results would be expected to
be biased toward Utilitarianism.
  1 4 Formally, using notation speci…ed below, these policies are as follows. To generate the Rawlsian policy option, the planner

solves the problem
                                                         max          U c1 ; y 1 =w1 ;
                                                fci ;yi gIi=1 2fF\ICg
where F is de…ned in (2); IC is de…ned in (3); and U c1 ; y 1 =w1 is de…ned in (12). The Rawlsian policy is the most redistributive
policy option.




                                                                8
yields two bene…ts. First, o¤ering the Rawlsian and poll tax options addresses a potential framing problem
with presenting respondents with only the set of policies along the Utilitarian-Equal Sacri…ce spectrum. To
the extent that individuals shy away from options that seem "extreme," having policies A and B as endpoints
could bias us toward …nding support for a mixed objective. Adding the Rawlsian and poll tax options as the
endpoints on the redistributive spectrum may alleviate this concern. Second, the most common deviation
from simple-sum Utilitarianism in conventional optimal tax theory is a generalized Utiltarianism under which
the planner takes a concave transformation of utilities before summing them. The Rawlsian option is often
included as an extreme version of this generalization. By including a Rawlsian policy as a choice, we can
gauge the empirical support for this prominent criterion.
    Respondents …rst compare option A to three additional options, two of which are less redistributive than
A, namely D and E, while C is more redistributive. Respondents then compare option B from the …rst choice
to three additional options, two of which are more redistributive than B, namely D and G, while F is less
redistributive. Both choices can be seen in the survey as reproduced in the Appendix. Policy D is included
in both sets of four-option rankings so that we can infer respondents’ preferences across the full range of
seven policies.15 Note that the redistributive spectrum is masked in both the alphabetical policy labels and
the physical placement of policies within the four-policy rankings (visible in the Appendix).
    Figure 2 shows each of these seven policy options and the share of respondents who placed them in their
top-ranked or second-ranked group of policies.
  The poll tax policy is de…ned as follows:
                                                           1
                                                ci = y i     G for all i 2 f1; :::; Ig;
                                                           I
where households maximize utility subject to this constraint. The poll tax is the least redistributive policy option (it is, in fact,
regressive).
  1 5 An alternative approach would be to give the respondents control over a continuous policy lever that would trace out the

entire range of redistribution (for instance, ES ). That alternative has two drawbacks, however. First, communicating the
meaning of that policy lever would be di¢ cult without in‡uencing the respondents’ answers. Second, we are likely interested
not merely in the respondents’ideal points but in their attitudes toward options along the entire range. Those would be di¢ cult
to elicit with this alternative approach.




                                                                 9
                             Figure 2: Respondent preferences across a range of policy
                                                     options


    Figure 2 reveals two main results from these rankings: one, support for the conventional Utiltarianism
assumption and the Rawlsian alternative is low; two, a plurality of respondents prefer a mixed objective.16
The purely Utilitarian policy (A) makes up only 10 percent of the top-ranked choices and 11 percent of
the second-ranked choices.17 For the Rawlsian alternative, these …gures are 9 percent and 10 percent.
Together, then, policies at least as redistributive as the conventional Utilitarianism make up less than 20
percent of the most-preferred policies in this survey, the same share claimed by the pure Equal Sacri…ce
policy B. In contrast, nearly half–48 percent–of the top-ranked policies were one of the three (E, D, and
G) that correspond to a mixed normative criterion. These mixed policies also dominate the second-ranked
preferences of respondents, making up 56 percent of those choices.
    Together, these results sharply contradict the normative assumptions that dominate modern optimal tax
research. Respondents give little support to using the conventional Utilitarian criterion as the optimal policy
benchmark. They also appear to disagree with the most commonly used alternative to pure Utilitarianism–a
more concave social welfare function–as respondents are less enthusiastic about the Rawlsian policy than
any other option except (perhaps) the poll tax. Instead, empirical normative preferences appear to favor the
use of a mixed objective with some weight on a less redistributive criterion such as Equal Sacri…ce.
    More direct evidence of a preference for an objective that combines Utilitarianism with Equal Sacri…ce
in particular is revealed when respondents are asked explicitly about the optimal distribution of sacri…ce in
  1 6 Note that the survey was designed to minimize the risk that aversion to choosing endpoints is generating the observed

preference for the intermediate policies D, E, and G. Each of the two scenarios in which respondents chose between four policies
had policy D as an endpoint option. In contrast, policies A and B were intermediate policies in each of their four-option
scenarios.
  1 7 These classi…cations are made as follows. Using option D, which was included in both of the four-option policy choices, we

can create a weak ranking of all seven policy options for each respondent. The top-ranked group includes any policy strictly
dominated by no other policy. Less than six percent of respondents had more than one top-ranked policy. The second-ranked
group includes any policy strictly dominated by only policies in the top-ranked group. For example, if a respondent ranks
option D as their …rst choice in both four-option choices, they will rank two policies second, each of which is therefore placed
in the "second-ranked" group for that respondent.




                                                              10
a tax system:




The responses to this question are as follows: 33 percent choose the …rst option; 48 percent choose the
second; and 19 percent choose the third option.18 As these responses demonstrate, the preference for mixed
objectives that was apparent in respondents’choices over tax systems is echoed by their stated preferences
over the distribution of sacri…ce from the tax system. The conventional Utilitarian policy is most consistent
with the third option in this question, though it would in fact recommend a more redistributive option in
which the poor received a net bene…t from the tax system. The pure Equal Sacri…ce policy is most consistent
with the …rst option. Fewer survey respondents show enthusiasm for the conventional Utilitarian outcome
than for the Equal Sacri…ce alternative, while the largest percentage of respondents prefers the intermediate
option. In other words, more than three-quarters of respondents choose policies re‡ecting some weight on
Equal Sacri…ce, the same share as in the choices over tax policies as shown in Figure 2.
    Finally, Figure 3 shows a degree of consistency that suggests the survey is accurately eliciting respondents’
policy preferences. It shows these preferences according to individuals’views on Equal Sacri…ce. Policy option
B, based purely on Equal Sacri…ce, claims more than twice the share of the top rankings among those who
state a preference for equal sacri…ce than among those who prefer distributing sacri…ce less equally. This
pattern holds despite that connection never being made apparent in the survey. Similarly, the Utilitarian and
Rawlsian policies are supported more by those who prefer to have the poor bear no sacri…ce, and intermediate
policies are supported more by those who prefer the intermediate distribution of sacri…ce.
  1 8 In the followup survey, the order of possible answers were randomized at the request of a referee. The results were 37, 39,

and 24 percent. Though slightly less enthusiasm for the middle answer was apparent, that option still was chosen by the most
respondents, and the lessons are the same as those drawn from the initial results.




                                                               11
                            Figure 3: Policy preferences by view on Equal Sacri…ce (top
                                                    choices only)



1.3     Robustness
Here, I analyze the data along several dimensions to check the robustness of these results.

1.3.1    Respondents’understanding

If respondents fail to understand the questions being asked, we might worry that their answers poorly re‡ect
their true preferences. Two sets of observations o¤er reassurance on this point.
    First, respondents appear to understand the economic concepts used in the survey. The survey begins
with de…nitions of the concepts of before-tax income, after-tax income and the average tax rate. It then
asks respondents to: 1) use before-tax income and taxes paid to calculate after-tax income; 2) use before-
tax income and taxes paid to calculate a (positive) average tax rate; 3) use before-tax income and taxes
paid to calculate a (negative) average tax rate; 4) calculate the average of three before-tax incomes. These
questions test comprehension and the ability to work with the concepts, as well as numeracy. The results
show that respondent understanding was very high, with 75 percent of respondents correctly answering all
four questions and 87 percent answering at least three correctly.19
    Second, the pattern of rankings by most respondents suggests they understood the choices they were
making. If a respondent reports single-peaked preferences across the …ve policy options along the spectrum
between pure Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce, we might be con…dent in his or her understanding of the
relationship among policies, not to mention the respondent’s rationality. In fact, 68 percent of respondents
exhibited single-peaked preferences across these …ve policy choices. Importantly, that result does not imply
that 32 percent of respondents were making irrational choices–someone may prefer policies that commit
  1 9 Respondents with fewer correct answers were more supportive of both extremes of the policy distribution, especially the

poll tax. As with those who answered at least three correctly, a substantial majority (more than two-thirds) of top choices for
this group were for a policy other than the Utilitarian or Rawlsian options. Policy B occupied the same share of top choices
across these groups.



                                                              12
fully to one normative criterion or another, or multiple-peaked preferences may suggest other in‡uences on
respondents’normative reasoning that are not captured in this two-component objective function.

1.3.2       Robustness across demographic groups

Natural concerns in any survey of this kind are whether the results are driven by particular demographic
groups and whether economic status is systematically related to respondents’preferences. To examine these
concerns, I ask respondents to report their gender, age, education, and economic status when young and
when an adult. Summary demographic data for the 381 respondents who successfully completed the survey
is provided in Table 2.
    Though not meant to be a representative sample, this group exhibits substantial variation in (self-
reported) personal characteristics and backgrounds. The self-reported distribution of respondents across
household types when they were children matches the overall U.S. income distribution remarkably well, with
36 percent reporting being from the bottom two quintiles, 45 percent from the next two quintiles, and 19
percent from the top quintile. The respondent population also appears to be (or to expect to be) upwardly
mobile, with only about one-quarter of those who report their childhood household most resembled one of
the two lowest-earning household types reporting that their household at age 40 was also one of those types.
Consistent with that fact, the respondents were generally more well-educated than the population aged 18-65
in the United States, where approximately 30 percent of adults are college graduates.20

           Table 2: Preferences across policy groups by demographic trait
           Tax policy group:            Rawls or Utilitarian            Mixed        Equal Sacri…ce        Share of
                                             (C or A)                (E, D, or G)         (B)             respondents
           Gender
              Male                               0.16                    0.48              0.23               0.56
              Female                             0.24                    0.47              0.16               0.44
           Age
              18-25                              0.16                    0.52              0.17               0.30
              26-40                              0.23                    0.49              0.19               0.48
              41-65                              0.18                    0.40              0.25               0.21
           Education
              High school grad                   0.21                    0.36              0.29               0.13
              Some college                       0.20                    0.48              0.18               0.35
              College grad                       0.19                    0.52              0.18               0.51
           Status when child
              Types 1-2 (lower)                  0.22                    0.41              0.22               0.36
              Types 3-4 (middle)                 0.19                    0.50              0.19               0.45
              Types 5-8 (higher)                 0.16                    0.55              0.17               0.19
           Status when adult
              Types 1-2 (lower)                  0.31                    0.28              0.24               0.16
              Types 3-4 (middle)                 0.19                    0.50              0.19               0.51
              Types 5-8 (higher)                 0.15                    0.55              0.18               0.33
 2 0 See   Table 229 of the Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2012, published by the U.S. Census Bureau.




                                                                13
    Table 2 also shows that there are few large di¤erences in preferred policies across demographic groups.
In the table, I group policies into three groups: Utilitarian or Rawlsian (C or A); Mixed (E, D, or G);
and Equal Sacri…ce (B).21 Respondents with more education and higher economic status tend to be more
supportive of Mixed policies. However, a large majority of each demographic group prefers policies other
than the Utilitarian or Rawlsian options, and a plurality of all but one group prefers policies that result from
a mixed normative criterion that combines Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce. The exception is those with
lower status as adults, where a slight plurality (though less than one-third) prefer the more redistributive
policies.22 With this exception, both main …ndings from the full survey apply across demographic groups.

1.3.3     Robustness across political views

A major conceptual question raised by this paper’s results is how individuals’ preferences are aggregated
in a political system. Though I largely set that question aside, we can analyze the survey results to test
whether the paper’s main conclusions are likely to be sensitive to the details of that aggregation. For
example, if we found that individuals of only a particular political perspective were driving the results, we
might discount their relevance. To address these concerns, I ask respondents to self-classify at three points
on the (U.S.) political spectrum with regard to economic issues: 1) Left-leaning, or Liberal; 2) Centrist,
or Moderate; 3) Right-leaning, or Conservative. I also ask them to classify themselves as (strongly or
somewhat) supportive of or opposed to Libertarianism (which is left unde…ned in the survey). Table 3 shows
the distribution of responses. A plurality of the respondents, 44 percent, self-classi…es as left-leaning.23
Support for Libertarianism in this sample is consistent with the magnitudes for the U.S. population cited
by Boaz and Kirby (2007).
    Table 3 also shows that both main …ndings from the full survey characterize respondents across a wide
range of political opinions.

         Table 3: Preferences across policy groups by political views
         Tax policy group:              Rawls or Utilitarian             Mixed          Equal Sacri…ce          Share of
                                             (C or A)                 (E, D, or G)           (B)              respondents
         Political position
            Left-leaning                          0.19                    0.57                 0.11                0.42
            Centrist                              0.21                    0.52                 0.18                0.30
            Right-leaning                         0.18                    0.29                 0.37                0.22
         View on Libertarianism
            Support                               0.17                    0.42                 0.25                0.46
            Oppose                                0.19                    0.57                 0.15                0.27

As might be expected, right-leaning and Libertarian respondents are more likely to favor less redistributive
policies.24 However, across all groups, and even among those who self-classify as left-leaning or liberal, a large
  21 I  do not show the results for the Poll Tax because it received little support and is too distinct from the Equal Sacri…ce
policy to be grouped with it.
  2 2 In a follow-up replication of the survey, requested by a referee, I also ask respondents to self-report race, using the General

Social Survey categories: white, black, other. The results for "white" and "other" respondents conform to the two main lessons
highlighted in the paper. For "black" respondents, a majority prefer policies other than the Utilitarian or Rawlsian, consistent
with the overall respondent group. In contrast with the overall group, however, relatively few black respondents prefer the
combination policies, with more than 40 percent preferring the Equal Sacri…ce or Poll Tax policies and just under 40 percent
preferring the Utilitarian or Rawlsian policies.
  2 3 We might expect this group to be more supportive of redistributive policy than a sample centered on the "centrist" position.
  2 4 Support for the poll tax (policy F, not shown in the table) is generally low, but as might be expected it is higher among




                                                                 14
majority of respondents prefer policies other than those re‡ecting conventional objectives, and a plurality
prefer a mixed normative framework with some (or all) weight on Equal Sacri…ce.


1.4     Relation to existing evidence on normative preferences
This paper’s survey evidence and the large body of prior empirical work on normative preferences share a
common main conclusion: individuals use and prefer a mixed normative criteria. In the Appendix to this
paper, I discuss the related research in detail, but summary statements from studies representing three
research designs in that literature illustrate the main point. Frohlich, Oppenheimer, and Eavey (1987) use
surveys in which participants are asked to rank di¤erent distributions of resources, much as in this paper, and
…nd that "...subjects preferred a compromise. This implies that individuals treat choice between principles
as involving marginal decisions. Principles are much like economic goods inasmuch as individuals are willing
to trade o¤ between them [italics in the original]." Feldman and Zaller (1992) ask a large group of Americans
open-ended questions on distributive justice and write: "Most people are internally con‡icted about exactly
what kind of welfare system they want...Ambivalence with respect to social welfare policy is more pronounced
among welfare liberals...They end up acknowledging the values of economic individualism even as they try
to justify their liberal preferences." Englemann and Strobel (2004) use allocation games among individuals
to elicit values and conclude: "a combination of e¢ ciency concerns, maximin preferences, and sel…shness can
rationalize most of the data."
    This prior work is only indirectly, not directly, supportive of the role of Equal Sacri…ce as a factor in
normative preferences. As far as I am aware, this paper is the …rst attempt to elicit (or infer) attitudes
toward that principle, though support for the Libertarian viewpoint that some have linked to Equal Sacri…ce
has been found by a number of researchers (e.g., Cappelen et al. 2011, Boaz and Kirby 2007, Frohlich,
Oppenheimer, and Kurki 2004, and Konow 2003).25
    An alternative normative perspective that has received substantial support in empirical work, such as
in Fong (2001) and Gaertner and Schokkaert (2012), emphasizes individual responsibility for di¤erences in
e¤ort as well as compensation for di¤erences in ability. Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2006) provide an in‡uential
theory of optimal taxation sensitive to this distinction, and Lockwood and Weinzierl (2012) discuss how
incorporating a simple version of that distinction into the standard model a¤ects optimal policy. While
the framework of this paper is not designed to include that alternative perspective directly, our conclusions
here are not in con‡ict with those of that literature, and a synthesis of them (along with others) may prove
fruitful.


2     Generalizing the optimal tax model for multiple objectives
The survey results and related literature presented in the previous section suggest two lessons for a positive
theory of optimal taxation: …rst, the conventional optimal tax model’s assumption of a Utilitarian objective
is counterfactually narrow; second, an accurate positive optimal tax theory must be able to accommodate
multiple normative objectives simultaneously. In this section, I generalize the conventional model to allow for
this normative diversity, retaining much of the standard theory’s (familiar) formal apparatus. I then develop
the details of that model for the case of the two main normative criteria used in the survey: Utilitarianism
those who identify as on the "right" (i.e., 16 percent of top choices vs. 11 percent for the rest of the sample) and among those
who support Libertarianism (i.e., 16 percent vs. 9 percent).
  2 5 Gaertner and Schokkaert (2012) discuss some work related to equal losses in "claims" problems, where they …nd support

for proportional monetary losses: see their section 4.2.


                                                              15
and Equal Sacri…ce. Finally, I show the parameterizations of the model that correspond to the policies
o¤ered to survey respondents.


2.1     The general model with multiple criteria
Appealing as it may be to generalize the normative objective in the optimal tax model, there is a method-
ological obstacle: many plausible normative criteria evaluate outcomes in ways that are not directly com-
mensurable. For example, Utilitarianism ranks all possible allocations, but Equal Sacri…ce yields only a
most-preferred outcome and fails to rank alternative allocations. To obtain a ranking of allocations that
re‡ects the judgments of both criteria therefore requires a translation of Equal Sacri…ce into a more com-
plete form. This case is an example of a more general problem with capturing unconventional principles in
a framework amenable to economic analysis.26
    This paper ensures commensurability by representing the priorities of each normative criterion with a
loss function that depends on deviations of the actual allocation of resources from each criterion’s optimal
allocation. Of course, specifying these loss functions is a matter of judgment, and some may object to their
use altogether. In the end, the appeal of my analysis will depend on how closely the optimal allocations and
loss functions I use align with the priorities of the normative criteria. An important feature of this approach
is that these loss functions can be speci…ed in a way that respects Pareto e¢ ciency, as the examples below
illustrate, avoiding the problem with non-welfarist criteria noted by Kaplow and Shavell (2001).
    In other words, one interpretation of this paper’s contribution is as providing a basis, in the form of
a speci…c alternative normative criterion, for including in the objective for policy some a¢ nity for a point
along the Pareto-e¢ cient frontier that is far from the conventional Utilitarian or Rawlsian points. This
interpretation relates to the distinction made earlier between this paper’s approach and one in which we
allow for any point on the Pareto frontier to be chosen, regardless of whether it is connected to any normative
principle. It may be useful to draw an analogy to how Rawls’theory has been reduced, in conventional optimal
tax analyses, to a simple maximin objective. While this reductivism no doubt betrays many fundamental
aspects of Rawls’framework, focusing on the maximin point along the Pareto-e¢ cient frontier is commonly
justi…ed by appeals to his work. Similarly, while Equal Sacri…ce as a principle may not correspond perfectly
to any point on that frontier, it provides an intuition for considering one point that conventional criteria do
not.
    Thus, the key formal innovation in this paper’s generalization of the standard model is that the social
planner minimizes a "social loss function" that is the weighted sum of these criterion-speci…c losses. The
weight on a given criterion’s loss represents the force that criterion exerts on society’s moral evaluations.
The social planner is therefore interpreted as an authority using a diverse normative criterion that is the
product of an (unspeci…ed) political process.
    This loss-minimization approach to combining disparate normative criteria appears to be consistent with
the "consequential evaluation" of Amartya Sen (2000).27 Sen does not specify how these criteria ought to be
  2 6 For example, Utilitarianism has a consequentialist (i.e., welfarist) criterion, namely maximal aggregate utility, that ranks all

possible allocations based exclusively on the utility levels of the individuals in society. In contrast, some normative frameworks
stress the moral relevance of concerns such as freedom, rights, and rules, rather than the ends emphasized by Utilitarianism.
These frameworks are often referred to as deontological, and a long-standing concern in moral philosophy is whether the
judgments of consequentalist and deontological frameworks can be compared. See Sen (1982).
  2 7 In Sen (1982) he writes: "...both welfarist consequentialism (such as utilitarianism) and constraint-based deontology are

fundamentally inadequate because of their failure to deal with certain important types of interdependences present in moral
problems. This leads to an alternative approach... which incorporates, among other things, some types of rights in the evaluation
of states of a¤airs, and which gives these rights in‡uence on the choice of actions through the evaluation of consequent states
of a¤airs."



                                                                 16
combined, but a suggestive passage indicates that my approach of social loss minimization may not be far
o¤ the mark: "...rights-inclusive objectives in a system of consequential evaluation can accommodate certain
rights the ful…llment of which would be excellent but not guaranteed, and we can still try to minimize the
shortfall."
    In most other respects, the model economy in this paper is identical to that considered in standard
modern optimal tax models. Individuals di¤er in their innate ability to earn income, denoted wi for types
                                                                                               PI i
i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig, with the proportion of the population with ability i denoted pi such that    i=1 p = 1.
Individuals derive utility from consumption c and disutility from exerting labor e¤ort y=w to earn income
y. Denote the interpersonally-comparable utility function U (c; y=w).
                                             I
    A planner chooses allocations ci ; y i i=1 to minimize social loss subject to feasibility and incentive
compatibility constraints. Formally, the planner’s problem is:

Problem 1 Social planner’s problem (general case)
                                                               X                                       I                     I
                                         min           L=                      L        ci ; y i       i=1
                                                                                                                ; ci ; y i   i=1
                                                                                                                                   ;              (1)
                              fci ;y i gIi=1 2fF\ICg
                                                                    2


where the criterion-speci…c loss functions L for each criterion                                            in the set         are de…ned below;
F denotes the set of feasible allocations for the economy:
                                                   (                          I
                                                                                                                   )
                                                                  I           X
                                                        i
                                           F=          c    ; y i i=1     :         i
                                                                                    p y    i
                                                                                                   c   i
                                                                                                                 G ;                              (2)
                                                                              i=1


where G is exogenous, required government spending on public goods;
IC denotes the set of incentive compatible allocations:
                          n              I
                                                                                                                                        o
                   IC =       ci ; y i   i=1
                                               : U ci ; y i =wi               U cj ; y j =wi               for all i; j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig :        (3)

    The weights f g 2 applied to each loss function represent the importance of each normative criterion
in society’s evaluations of policy. A number of models of the policymaking process could be used to generate
such weights, but incorporating a convincing model of the political economy of policymaking is beyond this
paper’s scope.28
    The losses to which these weights apply are calculated using two components that, together, capture the
priorities of each normative criterion.
    First, each criterion generates a preferred, economically-feasible allocation of consumption and income
across types, which I label the " -optimal feasible allocation." To identify these allocations, start by assuming
that each normative criterion 2 implies a (possibly incomplete) preference relation               on the set F, so
                              i I                                                                       I
that we say allocation c1 ; y1 i=1 2 F is weakly preferred under criterion to allocation c2 ; y2i i=1 2 F if
                           i                                                                      i


                                                                        I                          I
                                                        ci1 ; y1i       i=1
                                                                                    ci2 ; y2i      i=1
                                                                                                            :
   2 8 The most straightforward is that the pivotal voter has his or her own weights on each normative criterion, adopted by

policymakers as a result of electoral competition. If one wished to consider, instead, di¤erent groups engaged in a policy-setting
game, alternative approaches could be used. For example, the Nash bargaining solution would optimize a weighted combination
of their interests. "Veto" models such as that in Moulin (1981) would allow a coalition of voters to block some alternatives.
Such formulations are conceptually similar to this paper’s, as the key to this paper’s results is not the speci…c formalization of
the tradeo¤ between normative criteria but rather that the tradeo¤ is included at all. One implication of this paper’s analysis
is that future research estimating the values of these weights and how they are generated by the political process would be
valuable.


                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                       I                   I
Given        , the strict preference relation                           is de…ned as usual. For any ci1 ; y1i                          i=1
                                                                                                                                             ; ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                                                                                                                 2 F;

                        I                          I                         I                         I                               I                         I
            ci1 ; y1i   i=1
                                       ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                         , ci1 ; y1i         i=1
                                                                                          ci2 ; y2i    i=1
                                                                                                             but not       ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                                                                                                     ci1 ; y1i   i=1
                                                                                                                                                                       :

These preference relations allow the identi…cation of the                                                -optimal feasible allocations, which I denote
n         oI
 ci ; y i    , and formally de…ne as follows.29
           i=1
                                                                               n         oI
De…nition 1 An -optimal feasible allocation                                     ci ; y i              is any allocation in the set F for which there is
                                                                                              i=1
                                                                                                               n          oI
                                            I                                                           I
no other allocation ci ; y i                i=1
                                                   in the set F such that:                    ci ; y i i=1       ci ; y i    :
                                                                                                                                i=1

   These -optimal feasible allocations provide a key link across normative criteria. Note that no incentive
compatibility constraints are imposed when de…ning the -optimal feasible allocations, so that they equal
each criterion’s "…rst-best" allocation in this context (i.e., when ability is observable).30
   Second, each criterion’s priorities are represented by a loss function that measures the costs of deviations
                                                                                     n         oI
                                                                                                             I
from the criterion’s most preferred allocation. I denote these loss functions L       ci ; y i    ; ci ; y i i=1
                                                                                                                                                     i=1
   The loss functions fL g 2 that I use in this paper satisfy the following three conditions. The …rst two
are straightforward. The third, Pareto E¢ ciency, may be more controversial among political philosophers
but is generally viewed as a reasonable requirement in the optimal taxation literature.31

Remark 1 For all                   2 , the loss function L (x; y) satis…es:
                                                         I                    I
   1. Ordinality: For any ci1 ; y1i                      i=1
                                                               ; ci2 ; y2i    i=1
                                                                                    2 F,

                                   I                      I                                   I                     I                        I                         I
              L         ci ; y i   i=1
                                           ; ci1 ; y1i    i=1
                                                                       L           ci ; y i   i=1
                                                                                                      ; ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                                                                          , ci1 ; y1i        i=1
                                                                                                                                                           ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                                                                                                                             ;

      so that the loss from one allocation is no greater than that from another to which it is weakly preferred
      under criterion ;
                            n         oI  n         oI
   2. Normalization: L       ci ; y i    ; ci ; y i     = 0, so that the loss is zero32 when the equilibrium
                                                          i=1                      i=1
         allocation equals the -optimal feasible allocation.
  29 I  assume that any criterion can be speci…ed in enough detail to break ties and guarantee a unique -optimal allocation.
  3 0 Omitting    incentive compatibility constraints enables the -optimal feasible allocations to provide a stable target for each
criterion against which to measure the appeal of di¤erent policy proposals. The alternative, namely to use a "second-best"
allocation, requires assumptions on the planner’s information set that can lead to path-dependencies in policy evaluations and,
thus, unstable judgments. An example will illustrate this best. Recall that for each criterion , loss is calculated by comparing
the distributions of individual utility under the -optimal feasible allocation and the actual, constrained allocation. Consider
two cases for how to de…ne the -optimal feasible allocations. In case 1, allow the planner to condition taxes on ability. In case
2, assume that the planner cannot condition taxes on ability but can condition taxes on gender, an observable characteristic
related to ability in the data. The distributions of utility in the -optimal feasible allocations for these two cases will di¤er.
Now suppose we want to gauge the appeal of conditioning taxes on height or race (as in Section 3 below). Assume that height
and gender are correlated but race and gender are not. Then, the use of gender in de…ning the -optimal feasible allocations in
case 2 will di¤erentially a¤ect the loss calculations for the allocations that use a height tax or a race tax. By the same reasoning,
if we allowed a di¤erent trait to be used in case 2, the relative appeal of height and race taxes would be a¤ected yet di¤erently.
The problem is that no obvious principle exists by which to determine which information is to be included or excluded from
the planner’s information set when de…ning -optimal feasible allocations. In particular, note that limiting the information set
to the standard observables of optimal tax theory, namely income and consumption, does not solve the problem. Even in that
case, evaluating a height-gender-race combination tag may yield di¤erent results than evaluating each tag separately, whether
one-by-one or cumulatively. No such inconsistency exists if the information set includes all possible information.
   3 1 See, for examples of contrasting views, Sen and Williams (1982, introductory chapter) and Kaplow and Shavell (2001).
   3 2 Any constant would accomplish the same normalization, though zero is the natural choice.




                                                                                         18
   3. Weak Pareto E¢ ciency:

                  U ci1 ; y1i =wi       U ci2 ; y2i =wi for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig
                                                     n         oI                                 n         oI                               (4)
                                                                              I                                                    I
                                         )L           ci ; y i    ; ci1 ; y1i i=1         L        ci ; y i          ; ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                                                                                         ;
                                                                i=1                                            i=1


       which can be converted into Strong Pareto E¢ ciency if desired.33

    In words, Weak Pareto E¢ ciency as de…ned here says that if all individuals do at least as well under
allocation 1 as they do under allocation 2, the loss from allocation 1 cannot be greater than the loss from
allocation 2. This condition will prevent the planner from rejecting Pareto-improving allocations. It is too
weak, however, to guarantee that the planner will avoid Pareto-ine¢ cient allocations–for that, Strong Pareto
E¢ ciency is required.34
    Below, I apply this general approach to the case of the two main criteria between which I have respondents
to the survey choose: the conventional Utilitarian criterion and the principle of Equal Sacri…ce.


2.2         Equal Sacri…ce as an alternative to Utilitarianism
First, I provide a discussion of why Equal Sacri…ce is a natural choice as an alternative to Utilitarianism.
John Stuart Mill (1871) was the most famous proponent of Equal Sacri…ce, and his argument for it is worth
quoting at length.

           "For what reason ought equality to be the rule in matters of taxation? For the reason, that it
       ought to be so in all a¤airs of government...Equality of taxation, therefore, as a maxim of politics,
       means equality of sacri…ce. It means apportioning the contribution of each person towards the
       expenses of government so that he shall feel neither more nor less inconvenience from his share
       of the payment than every other person experiences from his."

    To Mill, the appeal of Equal Sacri…ce was simple: it treats all individuals equally. This argument for
Equal Sacri…ce was endorsed by other in‡uential thinkers, including Alfred Marshall and Henry Sidgwick,
the latter of whom claimed it was the "obviously equitable principle–assuming that the existing distribution
of wealth is accepted as just or not unjust."35
    Utilitarianism, in contrast, is willing to trade the losses of some for greater gains of others, a willingness
that thinkers as diverse as John Rawls and Robert Nozick have seen as a serious failing. The speci…c context
in which this concern has been seen as most forceful is "endowment" taxation, where individuals would
be taxed on their potential to earn income rather than their actual earned income. Of course, endowment
taxation is exactly the preferred policy of the conventional Utilitarian optimal tax model.36 Rawls (1971)
                                                                                          0   0        0             0   0     0
  3 3 Namely,   U ci1 ; y1i =wi       U ci2 ; y2i =wi for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and U ci1 ; y1i =wi       > U ci2 ; y2i =wi        for some i0 2
                       n           oI                          n         oI
                                                   I                                      I
f1; 2; :::; Ig ) L        ci ; y i     ; ci1 ; y1i i=1 < L      ci ; y i      ; ci2 ; y2i i=1
                                i=1                                    i=1
  3 4 The  Strong Pareto E¢ ciency condition states, in words, that if all individuals do at least as well under allocation 1 as
under allocation 2, and at least one individual does better, then the loss from allocation 1 must be strictly less than the loss
from allocation 2.
  3 5 In addition to the work of H. Peyton Young and Berliant and Gouveia mentioned earlier, Yaari (1988), Moyes (1989),

Ok (1995), Mitra and Ok (1996), and D’Antoni (1999) helped establish conditions on the progressivity of taxes designed in
accordance with Equal Sacri…ce and argue for the centrality of that principle. Lambert and Naughton (2009) is a recent
contribution that reviews much of this literature.
  3 6 Legal scholars have extensively analyzed this issue with endowment (ability) taxation under the heading of "talent slavery,"

the heavy taxation of those with high ability that forces them to work exceptionally hard or at an occupation they dislike. See,
for instance, Hasen (2007), Markovits (2003), Rakowski (2000), Shaviro (2002), Stark (2005), Sugin (2011), and Zelenak (2006).


                                                                      19
wrote that Utilitarianism "does not take seriously the distinction between persons," and that an endowment
tax "would force the more able into those occupations in which earnings were high enough for them to pay
o¤ the tax in the required period of time; it would interfere with their liberty to conduct their life within the
scope of the principles of justice."37 The broad force of this critique is made clear when it is coupled with
Robert Nozick’s (1974) claim that "taxation of earnings from labor is on a par with forced labor" because
"it is like forcing the person to work n hours for another’s purpose." While Rawls and Nozick take from their
critiques very di¤erent lessons, they share a similar target: Utilitarianism’s potential to violate individual
liberty due to its acceptance of unequal treatment.38
    This critique of Utilitarianism makes clear why Mill’s Equal Sacri…ce, with its emphasis on equal treat-
ment of all individuals, is a natural alternative normative criterion. Related, some have suggested that there
is an explicit connection between Equal Sacri…ce and Libertarianism. As noted earlier, Feldstein (1976)
writes: "Nozick (1974) has recently presented an extensive criticism of the use of utilitarian principles to
justify the redistribution of income and wealth...In this context, the principle of bene…t taxation or of tax
schedules that impose equal utility sacri…ce have an appeal that is clearly lacking in the utilitarian frame-
work." Similarly, Liam Murphy and Thomas Nagel (2002) have argued: "If (and only if) [libertarianism]
is the theory of distributive justice we accept, the principle of equal sacri…ce does make sense." Sidgwick’s
statement above, with its caveat that speaks to the core of Libertarianism, suggests the same link.
    A priority on equal treatment may be of paramount concern to only a small minority of individuals,
but evidence strongly suggests that it has at least some appeal to most. For many, that appeal is linked
to an a¢ nity for a non-welfarist normative perspective such as Libertarianism. Public opinion surveys,
including this paper’s, estimate that the proportion of individuals with largely Libertarian views is 10 to 20
percent in the United States (Boaz and Kirby 2007).39 But, research has shown that even those predisposed
toward redistribution feel some pull toward normative principles that prioritize the individual.40 Feldman
and Zaller’s (1992) statement cited in Section 1.4 makes this point, and this paper’s survey evidence clearly
supports that conclusion. As Feldstein (1976) noted prior to linking Nozick’s logic to Equal Sacri…ce: "Those
who are fully persuaded by Nozick will thus completely rede…ne the problem of optimal taxation. Others will
reject Nozick completely...Many will be persuaded that the entitlement principle limits the desirable degree
of redistribution."
    Mill himself provides a telling example of exactly this form of mixed normative reasoning, writing ap-
provingly of both Equal Sacri…ce and minimal total sacri…ce (which is similar to the Utilitarian criterion):

          As a government ought to make no distinction of persons or classes in the strength of their
      claims on it, whatever sacri…ces it requires from them should be made to bear as nearly as possible
      with the same pressure upon all, which, it must be observed, is the mode by which least sacri…ce
      is occasioned on the whole.
   3 7 This latter quote is from Rawls (2001). Political philosophers and legal scholars have developed this critique in depth. As

an example of the former, see Mazor (2012) and Richard Arneson (2000), who writes: "It is better to regard Rawls as making
the point that ...it is a ‡aw that utilitarianism would have the decision about what should be done vary only with the utility
total that di¤erent acts could achieve."
   3 8 Stark (2005) o¤ers a detailed argument that the concerns of Rawls and Nozick are closely connected. A related perspective

is captured in Immanuel Kant’s (1785) dictum "to treat himself and all others never merely as means but always at the same
time as ends in themselves."
   3 9 Cappelen et al. (2011) conduct experiments in which participants’ choices imply a preference among competing "fairness

ideals," and in their preferred speci…cation 18.7 percent of participants are classi…ed as "libertarians." Konow (2003) reports
results consistent with these magnitudes.
   4 0 Though the connection to problems of taxation is imperfect, Frohlich, Oppenheimer, and Kurki (2004) show that "just

deserts" or "entitlements" exert an in‡uence on allocations for most dictators in allocation games with production.




                                                               20
Mill is incorrect, as many others have noted, in the assertion that Equal Sacri…ce implies minimized total
sacri…ce. But this mistake reveals that, for Mill, both equal and minimized total sacri…ce were principles he
believed appealing and likely to be accepted by his readers. This paper is built on the idea that Mill’s split
normative intuition is more the rule than the exception.41


2.3     A two-criterion case: Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce
In this section, I apply the general approach from above to the case of the two main criteria used in the
survey of Section 1.

2.3.1      -optimal feasible allocations

The …rst step in this application is to de…ne the preference relations that determine the -optimal feasible
allocations. The preference relation for Utilitarianism is familiar from the conventional optimal tax literature:
allocations are preferred that generate a greater sum of individual utilities. Formally, U til is de…ned by:

                                                                         I
                                                                         X                             I
                                                                                                       X
                                  I                            I
                      ci1 ; y1i   i=1   U til      ci2 ; y2i   i=1
                                                                     ,          pi U ci1 ; y1i =wi           pi U ci2 ; y2i =wi :   (5)
                                                                          i=1                          i=1


The Utilitarian-optimal feasible allocation is therefore:

                                                               I
                                                               X                                     I
                                                                                                     X
                                             I
                          ciU til ; yU
                                     i
                                       til   i=1
                                                   2F:               pi U ciU til ; yU
                                                                                     i
                                                                                       til =w
                                                                                              i
                                                                                                           pi U ci ; y i =wi ;
                                                               i=1                                   i=1

                            I
for all possible ci ; y i i=1 2 F:
    The preference relation for the principle of Equal Sacri…ce requires more discussion. The key question is
from what starting point is each individual’s sacri…ce to be calculated? Though one could defend a number of
choices for that starting point, one natural option is the allocation that would obtain absent any government
intervention, i.e., the no-tax allocation. In particular, the allocation with no taxation is the preferred
allocation of the Libertarian framework with which the principle of equal sacri…ce has been linked. As Liam
Murphy and Thomas Nagel (2002) have argued: "The implication for tax policy of rights-based libertarianism
in its pure or absolute form is that no compulsory taxation is legitimate..." For clarity, I will refer to the
allocation with no taxation as the laissez-faire allocation and formally de…ne it as follows.
                                             n        oI
De…nition 2 The laissez-faire allocation, cilf ; ylf
                                                   i
                                                            2 F, where G = 0, satis…es the following conditions
                                                        i=1
(where Ux (c; y=w) denotes the partial derivative of individual utility with respect to x) :

   1. Ucilf cilf ; ylf
                    i
                       =wi = Uylf
                               i  cilf ; ylf
                                          i
                                             =wi =wi

   2. cilf = ylf
              i
                 :

    These conditions are simply that each individual maximizes utility and there are no interpersonal trans-
fers. In the statement of the de…nition, I clarify that G = 0, as this is the allocation with no government.
    A well-known conceptual issue with the idea of the laissez-faire allocation is that any economy is, in
reality, inseparable from the government and state institutions that taxes fund. The laissez-faire allocation
   4 1 Mill also wrote: "An income not exceeding 50l. should not be taxed at all, either directly or by taxes on necessaries," again

illustrating how his a¢ nity for Equal Sacri…ce was tempered by Utilitarian (or even Rawlsian) intuitions as well. I thank a
referee for bringing this example to my attention.


                                                                                21
is, therefore, not well-de…ned, because G = 0 implies a very di¤erent economy than that the status quo.
Without a well-de…ned starting point, calculating "sacri…ce" is impossible. In formal terms, if G > 0 is
required for the status quo economy to function, the laissez-faire allocation is not in the feasible set F.
    Fortunately, though I am not aware of this being recognized before, the Equal Sacri…ce principle provides
a natural way to convert the infeasible hypothetical laissez-faire allocation into a feasible one. Consider the
following thought experiment. Suppose that the public goods necessary to support the current economy are
sustained without any cost to the economy, so that G = 0 but the status quo economic system is feasible.
According to Equal Sacri…ce, the (no tax) laissez-faire outcome in this scenario is surely optimal, as it satis…es
Equal Sacri…ce with the smallest possible uniform sacri…ce–that is, zero–for all individuals. Now, suppose
that sustaining those public goods is costly, so that G > 0. The Equal Sacri…ce principle implies that the
cost of the public goods will be distributed across individuals such that the utility loss is identical (and as
small as possible) for all.
    Formally, de…ne ES as the set of all feasible allocations that satisfy the principle of Equal Sacri…ce relative
to the laissez-faire allocation:
        n               I
                                                                                                                                                            o
ES =         ci ; y i   i=1
                              2 F : U cilf ; ylf
                                              i
                                                 =wi                 U ci ; y i =wi = U cjlf ; ylf
                                                                                                j
                                                                                                   =wj                U cj ; y j =wj
                                                                                                                               for all i; j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig :
                                                                                                                                                 (6)
   The Equal Sacri…ce preference relation, denoted                                        ES ; indicates that one allocation in ES is preferred to
another if it generates a smaller uniform sacri…ce:

                    I                             I
        ci1 ; y1i   i=1       ES     ci2 ; y2i    i=1
                                                        , U cilf ; ylf
                                                                    i
                                                                       =wi               U ci1 ; y1i =wi     U cilf ; ylf
                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                          =wi      U ci2 ; y2i =wi ;   (7)

                    I                    I
for ci1 ; y1i i=1 ; ci2 ; y2i i=1 2 ES and for any i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig :
   Consequently, the Equal Sacri…ce-optimal feasible allocation is that which achieves the smallest equal
                                                                   I
sacri…ce while funding G. Formally, we de…ne ciES ; yES      i
                                                                   i=1
                                                                        as follows:

                                   I
                ciES ; yES
                        i
                                   i=1
                                          2 ES : U cilf ; ylf
                                                           i
                                                              =wi              U ciES ; yES
                                                                                         i
                                                                                            =wi            U cilf ; ylf
                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                        =wi      U ci ; y i =wi ;

                                                                                   I
for any i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and for all possible ci ; y i i=1 2 ES:
    Once we have speci…ed the -optimal feasible allocations, the next step is to specify the loss functions
for the planner.

2.3.2       Loss functions

The Utilitarian loss function LU til is:

                                                                                   I
                                                                                   X
                          LU til         ciU til ; yU
                                                    i
                                                      til   i
                                                              ; ci ; y i   i
                                                                               =         pi U ciU til ; yU
                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                           til =w
                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                        U ci ; y i =wi   :             (8)
                                                                                   i=1


In words, it is the sum of individuals’utility losses from having the equilibrium allocation ci ; y i i deviate
from the Utilitarian-optimal feasible allocation. This loss function has the appealing property that it di-
rectly adopts the cardinal welfare comparisons underlying the Utilitarian preference relation and, thus, the
conventional optimal tax model.42 Note that it converts the familiar goal of aggregate utility maximization
  4 2 An alternative approach would be to use a common loss function for all criteria. While this has the seeming advantage of

consistency, it in fact would lead to pathologies. For example, if full weight were put on the Utilitarian criterion, but the loss
function used was not the same as expression (8), the model would yield a di¤erent ranking of policies than the conventional


                                                                                         22
into aggregate sacri…ce minimization.
    Unlike Utilitarianism, the Equal Sacri…ce criterion does not rank allocations that deviate from its pre-
ferred allocation. As far as I am aware, no previous work has studied how to obtain a complete ranking of
allocations based on Equal Sacri…ce. While my approach is, therefore, by necessity somewhat speculative, I
design the Equal Sacri…ce loss function to re‡ect the priorities of that principle. In words, these priorities
are simple: deviations from equal sacri…ce are costly, even if they reduce the aggregate level of sacri…ce, and
outcomes with less sacri…ce for some and no more for all are preferred (i.e., Pareto e¢ ciency). Of course,
future research may discover alternative speci…cations that prove more useful. The goal of this paper is to
propose one reasonable way, not the de…nitive way, to capture the priorities of the Equal Sacri…ce principle.
    I will assume an Equal Sacri…ce loss function LES with three features: …rst, deviations of individual util-
ity below the Equal Sacri…ce-optimal feasible allocation are costly but deviations above the Equal Sacri…ce-
optimal feasible allocation yield little or no o¤setting bene…ts;43 second, losses increase more than proportion-
ally with the size of the deviation of individual utility below the Equal Sacri…ce-optimal feasible allocation;
third, gains are concave in the size of the deviation of individual utility above the Equal Sacri…ce-optimal
feasible allocation.
    I formalize these properties as follows:

                                                                  I
                                                                  X
                    LES     ciES ; yES
                                    i
                                          i
                                            ; ci ; y i   i
                                                             =          pi V U ciES ; yES
                                                                                       i
                                                                                          =wi ; U ci ; y i =wi   ;           (9)
                                                                  i=1


where                                                    (
                                       i
                                                                         i
                                                                    U i UES     if UESi
                                                                                        < Ui
                                 V    UES ; Ui     =                 i
                                                                                             ,
                                                                   UES  Ui          i
                                                                               if UES    Ui                                 (10)
                                     for scalars f           0;    > , 2 (0; 1], > 1g :

Consistent with the …rst property, the loss function in expressions (9) and (10) applies weights and ,
where 0        < , to deviations of individual utility above and below the Equal Sacri…ce-optimal feasible
allocation.
    The kink at the Equal Sacri…ce-optimal feasible allocation implied by < , and thus the asymmetric
punishment of downward deviations from that allocation, rejects the Utilitarian idea that the distribution of
utility across individuals is irrelevant. Though nondi¤erentiability is technically inconvenient, it is concep-
tually important to capturing the Equal Sacri…ce criterion’s priorities. The reason is that the alternative–a
smooth loss function at the Equal Sacri…ce-optimal feasible allocation–implies local indi¤erence to symmetric
deviations from that allocation. That indi¤erence is in direct con‡ict with the principle’s priority on equal
sacri…ce.
    The assumption that          0 respects Weak Pareto E¢ ciency as discussed above ( > 0 would respect
Strong Pareto E¢ ciency).44 Consistent with the second and third properties, the parameters > 1 and
  2 (0; 1] imply losses that increase more than proportionally with deviations below and gains that increase
(weakly) less than proportionally for deviations above the Equal Sacri…ce-optimal feasible allocation. As
noted above, I do not mean to claim that this functional form or these assumptions on its parameter values
Utilitarian model.
  4 3 This property is consistent with the classic "loss aversion" of Kahneman and Tversky (1979). However, equal sacri…ce is

not consistent with the diminishing sensitivity to losses that is part of classic prospect theory.
  4 4 Note the following asymmetry. The       -optimal feasible allocations need not be Pareto e¢ cient, in that one could (in
principle) include a criterion expressly designed to be Pareto-ine¢ cient. I assume, however, that the planner will choose Pareto
improvements from any such allocation if they are available. To avoid this asymmetry, one could relax the Weak Pareto
E¢ ciency constraint on loss functions.


                                                                        23
are the only possible choices, but rather to construct a plausible representation of the Equal Sacri…ce principle
for analysis.

2.3.3   Planner’s problem
                                                                                                                     I
With the loss functions de…ned by expressions (8), (9) and (10), the planner in this case chooses ci ; y i           i=1
to solve the following problem.

Problem 2 Social Planner’s Problem (speci…c case)
                                      8                                                                      9
                                      >             P
                                                    I
                                                                                                             >
                                      >                   pi U ciU til ; yU
                                                                          i        i
                                                                                            U ci ; y i =wi   >
                                      <     U til                           til =w                           =
                        min                         i=1
                                                                                                                 ;   (11)
                 fci ;y i gIi=1 2fF\ICg >
                                        >                 P
                                                          I                                                  >
                                                                                                             >
                                      :     +       ES          pi V U ciES ; yES
                                                                               i
                                                                                  =wi ; U ci ; y i =wi       ;
                                                          i=1


where
                                                           U til   +       ES   = 1;

V ( ) is de…ned in (10), F is de…ned in (2), and IC is de…ned in (3) :

   This planner’s problem is equivalent to the conventional approach if ES = 0:
   To illustrate the e¤ect of positive ES on optimal policy, I simulate a simple model with two types of
workers and show how this form of normative diversity a¤ects the well-being of individuals in the economy.

2.3.4   Example with two types

Individual income-earning ability is either w1 = 10 or w2 = 50, each of which makes up half the population,
so p1 = p2 = 0:5: The individual utility function is
                                                                       1
                                                                ci               1     1   yi
                                      U ci ; y i =wi =                                          ;
                                                                     1                     wi

where = 1:5; = 3. The Equal Sacri…ce loss function’s parameters are = 0:5; = 20; = 2:0; = 1:0,
and the social loss function’s weight on the Equal Sacri…ce loss function is ES = 0:20. Government spending
G is set to zero.
    This simple example is most useful for showing the e¤ect of such a mixed objective on the allocation
of utility across individuals. Figure 4 plots the utility of the high-ability individual against that of the
low-ability individual. The bold solid line shows the utility possibilities frontier (UPF): that is, the highest
incentive-compatible, feasible utility for the low-ability individual given a utility level for the high-ability
individual. The thin solid and dotted lines are the indi¤erence curves passing through the -optimal feasible
(but not necessarily incentive compatible) allocations for the Utilitarian and Equal Sacri…ce criteria. The
dashed line is the indi¤erence curve for the planner that chooses (by tangency with the UPF) the optimal
allocation for the economy. Also shown are the optimal feasible and incentive-compatible allocations chosen
by each criterion.




                                                                       24
                                                  1.58



                                                  1.56       ES o ptimum



                                                  1.54              Plan ner optimum



                          Utility for high type   1.52



                                                   1.5



                                                  1.48
                                                                                           U tilitarian op timu m



                                                  1.46



                                                  1.44


                                                                   U tility Po s s ibilities Fr on tie r
                                                  1.42                                                                             U tilitarian optimum ( not inc entiv e c ompa tible)
                                                                   U tilitarian indifferenc e c ur v e
                                                                   Plan ner indiffe renc e c ur v e
                                                                   Eq ual Sac rific e indiffe renc e c ur v e
                                                   1.4
                                                         1        1.1          1.2          1.3           1.4              1.5         1.6        1.7         1.8          1.9            2
                                                                                                                U tility for low ty pe




                      Figure 4: The Utility Possibilities Frontier and Indi¤erence Curves in
                                             the Two-Type Example


     Figure 4 shows how the Equal Sacri…ce loss function, LES ; di¤ers from the Utilitarian, LU til . To remain
indi¤erent while moving away from its optimal allocation, LES requires a greater gain for the low-ability
individual in exchange for a given loss for the high-ability individual. Moreover, LES increases more than
proportionally with these deviations, while LU til is linear. The impact of incorporating this loss function in
the planner’s decisions is as expected: the planner compromises between the competing normative criteria,
implementing some redistribution but stopping well short of what a Utilitarian would choose. By varying
  U til , we can shift the planner’s chosen allocation along the UPF.



2.4     Generating the survey’s policy options from the model
The set of policy options presented to respondents in the survey of Section 1 were generated using this
section’s generalized optimal tax model. Here, I describe the calibration of the model to data on the U.S.
income distribution and the parameterizations of the model that generate those policies.
    For each policy objective I simulate a constrained planner’s problem as in expression (11), calibrated
to data on the U.S. income distribution from 2006 as calculated by the Congressional Budget O¢ ce. In
particular, I take the gross labor income distribution as calculated (by the CBO) into eight bins: the bot-
tom four quintiles and the next 10, 5, 4, and 1 percentiles. The CBO also provides taxes paid for these
households,45 so I use the utility function speci…ed below to back out the earnings ability implied by the
households’pre-tax earnings and tax payments. Then, I calculate the earnings each household would choose
if there were no taxation, again using the individual utility function de…ned below. This calculation yields
the distribution presented to respondents as the baseline "no tax" income distribution. The distribution of
  4 5 The CBO provides income taxes, which are due to both labor and capital income tax payments. For simplicity, I multiply

total personal income taxes paid by the labor share of income for each type of household to generate labor income taxes.
Variations on this approach yield very similar results in terms of the distribution of abilities.


                                                                                                                    25
ability for the model, where wi denotes the ability and pi the population proportion of type i, is as follows.

                                                     Ability distribution
                          i
                        w     3:01    12:65    23:21       37:42       53:05       68:43          95:66   258:64
                        pi    0:20    0:20      0:20       0:20        0:10        0:05           0:04     0:01

   All model parameters other than ES and U til retain the same values across simulations. These para-
meters, and the underlying formal structure of the problem, are never disclosed to respondents. I assume
the following parameter values.

                                                      Parameter values
                                                                       1
                                                                           1       '        G
                                        2:0    1:0     0    10        0:10     2            8:26

The utility function for all households is

                                                                               '       yi
                                          U ci ; y i =wi = ln ci                              :                          (12)
                                                                                       wi

The values of ; ; ;and determine the shape of the Equal Sacri…ce loss function. The parameter controls
the elasticity of labor supply, while ' is a taste shifter used only to normalize labor e¤ort. The value of G is
chosen so that government expenditure as a share of equilibrium total output roughly matches that in the
United States. Several of these parameter values deserve additional comment.
    First, assuming = 0 implies that deviations of individual utility above the Equal Sacri…ce-optimal
feasible allocation generate no gains according to the Equal Sacri…ce criterion. This is the strictest version
of the Equal Sacri…ce loss function, in that it rejects redistribution even if it generates enormous gains for
some as long as it generates any losses for others. To the extent that respondents are, in reality, sympathetic
to a more moderate version of Equal Sacri…ce, this assumption biases the survey toward support for more
Utilitarian policies.
    Second, the implied Frisch labor supply elasticity 1 1 is low in these parameterizations, at 0.10. That
is below most mainstream estimates, though not for prime-aged heads of households. Lower labor supply
elasticities will reduce the e¢ ciency costs of redistributive policies, increasing their appeal. Therefore, our
survey results are likely to be biased toward Utilitarianism due to this choice.
    Third, assuming logarithmic utility of consumption has two implications. If it underestimates the con-
cavity of that subutility function, the simulations generate policies with less income redistribution than what
a more realistic calibration would produce. As with the other assumptions above, this bias would tend to
increase the reported support for Utilitarianism in the survey, as the survey results show that most people
prefer less redistributive policies than the purely Utilitarian one. Log utility of consumption also means
that average tax rates are ‡at under the Equal Sacri…ce criterion, and a ‡at tax may have some appeal to
respondents due to its simplicity. Working against this, if we were to use a more concave form of utility,
Equal Sacri…ce would yield progressive average taxes, making it appear closer to the most-preferred policies
in the survey.46
    Related to the choices of both 1 1 and the concavity of the utility of consumption (which I will later
  4 6 As noted by Berliant and Gouveia (1993), among others, Equal Sacri…ce endorses progressivity if, in the notation of this

paper, utility is separable across consumption and leisure and > 1. Mill’s writings suggest he thought logarithmic utility a
natural speci…cation.


                                                                 26
parameterize with the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion ) is the question of whether the Utilitarian and
Equal Sacri…ce criteria become quantitatively indistinguishable as redistribution becomes more costly ( 1 1
increases) and less rewarding ( decreases). It turns out that the answer is "no." The clearest example
is that Utilitarianism endorses negative average tax rates at low incomes, while Equal Sacri…ce does not
because, by de…nition, Equal Sacri…ce requires all individuals to bear some sacri…ce. More generally, the two
policies remain quite distinct even for unconventionally high values of 1 1 and low values of , as shown
below for Utilitarian and Equal Sacri…ce optimal average tax rates (ATR) under a range of values for these
parameters:

 Average tax rates by criterion and set of parameter values
                          Utilitarian                                          Equal Sacri…ce
                   1                                                            1
 Top type              1 = 0:10     0:25    0:50    1:00      Top type            1 = 0:10 0:25      0:50   1:00
   = 0:25               0:73        0:55    0:37    0:22        = 0:25             0:59    0:46      0:34   0:23
 0:50                   0:74        0:60    0:46    0:32      0:50                 0:36    0:31      0:24   0:19
 1:00                   0:78        0:70    0:62    0:54      1:00                 0:13    0:12      0:12   0:10

                   1                                                            1
 Bottom type           1   = 0:10   0:25    0:50    1:00      Bottom type           1= 0:10   0:25   0:50   1:00
   = 0:25                  4:68      2:35    0:86    0:06       = 0:25              0:03      0:03   0:04   0:04
 0:50                      5:27      3:16    1:56    0:41     0:50                  0:05      0:05   0:05   0:05
 1:00                      6:57      5:48    4:39    2:93     1:00                  0:12      0:12   0:12   0:11

   Finally, the values of ; , and are necessarily chosen without any direct empirical guidance. I do not
mean to suggest, therefore, that these are necessarily the correct values, or that the results of this paper are
robust to their choice. They are chosen to represent a plausible speci…cation of the Equal Sacri…ce criterion,
and the (indirect) test of their appropriateness is that they contribute to the explanatory power of this
paper’s model for real-world policy.


3    Descriptive power of the positive optimal tax model
In this section I show that the optimal tax model, as proposed and empirically estimated in this paper,
is able to explain aspects of existing policy that are di¢ cult to reconcile in conventional theory but widely
endorsed in reality. I focus especially on the puzzle of limited tagging–the taxation of personal characteristics
in addition to income introduced to the literature in Akerlof (1978). I prove analytically that the model with
an objective for taxation that puts some weight on Equal Sacri…ce will do less tagging than the conventional
model. I then use numerical simulations to show that a combination of Utilitarian and Equal Sacri…ce
principles, consistent with the survey evidence from Section 1, can quantitatively match the simultaneous
rejection of most forms of tagging and the acceptance of substantial income redistribution in U.S. policy. I
go on to show that optimal policy according to the same calibration can help resolve two additional puzzling
gaps between conventional theory and actual policy.
    The importance of the tagging application to this paper is that it suggests Equal Sacri…ce has explanatory
power beyond simply being a "less redistributive" criterion than Utilitarianism. I show that, while the
optimal extent of both tagging and redistribution decrease when Equal Sacri…ce is given more weight, tagging
is disproportionately discouraged. Intuitively, Equal Sacri…ce rejects tagging because it causing di¤erential



                                                       27
sacri…ce across people of the same underlying ability, not because it causes too much sacri…ce by those with
high ability. In an optimal policy that gives weight to both Equal Sacri…ce and Utilitarianism, only those
tags that provide su¢ ciently strong information about ability, and therefore Utilitarian welfare gains, will
be optimal.


3.1     Why do we redistribute so much but tag so little?
Tagging has an illustrious theoretical pedigree. James Mirrlees (1971) noted the potential of tagging in only
the …fth sentence of his Nobel Prize-winning analysis of optimal taxation. George Akerlof (1978), also a
recipient of the Nobel Prize, worked out the basic theory of tagging in a seminal paper just seven years later.
Forty years into the modern optimal tax literature, recent analyses have shown the substantial potential
gains from tagging according to three speci…c personal characteristics: height, gender, and race (see Mankiw
and Weinzierl 2010; Alesina, Ichino, and Karabarbounis 2011 and Cremer, Gahvari, and Lozachmeur 2010;
and Blumkin, Margalioth, and Sadka 2009). Though the most general version of the standard optimal tax
model does not necessarily imply tagging, the speci…cations of that model that dominate research strongly
recommend it.47
    In the modern theory of optimal taxation, tagging is a free lunch, and a wide variety of candidate tags
exist. Any observable and largely inelastic characteristic across which the distribution of abilities di¤ers
ought to a¤ect tax schedules. For example, groups with higher mean ability ought to be taxed to support
other groups, while groups with a higher variance of ability ought to face a more progressive within-group
tax policy. As Mirrlees writes: "One might obtain information about a man’s income-earning potential from
his apparent I.Q., the number of his degrees, his address, age or colour..."48 There are many other potential
tags–height, gender, facial symmetry, place in birth order, native language, parental traits, macroeconomic
conditions at age 18, and so on–all of which relate systematically to income-earning ability and are largely
exogenous to the individual. Genetic information may someday provide particularly powerful tags.49
    In comparison, the role for tagging in modern tax policy is highly constrained. Some sizeable tagging
does occur, but only for tags that are virtually guaranteed to indicate that a taxpayer has low income-earning
ability. For example, disability bene…ts are common among developed countries, as are programs aimed at
alleviating poverty among the elderly. Indeed, nearly two-thirds of U.S. federal entitlement spending goes
to programs generally limited to the elderly and disabled (Viard, 2001). These groups are the prototypical
examples of those with systematically low income-earning ability.50 The other large example of tagging
   4 7 I am grateful to a referee for suggesting this clari…cation. A fully general model in which the social welfare function simply

uses Pareto weights to value individual utility may not endorse tagging, depending on the values assumed for those Pareto
weights. For example, if "needs" vary with a tag that is positive correlated with ability, optimal policy may avoid using the
tag. Or, if Pareto weights put high value on those with high income-earning ability, optimal policy may not wish to redistribute
toward low-ability individuals, making tags less valuable. Such interpretations of the model are relatively rare, however, and
the claim that tagging is optimal under a Utilitarian criterion is largely uncontroversial. To cite just one example, Piketty
and Saez (2012) write in their new chapter for the Handbook of Public Economics that "We have assumed that T(z) depends
only on earnings z. In reality, the government can observe many other characteristics (denoted by vector X) also correlated
with ability (and hence social welfare weights) such as gender, race, age, disability, family structure, height, etc. Hence, the
government could set T(z,X) and use the characteristic X as a “tag” in the tax system. There are two noteworthy theoretical
results. First, if characteristic X is immutable then there should be full redistribution across groups with di¤erent X..."
   4 8 Despite this quotation, age should not be considered a tag. Unlike these other characteristics, age is shared by all individuals

(abstracting from mortality variation), so that age-dependent taxes do not achieve support for a disadvantaged group by taxing
another. In particular, age-dependent taxes do not violate equal sacri…ce once the full lifecycle of each taxpayer is considered.
See Weinzierl (2011) for a study of this and other aspects of age-dependent taxes.
   4 9 Note that privacy concerns may be relevant for some potential tags, such as genetic information. A concern for privacy is

one example of a value that could be incorporated into the optimal tax model using the approach of this paper, provided that
it can be translated convincingly into a preference over …nal allocations.
   5 0 The economic prospects for people over the age of 65 have improved in the decades since the programs designed to support




                                                                  28
is payments to families with young children, where the per capita ability to earn income is mechanically
low when compared to childless households. Other, isolated programs such as bene…ts for the blind follow
a similar pattern, so that existing tagging bears little resemblance to the broad and nuanced application
recommended by modern optimal tax theory.
    The generalized model proposed in this paper can resolve this puzzle. The Equal Sacri…ce principle says
that all taxpayers should bear the same sacri…ce (in terms of reduced well-being) from paying taxes. Tagging
violates Equal Sacri…ce because it causes, for example, a tall person to pay more tax–and therefore bear
a greater sacri…ce–than a short person who has the same ability to earn income. A revised optimal tax
theory that values Equal Sacri…ce, as do the preferred policies in the survey of Section 1, will determine
whether to use a given tag by weighing the costs of such violations against the gains it generates according
to Utilitarianism. Only tags providing su¢ ciently strong information about ability, and therefore Utilitarian
welfare gains, will be optimal according to this mixed objective.

3.1.1     Analytical results on optimal tagging

To analyze optimal tagging, I modify the social planner’s problem so that individuals di¤er in two character-
istics: unobservable ability w indexed by i, and an observable, tagged variable indexed by m = f1; 2; :::; M g.
                                                I;M
Therefore, allocations are denoted ci;m ; y i;m i=1;m=1 and the population proportion of the individual with
                                                                 PI PM
ability i and tagged variable value m is denoted pi;m where             pi;m = 1. The modi…ed planner’s
                                                                                                  i=1 m=1
problem is as follows.

Problem 3 Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging
                                   8                                      h                                                                     i   9
                                   >                 P
                                                     I P
                                                       M
                                                                                                                                                    >
                                   >                          p   i;m
                                                                              U    ci;m      i;m      i               i;m        i;m        i       >
                                   <         U til                                  U til ; yU til =w               U c     ;y         =w           =
                                                     i=1 m=1
                  min                                                                                                                                   ;   (13)
     fci;m ;yi;m gi=1;m=1 2fF\ICg >
                  I;M
                                  >                      PI PM                                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                                    >
                                  :         +        ES              pi;m V U ci;m   i;m
                                                                               ES ; yES =w
                                                                                           i
                                                                                             ; U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                                   ;
                                                          i=1 m=1


where
                                                                  U til   +       ES   = 1;

V ( ) is a modi…ed version of (10),
                                                          8          h                         i
                                                          <               U i;m         i;m
                                                                                       UES                     i;m
                                                                                                           if UESe < U i;m
                                 i;m
                            V   UES  ; U i;m         =        h                                   i                               ;
                                                          :            i;m
                                                                      UES              U i;m                   i;m
                                                                                                           if UES     U i;m                                 (14)
                            for scalars f             0;      > ,             2 (0; 1],        > 1g :

the feasibility set is a natural modi…cation of expression (2) ;
                                  (                                       I X
                                                                            M
                                                                                                                            )
                                                         I;M              X
                                           i;m
                             F=        c         ; y i;m i=1;m=1      :                 p   i;m
                                                                                                      y   i;m   i;m
                                                                                                                c         G ;                               (15)
                                                                          i=1 m=1

the elderly were created. The current debate over raising the retirement age in these programs may re‡ect, in part, skepticism
that age 65 is still a reliable indicator of lower income-earning ability. Also, see the earlier note in this section on age not being
a proper tag.




                                                                              29
and the set of incentive compatible allocations IC is:
       n                  I;M
                                                                                                                                              o
IC =       ci;m ; y i;m   i=1;1
                                  : U ci;m ; y i;m =wi        U cj;m ; y j;m =wi         for all i; j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m 2 f1; 2; :::; M g :
                                                                                                                                       (16)

   In this problem the incentive constraints (16) are m-speci…c. That is, the planner can restrict each
individual to the allocations within his or her tagged group, whereas if tagging were excluded the planner
would be required to ensure that each individual preferred his or her allocation to that of any individual in
any tagged group.
   The following proposition is implied by the …rst-order conditions of this planner’s problem, assuming
separable utility between consumption and labor e¤ort. The proof can be found in the Appendix.

Proposition 1 If Uc;y=w (c; y=w) = 0, the solution to the Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging satis…es:

                                                         1                                    i;m
                                                                                         @V (UES  ;U i;m )
                                       Ei    Uci;m                Ei    U til       ES        @U i;m
                                                         1
                                                              =                               i;n
                                                                                                             ;                        (17)
                                                                                         @V (UESe ;U i;n )
                                       Ei     Uci;n               Ei    U til       ES        @U i;n



where U i;m denotes U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                and Uci;m denotes @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi =@ci;m :

    The left-hand side of (17) is the ratio of the expected inverse marginal utilities of consumption across
tagged types.51 This equals the ratio of the cost in consumption units of an incentive-compatible marginal
increase in utility across all individuals with tagged value m versus n. The following corollary makes plain
why this ratio is of interest.

Corollary 1 If            ES   = 0, equation (17) simpli…es to:

                                                                                1
                                                             Ei    Uci;m
                                                                                1
                                                                                    = 1:                                              (18)
                                                             Ei    Uci;n


    This result, also shown in Weinzierl (2011) for age-dependent taxes and labeled the Symmetric Inverse
Euler equation in that context, shows that the Utilitarian planner with access to tagging will equalize the
cost of providing utility to tagged groups.52 Intuitively, the planner has full information about the tag, so
any opportunity to raise overall welfare by transfers across tag values will be exploited.
    Next, I derive a condition analogous to (18) for positive ES . I make two mild assumptions to provide a
clean benchmark case.53 Importantly, both of these assumptions hold in the numerical simulations below.
    Assumption 1: At least one pair of tagged groups (m; n) 2 f1; 2; :::; M g can be ordered such that m < n
implies that the solution to the Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging when ES < 1 satis…es

                                                U i;m        U i;n for all i = f1; 2; :::; Ig ;                                       (19)
  5 1 Note that the terms in brackets on the right-hand side of expression (17) are related to marginal social welfare weights, as

in Saez and Stantcheva (2014). In the conventional model, these terms are equal to one. Here, they di¤er from one because of
the planner’s aversion to unequal sacri…ce. I am grateful to Bernard Salanie for suggesting this note.
  5 2 A referee brought to my attention that this condition also appears in Parsons (1982).
  5 3 These assumptions are su¢ cient, but not necessary, for the result in Corollary 2.




                                                                       30
and
                                     U j;m > U j;n for at least one j = f1; 2; :::; Ig :                                    (20)

   In words, Assumption 1 holds that tagged groups can be "ranked", for instance by some function of the
mean and variance of wages within each group, so that individuals in at least one higher-ranked group fare
no better, and in some cases worse, than individuals of the same abilities in a lower-ranked group when
the planner is at least in part Utilitarian. That is, individuals of any given ability obtain allocations that
generate greater losses or smaller gains when they are members of a higher-ranked group.
   Assumption 1 is closely related to a well-known result from previous optimal tax analyses that an "advan-
taged" tagged group is taxed heavily by a conventional Utilitarian-optimal tax policy. Mankiw and Weinzierl
(2009) show this numerically for the optimal height tax in the United States, under which a tall taxpayer
ends up with lower utility than a short taxpayer of the same ability. Intuitively, the planner treats those with
the advantaged tag as higher-skilled workers on average, requiring them to produce more income than others.
Mirrlees (1971, 1974) showed much the same result for higher ability individuals in the full information case
(which is the relevant analogue) of his optimal tax problem, a result discussed in a di¤erent context (rank
reversals) below.
   Assumption 2: In the solution to the Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging when ES < 1,

                              i;m
                             UES  6= U i;m for all i = f1; 2; :::; Ig and m 2 f1; 2; :::; M g :                             (21)

    Assumption 2 is a technical assumption that rules out the scenario in which the utility allocated to
any individual under the optimal policy exactly equals the utility that individual obtains under the Equal
Sacri…ce-optimal feasible allocation.54 This assumption is unlikely to bind because the optimal allocations
with ES < 1 re‡ect not only the Equal Sacri…ce priorities but also the Utilitarian ones, and because
incentive compatibility is imposed on the optimal allocations but not on the Equal Sacri…ce-optimal feasible
allocations. Again, note that Assumption 2 is satis…ed in all cases in the numerical simulations below.
    With these assumptions, the following corollary to Proposition 1 can be derived and compared with
Corollary 1 above. The proof is in the Appendix.

Corollary 2 If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, then the solution to Social Planner’s Problem with Tagging
satis…es, for some pair of tagged groups (m; n) 2 f1; 2; :::; M g such that m < n;

                                                                    1
                                                    Ei    Uci;m
                                                                    1
                                                                        < 1:                                                (22)
                                                    Ei    Uci;n

    Corollary 2 states that the planner who puts positive weight on Equal Sacri…ce allocates consumption
in a way that leaves the cost of raising utility for the disadvantaged group (i.e., m in this example) lower
than that for the advantaged group. As shown in result (18), a purely Utilitarian planner would transfer
additional resources to the disadvantaged group, but the planner with this more diverse objective stops short,
redistributing less. The numerical simulations below reinforce this lesson.55
  5 4 In particular, the scenario it rules out, where these utility levels coincide, generates complications due to the nondi¤er-

entiability of the Equal Sacri…ce loss function at the point. An alternative assumption to Assumption 2 that yields the same
technical simpli…cation is that = 0.
  5 5 Corollaries 1 and 2 hold in the simulations below.




                                                               31
   Intuitively, taxing the advantaged tagged group to aid the disadvantaged group generates costs in unequal
sacri…ce to this planner. A Utilitarian planner ignores the distribution of sacri…ce, caring only about total
sacri…ce (which tagging helps to minimize). This disparity in the treatment of transfers across tagged groups
causes an optimal policy based in part on Equal Sacri…ce to use tagging less than in conventional theory.

3.1.2    Numerical results on optimal tagging

Next, I use numerical simulations calibrated to micro-level data for the United States to show that the positive
optimal tax model developed and estimated in this paper can quantitatively explain the puzzle of tagging.
First, I consider three prominent potential tags–height, gender, and race–and show that the parameterizations
of the model preferred in the survey of Section 1 yield an optimal policy that rejects the use of these tags
but accepts redistributive income taxes driven by di¤erences in income-earning ability. Second, I show that
the most preferred parameterization yields a policy that endorses a sizeable and empirically reasonable tag
on blindness, one of the few personal characteristics explicitly tagged in the U.S. tax code.56
    I use the following parameter values in the planning problem of expression (13):

                                                       Parameter values
                                                                                                    1
                                        ES                                                              1   G
                      f0:00; 0:03; 0:10; 0:20; 1:00g           2:0    1:0    0:01    10    1:5     0:5      20

A few of these values di¤er from those used to generate the policy options for the survey. While I chose
values for the survey of ; , and to increase the appeal of the conventional Utilitarian policy, here I choose
values to maximize realism. I set > 0 (rather than = 0) to capture a less strict version of Equal Sacri…ce,
in particular one that satis…es the Strong Pareto E¢ ciency property de…ned in Section 2.57 Utility from
consumption is 1 1 (c1       1), where I set > 1 (rather than = 1, log utility) to re‡ect many estimates
of the concavity of the utility from consumption that suggest logarithmic utility is too conservative. I set
  = 3 (rather than = 11) to be closer to mainstream estimates of the labor supply elasticity for a broad
population. I set G to approximate the current value of government expenditure as a share of total income
in the United States.

Rejecting tagging on height,                 gender,     and race but retaining redistribution
  The …rst data I use allows me to simulate optimal height, gender, and race taxes. To obtain ability
distributions by tagged type, I classify respondents to the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth into three
height categories, two gender categories, and two race categories.58 For height, I use gender-dependent
ranges, as the height distributions of males and females are substantially di¤erent: for men the thresholds
are 70 and 72 inches; for women the thresholds are 63 and 66 inches. Table 4 lists the twelve tagged groups
that these divisions generate in descending order of their mean wage, where the wage is reported earnings
divided by reported hours in 1996.59 The table shows the mean and standard deviation of each group’s
reported wages and the population proportion of each group, all adjusted for the NLSY sample weights, as
  5 6 For simplicity, I do not consider di¤erences in preferences or elasticities across these groups, though such di¤erences provide

an alternative justi…cation for tagging.
  5 7 Simulations with the special case of    = 0 show that the results are virtually identical to those reported in the paper.
  5 8 I omit individuals who report negative wages or earnings or who report less than 1,000 or more than 4,000 hours of annual

work. The results are not sensitive to these restrictions, which are likely to remove misreported data.
  5 9 Using all three tags in concert maximizes the power of tagging in the conventional model.




                                                                 32
well as each group’s raw sample size in the NLSY.

                                            Table 4: Tagged groups
                  1        2        3      4        5         6       7         8         9       10       11        12
                Tall     Med.     Short   Tall    Tall      Short    Med.     Med.      Short    Tall     Med.     Short
                  M        M        M      M        F         M       M         F         F       F         F         F
                White    White    White   NW      White      NW      NW       White     White    NW       NW        NW
 Mean wage      17.7     16.9      16.3   15.3    14.3       13.6    13.5     12.8       12.3    11.2     10.7      10.5
  SD wage       11.3     11.0      10.4   12.3    11.6       9.9     10.4     11.6       10.3    5.9       6.2       5.7
 Pop. share     0.11     0.13      0.21   0.02    0.09       0.08    0.02     0.14       0.10    0.01     0.03      0.05
   Obs.          411      507      785    226      340       994     314       557       405     223      469       653



   The di¤erences in wages among these twelve tagged groups are substantial. The highest-earning group in
Table 4 earns a mean wage nearly 70 percent greater than the lowest-earning group. Overall, average wages
are higher for those who are tall, male, and white. Appendix Table 1 provides more detail than Table 4,
reporting the (sample weights-adjusted) distributions of the members of the tagged groups across ten wage
bins. These wage distributions are the second key input to the numerical simulations (in addition to the
assumed parameters described above).
   For each of the …ve values of ES , I report measures of the optimal extent of tagging and income tax
progressivity in Table 5 and Table 6. To measure the extent of tagging, Table 5 reports the "extra" average
tax paid by or transfer made to the members of each tagged group as a share of their income when the
planner can use tagging as compared to when it cannot. This is the ratio of total tax payments to total
income for each group under the optimal policy less the same ratio under the constrained-optimal policy
with no tagging. If that di¤erence is positive, the group is paying taxes in addition to what it would pay
without tagging. If that di¤erence is negative, it is receiving an extra transfer.


                    Table 5: Extent of Tagging (Extra tax or transfer rate, in percent)
         1        2         3       4      5          6       7       8          9        10      11        12
        Tall     Med.     Short    Tall   Tall      Short    Med.    Med.      Short      Tall   Med.      Short
         M        M        M        M      F          M       M       F          F         F      F          F
   ES   White    White    White    NW     White      NW      NW      White     White      NW     NW         NW
  0      10.5      8.1      6.3     1.6    -4.3     -5.5      -3.5    -11.7     -13.4    -17.7    -22.0    -23.4
 0:03    4.5       3.6      3.1     1.5    -1.1     -1.5      -1.6     -5.0      -6.5     -8.4    -11.8    -12.7
 0:10    1.8       1.3      1.3     0.9    -0.4     -0.5      -1.3     -2.0      -2.6     -2.8     -4.9     -5.2
 0:20    0.8       0.5      0.5     0.7    -0.1     -0.1      -1.0     -0.9      -1.2     -0.8     -2.0     -2.7
 1:00    0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0     0.0      0.0       0.0     0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0

   To gauge the progressivity of the optimal income tax, Table 6 reports the average tax rate paid by the




                                                     33
members of each wage range under each parameterization.

                      Table 6: Extent of Progressivity (Average tax rates, in percent)
                                                Average wage rate in range
              ES    2.81   6.50   10.03       13.82 17.80 21.70 27.28        43.25   62.06   95.96
              0     -396    -64     -5         17      27     32      38      50      52      53
             0:03   -346    -51      1         18      25     30      35      47      50      52
             0:10   -300    -39      3         18      23     27      31      43      47      50
             0:20   -258    -29      7         17      22     24      28      40      44      47
             1:00    -5      11     13         14      16     17      19      22      25      29



   Finally, Table 7 shows the welfare gain obtainable from tagging in each case. To compute this welfare
gain, I calculate the increase in consumption for all individuals that would lower the total social loss under
the policy without tagging to the level of total social loss obtained by the optimal policy.

                                    Table 7: Welfare Gain from Tagging
                                         ES    Percent of aggregate consumption
                                   0                          0.96
                                  0:03                        0.45
                                  0:10                        0.20
                                  0:20                        0.10
                                  1:00                        0.00

    The results in these three tables show that the support expressed in the survey of Section 1 for objectives
that include Equal Sacri…ce can explain the coexistence of limited tagging and substantial income redistrib-
ution through progressive taxes observed in policy. Table 5 shows that Equal Sacri…ce dramatically reduces
the appeal of tagging according to height, gender, and race, despite the substantial information that these
three tags carry about income-earning ability. While large group-speci…c taxes and transfers are optimal
when ES = 0 and none are optimal once ES = 1, the values for ES behind the most favored policies
in this paper’s survey (namely, ES = 0:10 and ES = 0:20) generate a steep decline in the use of tags.
At the same time, for these values of ES , Table 6 shows that in all cases the extent of redistribution and
progressivity remains quite high when measured by either the maximal average tax rate or the gap between
the maximal and minimal average tax rates. Table 7 shows that the welfare gains one might achieve through
tagging are estimated to be large in the conventional case of ES = 0 but are small in the cases preferred in
the survey of Section 1.
    As a speci…c example, consider the single most popular policy in the survey of Section 1, in which
  ES = 0:20. The optimal tag-based tax is 0.8 percent of the highest-earning group’s total income in this
parameterization, whereas the conventional model suggests a tax of 10.5 percent. Consistent with this
reduced role for tagging, the welfare gain from tagging in this parameterization is negligible: translated into
the magnitudes of the current U.S. economy, it is equivalent to approximately $15 billion. Assuming some
costs from false tagging and administration (Akerlof 1978), these tags would likely be welfare-reducing, on
net, in this parameterization. In contrast, the conventional model implies a gain worth nearly $150 billion.
Nevertheless, in this parameterization top earners pay an average tax rate of 47 percent, close to the 53


                                                        34
percent recommended by the conventional model, and a substantial transfer is made to the poor. Moreover,
this most-preferred policy recommends a schedule of average tax rates that is quite similar to actual U.S.
policy. To see this resemblence, consider Table 8, which gives the schedule of average tax rates for this
favored parameterization (policy G) and the schedule implied by the same CBO data used to calibrate the
model.60 The close match between these schedules provides further evidence for the power and relevance of
this paper’s calibrated positive optimal tax model.

                   Table 8: Comparing most-preferred policy to actual U.S. average tax rates
                                                    Average tax rate in income percentile range (in percent)
                    Status                      1st quintile 20-39 40-59 60-79 80-89 90-94 95-98 99
  Most-preferred policy ( ES = 0:20)                -260            11      16       17        19        21       23      35
   Actual U.S. tax schedule (CBO)                   -298           -22      10       21        26        28       31      35

    The intuition for these results is as follows. The principle of Equal Sacri…ce is consistent with the
use of progressive taxes to pay for public goods if a given rate of taxation causes a smaller utility loss
for a higher-income individual than a lower-income one.61 But, that principle places little to no value on
redistribution.62 Similarly, while both Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce value the e¢ ciency gains from
tagging, tagging violates Equal Sacri…ce because such personal characteristics have no bearing on individual
utility. Altogether, the introduction of Equal Sacri…ce considerations into the evaluation of outcomes causes
optimal policy to move away from redistribution and, especially, tagging. For the range of parameters
considered here, those e¤ects are enough to make the optimal extent of tagging on height, gender, and race
negligible but leave substantial redistribution and progressivity intact.
    As this intuitive explanation suggests, the key forces determining the optimal extent of tagging in this
model will apply to di¤erent degrees for di¤erent tags. Most important, the costs that tagging generates
from the perspective of the Equal Sacri…ce principle will be smaller when a tag is closely correlated with
ability. If a tag were a perfect indicator of ability, it would generate no costs according to Equal Sacri…ce.
Given that such a tag would continue to generate e¢ ciency gains by being inelastic to taxation, it would
be more valuable to the social planner. In other words, the model suggests that personal characteristics
are more likely to be used as tags when they provide stronger and more reliable signals of income-earning
ability.63 I now turn to demonstrating this e¤ect for blindness.

Tagging blindness To demonstrate the model’s potential not only to reject most tags but to accept those
few tags that predict ability su¢ ciently well, I consider blindness, one of the few characteristics used as a
  6 0 Individual income taxes include taxes on capital income, while the simulations are based on labor income only (to match

the model). To calculate tax liability, I multiply each household type’s labor share of total market income by its total federal
taxes and use the product as the measure of total taxes paid. While variations on this approach a¤ect the estimated rates for
top earners, the bottom four quintile’s average tax rates are robust to using reasonable alternative approaches.
  6 1 As noted by Berliant and Gouveia (1993), among others, Equal Sacri…ce endorses progressivity if, in the notation of this

paper, utility is separable across consumption and leisure and > 1.
  6 2 Note that the average tax rate on the lowest earner when
                                                                    ES = 1:0 is slightly negative in this …gure. If     = 0, the
otherwise same simulation sets that average tax rate to a positive value. To see why, note that = 0 represents the most severe
adherence to Equal Sacri…ce, which rejects redistribution. I use = 0:01 in the baseline simulation to avoid the concern that
  = 0 is a special case, and > 0 causes the purely Equal Sacri…ce policy to admit some, although quite limited, redistribution
despite the inequality of sacri…ce it entails.
  6 3 The conventional, Utilitarian model also recommends more fully utilizing tags that more accurately signal ability, whether

because of …xed costs of tagging or because concavity of individual utility means that tagging errors have some cost. As the
simulation results show, however, a plausible calibration of the conventional model recommends dramatically di¤erent levels of
tagging than that seen in U.S. policy. Explaining these levels as optimal in a conventional model is likely to be di¢ cult.




                                                              35
tag in existing (i.e., U.S.) tax policy.64 Since 1943, the U.S. tax code has included a special deduction or
exemption for individuals with substantially impaired vision. To claim the exemption, individuals simply
check a box on their tax forms.
    The data source used for the previous tagging analysis has too few observations on the blind, so I combine
three years (1985, 1986, and 1987) of the Statistics of Income (SOI) microdata from the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service to obtain an earnings distribution of those who claim the blindness exemption. Lacking any
information on hours worked, I assume all individuals work the same number of hours (2,000 per year) and
calculate hourly wages using individuals’reported wage and salary incomes. I limit the sample to individuals
…ling as singles, to avoid complications with the proper treatment of couples that are abstracted from in
the model above. The distributions of calculated wages, adjusted for sampling weights provided in the SOI,
are shown in Table 9. The share of the population in each category also can be estimated from the SOI
sample, adjusting for sampling weights. Those claiming the blindness exemption make up 0.3 percent of the
population, with 99.7 percent not claiming the exemption.

                                 Table 9: Wage distributions for blind and non-blind
                                                        Average wage rate in range
           Status       0.00    1.73    4.44     7.12   9.60 12.61 15.08 19.17                27.56     44.51     264.19
          Blind         0.79    0.08    0.05     0.06    0.02     0.00      0.01     0.005    0.001     0.000     0.000
         Not blind      0.17    0.31    0.17     0.12    0.09     0.05      0.03     0.030    0.010     0.002     0.001

    As Table 9 makes clear, a large majority of those claiming the blindness exemption earned no wage and
salary income and are therefore assigned a zero wage by this calculation. Of course, these individuals would
be likely to earn positive wages in the labor market, but we cannot observe those wages, and a zero wage
may serve as a rough proxy for a combination of high …xed costs of work and low true wages. Moreover, I
will assign all of those who do not claim the blindness exemption but earn zero income a zero wage as well,
so both groups are treated the same.65
    Table 10 shows the optimal extent of tagging in the conventional calibration with ES = 0 and in the
most-favored calibration in the survey of Section 1, with ES = 0:20. All other parameters are as before
(though G is adjusted to be a similar share of total income).

                                        Table 10: Extent of Tagging on Blindness
                                         (Extra tax or transfer rate, in percent)
                                          ES        Not blind                Blind
                                         0              0.07                  -130
                                        0:20            0.01                   -16

As with height, gender, and race, Table 6 shows that adding this weight on Equal Sacri…ce to the objective
function substantially reduces the optimal extent of tagging on blindness. Unlike those other tags, however,
the optimal extent of tagging on blindness in the Utilitarian benchmark is so great that even the dramatically
reduced extent of optimal tagging is sizeable–namely, a 20 percent transfer to the blind on average. Using
  6 4 To the extent that disability status implies zero earning ability, it by de…nition merits tagging. Future work could usefully

focus on showing whether the model can explain the substantial tagging on dependent children in existing policy. That task
will require making judgments on the proper modeling and normative treatment of households.
  6 5 I excluded those who earn no income from the main analysis of tagging because they are so rare in the NLSY data. However,

simulations including these individuals leave the results on height, gender, and race taxation unchanged.




                                                                36
the data from Table 9, we can calculate mean income for the blind (including those with zero income) to
be approximately $2,350 per year. A 16 percent transfer to the blind on average is therefore equivalent to
approximately $376, not far from the value of actual blindness deductions and exemptions in the mid-1980s.


3.2     Equal sacri…ce, horizontal equity, and redistribution
The popularity of the principle of horizontal equity–that "equals ought to be treated equally"–has long been
used to explain the limited use of tagging.66 Boadway and Pestieau (2006) write: "Of course, such a system
may be resisted because, if the tagging characteristic has no direct utility consequences, a di¤erentiated
tax system violates the principle of horizontal equity". Similar statements are made by, e.g., Atkinson
and Stiglitz (1980), Auerbach and Hassett (1999), and King (1983). Akerlof (1978) himself writes: "the
disadvantages of tagging... are the perverse incentives to people to be identi…ed as needy (to be tagged), the
inequity of such a system, and its cost of administration." Akerlof’s …rst and third disadvantages of tagging
are straightforward but of limited e¤ect.67
    Importantly, the analysis of this paper is consistent with these arguments stressing horizontal equity.
Horizontal equity is implied by Equal Sacri…ce, as Equal Sacri…ce values both it and "vertical" equity as
part of its overall priority on equal treatment.68 Thus, one possibility raised by this paper is that the popular
enthusiasm for horizontal equity comes out of an underlying a¢ nity for Equal Sacri…ce. This possibility is
especially interesting in light of the critiques, for example by Musgrave (1959) and Kaplow (2008), of the
coherence of horizontal equity.69 ;70
    Horizontal equity, however, has no implications for the "vertical" distribution of income. The ability of
Equal Sacri…ce to imply empirically-realistic levels of redistribution along with limited tagging bolsters the
case for its use. A particularly stark version of this argument relates to the issue of so-called rank reversals.
It has been known since the analyses in Mirrlees (1971) and Mirrlees (1974) that an optimal Utilitarian tax
policy in the case of full information generally induces a negative relationship between innate ability and the
allocation of utility across individuals. This reversal of pre-tax and post-tax utility orderings has generated
considerable discomfort among optimal tax theorists (Saez and Stantcheva 2014) and tax law scholars (see,
   6 6 Additional concerns about tagging exist. First, tagging could induce stigma. Stigma in this context is plausibly related to

the normative appeal of equal sacri…ce, as those receiving tag-based transfers would be sacri…cing less. Second, tagging could
slow the resolution of underlying distortions. If those distortions are due to irrational behavior by employers, it is unclear why
tagging would exacerbate their mistakes. If not, the distortions are likely to be persistent. Third, tagging may be against the
laws or constitutions of various nations. Any such prohibitions on tagging beg the question of why they are accepted by voters.
   6 7 Tags are undoubtedly less appealing if they are easily mimicked–as they would then distort behavior while failing to

redistribute–or costly to monitor and administer. Most of the candidate tags mentioned above and considered in modern tax
theory, however, are inelastic and cheap to enforce. Even a statistic such as "apparent I.Q.", which may seem both elastic and
costly to monitor, has such large implications outside the tax system for individuals that we might argue it would be largely
immune to these concerns. Mirrlees (1971) makes the same point on I.Q. See page 208. Certainly a characteristic such as gender
is highly inelastic and could be cheaply incorporated into the tax system.
   6 8 Note that the horizontal equity’s role in optimal taxation may di¤er from its role in other contexts, such as in the use

of statistical discrimination or in determining legal liability. If we are not intending to treat individuals di¤erentially across
an exogenous dimension of heterogeneity, then horizontal equity may be thought of as equivalent to equal treatment more
generically. The Utilitarian optimal tax policy, however, treats individuals of di¤erent abilities di¤erently, making horizontal
equity’s incomplete version of equal treatment apparent. I am grateful to Yoram Margalioth and to a referee for comments that
prompted this discussion. An early analysis by Balcer and Sadka (1982) examined the conditions under which a Utilitarian tax
policy would violate or respect horizontal equity.
   6 9 As Kaplow (2008) writes, the principle of horizontal equity "lacks a¢ rmative justi…cation." The core of the problem for

horizontal equity is that its intuitive appeal is based on its guarantee of equal treatment, but in fact it provides only a limited
and arbitrary form of equal treatment, namely across those characteristics deemed "horizontal." The principle o¤ers no reliable
guidance as to how that classi…cation ought to be made. Musgrave (1959) puts it best: "If there is no speci…ed reason for
discriminating among unequals, how can there be a reason for avoiding discrimination among equals?"
   7 0 This appealing property of Equal Sacri…ce is related to what Berliant and Gouveia (1993) label "an ethically undesirable

property of the solutions implied by the [conventional] optimal income tax formulations: the marginal tax faced by a taxpayer
depends, other things equal, on the density of the population on the domain of taxpayer characteristics."


                                                                37
for example, King 1983 and Zelenak 2006). Horizontal equity raises no concerns about rank reversals. In
contrast, simulations described in the next subsection below that follow the same process as above for the
U.S. income distribution show that the mixed objective most preferred in the survey generates a nearly
uniform utility distribution in the …rst-best, substantially limiting rank reversals. Intuitively, Equal Sacri…ce
leaves the utility ordering of agents unchanged, even in the case of full information.71
    Some additional results from the survey of relate to this discussion. When respondents are given the
logic for height and blindness tags and asked whether they supported or opposed them, the individuals who
oppose tagging disproportionately support Equal Sacri…ce. In the survey, the respondents see the following
text (see the Appendix for the full survey screens):

         Suppose that reliable studies show the following fact: on average, short men earn lower
      incomes than tall men in the United States. Of course, many short men earn high incomes,
      and many tall men earn low incomes. But, these studies show that the average income among
      short men is lower than the average income among tall men. The reasons for this di¤erence are
      uncertain.
         Now, please consider the following proposal: decrease taxes slightly on short men and increase
      taxes slightly on tall men. Because short men, on average, earn less than tall men, this proposal
      would, on average, decrease taxes on lower-income men and increase taxes on higher-income men.

    A similar question is asked with regard to blindness, for which the respondents are told that the income
di¤erence between groups is substantially larger than height. Respondents are asked to say whether they
(strongly or somewhat) support or oppose these proposals.
    In their responses to this question, those who support a height tag are almost evenly split between the
Utilitarian policy A and the Equal Sacri…ce policy B, while nearly two-thirds of those who oppose the height
tax prefer the Equal Sacri…ce policy to the Utilitarian policy. That relationship is statistically signi…cant,
even with demographic controls, as shown in the following regression results:

                  Table 11: Regression results (dependent variable is opposition to height tax)
                                                                 Reg 1                     Reg 2
                  Support for progressive sacri…ce            -0.29 (0.07)             -0.26 (0.07)
                              Gender                                                   -0.07 (0.11)
                               Age                                                      -0.07 (0.08
                            Education                                                  -0.09 (0.08)
                               Race                                                    0.04 (0.12)
                      Income status as child                                          0.015 (0.037)
                      Income status as adult                                          0.089 (0.042)

The gaps are yet wider for the proposed blindness tag.72 These patterns provide direct support to the
mechanism proposed in this paper, namely that a concern for Equal Sacri…ce limits popular support for
tagging.
  7 1 The survey also showed that most individuals directly support, when asked, a more equal distribution of sacri…ce than the

Utilitarian criterion would recommend, even if it were augmented with a concern for horizontal equity.
  7 2 One can look at these data in the "other direction," as well. Namely, 75 percent of those who choose policy A oppose

a height tag, compared to 82 percent of those who choose policy B. Only about half of those who choose policy A oppose a
blindness tag, compared to more than two-thirds of those who choose policy B.




                                                              38
3.3         Using the generalized model to address two additional puzzles
Next, I show that the same favored calibration of this paper’s positive optimal tax model can help address
two additional puzzles in optimal tax research.73

3.3.1        Rank reversals

In this section, I use a detailed calibration of the U.S. ability distribution74 to simulate …rst-best (i.e., full
information) feasible income tax policies for a range of model parameterizations. Figure 5 shows the results
by plotting utility as a function of ability in four scenarios.



                                            2



                                          1.5



                                            1
                              U tility




                                          0.5



                                            0



                                         -0.5       U tilitarian firs t-bes t
                                                    Mix ed firs t-bes t
                                                    Equal Sac rific e firs t-bes t
                                                    H y pothetic al lais s ez -faire
                                          -1
                                                0             25                       50                     75   100   125
                                                                                            Ability (w age)



                          Figure 5: Utility levels by ability type under di¤erent objective
                                functions in full-information …rst-best allocations.


    The thick solid line is the hypothetical laissez-faire allocation in which no taxes are collected. It shows
how utility increases monotonically with ability absent government intervention. The other three lines show
utilities under three parameterizations: the thin solid line is for the Utilitarian case of ES = 0:00, the
dotted line is for the Equal Sacri…ce case of ES = 1:00, and the dashed line is for the mixed case preferred
in the survey of Section 1 in which ES = 0:20. All other parameters are as in the tagging simulations above
(though G is adjusted to be a similar share of total income).
    Figure 5 shows the rank reversals when going from the laissez-faire or Equal Sacri…ce allocations to the
Utilitarian allocation, as the upward sloping thick solid and dotted lines contrast sharply with the downward
sloping thin solid line. The empirically-preferred, mixed objective (shown as the dashed line) generates a
far more uniform utility distribution than either of the more pure objective functions. More important, the
empirically-preferred objective chooses a …rst-best allocation that substantially limits rank reversals. The
reason for this result is that Equal Sacri…ce’s optimal allocation reduces each individual’s utility by the same
quantity and thus leaves the utility ordering of agents unchanged. In the mixed objective functions used
here, the Utilitarian preference for rank reversals is tempered.
  7 3 This working paper version of the paper provides more detail than was possible in the published version, Weinzierl (2014).
  7 4 The previous section’s simulation used a calibration of the U.S. ability (i.e., wage) distribution that was limited by the
availability of tagging data. Here, I use a lognormal-Pareto calibration of the U.S. wage distribution originally calculated by
Mankiw, Weinzierl, and Yagan (2009).




                                                                                            39
3.3.2      Optimal top marginal income tax rates

Finally, I use the more detailed ability distribution from the previous simulation to explore in depth the e¤ects
of a role for Equal Sacri…ce on optimal marginal income tax rates. I use the same preferred calibration
( ES = 0:20) in which the optimal policy rejected height, gender, and race tags, accepted tagging on
blindness and substantial redistribution, and largely avoided rank reversals in utility in the …rst-best. All
other parameters are as before.75
    Figure 6 shows the optimal schedule of marginal tax rates for this calibration, calculated as the distortions
to individuals consumption-leisure margins (as de…ned formally in the Appendix). For comparison, the …gure
also shows the optimal results under a pure Utilitarian criterion, that is when ES = 0 as in the conventional
model.

                                                     1
                                                                                                                      U tilitarian
                                                    0.9                                                               Mix ed (0.20)


                                                    0.8

                                                    0.7
                                Marginal tax rate




                                                    0.6

                                                    0.5

                                                    0.4

                                                    0.3

                                                    0.2

                                                    0.1

                                                     0
                                                          0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8       1         1.2   1.4   1.6     1.8           2
                                                                                 Annual dollar inc ome                                5
                                                                                                                               x 10



                                                                Figure 6: Optimal Marginal Tax Rates


    Figure 6 shows that the optimal marginal income tax rate at high incomes falls substantially, by about
seven percentage points, with the empirically-preferred role for the principle of Equal Sacri…ce. The marginal
tax rate schedule has the U-shape introduced by Diamond (1998) and Saez (2001) whether ES = 0 or 0:20,
though positive ES does lead to lower rates for all workers. The explanation for this pattern is that the
planner with ES > 0 redistributes less. This reduces higher earners’ temptation to mimic lower income
earners and thus the required distortions throughout the income distribution. At the same time, substantial
redistribution persists despite this role for the principle of Equal Sacri…ce. Though not shown here, the
high-skilled continue to pay sizeable average tax rates of 45 percent, not far from the 54 percent rate under
the Utilitarian policy. A related result is that the lowest-ability type enjoys a level of consumption worth 52
percent of average consumption in the economy under the policy with ES = 0:20 compared to 63 percent
under the Utilitarian policy with ES = 0.
    Therefore, this paper’s calibrated positive optimal tax model may help address a gap between conventional
theory and existing policy noted by Diamond and Saez (2011). Using the conventional model, they conclude
that the optimal top rate is "73 percent, substantially higher than the current 42.5 percent top US marginal
tax rate (combining all taxes)." The top rate in the mixed policy shown in Figure 6 is 55 percent, compared to
62 percent under the conventional Utilitarian criterion. Of course, a number of other potential explanations
exist for why top marginal tax rates are not higher, such as a higher elasticity of taxable incomes at high
 7 5 The   appendix contains analytical results on optimal marginal rates in this model.




                                                                                       40
income levels or the existence of preference heterogeneity. But these simulation results suggest that a
di¤erence between the objective assumed in the conventional model and the prevailing normative preferences
in society may play a role.


4    Conclusion
The optimal tax literature occupies a rare place in economic research in which the normative assumptions of
economists are given priority. The conventional use of Utilitarianism as the criterion for quantitative analyses
of optimal policy is expedient, as it narrows the range of models to consider. It may also be compelling, if
we believe the Utilitarian criterion is the right one.
    An alternative to the conventional approach is to use empirical evidence on normative preferences to
develop a positive optimal tax theory in which economists’normative intuitions are replaced by those that
hold sway among voters and taxpayers in reality. Of course, a number of classic questions arise about such
an approach, such as: whose preferences matter for policymaking, how are individual preferences aggregated,
and what are the admissable normative criteria. This paper has not focused on these questions, which are
important topics for future work. The conventional approach sidesteps these questions, but at the potential
cost of relevance.
    In this paper, I make three contributions toward demonstrating the promise of such a positive optimal
tax theory.
    First, I present novel survey evidence on the empirical normative preferences of individuals in the United
States. Using a fully-speci…ed planner’s problem, I generate feasible and incentive-compatible tax policies
that are optimal according to a range of social objective functions, and I have respondents rank these policies.
I …nd striking and robust results: few respondents prefer the conventional Utilitarian policy or the Rawlsian
alternative, and a plurality (nearly half) prefer policies that re‡ect a mixed objective that gives weight to
both Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce. Additional questions in the survey provide more direct evidence
in support of these results. When asked explicitly how "sacri…ce" from paying taxes should be distributed,
respondents prefer a distribution between that implied by Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce. And the more
enthusiastic a respondent is about Equal Sacri…ce, the more likely he or she is to reject tagging, the taxation
of personal characteristics that is a feature of Utilitarian-optimal tax policy but that is rejected by Equal
Sacri…ce. This evidence is consistent with a substantial body of previous work showing that the normative
reasoning of most individuals draws on a diverse set of criteria.
    Second, I generalize the conventional optimal tax model to accommodate this evidence of a mixed objec-
tive for taxation. This generalization requires overcoming the challenge of combining disparate, sometimes
incommensurable, criteria for optimality. I develop a method by which any set of criteria can be integrated
into a uni…ed objective that respects Pareto e¢ ciency, and I apply that method to the speci…c case of two
criteria at the heart of this paper: Utilitarianism and Equal Sacri…ce. More generally, this method provides a
way to inform the choice of welfare weights in the generalized Pareto-e¢ cient approach to optimal taxation.
    Third, I show that the empirically-preferred calibration of the generalized theory can explain some con-
ventionally puzzling features of real-world tax policy. I focus on the model’s ability to explain the limited
role of tagging in policy that is otherwise quite redistributive. I show, analytically, that a concern for Equal
Sacri…ce limits the optimal extent of tagging. I then simulate optimal policy with the objective functions
favored by survey respondents, calibrated to microdata from the United States. That policy rejects the use
of height, gender, and race as tags; it accepts the use of blindness as a tag, endorsing a quantitatively realistic


                                                        41
blindness bene…t; and it provides redistribution through a progressive schedule of average income tax rates
that closely resembles actual policy. Moreover, it substantially reduces the extent of utility rank reversals
in the …rst-best policy, and it implies top marginal tax rates lower than what conventional theory would
recommend and closer to reality. In sum, optimal policy in this calibrated model matches remarkably well
several prominent characteristics of existing policy that are puzzling from the perspective of conventional
theory but widely endorsed in reality.




                                                     42
References
 [1] Akerlof, George, (1978). "The Economics of ’Tagging’ as Applied to the Optimal Income Tax, Welfare Pro-
     grams, and Manpower Planning," American Economic Review, 68(1), March, pp. 8-19.

 [2] Alesina, Alberto, Ichino, Andrea, and Karabarbounis, Loukas (2011)."Gender-based taxation and the division
     of family chores," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(2).

 [3] Arneson, Richard (1982), "Rawls versus Utilitarianism in the Light of Political Liberalism," published in
     Davion, Victoria and Clark Wolf, The Idea of a Political Liberalism: Essays on Rawls, Rowman & Little…eld:
     Maryland.

 [4] Atkinson, Anthony B. and Joseph Stiglitz, (1980). Lectures on Public Economics. McGraw-Hill.
 [5] Auerbach, Alan, and Kevin Hassett, (1999). "A New Measure of Horizontal Equity." Working Paper.
 [6] Bargain, Olivier, Mathias Dolls, Dirk Neumann, Andreas Peichl, and Sebastian Siegloch (2011). “Tax-bene…t
     Systems in Europe and the US: Between Equity and E¢ ciency.” IZA DP No 5440.

 [7] Bargain, Olivier, Mathias Dolls, Dirk Neumann, Andreas Peichl, and Sebastian Siegloch (2013). “Partisan Tax
     Policy and Income Inequality in the US, 1979-2007,’IZA DP No 7190.

 [8] Boadway, Robin and Pierre Pestieau, (2006). "Tagging and Redistributive Taxation," Queen’s University Work-
     ing Paper 5-2006.

 [9] Balcer, Yves and Efraim Sadka (1982), "Horizontal Equity, Income Taxation and Self-Selection with an Appli-
     cation to Income Tax Credits," Journal of Public Economics, 19.

[10] Berliant and Gouveia (1993). "Equal sacri…ce and incentive compatible income taxation," Journal of Public
     Economics, 51.

[11] Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate (1992). "Workfare versus Welfare: Incentive Arguments for Work Require-
     ments in Poverty-Alleviation Programs," American Economic Review 82(1).

[12] Boadway, Robin and Pierre Pestieau (2006). "Tagging and Redistributive Taxation," Working Paper.
[13] Boaz, David and Robin Kirby (2007)."Libertarian Voters in 2004 and 2006", CATO Policy Report, Janu-
     ary/February.

[14] Bolton, Gary and Axel Ockenfels (2000). A Theory of Equity, Reciprocity, and Competition," American Eco-
     nomic Review, 90(1)

[15] Bolton, Gary and Axel Ockenfels (2006). "Inequality Aversion, E¢ ciency, and Maximin Preferences in Simple
     Distribution Experiements: Comment" American Economic Review, 96(5).

[16] Bourguignon, Francois and Amedeo Spadaro (2012), "Tax-bene…t revealed social preferences," Journal of Eco-
     nomic Inequality, 10.

[17] Cappelen, Alexander W., Astri Drange Hole, Erik O. Sorensen, and Bertil Tungodden, (2011). "The Pluralism
     of Fairness Ideals: An Experimental Approach," American Economic Review 97(3).

[18] Charness, Gary and Matthew Rabin (2002). "Understanding Social Preferences with Simple Tests," Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 117(3).

[19] Cremer, Helmuth, Firouz Gahvari, and Jean-Marie Lozachmeur (2010). "Tagging and Income Taxation: Theory
     and an Application," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(1).

[20] D’Antoni, Massimo (1999). "Piecewise linear tax functions, progressivity, and the principle of equal sacri…ce,"
     Economics Letters.

[21] da Costa, Carlos and Thiago Pereira (2012). "E¢ ciency of Equal Sacri…ce Income Tax Schedules," Working
     paper.


                                                        43
[22] Deutsch, Morton (1985). Distributive Justice: A Social-Psychological Perspective. Binghamton: NY: Vail-Ballou
     Press.

[23] Diamond, Peter, (1998). "Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern of Optimal Mar-
     ginal Tax Rates," American Economic Review, 88(1).

[24] Diamond, Peter and Emmanuel Saez (2011). "The Case for a Progressive Tax: From Basic Research to Policy
     Recommendations," Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(4).

[25] Engelmann, Dirk and Martin Strobel (2004). "Inequality Aversion, E¢ ciency, and Maximin Preferences in
     Simple Distribution Experiements," American Economic Review, 94(4).

[26] Engelmann, Dirk and Martin Strobel (2006). "Inequality Aversion, E¢ ciency, and Maximin Preferences in
     Simple Distribution Experiements: Reply," American Economic Review, 96(5).

[27] Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning (2010). "Progressive Estate Taxation", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     125(2).

[28] Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt (1998). "A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation," Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, August.

[29] Fehr, Ernst, Michael Naef, and Klaus M. Schmidt (2006). "Inequality Aversion, E¢ ciency, and Maximin
     Preferences in Simple Distribution Experiements: Comment" American Economic Review, 96(5).

[30] Feldman, Stanley and John Zaller (1992), "The Political Culture of Ambivalence: Ideological Responses to the
     Welfare State," American Journal of Political Science 36(1).

[31] Feldstein, Martin (1976). "On the Theory of Tax Reform," Journal of Public Economics, 6, pp. 77-104.
[32] Fleurbaey, Marc and Francois Maniquet (2006). "Fair Income Tax," Review of Economic Studies, 73, pp. 55-83.
[33] Fong, Christina. (2001). "Social preferences, self-interest, and the demand for redistribution," Journal of Public
     Economics, 82.

[34] Free, Lloyd A. and Hadley Cantril, (1968). The Political Beliefs of Americans. New York: Simon and Schuster.
[35] Friedman, Milton (1962). Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[36] Frolich, Norman, Joe A. Oppenheimer, and Cheryl L. Eavey, (1987). "Laboratory Results on Rawls’s Distrib-
     utive Justice," British Journal of Political Science, 17.,

[37] Frolich, Norman and Joe A. Oppenheimer (1992). Choosing Justice: An Experimental Approach to Ethical
     Theory. Berkeley, CA: UC Press.

[38] Frohlich, Norman, Joe Oppenheimer, and Anja Kurki, (2004). "Modeling Other-Regarding Preferences and an
     Experimental Test," Public Choice 119(1/2), April.

[39] Gaertner, Wulf and Erik Schokkaert (2012). Empirical Social Choice: Questionnaire-Experimental Studies on
     Distributive Justice. Cambridge.

[40] Gainous, Jason, and Michael D. Martinez (2005). “What Happens When We Simultaneously Want Opposite
     Things? Ambivalence about Social Welfare.” Ambivalence, Politics, and Public Policy, edited by Stephen C.
     Craig and Michael D. Martinez, Palgrave.

[41] Golosov, Mikhail and Aleh Tsyvinski (2006). "Designing Optimal Disability Insurance: A Case for Asset-
     Testing," Journal of Political Economy, 114(2).

[42] Hasen, David M. (2007). "Liberalism and Ability Taxation," Texas Law Review 85(5), April.
[43] Harsanyi, John C. (1953) "Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and in the Theory of Risk-Taking," Journal
     of Political Economy, 61(5), (October), pp. 434-435.


                                                          44
[44] Harsanyi, John C. (1955). "Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal Comparisons of Utility,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 63(4), (August), pp. 309-321.

[45] Hendren, Nathaniel (2014). “The Inequality De‡ator: Interpersonal Comparisons without a Social Welfare
     Function,” Working paper.

[46] Hochschild, Jennifer (1981. What’s Fair? American Beliefs about Distributive Justice. Cambridge, MA: Har-
     vard University Press.

[47] Horton, John J., David G. Rand, and Richard J. Zeckhauser, "The Online Laboratory: Conducting Experiments
     in a Real Labor Market," Experimental Economics.

[48] Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky (1979). "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk." Econo-
     metrica.

[49] Kant, Immanuel (1785). Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. See section 4:434 of the Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press edition, 1997, Mary Gregor, ed.

[50] Kaplow, Louis and Steven Shavell (2001). "Any non-welfarist Method of Policy Assessment Violates the Pareto
     Principle," Journal of Political Economy 109(2).

[51] Kaplow, Louis (2008). The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics, Princeton.
[52] King, Mervyn A. (1983). "An Index of Inequality: With Applications to Horizontal Equity and Social Mobility,"
     Econometrica.

[53] Konow, James (2001). "Fair and square: the four sides of distributive justice," Journal of Economic Behavior
     and Organization 46.

[54] Konow, James (2003). "A Positive Analysis of Justice Theories," Journal of Economic Literature XLI, Decem-
     ber.

[55] Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva, (2013). "How Elastic are Pref-
     erences for Redistribution: Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments," Working Paper.

[56] Lambert, Peter J. and Helen T. Naughton (2009). "The Equal Absolute Sacri…ce Principle Revisited." Journal
     of Economic Surveys 23(2).

[57] Lockwood, Benjamin B. and Matthew Weinzierl (2012). "De Gustibus non est Taxandum: Theory and Evidence
     on Preference Heterogeneity and Redistribution," NBER Working Paper 17784.

[58] Lockwood, Benjamin B. and Matthew Weinzierl (2014). "The Evolution of Revealed Social Preferences in the
     United States and the Costs of Unequal Growth and Recessions," Working Paper.

[59] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Matthew Weinzierl (2009). "The Optimal Taxation of Height: A Case Study of
     Utilitarian Income Redistribution," American Economic Journals: Economic Policy.

[60] Mankiw, N. Gregory, Matthew Weinzierl, and Danny Yagan, (2009). "Optimal Taxation in Theory and Prac-
     tice," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(4), pages 147-174.

[61] Markovits, Daniel (2003), "How Much Redistribution Should There Be?" Yale Faculty Scholarship Series. Paper
     412

[62] Mazor, Joseph. (2012). "Who Should Pay for Entitlements," Working paper.
[63] McCa¤ery, Edward J. and Jonathan Baron (2004). "Framing and taxation: Evaluation of tax policies involving
     household composition," Journal of Economic Psychology 25.

[64] Mill, John Stuart (1871). Principles of Political Economy. Oxford University Press, 1994. Book V, page 169.

[65] Miller, David (1976). Social Justice. London: Oxford University Press.


                                                        45
[66] Mirrlees, J.A., (1971). "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation," Review of Economic
     Studies 38, 175-208.

[67] Mirrlees, J.A. (1974), "Notes on Welfare Economics, Information, and Uncertainty," in Balch, McFadden and
     Wu (eds.), Essays on Equilibrium Behavior under Uncertainty. North-Holland.

[68] Mirrlees, J.A., S. Adam, T. Besley, R. Blundell, S. Bon, R. Chote, M. Gammie, P. Johnson, G. Myles, and J.
     Poterba (eds.) (2010) Dimensions of Tax Design: The Mirrlees Review. Oxford University Press.

[69] Mitchell, Gregory, Philip E. Tetlock, Barbara A. Mellers, and Lisa D. Ordonez (1993). "Judgments of Social
     Justice: Compromises between Equality and E¢ ciency," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65(4).

[70] Mitra, Tapan and Efe A. Ok (1996). "Personal Income Taxation and the Principle of Equal Sacri…ce Revisited."
     International Economic Review.

[71] Moulin, Hervé, (1981), "The Proportional Veto Principle," Review of Economic Studies, 48(3).
[72] Moyes, Patrick (2003). "Redistributive e¤ects of minimal equal sacri…ce taxation." Journal of Economic Theory.
[73] Murphy, Liam and Thomas Nagel (2002). The Myth of Ownership. Oxford.
[74] Musgrave, Richard (1959). The Theory of Public Finance. McGraw-Hill.
[75] Nozick, Robert (1974). Anarchy, State, and Utopia. New York: Basic Books.
[76] Ok, Efe A. (1995). "On the principle of equal sacri…ce in income taxation," Journal of Public Economics.
[77] Parsons, Donald O. (1982). "Imperfect ’tagging’in Social Insurance Programs. Journal of Public Economics.
[78] Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez (2012), "Optimal Labor Income Taxation," Availble as NBER WOrking
     apper 18521.

[79] Rakowski, Eric (2000). "Can Wealth Taxes be Justi…ed," NYU Tax Law Review.
[80] Rawls, John (1971). A Theory of Justice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[81] Rawls, John (2001). Justice as Fairness. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[82] Rothschild, Casey and Florian Scheuer (2012). "Optimal Taxation with Rent-Seeking," NBER Working Paper,
     17035.

[83] Saez, Emmanuel, (2001). "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates," Review of Economic
     Studies, 68.

[84] Saez, Emmanuel (2002). "The desirability of commodity taxation under non-linear income taxation and het-
     erogeneous tastes," Journal of Public Economics, 83: 217-230.

[85] Saez, Emmanuel and Stefanie Stantcheva (2014). "Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights for Optimal
     Tax Theory." Available as NBER working paper 18835.

[86] Samuelson, Paul (1980). Economics 11th edition. McGraw Hill.
[87] Scott, John T., Richard E. Matland, Philip A. Michelbach, and Brian H. Bornstein (2001). "Just Deserts: An
     Experimental Study of Distributive Justice Norms," American Journal of Political Science 45(4).

[88] Sen, Amartya and Bernard Williams (1982), Utilitarianism and Beyond, Cambridge
[89] Sen, Amartya, (1982). "Rights and Agency," Philosophy and Public A¤airs, 11(1), Winter, pp. 3-39.
[90] Sen, Amartya, (2000). "Consequential Evaluation and Practical Reason." Journal of Philosophy, 97(9), Sep-
     tember, pp. 477-502.




                                                       46
 [91] Shaviro, Daniel (2002), “Endowment and Inequality,” in Thorndike and Ventry Jr., eds., Tax Justice: The
      Ongoing Debate. Urban Institute.

 [92] Spadaro, Amedeo, Lucia Mangiavacchi, and Luca Piccoli (2012). “Optimal taxation, social contract, and the
      four worlds of welfare capitalism,” Working paper.

 [93] Smith, Adam (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
 [94] Stark, Kirk J. (2005). "Enslaving the Beachcomber: Some Thoughts on the Liberty Objections to Endowment
      Taxation," UCLA Law and Economics Research Series.

 [95] Stiglitz, Joseph E., (1987). "Pareto e¢ cient and optimal taxation and the new new welfare economics," in:
      Auerbach, Alan and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook on Public Economics. North Holland: Elsevier.Science
      Publishers, pp. 991-1042.

 [96] Sugin, Linda (2011). "A Philosophical Objection to the Optimal Tax Model," NYU Tax Law Review.
 [97] Viard, Alan D. (2001). “Some Results on the Comparative Statics of Optimal Categorical Transfer Payments.”
      Public Finance Review, 29(2): 148–80.

 [98] Weinzierl, Matthew (2011). "The Surprising Power of Age-Dependent Taxes," Review of Economic Studies,
      78(4).

 [99] Weinzierl, Matthew (2012). "Why do we Redistribute so Much but Tag so Little? Normative Diversity, Equal
      Sacri…ce, and Optimal Taxation," NBER Working Paper 18045.

[100] Weinzierl, Matthew (2014). "The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation," Journal of Public Economics.
[101] Werning, Ivan, (2007). "Pareto E¢ cient Income Taxation," Working Paper, MIT, April.
[102] Yaari, Menahem (1988). "A Controversial Proposal Concerning Inequality Measurement," Journal of Economic
      Theory.

[103] Young, H. Peyton (1987). "Progressive taxation and the equal sacri…ce principle," Journal of Public Economics,
      32(2).

[104] Young, H. Peyton (1988). "Distributive Justice in Taxation," Journal of Economic Theory, 44.
[105] Young, H. Peyton (1990). "Taxation and Equal Sacri…ce," American Economic Review, 80(1).
[106] Young, H. Peyton (1994).Equity: Theory and Practice. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[107] Zelenak, Lawrence. (2006). "Taxing Endowment," Duke Law Journal.
[108] Zoutman, Floris, Bas Jacobs, Egbert L.W. Jongen (2013a). “Optimal redistributive taxes and redistributive
      preferences in the Netherlands,” Working paper.

[109] Zoutman, Floris, Bas Jacobs, Egbert L.W. Jongen (2013b). “Revealed social preferences of dutch political
      parties.” Working paper




                                                        47
      Appendix to: "The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation:
             Normative Diversity and a role for Equal Sacri…ce"
                                                                    Matthew Weinzierl

                                                                          June, 2014


1     Analytical Results
1.1    Proof of Proposition 1
The …rst-order condition of the planner’s problem with respect to ci;m is:

                                             i;m
                                         @V UES  ; U i;m                                                                    X                        X
                i;m          i;m                                                            F
         U til p    +    ES p                                                                                 pi;m +                jji;m                ijj;m
                                                                                                                                                                 = 0;
                                                   i;m        i;m                     i;m        i;m
                                        @U c             ;y         =wi       Uc c          ;y         =wi                      j                    j


where F is the multiplier on the feasibility constraint and jji;m is the multiplier on the incentive constraint
that type i in group m prefers its allocation to any other type j. In deriving this condition, I used separability
                               Uc (ci;m ;y i;m =wj ;m)
in the utility function to set U ci;m ;yi;m =wi ;m = 1. Taking the sum across types and simplifying yields:
                                c(                   )
                          2                                       i;m
                                                                                        3               2                                    3
                                                              @V UES  ; U i;m
                        Ei 4          U til   +     ES
                                                                                        5 = Ei 4                            F                5:
                                                          @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                               Uc ci;m ; y i;m =wi

The analogous condition applies for ci;n , where n indicates a di¤erent tagged group:
                              2                                    i;n
                                                                                        3               2                                    3
                                                               @V UES  ; U i;n
                        Ei 4           U til   +     ES
                                                                                        5 = Ei 4                            F                5:
                                                              @U ci;n ; y i;n =wi                           Uc ci;n ; y i;n =wi

Combining these conditions, we can write:
                                  h                                   i   1                                       i;m
                                                                                                             @V (UES   ;U i;m )
                         Ei           Uc ci;m ; y i;m =wi                         Ei        U til        ES @U ci;m ;y i;m =wi
                                                                                                                   (                     )
                                  h                    i                  1
                                                                              =                                        i;n
                                                                                                                                                 :
                                                                                                                  @V UES(  ;U i;n    )
                         Ei        Uc ci;n ; y i;n =wi                            Ei        U til           ES       i;n i;n
                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                 @U c ;y =wi             )

This is the result in Proposition 1.




                                                                                  1
1.2     Proof of Corollary 2
                         i;m    i;n
First, I establish that UES  = UES  for all m; n 2 f1; 2; :::; M g : Recall the de…nition of the ES-optimal feasible
allocation when individuals di¤er in only one dimension (ability) from the main text. The extension to two
dimensions of heterogeneity is straightforward:
n             oI;M
 ci;m
  ES  ; y i;m
         ES                 2 ES : U ci;m   i;m
                                      lf ; ylf =w
                                                  i
                                                               U ci;m   i;m
                                                                  ES ; yES =w
                                                                              i
                                                                                        U ci;m   i;m
                                                                                           lf ; ylf =w
                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                              U ci;m ; y i;m =wi ;
                i=1;m=1

                                                                                                I;M
for any i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m 2 f1; 2; :::; M g and for all possible ci;m ; y i;m            i=1;m=1
                                                                                                          2 ES; where the set ES
is de…ned as
        (                   I;M
                                                                                                                                         )
             ci;m ; y i;m   i=1;m=1
                                      2 F : U ci;m   i;m
                                               lf ; ylf =w
                                                           i
                                                                          U ci;m ; y i;m =wi = U cj;n   j;n
                                                                                                  lf ; ylf =w
                                                                                                              j
                                                                                                                    U cj;n ; y j;n =wj
ES =                                                                                                                                         :
                                              for all i; j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m; n 2 f1; 2; :::; M g
                                                                                                                                (1)


                                n             oI;M
   The laissez-faire allocations ci;m
                                  lf  ; y i;m
                                         lf                       are de…ned by individual maximization, which depends
                                                      i=1;m=1
only on ability as shown in the main text. Therefore, we know that

                                                           ci;m
                                                            lf        = ci;n
                                                                         lf ;
                                                            i;m          i;n
                                                           ylf        = ylf  ;

for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m; n 2 f1; 2; :::; M g. By the de…nition in (1), this immediately implies:

              U ci;m   i;m
                 ES ; yES =w
                             i
                               = U ci;n   i;n
                                    ES ; yES =w
                                                i
                                                                for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m; n 2 f1; 2; :::; M g ;         (2)

which completes this step of the proof.
   Second, recall Assumption 1:

                                 U i;m         U i;n for all i = f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n                                       (3)
                             and U j;m    >    U j;n for at least one j = f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:

Using (2), (3), and the technical Assumption 2 that rules out special cases in which the optimal allocation
of utility equals the ES-optimal allocation for any individual, I consider three exhaustive cases.

1.2.1       Case 1

In this case, all equilibrium allocations generate at least as much utility for all individuals as in the ES-
optimal feasible allocation and, for at least one individual, more utility than in the ES-optimal feasible
allocation. Formally,


                                                   i;m    i;n
                             U i;m        U i;n > UES  = UES  for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n                              (4)
                                                     j;m        j;n
                       and U j;m      >   U j;n >   UES    =   UES    for some j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:




                                                                      2
The proof of the corollary for this case is as follows.
                                                            i;m
   First, given (4), we can take the derivative of V UES        ; U i;m with respect to its second argument and
obtain,
                         @V (UESi;m
                                     ;U i;m )
                                                    h                 i 1
                                                        i;m       i;m         i;m
                        @U (c i;m i;m
                                  ;y     =wi )
                                               =     U         U ES       if UES  < U i;m ;

                        for scalars f          0; > , 2 (0; 1], > 1g ;
which directly implies
                                                            i;m
                                                        @V UES  ; U i;m
                                                                                        0;                                      (5)
                                                     @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi

with the inequality strict if      > 0. Taking the second derivative yields:

                              i;m
                      @ 2 V (UES  ;U i;m )
                                                                      h                      i   2
                               i;m 2         =          (    1)           U i;m       i;m
                                                                                     UES                 i;m
                                                                                                     if UES  < U i;m ;
                          (@U )
                          for scalars f            0;       > ,    2 (0; 1],          > 1g ;

which directly implies
                                                               i;m
                                                        @ 2 V UES  ; U i;m
                                                                           2            0:                                      (6)
                                                             @U i;m

   Second, combine (5), (6) ; and (3) to obtain:

                    i;m
                @V UES  ; U i;m                      i;m
                                                 @V UES  ; U i;n
                                                                               for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n             (7)
              @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                @U ci;n ; y i;n =wi
                   j;m
               @V UES  ; U j;m                        j;m
                                                  @V UES  ; U j;n
        and                              >                                     for at least one j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:
              @U cj;m ; y j;m =wj                @U cj;n ; y j;n =wj

   Third, use(2) to rewrite (7) as:

                    i;m
                @V UES  ; U i;m                       i;n
                                                  @V UES  ; U i;n
                                                                               for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n             (8)
              @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                @U ci;n ; y i;n =wi
                   j;m
               @V UES  ; U j;m                        j;n
                                                  @V UES  ; U j;n
        and                              >                                     for at least one j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:
              @U cj;m ; y j;m =wj                @U cj;n ; y j;n =wj

which implies                      2                              3             2                           3
                                            i;m
                                        @V UES  ; U i;m                                  i;n
                                                                                     @V UES  ; U i;n
                               Ei 4                               5 > Ei 4                                  5:                  (9)
                                       @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                          @U ci;n ; y i;n =wi

   Expression(9) is a su¢ cient condition for Corollary 2 to hold. This completes the proof in this case.

1.2.2   Case 2:

In this case, all equilibrium allocations generate no more utility for all individuals as in the ES-optimal feasible
allocation and, for at least one individual, strictly less utility than in the ES-optimal feasible allocation.


                                                                      3
Formally,


                          i;m         i;n
                         UES       = UES  > U i;m                   U i;n for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n         (10)
                          j;m             j;n            j;m          j;n
                  and    UES       =     UES    >U             >U           for some j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:

The proof of the corollary for this case is as follows.
                                                            i;m
   First, given (10), we can take the derivative of V UES       ; U i;m with respect to its second argument and
obtain,
                                i;m
                          @V (UES    ;U i;m )                           1
                                                        i;m      i;m          i;m
                        @U (c i;m i;m
                                  ;y     =w )
                                            i
                                              =      U ES     U           if UES   U i;m ;
                         for scalars f         0; > , 2 (0; 1], > 1g ;
which directly implies
                                                             i;m
                                                         @V UES  ; U i;m
                                                                                        0:                             (11)
                                                     @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi

Taking the second derivative yields:

                             i;m
                     @ 2 V (UES  ;U i;m )                                                      1
                                                                             i;m
                                 i;m 2      =        (         1)           UES     U i;m              i;m
                                                                                                   if UES    U i;m ;
                           (@U )
                           for scalars f            0;         > ,      2 (0; 1],     > 1g ;

which directly implies
                                                                i;m
                                                         @ 2 V UES  ; U i;m
                                                                                2      0:                              (12)
                                                                @U i;m

    Given (11) and (12), the remainder of the proof for this case repeats exactly the proof of Case 1 after
(6). This completes the proof in this case.

1.2.3   Case 3:

In this case, the equilibrium allocations give some individuals more utility than in the ES-optimal feasible
allocation and others of the same ability but di¤erent tagged values less utility than in the ES-optimal
feasible allocation. Formally,



                         U i;m           U i;n for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n                                    (13)
                          j;m             j;m        j;n              j;n
                  and U            >     UES    =   UES        >U           for some j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n:

                                                                                                 i;m
The proof of the corollary in this case for any i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig such that either U i;m U i;n UES     i;n
                                                                                                     = UES  or
  i;m      i;n    i;m     i;n
UES = UES U             U is the same as in Case 1 or Case 2, respectively. The new scenario is the second
line in (13), where the m type has been given more utility and the n type less utility than in the ES-optimal
feasible allocation. Using (2) we can derive:




                                                                            4
                                                      j;m
                                                 @V (UES  ;U j;m )
                                                                                  h                       i       1
                                                     @U    j;m       =                U j;m        j;m
                                                                                                  UES
                                                      j;m
                                                 @V (UES  ;U j;n )                                                1
                                                                     =                 j;m
                                                                                      UES         U j;n                                                                     (14)
                                                           j;n
                                                      @U
                                  for scalars f            0;     > ,     2 (0; 1],           > 1g ;

for some j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n.
                                            j;m                    j;m
                                      @V (UES   ;U j;m )      @V (UES  ;U j;n )
    Expression (14) implies that           @U j;m
                                                          and     @U j;n
                                                                                are both negative (i.e., non-zero). Thus,
                        j;m   j;m          j;m    j;n
                @V (UES ;U        )   @V (UES ;U      )
for some > 0 ,         @U j;m
                                    >     @U j;n
                                                        , and we have

                        i;m
                    @V UES  ; U i;m                         i;n
                                                        @V UES  ; U i;n
                                                                                      for all i 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n                                                  (15)
                   @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                @U ci;n ; y i;n =wi
                        j;m
                    @V UES  ; U j;m                         j;n
                                                        @V UES  ; U j;n
          and                                    >                                    for at least one j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig and m < n;
                   @U cj;m ; y j;m =wj                @U cj;n ; y j;n =wj

which implies                             2                              3             2                                       3
                                                    i;m
                                                @V UES  ; U i;m                                 i;n
                                                                                            @V UES  ; U i;n
                                        Ei 4                             5 > Ei 4                                              5:                                           (16)
                                               @U ci;m ; y i;m =wi                         @U ci;n ; y i;n =wi

       The same last step as in the previous two cases completes the proof.


1.3       Optimal marginal distortions
To analyze marginal distortions to labor supply in this paper’s generalized model, I return to the Social
Planner’s Problem where individuals di¤er only in ability w. Denote with jji the multiplier on the incentive
constraint indicating that type i does not prefer type j 0 s allocation. We can show the following:

Proposition 1 The optimal marginal distortion to the labor supply decision of an individual with ability
type i, denoted i , satis…es the following condition.

                                                                                       i
                                                                                  @V (UES ;U i )                               P
                                                                                                                               I
                          i   i     i
                                                           pi 1 +        ES          @U i                     1        +             pj      jji        ijj

           i
                 Uyi c ; y =w                                                                                              j=1
  1            = i                    =                                                                                                                                     ;
                w Uci (ci ; y i =wi )                                @V (UES
                                                                          i ;U i
                                                                                 )                        P
                                                                                                          I                                  U (ci ;y i =wj )
                                                                                                                                          wi yi
                                                pi 1 +       ES         @U i                  1      +            pj           jji
                                                                                                                                          wj Uyi (ci ;y i =wi )
                                                                                                                                                                      ijj
                                                                                                          j=1
                                                                                                                                                                            (17)
                                                                                                                           i                        i         i   i
where Ux is the partial derivative of individual utility with respect to x and U denotes U c ; y ; w .

   To interpret condition (17), start with the conventional case in which ES = 0. Then, because the
              ci ;y i =wj )
     wi yi (
         U
term w j U     i    i
           i (c ;y =w )
                        i   is less than one for wi < wj , binding incentive constraints on higher skill types (i.e.,
               y
 ijj
    > 0) drive the optimal distortion i above zero in the conventional model.
   A positive marginal distortion on type i has a bene…t and a cost in conventional theory. The bene…t of
such a distortion is that it allows the planner to o¤er a more generous tax treatment to i without tempting
higher-skilled individuals to claim it. The greater the gain in social welfare due to this redistribution
(measured by ijj for wj > wi ), the greater is the optimal distortion to i. The conventional cost of such a



                                                                              5
distortion is the reduced e¤ort and, therefore, output from type i. The size of this cost increases with the
share of i in the population, pi , so i falls with larger pi .
    If ES > 0, both the bene…ts and costs of optimal marginal distortions are a¤ected.
    First, with ES > 0 marginal distortions have a second cost because they cause deviations from the
ES-optimal allocations. The social cost of this deviation for individual i is measured by the expression
              i
         @V (UES ;U i )
 ES         @U i        1 . A larger ES will increase this expression and decrease the optimal distortion on
             i
       @V (UES    ;U i )                          i
                                            @V (UES  ;U i )
i if       @U i          > 1. Note that         @U i        measures the marginal reduction in social loss from raising
the allocated utility of type i. Starting from the Utilitarian allocation, this reduction in loss will tend
to be greater for the high-skilled, as their utilities will be far below the laissez-faire allocation. Formally,
        i
  @V (UES  ;U i )
      @U i         is likely to be increasing in type because losses increase more than proportionally with deviations
below the laissez-faire allocation and gains are concave in deviations above it. This e¤ect of increasing ES
will tend to be a decrease in the optimal distortions on higher-skilled workers relative to lower-skilled workers.
     Second, the bene…ts of redistribution change when the planner puts weight on Equal Sacri…ce. In par-
ticular, the social value of redistributing from higher-skilled individuals ( ijj for wj > wi ) is less, because
the planner places less value on individuals (i.e., low earners) enjoying greater utility that in the laissez-
faire. With smaller bene…ts from redistributing to the low- and moderate-skilled individuals, the required
distortions on them are smaller. Therefore, this e¤ect of increasing ES will tend to decrease the optimal
distortions on low- and moderate-skilled workers relative to higher-skilled workers.


2       Related evidence from prior work
2.1         Surveys in which participants judge distributions of resources
One category of prior research takes an approach closely related to this paper’s, using surveys in which
participants are asked to rank di¤erent distributions of resources, usually income, across members of hypo-
thetical societies. This approach has been pursued by many researchers and is especially associated with
the political scientists Norman Frohlich and Joe A. Oppenheimer.1 For example, Frohlich and Oppenheimer
(1992) ask their survey respondents to choose, as both individuals and in deliberative small groups, among
hypothetical income distributions. Respondents are told that each distribution is based on a particular
principle of distributive justice, the basics of which are also described in the survey. Respondents receive
payments based on the distribution they choose and, in some cases, on their productivity in a task com-
pleted after making their choice. This and other studies by Frohlich and Oppenheimer, and their coauthors,
establish a number of important …ndings, three of which are most relevant to the purposes of this paper.
First, they …nd that "...subjects preferred a compromise. This implies that individuals treat choice between
principles as involving marginal decisions. Principles are much like economic goods inasmuch as individuals
are willing to trade o¤ between them [italics in the original]."2 Second, they …nd that "The experiments
demonstrated an almost total lack of support for the [Rawlsian] di¤erence principle."3 Third, they …nd that
"A ‡oor constraint without a ceiling was dominant...", where by "‡oor constraint" they refer to the principle
they de…ne as "The most just distribution of income is that which maximizes the average income only after
a certain speci…ed minimum income is guaranteed to everyone."
    1 SeeFrohlich, Oppenheimer, and Eavey (1987), Frohlich and Oppenheimer (1992), and Frohlich, Oppenheimer, and Kurki
(2004).
   2 Frohlich, Oppenheimer, and Eavey (1987).
   3 Frohlich and Oppenheimer (1992).




                                                          6
    A number of studies …nd results consistent with Frohlich and Oppenheimer. Scott, Matland, Michelbach,
and Bornstein (2001) ask participants to rank a set of income distributions that re‡ect di¤erent levels of
"e¢ ciency," by which is meant average income, and "equality," by which is mean the top-bottom quintile
income ratio. They also vary, across participants, information on the role of luck in income and on the
poverty line. As noted in the Introduction, they …nd that most people use multiple principles when judging
these income distributions. Mitchell, Tetlock, Mellers, and Ordonez (1993) ask participants to perform a
similar task. They …nd more support than do Frohlich and Oppenheimer for policy prioritizing the least
well-o¤, but they nevertheless …nd that "The overwhelming majority of subjects made trade-o¤s between
equality and e¢ ciency."
    This paper’s survey shares many features and results with this …rst line of prior research. An important
shared feature is the placement of the participant in an objective position. Removing the individual’s direct
self-interest from the policy choice is essential if we hope to mimic the planner’s problem at the heart of the
optimal tax model. A second valuable shared feature is that most of these studies, like this paper’s, give
respondents choices that uncover whether normative principles tend to be used in isolation or combination.
As does this paper, they …nd strong evidence that most individuals prefer normative diversity.4
    It is equally important to understand the key di¤erence between this …rst category of prior research and
the current paper: unlike prior research, this paper is designed to carefully mimic the planner’s problem from
optimal tax theory. Two characteristics of prior research are at odds with that planner’s problem.
    First, all of the cited studies, among many others, frame the participants’choices in terms of "income,"
the interpretation of which is unclear.5 The problem with the use of "income" is that the relationship between
it and "utility," which is more likely the true outcome of interest, is unspeci…ed. Do preferences over the
distribution of "income" accurately capture preferences over utility? Related, we might wonder whether the
preference for maximal average income subject to a ‡oor constraint would hold if the distributions included
more of the plausible components of utility, not just income (e.g., labor e¤ort and consumption). In contrast,
this paper’s survey shows respondents both after-tax incomes and before-tax incomes, which the households
must earn through labor e¤ort.
    Second, a related but more fundamental di¤erence between this body of research and the current paper is
that most of the income distributions used in the former re‡ect neither feasibility nor incentive constraints.
Usually, they were (or at least appear to have been) generated without taking into account required govern-
ment expenditure or elasticities of labor e¤ort. Those simpli…cations may be innocuous in many contexts,
but they are incompatible with the exercise at the heart of this paper, namely to use stated preferences over
policies to calibrate a fully-speci…ed planner’s problem. In this paper, all of the distributions among which
respondents choose are feasible, given a …xed level of government expenditure, and incentive compatible,
using a standard calibrated individual utility function.
   4 Frohlich and Oppenheimer …nd a preference for maximizing average income subject to a ‡oor constraint. That …nding may

be consistent with the result in this paper that most respondents prefer policies that assess small positive or negative average
tax rates on the lowest-earning (Carter) household.
   5 It seems likely that these researchers intended "income" as a shortcut for after-tax income. One uncertainty this shortcut

generates is what their study participants inferred about the work e¤ort of households–in other words, how much of the income
was earned versus due to transfers?




                                                               7
2.2     Surveys in which participants evaluate normative criteria directly
A second category of prior research sidesteps the inference of normative preferences from choices over dis-
tributions and simply uses narrative questions directly about distributive justice and normative principles.6
Feldman and Zaller (1992) is a prominent example. They ask a large group of Americans open-ended
questions such as "what kinds of things come to mind when you think about the government making sure
that every person has a good standard of living?" They classify the responses in various ways and analyze
what they call the "values" underlying them. Among many interesting …ndings, one is particularly rele-
vant for this paper: "Most people are internally con‡icted about exactly what kind of welfare system they
want...Ambivalence with respect to social welfare policy is more pronounced among welfare liberals...They
end up acknowledging the values of economic individualism even as they try to justify their liberal prefer-
ences." Gainous and Martinez (2005) use a more structured version of this approach by asking respondents
to react on a positive-negative scale to statements such as "The government should provide programs that
improve the standard of living of poor Americans." They conclude that "a sizable chunk of the Ameri-
can public is, in fact, ambivalent to some degree about social welfare."7 At the other extreme, Hochschild
(1981) is an important early example of particularly intensive, one-on-one interviews that tries to understand
how individuals reason about distributive justice. It concludes: "Some people...hold beliefs that are predomi-
nately clear and sharp–but even they express some ambivalence. Others...hold beliefs that are predominately
ambivalent and blurred–but even they express the dominant pattern much of the time."
    As in these studies, the current paper’s survey includes questions that directly ask respondents about
the importance of e¤ort versus luck in determining income, the role of government, and (most important)
their normative preferences. In particular, I ask respondents to choose among three statements describing
di¤erent ways of distributing "sacri…ce from paying taxes." This question directly gauges their support for
the principle of Equal Sacri…ce, with the results as described in Section 3.
    At the same time, the research design of studies in this category is of limited use for the purposes of the
current paper. The strength of individuals’support for di¤erent normative principles as measured by these
studies cannot inform the calibration of weights on them in a planner’s problem. For that, we must have
individuals choose between the consequences of having di¤erent weights.


2.3     Experiments in which participants produce and distribute resources
Rather than having participants choose between hypothetical income distributions or normative principles,
a third category of studies has had participants play a version of the dictator game in which they propose a
distribution of resources (in some cases, they have a role in producing those resources as well). These studies
are part of a broader literature within experimental economics on why individuals make choices in the lab
that seem to contradict pure self-interest. Their results support this paper’s …ndings, despite the substantial
di¤erence between the two research designs.8
   6 Note that the Frohlich and Oppenheimer (1992) surveys also made their normative criteria explicit. Research by James

Konow uses targeted vignettes to elicit participants’judgments on fairness (see Konow 2001, 2003). While fairness is certainly
part of what goes into most people’s judgments on policies, it is far enough from "best" or "optimal" that its implications for
this paper remain unclear.
   7 Fong (2001) uses similar survey evidence to show that variation in beliefs about what explains individual outcomes is a

major factor behind disparate opinions on redistribution.
   8 The main challenge for these studies, in the context of this paper, is how generalizable their results are from small-scale

experiments to tax policy. The economic stakes in these experiments are negligible compared to those at issue in tax policy.
Related, it is unclear whether decisions over the allocations of these dictator games re‡ect decisions these respondents would
make as a social planner, with no self-interest, who must respect incentive compatibility and feasibility constraints.




                                                               8
    Prominent contributions to this category are Fehr and Schmidt (1998), Bolton and Ockenfels (2000),
and Charness and Rabin (2002). All three of these papers show that a mixture of self-interest and other
concerns, such as for equitable outcomes, can explain experimental results. Englemann and Strobel (2004),
Bolton and Ockenfels (2006), Fehr and Schmidt (2006), and Engelmann and Strobel (2006) continue the
study of exactly which other concerns are relevant and in what combination. The …rst of these concludes: "a
combination of e¢ ciency concerns, maximin preferences, and sel…shness can rationalize most of the data."
Frohlich, Oppenheimer, and Kurki (2004) take a related approach and …nd that the "just deserts" emphasized
by Libertarians exert in‡uence on most dictators in allocation games with production.
    Another important set of recent studies with this approach is by Cappelen et al, (2007, 2010). In
Cappelen et al.(2010), each participant chooses how much money to invest, receives a stochastic rate of
return on his investment, and then proposes an allocation of resources between him and another participant.
The researchers de…ne three competing notions of fairness that yield distinct implications depending on the
outcomes of the experiment: egalitarian, libertarian, and liberal egalitarian. They can therefore infer the
proportions of the participant pool that holds each fairness view. Though Cappelen et al (2010) does not
allow for the possibility that a given individual may use multiple fairness criteria, they show the related
…nding that multiple fairness criteria, including some less redistributive than Utilitarianism, are used in a
population of individuals. They write, "there is considerable pluralism in the fairness ideals that motivate
the participants, even in a rather simple distribution situations involving a homogenous group of students."


3    Appendix Table 1: wage distributions by tagged group
The following table lists the wage distributions by tagged group, adjusted for the NLSY’s sample weights.
The representative wage rate in each bin is the mean wage, again adjusted for sample weights, across the
population within that bin range. The sample weights adjustments have only minor e¤ects on the mean
wages and the population distributions. In particular, simulations using unweighted means and distributions
(reported in earlier, working paper versions of this paper) yield results on optimal tagging and income taxa-
tion that closely resemble the results with weighting and that are consistent with the qualitative conclusions




                                                      9
reached here.

                          Appendix Table 1: Wage distributions by tagged group
          1        2         3      4      5        6      7      8         9     10      11     12
         Tall     Med.     Short   Tall   Tall    Short   Med.   Med.     Short   Tall   Med.   Short
          M        M        M       M      F        M      M      F         F      F      F       F
 Wage    White    White    White   NW     White    NW     NW     White    White   NW     NW      NW
 2.89     0.02     0.03     0.03   0.03   0.04    0.06    0.09     0.08   0.12    0.05   0.12   0.12
 6.53     0.10     0.12     0.13   0.23   0.24    0.23    0.27     0.29   0.27    0.30   0.26   0.29
 10.07    0.21     0.22     0.23   0.23   0.24    0.24    0.16     0.23   0.23    0.31   0.31   0.25
 13.86    0.23     0.20     0.24   0.15   0.18    0.21    0.14     0.21   0.16    0.13   0.14   0.18
 17.82    0.15     0.15     0.14   0.21   0.13    0.09    0.15     0.08   0.09    0.13   0.08   0.09
 21.73    0.11     0.12     0.09   0.02   0.09    0.07    0.12     0.05   0.05    0.05   0.06   0.04
 27.26    0.11     0.09     0.08   0.10   0.04    0.06    0.03     0.03   0.06    0.02   0.01   0.03
 43.59    0.05     0.06     0.06   0.02   0.03    0.02    0.02     0.03   0.01      –    0.01    –
 62.20    0.02     0.01     0.01   0.03   0.01    0.01    0.03     0.01   0.01      –      –      –
 94.05    0.003   0.002    0.002     –    0.003   0.005     –     0.004   0.007     –      –     –




                                                  10
4    Survey screen shots (complete)
The following are the pages as seen by survey participants. Each frame represents a separate screen.




                                           Figure A1: Welcome screen




                                            Figure A2: Consent screen




                                                    11
Figure A3: First example household screen




                 12
Figure A4: Example with two households screen




                  13
Figure A5: Questions to test numeracy and understanding of concepts




                                14
Figure A6: Pre-tax income distribution under no taxation screen




                              15
Figure A7: First choice (A, B) screen




                 16
Figure A8: Second choice (A,C,D,E) screen




                   17
Figure A9: Third choice (B,D,F,G) screen




                  18
Figure A10: Response to height tax proposal, and followup free text entry




                                 19
Figure A11. Response to blindness tax proposal, and followup free text entry




                                  20
Figure A12: Perspectives on role of government and the distribution of sacri…ce screen




                                         21
Figure A13: Political perspectives screen




                   22
Figure A14: Household economic status screen




                    23
Figure A15. Household demographics screen




         Figure A16: Closing screens




                   24
