NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SEARCH METHOD USE
BY UNEMPLOYED YOUTH

Harry J. Hoizer

Working Paper No. 1859

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1986

I would like to thank William Dickens and Carl Davidson for helpful
comments as well as assistance. This work was supported with
funding from NSF Grant No. SES—8408876, as well as a Research
nitiation Grant From Michigan State University. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

ER Working Paper #1859
Narch 1986

Search ethod Use by Unemployed Youth

ABSTPAC

In

this paper I investigate the use of different search methods by

unemployed youth. I present a job search model which shows that search method
choices should be related to their costs and expected productivities, as well
as other factors

Such as nonwage income and wage offer distributions.

I then present empirical evidence on the use of these methods and their

effects on employment outcomes. These results show that the most frequently
used search methods, which are friends and relatives and direct applications

without referral, are also the most productive in generating job offers and
acceptances. Econometric evidence then shows that the number of methods used
is affected by factors which presumably reflect market opportunities as well
as income sources and needs. While the use of specific search methods respond

differently to these factors, they are chosen in a manner which generates
positive average effects on employment outcomes for those who use them. The
results are thus consistent with the search model presented here.

Harry J. Hoizer
tpartrrnt of Economics
Michigan State University

East Lansing, MI 4824

2

temporary layoff, or tastes for leisure. The notion that particular kinds of

search, such as checking with friends and relatives, may be low in time—
intensity but high in productivity has not been emphasized in the search
literature to date.

There has also been limited empirical work done on the choices and
effects of specific methods of search.

Summary evidence has been frequently

provided on search method use and on methods by which recent jobs were
obtained.6 But there have been few attempts to systematically explore the
determinants of search method choices or their different effects on employment
outcomes of individuals.7

This paper is an attempt to extend our understanding of these issues. I
first present a job search model which relates search method choices to their

expected costs and productivities, among other factors.

Whether different

search methods are complements or substitutes in the production of job offers
turns out to be an important determinant of these relationships.

I then provide some empirical evidence from a sample of unemployed
youth.8 There are two aims in the empirical analysis:

(1) To explore the

factors which cause young unemployed workers to use different methods of
search; and (2) to analyze the effects of these search method choices on
certain outcomes for these job seekers. The use of various search methods is

measured both extensively (i.e., the number of search methods used) and

intensively (i.e., the amount of time spent using each method).

The

employment outcomes considered are job offers and acceptances. The data used

in the empirical work are taken from the Youth Cohort of the National
Longitudinal Survey (NLS) for the year 1981.

I.

Introduction

It is a fundamental fact, long known to labor economists and sociologists

as well as to the lay person, that many people hear about or obtain their jobs

through friends and relatives.' This method is less costly in time and money

than virtually any other, and may be more productive than most in terms of
generating job offers.

This higher productivity derives from the fact that

employers seem to regard referrals from their current employees as being more
informative and reliable than direct applications from prospective employees.2

Employees also regard their employed friends and relatives as reliable sources

of information.3 On the other hand, making contact with and applying to firms

directly without such information may be costly and less effective in many
places.

The use of state employment agencies has also been known to be of

very limited effectiveness in matching employers and workers.4

While these stylized facts have long been known to economists, there are
few formal economic models which incorporate them. Saloner (1985) has modeled
the "old boys' network" as a screening mechanism, while Pissarides (1979) and

Barron and Mellow (1982) have focused on state employment agencies in their
work. But more general search models in which individuals choose among a set

of methods with different costs and expected productivities have yet to be
presented.

This issue has particular relevance for models where search effort is

analyzed, since such effort is generally treated as a single uniform
activity.5 The low level of search intensity among the unemployed which has
often been observed in survey data is therefore explained in these models by

various factors such as Unemployment Insurance, the awaiting of recall from

4

search effort nnd employment probabilities of various groups are explained as

The next section presents the empirical results, while the final

well.

section presents the conclusion.

II. The Model

The theoretical model which is used here to motivate the empirical
analysis is a direct extension of a particular model developed by Burdett
(1980).

The model posits that, in each period, unemployed individuals

maximize the sum of current and expected future utility.9

The latter is a

weighted average of the utilities derived from working and not working, and

the weights represent the probabilities of being in each of these states.
Individuals maximize their utility by choosing a reservation wage and search
effort. Each unit of search which is undertaken lowers current period utility

of the unemployed because the costs of search in time and money must be
deducted from the individual's nonwage income and leisure time.

However,

search is productive in that it raises the probability of receiving an offer,
which raises the expected future utility of being employed.

The major innovation in the version of the model presented here is that
individuals choose from a set of search methods which vary in both cost and
productivity for any given individual.

For instance, checking with friends

and relatives for information and "contacts" should be less costly and
possibly more productive than other methods. The costs and productivities can

also vary across individuals for any given search method, according to the
skills, background, and place of residence.

Thus individuals who have few

employed friends and relatives or who live far from business areas may find

direct contact with firms more costly and the use of friends and relatives
less productive than will other individuals.

3

The major empirical findings can be summarized as follows:

1.

The methods of search used most frequently and most intensively by
unemployed youth are checking with friends and relatives and direct

application, respectively. These are also the most productive in

terms of generating job offers and acceptances, conditional on

The acceptance rate for offers generated by friends and

use.

relatives is particularly high.
2.

The number of search methods used by each individual is positively

affected by one's expected offer probability and by being married

and is negatively affected by being on layoff.

These variables

presumably reflect market opportunities as well as income sources
and needs. The determinants of specific search method use are more
varied.
3.

Individuals choose search methods so that the number of search
methods used has a positive effect on actual offers received (arid
accepted).

Use of specific methods also have positive effects on

offers in most cases.
Overall,

search method choices appear

to

be based on relative

productivities and costs, as the search model suggests they should be. The

central importance of informal job search methods, especially friends and
relatives, is also underscored here, though extensive use of several search
methods can be beneficial as well.

The rest of the paper is organized into three sections. In the first of

these I present a theoretical job search model that incorporates search
methods which vary in cost arid productivity, for a particular individual and

also across individuals.

The implications of such a model for explaining

5

More formally, individuals perform the following maximization:

Max U= v(Y — E c.SM., L —
SM

t.SM.)
.I

+

n(sM1,...,sM.)(1

—

F(Wr))E((W)IWr)

.1

1)

:

+ (1 — ri(sti1,

...,

SM.))

(1 —

F(wr))U÷l

where

is the reservation wage; SM1...,SM are the number of times each of

the j

search methods is used; U is total expected utility at period t; v is

current period utility, Y is outside income, and L is leisure;

c and t are

monetary and time costs per unit of SM; r[ is the offer probability function;
f(w) is the wage offer distribution; and i4. is the utility function for work in

the next period.

For the sake of simplicity, it is assumed here that c and

are constants, though it will be assumed below that each method has
diminishing effects on offer probabilities (i.e., r. > 0 and ii.. <

0). A

zero discount rate is also assumed throughout for algebraic simplicity, though
results are not affected by this.

The following first—order conditions determine choice of reservation wage
and search method use:

2)

(Wr)

3)

v1c. +

v2t.

n. f (ip(w) — U÷i)f(w)dw for every j

Equation (2) states that the utility of employment must equal the expected
utility of being unemployed in the next period. Equation (3) states that use

of each search method is chosen to equate its marginal costs (in time and
money) with its marginal benefit, where the latter is the expected gain in

6

utility from being employed that each search method provides.

Corner

solutions in which search methods are not used because costs exceed benefits
at any level of usage can also occur for any method; if true for all methods,

no search is undertaken. Thus the model determines labor force participation

as well as use of particular search methods.

Total search time (ST) and

search costs (SC) undertaken are also determined:

33tSM.
J

4)

ST =

5)

SC = E c.SM.

33 J

Total search time and costs thus capture extensive use of search methods as
well as intensive use —
spent per method.

i.e.,

number of methods used as well as time or cost

The choices of search method use and reservation wage

together determine the probability of an individual being employed in any
particular period:

6)

P = TE(SM1,...,SN.)(1

—

F(Wr))

with search methods determining offer probabilities and reservation wages
determining probabilities of offer acceptance.

It should be noted that the model can be extended to allow for search

method effects on the wage offer distribution as well as

the offer

probabilities. This would enable some search methods to result in higher wage

offers than others.

In this case, search methods will affect employment

probabilities through job acceptances as well as through offers:

7

4

= ll.(1

_______

- F(Wr)) +

where both terms would now be positive.11 Search methods would also affect
the expected wage at time of employment in this case.'2

Comparative statics are generated in this model by total differentiation

of Equations (2) and (3).

For the sake of simplicity, we consider a two—

factor case below where j = 1, 2. We also assume constant marginal utility of
income and separability of income and leisure during the current period.

The effect of changes in the costs and the productivity respectively of
search method on its own use are as follows:
1122(v1 —

dSM
dc

1

T (1T11

—
dSM

ir22v2

dt1

dSM

—

dT

2

12

dt

dT\+ 112

1112

1

a

1

T (itt, 22 —

1122 (T +

:1111=

r

22

2 12

2

1

where T =

+
1

8)

10)

dT

( (w) —

1

T

12

+ 2 12 E
1

22 —
f(w)dw.

2

12

Assuming that the denominator in each

case is positive (on the basis of second—order conditions) the signs of these

derivatives depend on two terms:

the cross—method effect on offer

probabilities (i.e., 12 and the effects of each change on the benefits of
future employment (i.e., dT/d).

If the latter were zero, then the signs would be unambiguous:

rising

costs of methods would lower own use and rising productivity would raise use,

as intuition suggests they would.

However, this would require the strong

8

assumption that changes in costs and productivities last only for the current
period.

While possibly true in some particular cases (e.g., cyclically

induced changes in offer probabilities or temporarily available positions),
the more relevant considerations involve permanent differences in costs and
productivities

across

individuals

different

with

backgrounds

and

characteristics. Such differences affect T only through their effect on

the expected utility of being unemployed and searching next period.
Given the recursive nature of the model, the magnitudes of the latter effects

cannot be determined. However, it seems safe to assume that rising costs of

search methods will lower expected utility next period, thereby raising
utility of employment (i.e, dU÷1/dc1 < 0, dT/dc1 > 0, dU+i/dti < 0,
dT/dt1 > 0); while rising productivities will have the c

osite

effects

(i.e., dU÷i/d1ri > 0, dTIth1 < 0).

Under these more general assumptions, two conditions are sufficient for

there to be negative effects of costs on use of own methods:

1)

The two

methods are either substitutes or independent in the production of offers

(i.e., 12 0); and 2)

The effects of costs on the utility of future

employment are relatively small (i.e., -a.—— <
1

—, —-- < —).
111

Likewise,

the

1

effects of productivities on use of own methods are positive when cross—method

effects are the same and when effects on future employment are again fairly
small in absolute value (i.e., dT/dii1 > —

Tin1).

The effects of various other factors on search method use can be
similarly determined. For instance, the effects of non—wage income and shifts
In wage offer distributions on search method use are as follows:
dT
dSM1 —
dy

T

'm n12

—

l

22 +

22
2

9

dT
12.

dSM1 —
df(wY —

df(w) 2 12 —
T

22 +

1 22
2

12

Assuming that the utility of future employment is negatively affected by
outside income (i.e., dT/dy K 0), we obtain unambiguously negative effects of

such income on search method use if the two search methods are either
complements or independent (i.e., 12 0).

Likewise, we obtain positive

effects of shifts in the wage distribution in search method use assuming that
the utility of future employment is positively affected by such shifts
(i.e., dT/df(w) > 0) with the same cross—method effects.

The model therefore implies that the use of different search methods may

respond differently to changes in any of these particular factor. The fact
that

substitutabiLity of methods

ensure5 results in

some cases and

complementarity ensures them in others need not be too surprising.

The

changes in costs and productivities considered above are method—specific,
while those involving nonwage income and wage offerfare more general. Nethod—

specific changes should have stronger effects when methods are substitutes,

since overall search effort needn't change greatly when use of methods
change. On the other hand, general changes should have stronger effects when
methods are complements, since these changes would then affect these methods
in similar fashions and result in higher or lower search effort overall.

It should also be remembered that, by the assumptions stated above,

higher frequency of use for any search method should lower its ex—post
marginal product in generating offers.

This occurs to the point where

marginal products equal marginal costs of use for each method. Thus, lower

cost methods may show higher frequency of use and therefore lower ax—post
marginal (and average) productivity than higher cost referrals; while methods
with higher ex—ante productivity may also show higher frequency and therefore

10

comparable ex—post marginal (though still higher average) products relative to

other methods of search. These comparisons are valid across individuals for
the same method of search as well as across methods for the same Individual.

Finally, the dynamics of the model should be noted. As with most optimal
search models, the process will continue from one period to the next until an

acceptable job offer is received.

During that time, both reservation wages

and use of search methods may change.

In particular, declining flows of

outside income may change use of search methods, while changing expectations

of wage offers may also have effects.

If the marginal value of leisure

declines over time, this may provide another reason for search method use to
rise.

Therefore, use of search methods should be affected by the prior

duration of unemployment, though the effects of duration are unclear.

III. Empirical Results

The empirical analysis described below is based on data from the Youth

Cohort of the National Longitudial Survey (NLS).

This cohort has been

surveyed each year since 1979, and data regarding search behavior are
available in each panel. However, the 1981 panel contains an extensive set of

questions on use of particular search methods as well as their effects. The
analysis below is therefore limited to these data.

The NLS in 1981 contains a list of search methods which often appear in
other surveys, such as the CPS. These methods include "formal" methods, such

as the use of private or state employment agencies, CETA offices, labor
unions, school placement programs, etc.; as well as "informal" methods, such
as checking with friends and relatives, newspapers, schoolteachers or

professors, etc.

Applying directly to employers without referral is also

listed as a method of search. Since there are too many methods listed here to

11

be studied in detail, the analysis below focuses on the four methods most

frequently used by both white and black youth:

friends and relatives,

newspapers, state employment agencies, and direct employer contact without
referral. All other methods are combined below into an additional category.
For every individual who reports having searched for work in the previous

month, the NLS asks whether each specific method has been used during that
time. For those who answer affirmatively on any method, a set of questions is
then asked about the effects of using those methods. In particular, users are

asked whether or not each method resulted in job offers and job acceptances.
Other questions are asked as well for users of each method, such as time spent
using that method and wages on any offer obtained.

The sample used below is limited to nonenrolled and nonenlis ted young

males (age 16 through 23) who were unemployed at the time of search.

To

obtain this last group, we include the currently unemployed as well as those

among the the employed who had searched in the previous month and whose
employment durations were 30 days or less.'3

Table 1 presents means on search method use by young blacks and whites.
All means are weighted to account for NLS oversarnpling of low—income whites.

The first row shows that the average number of methods used by unemployed

jobseekers is a bit over three. Thus search does not appear to constitute a
single, uniform activity for those seeking employment.

The next five rows

show the proportion of jobseekers who used each method of search.

These

extensive measures indicate that the two most frequently used methods of
search are friends and relatives and direct application, respectively.

The

higher frequency of use for these methods is consistent with previous evidence
based on census data for youth and older groups (Bradshaw, 1973).

The time spent using each method appears in the next five rows.'4 These

Table 1

Search Method Used and Time Spent
by Unemployed Youth
Means and Standard Deviations

Number of Methods Used

3.286
(1.261)

Percentage Who Used:
Friends/Relatives
Direct ApplicatIon
State Agency
Newspaper
Other Methods

.852
.796
.538
.578
.524

Time Spent by Those Who Used:
Friends/Relatives

316.65
(549.82)

Direct Application

385.37
(548.19)

State Agency

217.88
(301.63)

Newspaper

238.68
(309.26)

Other Methods

247.01
(375.28)

Note:

These calculations are based on data from the 1981 panel of the NLS,
Youth Cohort. All means are weighted. The sample size for number of
methods used and percentage using each method is 608. For time spent,
236 for friends and relatives; 182 for direct
sample sizes are:
application; 102 for state agencies; 142 for newspapers; and 108 for
other methods. The sample includes nonenrolled and nonenlisted males
who were unemployed and searching in the previous month.

12

intensive

measures of use include only those who used each method and for whom

time spent was not missing. The results show that friends and relatives, as

well as direct application, are used most intensively as well.

Since this

measure reflects time costs per unit of search method as well as frequency of

use per person (Equation (4)); and since these time costs are likely to be
relatively low for use of friends and relatives; we can infer that frequency

of use for this method of search is substantially higher than that for any
other method.

Table 2 presents summary measures of outcomes for the entire sample and

for each search method.

These measures include the fraction of users who

obtained job offers and accepted job offers for the entire sample and for
users of each method.

The results show that 34% of the unemployed have received at least one

offer in the previous month, and that 12% report more than one. The latter
figure may, however, be biased upward by some who report a single offer twice

for different methods of search.'5

Almost 28% of the unemployed report

accepting new employment in the previous month. This constitutes about 82% of
all

individuals with offers and about 70% of all offers made.

The results for each method show that the two methods most likely to
result in job offers and job acceptances are friends and relatives and direct
application. In fact, these two methods account for about 67% of all reported

offers and 74% of all accepted offers.

While it has long been known that a

large fraction of jobs are obtained from "informal search" and especially from

friends and relatives, the results of Tables 1 and 2 establish for the first
time that these high fractions reflect both higher productivity in generating
jobs and higher frequency of use among these methods.16

In fact, the high frequency and intensity of use for friends and

Table 2

Outcomes of Search Methods Used
by Unemployed Youth

Percentage of Job Seekers
Who Reported Offers:
One
Two or More

.220
.120

Percentage Who Reported
Offers From Use of:
Friends/Relatives
Direct Application
State Agency
Newspaper
Other Methods

.177
.186
.089
.099
.078

Percentage of Job Seekers Who
Reported Job Acceptance:

One
Two or More

.234
.043

Percentage Who Reported
Acceptance From Use Of:
Friends/Relatives
Direct Applications
State Agency
Newspaper
Other Methods

Note:

.143
.121
.048
.040
.050

Samples for those reporting offers and acceptances for each method
include only those who used each one. All means are weighted.

13

relatives and for direct application may be at least partly explained by the

high productivity of these methods in producing offer and acceptances, as
predicted by the theoretical model presented above.

It should be noted here

that the measures listed in Table 2 reflect ex—post rather than the ex—ante

outcomes needed for testing the theory.

However, ex—post outcomes will be

relatively lower for methods with high frequency of use if productivity
dimishes as frequency rises. If this is the case for friends and relatives or
direct application, the ex—ante outcomes for these methods are presumably even

higher and the result of high use for high productivity methods continues to
hold.

The results on friends and relatives are particularly striking, in that

of all offers received through this method are accepted —
well above that of any other method listed. Since acceptance or
81%

offers

a

percentage

rejection of

presumably is based on a comparison of offered wages with reservation

wages, this finding implies that job offers obtained through friends and
relatives generally have higher wages and/or more appealing

nonwage

characteristics than those otherwise obtained. This result is consistent with

evidence showing low rates of quits out of such jobs (Datcher, 1983).17 Also
it further explains the high frequency of use for this method observed above,
as would its apparently low cost of use (in both time and money).

Finally,it is worth noting that differences in search method use between

groups of individuals may also be explained by differences in relative
productivities for these groups across these methods.

While black—white

differences in search method use and outcomes are explored elsewhere at
greater length (Holzer, 1986 (b)), it is worth noting here that time spent on

friends and relatives and on direct application is higher for whites while

time spent on other methods is higher for blacks.'8

Likewise, the racial

14

differences in job offers for users of each method are generally highest for

the first two (i.e., informal) methods (Hoizer, 1986 (b)).

Thus, the

prediction of the search model above that productivity of search methods
affect their use appears to be supported by evidence across groups as well as
for the unemployed overall.

We now consider some econometric evidence on the determinants and
outcomes of search method use among unemployed youth. Tables 3 thru 5 present
estimated coefficients from equations of the following general form:

S1 =

13)

S

= 0

14)

(Z1,

O)

+

(Xi, Si) +

—

where S. is some measure of search method use for the i th individual; 0.1
1

represents an employment outcome which depends on search choices; the X are a

vector of personal characteristics which affect offer probabilities and/or

wage offers; and

are other characteristics which affect search choices,

based on Equations 2) arid 3) above. While expected outcomes enter the search
choice equations, these choices themselves enter the ex—post outcome equations

and are considered exogenous.

While reservation wage formation is not

explicitly considered among the search choices here, it could be thought of as
a joint product of Equation 13) and an additional determinant of some outcomes
from Equation 14).

In Table 3 consider estimates of Equation 13) in which the dependent
variables are the number of search methods used in the previous month, while

in Table 4 we consider estimates in which the dependent variables are
dichotomous variables for the use of each of the five search methods.2° In

Table 3

Equations for Number of Search t1ethods
Used by Unemployed Youth

1

Constant

Predicted Offers

3.031
(.170)

2

3.203
(.085)

.714

(.511)

On Layoff

Married

—.308
(.249)

—.288
(.253

.296
(.185)

.321
(.186)

Duration of Jobless Spell

DF

Note:

.029
(.037)

.005

.003

605

605

Predicted offers are based on estimated coefficients that appear in
the Appendix. Duration is measured in hundreds of days.

15

both cases, the

include a dichotomous variable for marital status, one for

being on layoff, and the duration of the current spell of unemployment. The
predicted outcome variable is the probability of obtaining an offer, estimated

from a first stage equation which included the Z and
variables.

The

as independent

include age, education, race, urban residence, region

(South v non—South), family income, and the local unemployment rate.

The

estimated equation upon which this variable is calculated appears in the
Appendix.

The decision to focus on extensive rather than intensive (i.e., time
spent) measures of search method use rested on the large number of missing

values and presumed measurement error (based on memory) of the latter.2'
Offer probabilities are used as the expected outcome because other possible

measures (e.g., acceptance probabilities or offered wages) were less
consistent with the theoretical model presented above or involved some
econometric difficulties.22

As for the Z.,, the variables included here in rio way consititute a
complete specification. Most clearly missing from this group is a variable
for Unemployment Insurance (or other sources of outside income). However, the

UI variables in the NLS Youth Cohort refer to the previous year rather than
month.

In these equations the layoff variable provides a rough proxy for

receipt of such funds as well as for the probability of being recalled.

In

addition, the marital status variable should capture marginal value of income
(as related to family responsibilities), while duration of unemployment should

capture income stocks or flows (from UI), tastes for leisure, and other
factors.23

The duration variable is treated as exogenous here, though some

possible biases are considered below.

Because of its high correlation with

the offer probability term (see Appendix), duration and offer probabilities

16

appear in separate specifications below. The equations for number of methods
used are estimated using OLS, while those for specific methods are estimated
using Probit.

The results of Table 3 show that there are several factors which
influence the number of search methods used. Expected offer probabilities and

being married have positive effects, while being on layoff has a negative
effect. The last result appears to reflect recall probabilities or receipt of

UI while on layoff and the first two appear to reflect expected returns to

search (and perhaps a higher marginal value of income among the married).
However,

these results are all only marginally significant, and the

explanatory power of the equation is quite weak.

When duration of

unemployment is included among the independent variables, it has a positive
though insignificant effect on search method use.

This, too, is consistent

with declining income and marginal value of time as a spell progresses. It is
also likely that this coefficient represents a lower bound to the true effect
of duration, due to various heterogeneity or selection effects.24

When similar equations are estimated for individual search method use,

the results are somewhat more varied.

Table 4 presents these estimates.

Offer probabilities have positive and marginally significant effects on three

methods, and insignificant negative effects on the other two.

It is perhaps

not surprising that the latter two effects occur for friends and relatives and

state employment agencies. The low cost of the former enables it to be used
even by those with low expected returns, and the latter is known to be used
primarily by those with few other opportunities. Marital status has effects
which are positive and at least marginally significant for two methods, while

being on layoff has similarly negative effects for two methods.
effects are mildly positive or close to zero in each case.

Duration

(.284)

.060

—.327
(.279)

—

On Layoff

Note:

572.74

—2 Log L

.805

620.80

—

—.052
(.277)

623.22

—.001
(.042)

—.068
(.282)

.133

(.216)

.115

(.096)

(.216)

.808
(.579)

.551
(.189)

Direct Application

822.00

——

(.253)

.003

(.205)

.711

—.199
(.513)

824.36

—.008
(.037)

—.004
(.257)

(.205)

.703

.095
(.085)

.141

(.170)

State Agency

830.52

——

(.251)

.027

—.160
(.185)

(.516)

.851

—.103
(.171)

834.40

(.037)

.027

(.254)

.043

—.130
(.185)

(.085)

.115

Newspaper

836.36

——

—.597
(.261)

(.187)

.006

(.513)

.579

—.110
(.170)

837.52

(.037)

.023

(.264)

—.583

(.187)

.024

(.085)

.033

Other Methods

Equations are estimated using Probit. Predicted offers are based on estimated coeficients which appear
in the Appendix, and duration is measured in hundreds of days.

514.06

(.046)

Duration of
Jobless Spell

—.255

.318
(.253)

(.632)
.338
(.254)

(.210)

—.136

.923
(.102)

1.067

Married

Predicted Offers

Constant

Friends/Relatives

Equations for Specific Search Methods
Used by Unemployed Youth

Table 4

17

These results therefore suggest that the use of specific search methods
varies across individuals with different opportunities in the labor market and

different sources or needs for income.

They are at least broadly consistent

with the model presented above in which search method use is chosen on the
basis of relative productivities and costs which can vary across people.

In Table 5 we turn to the effects of search method use on the production

of offers.

These estimates are based on Equation 14), and the dependent

variable is a dichotomous one for whether an offer has been received in the
previous month.

Two equations are presented:

one in which the number of

methods is used to reflect search method choice, and one in which separate
variables appear for the use of each specific method.

Both equations are

estimated using Probit.

The results show that the number of search methods used has a positive

and significant effect on the probability of receiving an offer. Estimated

equations in which the dependent variable was receipt of a job offer and
acceptance showed similar effects.25

The results thus stand In marked

contrast to those reported recently by Keeley and Robins (1985) ciho found

negative effects on number of methods used on the probability of gaining
employment. While they attribute the negative effects which they found to the

job search requirements of the UI system, it is very possible that their
results reflect the particular empirical specification which they use to
estimate these effects.26

As for the use of specific search methods, friends and relatives once

again shows the largest positive effect on receipt of offers, while state
agencies and newspapers show effects which are also positive and at least
marginally significant.

The effect for state agencies is particularly

Table 5

Equations for Offers Received From
Search Methods Used

1

Number of Methods Used

2

.145
(.045)

Methods Used:
.314
(.166)

Friends/Relatives

.038
(.138)

Direct Application

.138

State Agency

(.120)

Newspaper

.242
(.116)

Other

.037
(.118)

—2 Log L

Note:

736.91

733.82

Control variables include:
Equations are estimated using Probit.
age, education, region (South v, Non—South), urban residence, race,
family Income, and local unemployment rate.

18

noteworthy,

given their reputation for low effectiveness.

Furthermore, no

method shows a negative effect on receipt of offers.

These results thus show that, while different search methods may have
different effects on employment outcomes, they appear to be chosen in a manner

which generates positive effectS on these outcomes.

Methods which generate

fewer offers (such as state agencies) are chosen less frequently and mostly by

those with fewer other opportunities, but even these methods show some
effectiveness for those who use them. Given that there are presumably costs

for the use of each method, the finding of positive average effects on
outcomes is again consistent with a model in which individuals choose methods
which balance the relative productivities and costs of each.

IV.

CONCLUSION

In this paper I investigate the use of different search methods by
unemployed youth. I present a job search model which shows that search method
choices should be related to their costs and expected productivities, as well
as other factors such as nonwage income.

I then present empirical evidence on the use of these methods and their

effects on employment outcomes. These results show that the most frequently
used search methods, which are friends and relatives and direct application,

are also the most productive in generating job offers and acceptances. The
acceptance rate for offers generated by friends and relatives is particularly
high.

Econometric evidence then shows that the number of methods used is
affected by factors such as expected offers, marital status, and being on

19

layoff which presumably reflect market opportunities as well as income sources

and needs.

While the use of specific search methods respond differently to

these factors, they are chosen in a manner which generates positive average
effects on employment outcomes.

The results are thus consistent with the

model presented above in which individuals balance relative productivities and
costs across methods when choosing among them.

The fact that search methods are chosen more or less frequently by
different individuals and that these methods have significant effects on
outcomes suggests that they may be an important part of the labor market
process by which individuals are matched with jobs. More research is needed

to further our understanding of this process.

In particular, we need to

increase our understanding of why search methods vary in productivity across

individuals who differ in personal characteristics such as race and family
background.

Furthermore, we need to understand why the hiring policies of

firms vary in their reliance on employee referrals, direct applications, and

outside institutions.

These decisions by firms clearly affect the

productivities of search methods which are exogenously determined for
individuals in the model presented here.

Therefore, the analysis of search

method use in general equilibrium search models, as well as more empirical
analysis of both employer and employee search behavior, are clearly warranted.

20

FOOTNOTES
1.

See Reynolds (1951), Rees and Schultz (1970), and Cranovetter (1974).
For more recent evidence see Corcoran et.al. (1980) and Winship (1982).

2.

See Reynolds, op.cit.; also, Heneman et.al (1980), PP. 215—216.

3.

See Rees (1966). The greater reliability of Information so obtained and

its implication for reducing employee turnover is stressed in Datcher
(1983).
4.

Rees, op.cit.

5

For theoretical models of search effort choice, see Barron and McCafferty

(1977), Barron and Mellow (1979), Seate14979)) and Burdett (1980).

For

empirical evidence on search effort choices or effects see Rosenfeld
(1977), Barron and Mellon (1979), Barron and Gluey (1981), Yoon (1981)
and Chirinko (1982).
6.

See Bradshaw (1973) for summary evidence on search method use and Winship

op.cit. for evidence on methods by which recent jobs were obtained. Data

on the former are regularly collected and published by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, whereas those on the latter were based on a special
supplement to the January 1973 CPS.
7.

Barron and Gilley op.cit. and Chirinko op.cit. distinguish direct and
indirect search, on "self—directed' and "intermediary" methods. Keeley

and Robins (1985) distinguish "public" from other methods in their
analysis of number of search methods used on employment probabilities.
8.

This paper focuses on job search among unemployed youth only.

For

empirical evidence which compares job search between employed and
unemployed youth see Holzer (1986ctL

21

9.

The model is in the tradition of the "partial—partial" job search
literature where

individuals

face

exogenously determined

offer

probabilities and wage offer functions which reflect the demand side of
the labor market.

The model also focuses on unemployed search only,

though it could be modified to include search among the employed as well

10. Assuming increasing marginal costs rather than constant ones does not
appear to change any of the results of the model.

11. One way of modelling search method effects on wage offers is to assume

that the use of each search method shifts the entire wage offer
distribution by some amount v(SM). The new offer wage distribution then
becomes f*(w) = f(w—v).

d(1_F(Wr))

'r

The second term in Equation (7) then becomes:

df(w—v)

dw — f(Wr)

dSN.

>

which will be

greater than zero for small adjustments in wr.

12. Expected wages are E(w) =

rrwf()dW
W
w

r

a ( w) dw

13. Those out of the labor are excluded from the sample as well, so as not to

confound search method choices with more general labor force
participation decisions.

14. Hours spent on each method in the previous month are adjusted for those

who have stopped searching to accept new jobs.
is (30 —

The adjustment factor

D)/30, where D represents duration of current job in days.

15. Though the phrasing of questions imply that search methods are totally
independent in the production of job offers, it is certainly possible

22

that more than one of these methods has been used and that the same offer

is reported twice. There is, however, no obvious way of distinguishing
these cases from those in which more than one offer is actually recieved.

16. The question, "How did you obtain your most recent job?" reflects both
frequency of use and productivity in generating offers and acceptances.
For any method j, the probability that a job was obtained through j can

be written as p (E.jE) =

P(E.)

where P(E) is the probability of having

p(E)

obtained the job through j and P(E) is the probability of having obtained

any job. The numerator is a product of the probability of using method j
and the conditional probabilities of obtaining offers and accepting them
from using that method.

17. Datcher's interpretation of this result is that friends and relatives

provide better information about non—wage job characteristics and
therefore less quitting on the basis of new information about these
characteristics.

An alternative explanation is that the higher wage

relative to reservation wages (which reflect non—wage characteristics of
the job) of these jobs provides less incentive to quit.

13. Time spent on friends and relatives by whites and blacks are 331.8 and
Comparable numbers for the other methods

256.4 minutes, respectively.

are: 420.0 and 251.5 for direct applications; 194.4 and 291.3 for state

agencies; 225.0 and 291.5 for newspapers; and 209.2 and 382.2 for all
other methods. Fractions using each method are quite comparable between
the two groups.

19. Reservation wage formation and effects among unemployed youth are
considered in Hoizer (1986 c,d).

20. A preferable specification of these equations might have included

for

all five methods simultaneously, since the theory implies that relative

23

productivities of all methods are considered when choosing use for each
one.

However, attempts to estimate such expected productivities were

hampered by selection problems (since use of each is endogenous), small

sample sizes and wtcclinearity in Equation 13).

The effort was

therefore abandoned.

21. Sample sizes for time spent on each method appear in the note for Table
1. Missing values appear for half or more of the users of each method.

22. Acceptance probabilities have the appealing feature of reflecting wage
offers but the problem of reflecting reservation wages as well. First—
stage equations also had much lower explanatory power for this variable,
producing low variance among the predicted variables.

Furthermore, the

lower mean of this variable resulted in more predicted values outside of

the 0—1 range, which occurred in very few cases for the offer
probabilities. As for offered wages, these were hampered by small sample
sizes for most of the search methods considered here.

23. Another variable which might have been used to capture marginal value of
income was whether or not an individual lives at home, which was recently

shown to be related to youth employment status (McElroy, 1985).

This

variable was highly correlated with marital status, and the latter was
used instead (though results using the former variable were often quite
similar). Other variables which are frequently used to reflect discount
rates among job searchers (e.g., asset values) were not available in the
NLS Youth Cohort.

24. Since duration is presumably negatively correlated with unobserved skill,

and since skill appears to be positively correlated with search method
use, the resulting bias is downward on duration.

In particular, when

predicted offers were included along with duration in these equations,

24

the coefficients on both rose dramatically (though these results
presumably reflect the high correlation between these variables that is

apparent from

the

first—stage offer equation

in

the

Appendix.

Furthermore, if shorter spells (due to high search method use) are less
likely to be observed at the time of the survey, this "length bias" will
be downward as well.

25. The estimated coefficient and standard error on number of methods in this
equation was .109 and .048 respectively.

26. Since Keeley and Robins control for intermediate effects (e.g., employer
contacts) in their equations for new employment outcomes, the former may

be picking up the effects of choice variables. The fact that they also
control for UI search requirements in their equations casts doubt on the

claim that the negative effects of search methods can be explained by
these requirements.

25

REFERENCES

Barron, John and Otis Gilley.

"Job Search and Vacancy Contacts':

Note.

American Economic Review. September, 1981.
Barron, John and Stephen McCafferty.

"Job Search, Labor Supply, and the Quit

Decision." American Economic Review. September, 1977.

Barron, John and Wesley Mellow.

"Labor Contract Formation, Search

Requirements, and Use of Public Employment Service." Economic Inquiry.
July, 1982.

Barron, John.

"Search Effort in the Labor Market."

Journal of Human

Resources.

Bradshaw, Thomas. "Job Seeking Methods Used by Unemployed Workers." Monthly
Labor Review. February, 1973.

"Search, Leisure, and Individual Labor Supply."

Burdett, Kenneth.

In S.

Lippman and J. McCall (eds.) The Economics of Job Search. North Holland,
1980.

Chirinko, Robert.

"An Empirical Investigation of the Returns to Job

Search." American Economic Review. June, 1982.
Corcoran, March, et.al.

"Most Workers Find Jobs Through Word of Mouth.'

Monthly Labor Review. August, 1980.
Datcher, Linda.

"The Impact of Informal Networks on Quit Behavior." Review

of Economics and Statistics. August, 1983.
Granovetter, Mark.

"Getting a Job":

A Study of Contacts and Careers.

Harvard University Press, 1974.

Heneman, Herbert et.al.
Irwin, Inc., 1980.

Personal Human Resources Mangement.

Richard 1).

26

"Employed v. Unemployed Job Search:

Elolzer, Harry J..

A Comparison of

Choices and Outcomes Among Youth." Unpublished paper, 1986 (a).

"Informal Job Search and Black Youth Unemployment."

Holzer, Harry J.

Unpublished paper, 1986 (b).

Hoizer, Harry J. "Reservation Wages and Their Labor Market Effects for Black
and White Male Youth." Journal of Human Resources. Spring 1986 (c).
Hoizer, Harry J.

"Are Unemployed Black Youth Income — Maximizers?"

Southern

Economic Journal. January 1986 (d).

Keeley, Michael and Philip Robins.

"Government Programs, Job Search

Requirements, and the Duration of Unemployment."

Journal of Labor

Economics. July, 1985.
McElroy, Marjorie.

"The Joint Determination of Household Membership and

Market Work: The Case of Young Men." Journal of Labor Economics. July,
1985.

Pissarides, Christoper.

"Job Matchings With State Employment Agencies and

Random Search." Economic Journal, 1979.
Rees, Albert.

"Information Newtworks in Labor Markets." American Economic

Review. May, 1966.
Rees, Albert and George Schultz. Workers in an Urban Labor Market, 1970.

Reynolds, Lloyd. The Structure of Labor Markets. Harper and Row, 1951.
Rosenfeld, Carl.

"Job Search of the Unemployed."

Monthly Labor Review.

November, 1977.

Saloner, Garth. "The Old Boys' Network as a Screening Mechanism." Journal of

Labor Markets. July, 1985.
Seater, John.
1979.

"Job Search and Vacancy Contacts." American Economic Review.

27

Winship, Christopher.

Youth Employment."

Comment on A. Rees and W. Gray, "Family Effects on
R. Freeman and D. Wise (eds.).

The Youth Labor

Market. University of Chicago Press, 1982.

Yoon, Bong Joon.

"A Model of Unemployment Duration with Variable Search

Intensity." Review of Economics and Statistics. November, 1981.

Appendix
First—Stage Equation for Offer Probabilities
Constant

.296
(.194)

Age

.007
(.010)

Education:
High School

College

Race

—.014
(.041)
.181
(.180)

—.059
(.042)

South

—.018
(.043)

Urban Residence

.002
(.048)

Family Income

.003
(.002)

Family Income Missing

.015
(.050)

Local Unemployment Rate:
K 3%

—.026
(.056)

3 —

6%

—.012
(.043)

Duration of Unemployment Spell

—.056
(.014)

Married

—.026
(.070)

On Layoff

—.108
(.093)
.025

DF
Note:

595

Family Income variable includes zeroes for missing values and a
dummy variable which equals one in these cases.
Family income is
measured in thousands of dollars, while duration is measured in
hundreds of days.

