NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID THE COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT (CRA) LEAD TO RISKY LENDING?
Sumit Agarwal
Efraim Benmelech
Nittai Bergman
Amit Seru
Working Paper 18609
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18609

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

The authors thank Brent Ambrose, Gadi Barlevy, Charles Calomiris, Itzhak Ben-David, John Cochrane,
Doug Evanoff, Gene Fama, Erik Hurst, Benjamin Keys, Mitchell Petersen, Tomasz Piskorski, Raghuram
Rajan, Vikrant Vig, Luigi Zingales and seminar participants at Duke (Fuqua School of Business) and
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago for useful discussions. Caitlin Kearns provided outstanding research
assistance. The analysis in this paper was conducted and finalized while Agarwal was a senior financial
economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The views expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Sumit Agarwal, Efraim Benmelech, Nittai Bergman, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Did the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Lead to Risky Lending?
Sumit Agarwal, Efraim Benmelech, Nittai Bergman, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 18609
December 2012
JEL No. G01,G21,G38,H24,H31
ABSTRACT
Yes, it did. We use exogenous variation in banks’ incentives to conform to the standards of the Community
Reinvestment Act (CRA) around regulatory exam dates to trace out the effect of the CRA on lending
activity. Our empirical strategy compares lending behavior of banks undergoing CRA exams within
a given census tract in a given month to the behavior of banks operating in the same census tract-month
that do not face these exams. We find that adherence to the act led to riskier lending by banks: in the
six quarters surrounding the CRA exams lending is elevated on average by about 5 percent every quarter
and loans in these quarters default by about 15 percent more often. These patterns are accentuated
in CRA-eligible census tracts and are concentrated among large banks. The effects are strongest during
the time period when the market for private securitization was booming.

Sumit Agarwal
Associate Professor of Finance and Real Estate
NUS Business School
Mochtar Raidy Building, BIZ1
15 Kent Ridge Road
Singapore, 119245
ushakri@yahoo.com
Efraim Benmelech
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Nittai Bergman
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-632
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
nbergman@mit.edu
Amit Seru
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu

I.

Introduction
The role of financial regulation in fueling the recent financial crisis is being hotly debated

by academics, politicians, and policymakers (Mayer, Morrison and Piskorski, 2009). A central
piece of this heated discussion relates to the role played by the Community Reinvestment Act
(CRA) in the buildup to the financial crisis and, in particular, its impact on pre-crisis mortgage
lending standards. Although regulators and community groups strongly defend the act,
economists remain divided in their views on the role of the CRA in lowering underwriting
standards. This debate is best illustrated by the stark views taken by economists Raghuram Rajan
and Paul Krugman. Rajan (2010) suggests that the CRA was the channel through which “a US
Congress, worried about growing income inequality, towards expanding low income housing,
joined with the flood of foreign capital inflows to remove any discipline on home loans.”1 In
contrast, Krugman (2010) argues that “the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 was irrelevant
to the subprime boom.”2
Most empirical studies find that the CRA had little or no effect when looking into a
battery of dependent variables (e.g., Dahl, Evanoff, and Spivey 2000 and Kroszner 2008). This
lack of results makes it hard to conclude whether the CRA truly had no impact on lending
standards or, alternatively, whether the empirical approaches used employed insufficient
variation to identify the causal effect of the act. In this paper we attempt to fill this gap. Using
exogenous variation in banks’ incentives to conform to CRA standards around regulatory exams,
we study whether the CRA led to riskier lending. By tracing out banks’ responses to CRA
evaluations in terms of both the quality and the quantity of mortgages originated, we show
clearly that the CRA did lead to riskier lending.3
The main econometric challenge of an evaluation of the CRA’s impact is the lack of
counterfactual lending behavior in the absence of the CRA. Our empirical design addresses this
issue by exploiting variation in banks’ incentive to conform to CRA standards around regulatory
exams. The Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 instructs federal financial supervisory
agencies to encourage their regulated financial institutions to help meet credit needs of the
communities in which they are chartered while also conforming to “safe and sound” lending
standards. To enforce the statute, federal regulatory agencies periodically examine banking
1

“Bankers Have Been Sold Short by Market Distortions.” Raghuram Rajan, Financial Times, June 2, 2010. See also
Calomiris 2008 and Calomiris 2011 for a similar view.
2
“Things Everyone in Chicago Knows.” Paul Krugman, krugman.blogs.nytimes.com, June 3, 2010.
3
For other studies on mortgage defaults see Mayer, Pence and Sherlund 2009 and Mayer, Morrison, Piskorski and
Gupta 2011 and cites therein.

1

institutions for CRA compliance. Regulators use this compliance information when approving
applications for new bank branches as well as for mergers and acquisitions. Banks may therefore
have a strong incentive to concentrate their CRA-compliant lending before an exam date to
ensure a satisfactory CRA evaluation while minimizing the likelihood that such lending would
fail the “safe and sound” criteria at the time of the exam.4 Moreover, since the exam itself is not
an instantaneous event, with a significant time gap between the exam initiation and the
submission of the final CRA report, banks also may choose to elevate their lending a few
quarters after the CRA exam.
Our empirical design exploits this intertemporal variation in incentives to comply with
CRA standards by comparing banks undergoing CRA exams (treatment group banks) to similar
banks operating in the same vicinity but not undergoing a CRA exam (control group banks). The
identifying assumption is that around the time of CRA exams, because of their increased
incentive to comply with CRA standards, banks will shift their lending behavior toward
borrowers that improve their CRA rating. By law, such borrowers include any applicant that is
located in CRA-target tracts – defined as census tracts with a median income less than 80 percent
of the median income at the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level – as well as low-income
and minority borrowers in non-CRA-target tracts. Importantly, in comparing lending behavior of
banks that underwent CRA exams to those that did not, our analysis always includes tract-bymonth fixed effects. This battery of fixed effects implies that our regressions are identified
through variation between treatment group and control group banks within a given tract in a
given month. As such, the fixed effects control for potentially important demand-side variables
affecting the lending behavior of all banks within a given tract-month. The empirical strategy we
use in the paper is related to the literature that examines the role of nonlinear incentives in
shaping economic decisions. Examples include the timing of sales (Oyer 1998), procurement
spending (Liebman and Mahoney 2012), and risk-taking in mutual funds (Chevalier and Ellison
1997).
Our identification strategy hinges on the assumption that the timing and frequency of the
CRA exams themselves are not driven by local credit and economic conditions affecting a given
bank’s lending behavior. This is a plausible assumption since in practice both the timing and the
frequency of CRA evaluations are driven by a fixed policy that is unrelated to local economic
conditions. In particular, the review cycle for smaller banks – those with less than $250 million
in assets – is five years, whereas for larger banks the review cycle is two years.
4

In particular, this may be the case as long as the adjustment costs to elevate lending are not too large and a loan
becomes delinquent over time with some hazard rate.

2

We use loan-level data on mortgage originations and performance to conduct our
analysis. Using exogenous variation in bank incentives to conform to CRA standards around
exams, we find that the CRA did indeed induce riskier lending by banks. First, we find that in the
six quarters surrounding a CRA exam, lending by treatment group banks (i.e., those undergoing
the CRA exam) is elevated on average by 5 percent as compared to lending by control group
banks. Second, using data that track loan performance, we show that loans originated by
treatment group banks around CRA exams are 15 percent more likely to be delinquent one year
after origination as compared to those originated by control group banks. The evidence therefore
shows that around CRA examinations, when incentives to conform to CRA standards are
particularly high, banks not only increase lending rates but appear to originate loans that are
markedly riskier.
We provide several pieces of evidence that support our interpretation of these findings.
First, CRA assessments place particular weight on the fraction of loans targeted to low-income
areas – i.e., so-called CRA-eligible tracts. We therefore expect the differential lending behavior
between treatment group and control group banks to be more pronounced in these CRA-eligible
tracts. This is precisely what we find in the data. Second, we exploit the fact that all loans within
a CRA-eligible tract are taken into account in a CRA assessment, regardless of borrower income.
We hypothesize that in attempting to comply with the CRA, banks take advantage of this
regulatory feature by concentrating lending in CRA tracts to higher-income borrowers, who
presumably are less risky. Consistent with this hypothesis, our results show that the effect of a
CRA exam in CRA-eligible tracts indeed rises with borrower income.
Third, we find that large lending institutions drive our main findings on the impact of
CRA exams on the quantity and quality of extended loans. This is to be expected: federal
regulatory agencies consider depository institutions’ CRA scores when considering applications
for deposit facilities, including branch openings as well as mergers and acquisitions. To the
extent that larger banks are more heavily engaged in mergers and acquisitions activity and
expansion through branch openings, they will have a greater incentive to maintain a high CRA
score and thus to adjust their lending behavior to satisfy CRA exams.
Fourth, we find that the reduction in loan standards associated with elevated lending
around CRA exams is based primarily on unobservable characteristics. In other words, there is
no meaningful change in the observable characteristics of loans made by treatment group banks
relative to the control group banks around the CRA exam. This, again, is to be expected under
our interpretation of the results, since banks have an incentive to convince regulators that loans
extended to meet CRA criteria are not overly risky. This would be consistent with the CRA
3

mandate of “encouraging financial institutions to help meet the credit needs of the local
communities in which they are chartered, consistent with safe and sound operation” (CRA 1977,
Section 802).
The final part of our analysis investigates whether banks’ responses to the CRA
examinations have changed over time. Our analysis here is motivated by the fact that
securitization activity – originating loans and selling them to investors – changed dramatically
during our sample period. We find evidence of elevated lending by treatment group banks
around the CRA exam during the 2004–2006 period. Moreover, our results show that the
differential performance of loans originated by treatment and control group banks around CRA
exams is particularly strong during the 2004–2006 period. This coincides with the time period
when private securitization boomed and might therefore reflect an unexplored channel through
which the private securitization market induced risky lending in the economy.
It is important to note that our empirical strategy does not provide an assessment of the
full impact of the CRA on the origination of risky loans. This is because the analysis examines
the effect of CRA evaluations relative to a baseline of banks not undergoing a CRA exam. To the
extent that there are adjustment costs in changing lending behavior, the baseline level of lending
behavior itself may be shifted toward catering to CRA compliance. That is, banks may have
responded to the CRA in periods outside of CRA exams. Because the empirical strategy nets out
the baseline effect, our estimates of the effect of CRA evaluations provide a lower bound to the
actual impact of the CRA. If adjustment costs in lending behavior are large and banks can’t
easily tilt their loan portfolio toward greater CRA compliance, the full impact of the CRA is
potentially greater than that estimated by the change in lending behavior around CRA exams.
The results also help rationalize why it might be difficult to identify the impact of CRA
by comparing lending in CRA-eligible tracts relative to that in comparable non-CRA-eligible
regions. As we demonstrate, the CRA exam induces lending to riskier borrowers both in CRAeligible tracts as well as to low-income borrowers in non-CRA-eligible tracts. Consequently,
studies that compare lending behavior in CRA-eligible tracts with that in non-CRA-eligible
tracts (e.g., Kroszner 2008) might be netting out at least some variation that is induced by the
CRA itself.
Our paper is connected to several strands of literature. It is related most directly to the
recent literature on the causes and consequences of the financial crisis (e.g., Agarwal et al. 2012;
Barlevy and Fisher, 2010; Ben-David, 2011; Keys et al. 2010, 2012; Loutskina and Strahan,
2011; Mayer and Pence 2009; Mayer et al. 2011; Mian and Sufi 2009). It is also connected to
studies that discuss the role of the CRA in fueling the crisis (see Barr 2005; Hernandez-Murillo
4

et al. (2012), Kroszner 2008; Calomiris 2011; Bhutta

2012 and Financial Crisis Inquiry

Commission 2010). Our work is also related to an old literature that has examined the impact of
the CRA on lending behavior of banks (e.g., Dahl, Evanoff, and Spivey 2000 and Bostic and
Robinson 2003). As far as we know, ours is the first paper in this area to identify an
economically meaningful impact of the CRA on both the quality and the quantity of lending.
In interpreting our results, it should be stressed that while we find that the Community
Reinvestment Act led to increased origination rates of risky loans, it may still be an efficient
policy due to other, desirable consequences. Perhaps most important of these is the provision of
credit to potential borrowers who would otherwise have been denied access to credit markets for
reasons such as redlining or pure discrimination. However, by showing the costs that are
associated with the regulation, we provide evidence that can help inform the debate on the
overall desirability of CRA.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we discuss the historical
development of the CRA and the institutional details of the CRA exam scheduling. In Section
III, we discuss our data sources. Section IV highlights our empirical strategy. Section V reports
our main results and auxiliary findings. Section VI concludes.

II.
History of the Community Reinvestment Act and the Exam
Schedule
The Community Reinvestment Act was enacted by Congress in 1977 (12 U.S.C. 2901)
and implemented by Regulations 12 CFR parts 25, 228, 345, and 563e. The purpose of the CRA
is to make sure that depository institutions fulfill the credit needs of the communities in which
they serve and operate. In particular, the CRA is designed to encourage banks to provide loans in
low- and moderate-income neighborhoods in a manner that satisfies the safety and soundness of
banks. Since its inception, the CRA has focused on the geographic distribution of credit, heavily
weighing lending activities in lower-income neighborhoods within a banking institution’s CRA
assessment area(s). Generally, CRA assessment areas are the areas in which an institution
operates its branches and deposit-taking ATMs and any surrounding areas in which it originates
or purchases a substantial portion of its loans.
Initially, the CRA did not specify how the objective of serving community needs was to
be accomplished. Implementation was left to regulatory agencies, which established several
assessment factors intended to reflect the performance of a financial institution in determining
community credit needs; (i) marketing of credit; (ii) participating in community development;
(iii) maintaining branch offices; and (iv) avoiding discriminatory credit policies. Supervisory
5

agencies were explicitly required to assess an institution’s record in meeting the credit needs of
low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. Supervisors assessed CRA performance in formal
onsite examinations from which a composite rating was determined. The ratings from this
process were confidential until 1989. However, following heightened public attention to the
volume and complexity of CRA issues, Congress amended the act in 1989 to require the public
release of CRA ratings.
Subsequent complaints from community groups that the CRA was ineffective led the
regulatory agencies to issue new guidelines that based CRA evaluation scores primarily on how
well an institution was helping to meet the credit needs of local communities. Specifically, in
1995, the regulators introduced three specific performance tests: (i) a lending test; (ii) an
investment test; and (iii) a service test.5 The institution’s compliance with the CRA is evaluated
by examiners according to the three performance tests.
The lending test assesses the number, amount, and distribution across income groups and
geographic areas of a financial institution’s mortgage loans, small business loans, small farm
loans, and consumer loans. Among the factors considered are the geographic distribution of
lending, the distribution of lending across different borrower income groups, the extent of
community development lending, and the use of innovative or flexible lending practices to
address the credit needs of lower-income geographies (census tracts) or individuals.6
The investment test considers a banking institution’s qualified investments that benefit
the institution’s assessment area or a broader statewide or regional area that includes its
assessment area. The service test considers the scope of an institution’s system for delivering
retail-banking services and judges the extent of its community development services and their
degree of innovativeness and responsiveness.
In order to enforce compliance with the CRA, institutions are evaluated periodically
through an onsite exam. The exam is conducted by the federal agencies responsible for
supervising depository institutions: the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(FRB), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency (OCC), and the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS). After the onsite exam is completed
– a process that takes several months – the federal agencies issue a written score on a five-point
5

The new guidelines were put into place in July 1997 for small banks (less than $250 million) and in July 1998 for
larger banks.
6
In general, CRA compliance examinations focus on the number and dollar amount of lending in a banking
institution’s CRA assessment area(s). More specifically, examiners determine the geographic distribution of lending
measured by the proportion of total activity in the assessment area(s), the dispersion of that lending, and the number
and amount of such lending in lower, middle and upper income geographies.
.

6

scale (O = Outstanding, H = High Satisfactory, L = Low Satisfactory, N = Need to Improve, and
S = Substantial Noncompliance). Banks generally care a great deal about CRA compliance since
federal regulators consider CRA ratings when approving applications for new bank branches or
for mergers and acquisitions (Section 804).
There are three issues worth noting in the context of CRA evaluation scores. First, under
the current rules, the lending test is more heavily weighed than the investments or services tests,
so that an institution may not receive a “Satisfactory” or “Outstanding” rating unless it obtains a
“Satisfactory” score in its lending test. Second, although CRA performance evaluations have
always considered the activities of banking institutions across a broad spectrum of lending
products, public attention has focused primarily on residential mortgage lending. This is largely
due to the fact that information on mortgage lending became public pursuant to the Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). That lending, and in particular mortgage loans, play a crucial
role in CRA evaluation scores is confirmed in Dahl, Evanoff, and Spivey (1999), who document
that the lending test is by far the most important element of the evaluation and that mortgages are
the most important type of loans for CRA assessments. Our focus on mortgage lending around
CRA exams is hence justified. Finally, in conducting the lending test, CRA evaluations place
particular attention on lending in CRA target tracts, which – as mentioned earlier – are census
tracts with a median income that is less than 80 percent of median income at the MSA level.
The CRA exam schedule is typically announced several quarters before the actual exam.
The onsite exam and report preparation are not instantaneous and may proceed for a quarter or
more after the exam date. The timing of CRA examinations and the information about the
schedule of the examinations are publicly available to the bank as well as to other parties in
advance. For example, each quarter the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency releases a list
of national banks to be examined for compliance with the CRA in the next calendar quarter.7 The
frequency of CRA evaluations is also not likely to be driven by local economic conditions
affecting the bank since it is driven by a fixed policy of cyclical examination. In particular, when
CRA was enacted in 1977, federal regulators had to evaluate most of the banks under their
oversight every two years. In 1999, as part of the Gramm-Leach-Billey Act, the review cycle for
smaller banks – those with less than $250 million in assets – was extended from two to five
years. This rigid cycle makes the exact timing of the exam unlikely to be driven by local
economic conditions affecting the bank being examined. We discuss the plausibility of this
assertion in Section IV.
7

Note, though, that banks can anticipate the general timing of an exam as these occur once every two or five years,
depending on bank size (see below).

7

III.

Data
Our primary source of loan-level data for the period spanning the years 1999 to 2009 is

the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data collected by the Federal Financial Institutions
Examination Council (FFIEC). HMDA data represent the universe of mortgage applications,
with some exceptions for small lenders and lenders located outside an MSA. The data provide
borrower demographic characteristics, a lender identifier, tract-level geographic information, and
limited information on loan characteristics.
Next, we assemble a novel dataset at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago that contains
information on CRA exams, including exam date, bank RSSD ID, and the ratings given by the
regulators. The data on CRA exam schedules, as well as many of the evaluation reports, are
publically available at websites of regulators that conduct these exams (i.e., OCC8, FRB, FDIC,
and OTS). 9
To identify banks in the HMDA data that participate in CRA examinations, we match
HMDA bank identifiers to RSSD ID with the identifiers cleaned to account for mergers and
acquisitions since 2007. Our identification strategy exploits variation across CRA target tracts
and non-CRA target tracts around CRA examination dates. We identify CRA target tracts by
matching tract-level economic data to HMDA loan applications. We use the matched HMDACRA data to identify loan applications that were accepted or rejected by a lender in the quarters
immediately before and after a CRA examination.
We also collect data on performance of loans in our analysis. This information is not
available in the HMDA data. Instead, we use loan-level data from a major mortgage-processing
server that collects data on loan characteristics as well as monthly loan-level performance for
approved loans. Since no lender identifier is available, we match HMDA loans to this dataset
based on origination date, loan characteristics, and geographic information (see Agarwal et al.
2012 for details on a similar matching algorithm). The HMDA data matched with loan-level data
allows us to assess the subsequent performance of loans that were approved in the quarters
immediate before and after a CRA exam.
Our main analysis restricts the sample period to the years 1999–2009. Although the CRA
ratings data are available beginning in 1990, we can obtain HMDA data that can be reliably
8

For instance, the data for OCC is available at: http://www.occ.gov/topics/compliance-bsa/cra/communityreinvestment-evaluations-coming-due.html.
9
Since the exam start date is often missing, we use the exam end date in defining the CRA exam period.
Importantly, because the start and end dates of CRA exams are usually no more than two weeks apart, this does not
pose an issue for our identification strategy which examines the data at a quarterly frequency. Note that we do not
use here the exam report date – i.e. the date at which the report is filed with the relevant regulator – as this often
occurs several months after the end of the actual exam. We return to this point in the robustness section below.

8

merged with loan performance data only from 1999 onward. We end our sample in 2009 because
it allows us to track performance of loans in our sample two years after the loans were
originated.
For robustness we employ performance data that is available from a second data vendor
specializing in private-label securities (see Keys et al. 2010 for similar use of these data). This
dataset provides lender names that we then match directly to the CRA exam data. However,
because the lender names are not standardized (e.g., there are differences spelling), we must
standardize them manually. We then match these lender names to RSSD IDs based on bank
names provided in the call reports. Although this dataset has better coverage of subprime and
Alt-A loans than the first dataset we use, it also suffers from two disadvantages for the purpose
of our analysis. First, the number of lenders that can be reliably matched to the CRA examination
data is significantly smaller than in the previously used matched sample (74 versus 4,434).
Second, and more important, this dataset does not report the loan’s census tract. As a result, we
cannot analyze the data at the tract level and instead must rely on coarser resolution at the zip
code level.10

IV.

Empirical Strategy
The main econometric challenge in evaluating the CRA’s impact on lending is obtaining

the counterfactual lending behavior in the absence of the CRA. Our empirical design addresses
this issue by exploiting variation in banks’ incentive to conform to CRA standards around
scheduled regulatory examinations. The CRA instructs federal financial supervisory agencies to
encourage their regulated financial institutions to help meet the credit needs of the communities
in which they are chartered while also conforming to “safe and sound” lending standards. To
enforce the statute, federal regulatory agencies periodically examine banking institutions for
CRA compliance. Regulators use this compliance information when approving applications for
new bank branches as well as for mergers and acquisitions. Banks therefore have a strong
incentive to concentrate their CRA-compliant lending before an exam date to ensure a
satisfactory CRA evaluation while minimizing the likelihood that such lending would fail the
“safe and sound” criteria at the time of the exam. Moreover, since the exam itself is not an
instantaneous event – there is a time gap between the exam initiation and the submission of the
final CRA report – banks may also choose to elevate their lending a few quarters after the CRA
exam.
10

Agarwal et al. (2012) discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the two datasets.

9

Our empirical design exploits this idea and relies on comparing banks undergoing CRA
exams (treatment group banks) to similar banks operating in the same area but not undergoing a
CRA exam (control group banks). The identifying assumption is that around CRA exams, banks
have a strong incentive to conform to CRA standards by shifting their lending behavior toward
borrowers and census tracts that could improve their CRA rating. Such borrowers include any
applicant located in a CRA-target tract and low-income and minority borrowers in non-CRAtarget tracts.
More formally, our identification strategy compares, within a given time period and
region, the lending behavior of banks facing a CRA exam to that of other banks not facing such
an exam. Our baseline specification is as follows:
3

3

q 1

q 1

Yibct      q *( PreExam q)bt   q *( PostExam q )bt   Xit  fct   ibct ,

in which Yibct is a borrower-level outcome variable pertaining to borrower i made by bank b in
census tract c in month t. For example, Y in certain specifications measures whether a loan
application was accepted by a bank or, alternatively, whether a loan originated by a bank
eventually becomes delinquent or defaults. The variables PreExam q in the first summation are
event-time indicator variables measuring the timing of the bank’s CRA evaluation. Specifically,
(PreExam q)bt takes on the value of one if a CRA exam is initiated on bank b, q quarters prior to
month t. For example, (PreExam 1)bt takes on the value of one if a CRA exam is initiated on
bank b in the quarter prior to month t. Similarly, (PostExam q)bt is an event-time indicator
variable that equals one if a CRA exam is initiated on bank b, q quarters after month t.11 Xit is a
vector of borrower-level covariates. Finally, f is a vector of tract-by-month fixed effects. This
battery of fixed effects implies that the regressions are identified through variation between
treatment group and control group banks within a given tract in a given month. As such, the
fixed effects control for potentially important demand-side effects affecting the lending behavior
of all banks within a given tract-month. The coefficients of interest in these baseline regressions

˜ coefficients. For example, in the case where Y measures loan acceptance,
are the q and 
q
positive beta coefficients indicate that banks increase origination rates around CRA exams.
As a corollary to our baseline specification, we hypothesize that the effect of CRA exams
will be particularly strong on lending in CRA-target tracts. These are tracts with median income
less than 80 percent of median income at the MSA level. Because lending to CRA-target tracts is

11

For ease of notation and presentation, we include the month of the exam itself in the PreExam 1 indicator variable.

10

particularly important in determining the ultimate CRA evaluation, we predict that in response to
a CRA exam, banks will shift lending toward these tracts. We therefore add to our baseline
specification interaction terms between the CRA exam event-time indicator variables, PreExam
and PostExam, and an indicator variable measuring whether a loan is made within a CRA-target
tract.12 As before, the identification assumption behind this strategy is that in a given tract and
month, differences in lending behavior between banks facing a CRA exam and those that do not
are driven by the CRA exam itself rather than other effects such as borrower demand.
We note that, throughout the paper, we estimate our specifications using OLS despite the
binary nature of several of the dependent variables. The reason is that we have a large number of
fixed effects along several dimensions and using logit or probit results in an incidental
parameters problem. Our OLS specification with flexible controls to capture nonlinearity allows
us to estimate our coefficients consistently even with multiple fixed effects (Dinardo and
Johnston 1996).
We now discuss the important ingredients of our empirical strategy. As we described
earlier, different regulatory bodies conduct evaluations of banks under their supervision to ensure
that their lending meets the criteria laid out in the CRA. Our identification strategy hinges on the
notion that the timing and frequency of these evaluations are not driven by local credit and
economic conditions affecting a given bank’s lending behavior. This is a plausible assumption
since CRA examinations are scheduled well in advance and the information about the schedule
of the examinations is publicly available to the bank as well as to other parties. For example, the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency each quarter releases a list of national banks to be
examined for compliance with the CRA in the next calendar quarter. As of early January 2012,
the OCC announced the examination of 105 national banks in the first quarter of 2012.
According to the OCC, the purpose of releasing the information to the public is to allow:
“interested parties to file public comments about the banks’ performance under the CRA. All
public comments received before the close of the CRA examination will be considered by the
OCC in its evaluation.”13
The frequency of CRA evaluations is also not likely to be driven by local economic
conditions affecting the bank. When the CRA was enacted in 1977, federal regulators evaluated
most of the banks under their oversight every two years. In 1999, as part of the Gramm-LeachBilley Act, the review cycle for smaller banks – those with less than $250 million in assets – was
12

As is standard, all interaction regressions include direct effects as well.
See the OCC website’s at: http://www.occ.gov/topics/compliance-bsa/cra/community-reinvestment-evaluationscoming-due.html.
13

11

extended from two years to five years. The effect of Gramm-Leach-Billey is well reflected in
figure 1, which shows the bi-module distribution of the number of quarters that elapse between
CRA examinations. Furthermore, the Office of Thrift Supervision later increased the size
threshold for an extension from two to five years to $1 billion; as a result, 87 percent of banks
supervised by the OTS now qualifying for a five-year evaluation cycle.14 As figure 1
demonstrates, the vast majority of the banks are evaluated on a two-year or five-year cycle,
suggesting that evaluations are predetermined by the regulatory cycle rather than by the
conditions affecting the bank under supervision. Finally, we control for tract*month fixed effects
whenever the data enable us to identify the census tract in which the property is located. The
inclusion of these fixed-effects is designed to absorb any local time-varying effects that are likely
correlated with local demand for credit that affect all banks regardless of the timing of their CRA
examination.

V.

Empirical Findings

A. Descriptive Statistics
We start by providing information on CRA exams for the banks in our sample. Panel A of table 1
provides summary statistics for CRA exams occurring during the sample period, 1999–2009.
Over the 11 years covered by the data, 5,651 banks underwent a CRA exam, with the average
number of exams per bank being 2.28. The average duration between CRA exams was 15.3
quarters with a standard deviation of 5.56 quarters. Figure 2 provides the distribution of the
number of examinations per bank, showing that a sizable number of banks (35 percent) were
examined three or more times during the sample period.
Coding the five-level ratings of the CRA examination on a scale of one through five, with
a grade of one associated with an “Outstanding” rating and a grade of five associated with a
“Substantial Noncompliance” rating, the sample average rating is 2.78 (table 1A). Figure 3
displays the distribution of CRA exam ratings: while 84 percent of the sample obtain a “Low
Satisfactory” rating, 14 percent obtain “Outstanding” rating, and about 2 percent obtain a
“Substantial Non-compliance” rating. Figure 4 provides the evolution of the number of CRA
bank examinations over time. The figure shows that examination intensity varied over time, with
more than 600 banks examined in the second quarter of 1999 and almost 150 examined in the
fourth quarter of 2001. Since 2004, examination intensity stabilized with approximately 250
examinations per quarter on average. This is a result of two factors – a trend in mergers and
14

The OTS extension became effective on October 1, 2004, and is reflected in the decline in CRA evaluations per
quarter from 2004 onward, as we show in the next section.

12

acquisitions activity that reduced the number of banks to be evaluated as well as a change in
regulation by the OTS that allowed for less frequent evaluations of banks with assets worth less
than $1 billion.
We now discuss descriptive statistics of main variables used in our analysis, focusing on
the two datasets covered in Section III. Panel B of table 1 reports summary statistics of loan
applications in the HMDA–CRA exam matched dataset. These data comprise the 94,499,633
applications submitted to banks that underwent at least one CRA exam during the sample period.
As can be seen, the average approval rate across all sample loan applications is 72 percent. CRAeligible tracts constitute 17 percent of the census tracts in our sample. Furthermore, about 5
percent of loan applications are submitted to banks that are in the first month of a CRA exam or
are about to undergo such an exam within three months.
We also find that 93 percent of the applications are for conventional mortgages, 62
percent are for loan refinancing, and 91 percent are for properties that are owner occupied.
Average annual applicant income in this sample is $89,030. Finally, minority applications
account for 17 percent of the HMDA-based sample, 29 percent of applicants are female, and the
average loan amount requested is $141,360. In general, the nature of loan application
characteristics in our HMDA-based dataset is comparable to that found in other related studies
(Dahl et al. 1999).
Panel C of table 1 reports summary statistics of the loans originated by banks that
underwent at least one CRA exam over the sample period. The data are obtained by matching
HMDA loans to data on loan performance. As can be seen, average income of borrowers is
$100,340, which is about $11,000 greater than the average income of loan applicants shown in
panel B of table 1. The average approved loan amount is $184,110. The fraction of approved
loans held by minorities is 15 percent, while the female share of approved loans is 28 percent.
These are comparable to the application shares of minorities and females described in panel B.
The fraction of high-risk and alternative loans originated by CRA banks is comparable to other
studies that have used this data (Agarwal et al. 2012).The average loan-to-value ratio is 82
percent, the average FICO score is 713, and the 30-, 60-, and 90-day delinquency rates within
one year of origination are 7 percent, 2 percent, and 1 percent, respectively.
Finally, panel D of table 1 presents summary statistics of loans originated by banks that
underwent at least one CRA exam over the sample period. The data are obtained by matching the
bank names provided in the call reports with the private-label ABS/MBS mortgage data. The
characteristics of loans originated by CRA banks is comparable to other studies that have
employed these data (Keys et al. 2010). The average loan-to-value ratio is 82 percent, the
13

average FICO score is 654, and the 30-, 60-, and 90-day delinquency rates within one year of
origination are 23 percent, 10 percent, and 6 percent, respectively.

B. Main Results
1. Elevated Lending Due to CRA
We turn now to our main results. Table 2 presents the baseline regressions in which we use the
HMDA–CRA exam matched dataset to investigate the effect of the CRA on mortgage
origination levels. The regressions analyze origination rates of loan applications around CRA
examination dates by comparing treatment group to control group banks. All regressions in this
table employ as dependent variable an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if a loan
application was accepted and zero otherwise.
In column 1 of the table, the loan acceptance indicator variable is regressed on a dummy
variable, Pre-exam 1, which equals one if the loan application is submitted to a bank that will
undergo a CRA exam in one quarter. The regression also includes analogous indicator variables,
Pre-exam 2 and Pre-exam 3, measuring whether a bank will undergo a CRA exam in two and
three quarters, respectively. As discussed in Section IV, the regression employs a full set of
census-tract-by-month fixed effects that absorb location-specific time-varying effects that are
likely to drive loan demand. The regressions are therefore identified off of the differential
lending behavior of treatment group and control group banks within a given month and census
tract. The standard errors reported are clustered at the state*year level.15
The results in the first column of the table suggest that banks increase their origination
rates before undergoing a CRA exam. We find that treatment group banks increase their
origination rate three quarters before the exam. This effect is economically significant. As the
coefficient on Pre-exam 3 demonstrates, treatment group banks increase originations by about
four percentage points as compared to control group banks. This corresponds to a sizable 5.5
percent increase in the likelihood of loan origination relative to mean sample origination rate of
72 percent, three quarters before the CRA exam. Two quarters before the exam, treatment banks
maintain a four percentage point elevated origination rate (5.5 percent relative to mean sample
origination rate), whereas one quarter before the exam the effect intensifies to 5.1 percentage
points (7.1 percent relative to mean sample origination rate).
At this point it is useful to discuss why we see elevated lending in the quarters preceding
the CRA exam. As we explain in section II, regulatory considerations induce banks to meet the
15

Our results are robust to clustering only at state and year levels.

14

CRA lending goals. Banks have a strong incentive to concentrate CRA-compliant lending before
the exam date to ensure a satisfactory CRA evaluation, since doing so minimizes the likelihood
that such lending would fail the “safe and sound” criteria at the time of the exam.
In column 2, we add indicator variables (Post-exam 1, Post-exam 2, and Post-exam 3) to
capture the effect of CRA examinations one, two, and three quarters after the onset of the exam.
The results show that the differential effect between CRA-examined banks and their peers
persists following the onset of the exam. In the first quarter after the initiation of a CRA exam,
treatment group banks exhibit an origination rate that is elevated by 6.3 percentage points as
compared to control group banks, or 8.75 percent of the average origination rate. Two quarters
after exam initiation, treatment group bank lending is elevated by 5.8 percentage points, while
three quarters after the exam this effect decays to 3.3 percentage points.
The lending is likely to remain elevated in the quarters after the exam for two main
reasons. First, the exam itself is not an instantaneous event. Figure 5 illustrates the distribution of
the time elapsed between exam initiation and the submission of the final CRA report. As can be
seen, CRA examiners interact with a bank over a period of time – often submitting their report
more than two quarters after the exam is conducted. Second, there may be inertia in banks’
lending behavior after a policy of CRA examination targeting has been initiated. Organizational
adjustment costs may cause banks to keep elevated lending rates even after the CRA exam is
formally completed. For example, after management issues an informal companywide directive
to increase lending, it may take time to reverse direction, with the result that lending may remain
elevated for few more months.
In the last column of table 2, we interact the CRA exam variables with an indicator
variable, CRA-eligible tract, measuring whether the loan application is associated with a tract
that is CRA eligible. As explained above, CRA-eligible tracts are those with a high proportion of
low-income households. CRA assessments are also based on the geographic distribution of
mortgages and, in particular, on the fraction of loans originated in low-income areas. As a result,
we expect the differential behavior between treatment group and control group banks to be more
pronounced in CRA-eligible tracts.
Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that the interaction terms between the CRA
examination dates and CRA-eligible tracts are statistically and economically significant. Similar
to the trends of the CRA exam indicator variables, the effect of the CRA target-tract interaction
variable peaks around the initiation of the exam. For example, in the quarter following the onset
of the exam, summing the coefficients on the direct effect of the CRA exam and the interaction
term shows that treatment group banks increase origination rates in CRA-eligible tracts by 8.2
15

percentage points. This is an economically meaningful effect, representing 11.4 percent of the
mean sample wide origination rate.16
Figure 6 plots the dynamics of elevated lending in CRA-eligible tracts as well as nonCRA-eligible tracts using the coefficients on the level and interaction terms from table 2. The
figure shows the increase in origination rates among treatment group banks around the CRA
exam in both CRA-eligible tracts as well as non-CRA-eligible tracts. Increased origination in
non-CRA-eligible tracts could be explained by the fact that CRA assessments take into account
lending done by a bank more broadly in its “servicing area” – to the extent that it is provided to
underserved populations such as low-income or minority borrowers (see Dahl et al. 1999). We
explore this issue further in the next sections.17

2. Heterogeneity in Elevated Lending
We next assess the heterogeneity of the CRA examination effect across varying borrower
income levels as well as across different bank size groups. We first segment the sample of loans
into three groups based on borrower income terciles. The income terciles are formed within each
tract over the sample period. For each subgroup we rerun the baseline regressions that include
the pre- and post-CRA exam indicator variables as well as the interaction terms with the CRAeligible tract indicator variable. As discussed above, we expect that in non-CRA-eligible tracts,
elevated lending associated with a CRA exam should be more pronounced among low-income
borrowers. The reason is that loans to this subgroup are counted in CRA assessments even if they
are provided in non-CRA-eligible tracts. Results, shown in the three columns of table 3, are
consistent with this hypothesis. Comparing the coefficients on the examination indicator
variables – i.e., the level effects – across the three income tercile subsamples reveals that
elevated lending in non-CRA target tracts is monotonically decreasing in borrower income. For
example, the coefficients on Pre-exam 1, the indicator variable capturing the first quarter after
the onset of a CRA exam, are 0.059, 0.054, and 0.035 for the low-, medium-, and high-income
borrower subsamples, respectively. This is equivalent to about 9.5 percent, 7.4 percent, and 4.9

16

Since the average loan origination rate in CRA tracts is only 61 percent – i.e., lower than the sample wide
average, as would be expected – the economic significance of this effect is particularly large: in CRA-eligible tracts
a CRA exam is associated with a 13.4 percent increase in the loan origination rate.
17
We do not have a prior on how many quarters before and after the lending stays elevated. We experiment with
more than three quarters on either side of the CRA exam and find that the elevated lending occurs only from three
quarters before the CRA exam until three quarters after the exam. For instance, figure 7 plots coefficients of a
specification analogous to Figure 6 and shows that the pattern of elevated lending is not visible for the fourth quarter
before and fourth quarter after the CRA exam.

16

percent elevated lending relative to the mean lending in low-, medium-, and high-income
borrower terciles, respectively.
In addition, the interaction-terms coefficients in columns 1–3 of table 3 reveal an
interesting pattern. During periods of CRA examinations, lending in CRA-eligible tracts is
monotonically increasing in borrower income levels. That is, banks lend more to higher-income
borrowers in CRA-eligible tracts during CRA examinations. This result is consistent with banks’
taking advantage of the fact that all loans within a CRA-eligible tract carry the same weight in a
CRA assessment, including loans to higher-income borrowers, which presumably are less risky.
We next segment the sample of loans into three subsamples based on bank asset size
using two threshold asset levels: $1 billion and $50 billion. As can be seen from the first three
columns of table 4, the effect of CRA examinations, in both CRA-eligible tracts and non-CRA
eligible tracts, is concentrated among the largest banks with assets above $50 billion.18 The
coefficients of both the level and interaction-terms of CRA examination variables are smaller in
magnitude and, in the case of banks with assets between $1 billion and $50 billion, often not
statistically significant. The results in column 3 show that among the largest set of banks, one
quarter after the initiation of a CRA exam, treatment banks increase origination rates by 7.8
percentage points in CRA-target tracts as compared to peer banks not undergoing such an exam
(around 11.3 percent relative to mean rate of 69 percent). In contrast, the same effect in banks
with assets smaller than $1 billion in loans is 2.5 percentage points (around 2.9 percent relative
to mean rate of 84.9 percent). Our leading explanation for this finding is that federal regulatory
agencies are instructed to consider depository institutions’ CRA score when considering
applications for deposit facilities, including branch openings and mergers and acquisitions (CRA
1977, Section 804). Since larger banks are the ones more heavily engaged in mergers and
acquisitions and are more likely to expand through branch openings, maintaining a high CRA
score will be more important to them.
In final column, we re-estimate the regressions for the largest banks with bank fixed
effects. As is evident, the results for these banks remain. In unreported tests, we also conduct the
tests for medium- and small-size banks and find inferences similar to those reported in the first
two columns.

3. Riskier Lending Due to CRA
18

The distribution of bank asset size in the U.S. economy is skewed (see Agarwal et al. 2012). In our sample there
are 49 banks with assets above $50 billion, but these account for around 52 percent of the loan applications in the
sample.

17

Our results so far suggest that treatment banks undergoing a CRA exam exhibit higher
origination rates relative to a control set of banks lending in the same regions, with the effect
being especially strong in CRA-eligible tracts. We now examine the riskiness of these loans. To
this end, we run the baseline specification described in Section IV using loan delinquency as the
dependent variable. As discussed in Section III, since HMDA data do not provide loan
performance information, we match the HMDA dataset to loan-level data and track the
performance of loans in this dataset.
Table 5 presents the results of running the baseline regression of Section IV using an
indicator variable measuring whether a given loan became delinquent as a dependent variable
and the standard set of pre-CRA exam and CRA-eligible tract indicator variables. The first three
columns of the table examine delinquencies during the year following origination, in which the
delinquency indicator variable takes on a value of one if the loan is 30, 60, or 90 days’
delinquent. As explained earlier, we estimate these regressions using OLS, given the large
number of fixed effects along several dimensions.
The results presented in the table show that delinquency rates increase around CRA
examination rates, especially for loans made in CRA-target tracts. For example, focusing on the
third column, loans made in the quarter following the initiation of a CRA exam to borrowers in
non-CRA-target tracts have a 0.1 percentage point higher 90-day delinquency rate as compared
to loans made by control group banks. This effect is economically large, representing an 8.3
percent increase in the average 90-day delinquency rate of 1.2 percent. The equivalent effect in
CRA-target tracts is even more pronounced: in these tracts, loans made in the quarter following
the initiation of a CRA exam have a 0.4 percentage point higher delinquency rate, representing a
33 percent increase compared to the average 90-day delinquency rate.
We find similar results with similar magnitudes when we define delinquency as more
than 30 or 60 days’ delinquencies (columns 1 and 2) or when we examine delinquencies over a
longer horizon of two years after the date of origination (columns 4 through 6). For example,
loans made within CRA-target tracts in the quarter following the initiation of a CRA exam have
a 0.8 percentage point higher 90-day delinquency rate within two years of loan origination,
representing a 21 percent increase relative to the average delinquency rate. Interestingly,
comparing the increase in delinquencies across the different quarters shows that the effect is
largest for loans made three quarters after the onset of the CRA exam.
In sum, the results in table 5 suggest that periods around CRA examinations when there is
elevated lending by treatment banks are also periods when loans made by these banks have
higher delinquency rates, particularly in CRA-target tracts.
18

4. Risk and Loan Characteristics
We now assess the factors that may contribute to the increase in delinquency rates of loans made
by treatment banks around CRA exam dates. We start by assessing whether observable
characteristics of loans originated by treatment group banks around the CRA exam are different
than those of loans originated by the control group banks. We are particularly interested in
mortgage and borrower characteristics that have been shown to be related to the likelihood of
loan default (Agarwal et al. 2012). These regressions are similar to the specifications in table 5
and use various observable loan and borrower characteristics as dependent variables. In
particular, we use the FICO score of the borrower, a dummy variable for low-documentation
mortgage, the LTV ratio of the mortgage, and interest rate charged on the mortgage. As
explained earlier, we estimate these regressions using OLS, given the large number of fixed
effects along several dimensions.
The results are reported in table 6. As the coefficients on different quarter indicators
around the CRA examination demonstrate, there are some changes in loan characteristics along
observable characteristics. However, the economic significance of most of these characteristics is
very modest. For example, consider the case of FICO scores. Our results suggest that FICO score
is lower in pre-CRA exam quarters and – as evident from the interaction term – that FICO scores
are even lower in CRA-target tracts. However, the magnitude of these effects is quite small. For
example, during the quarter before the CRA examination, FICO scores of loans originated by
treated banks are 3.7 points lower, and loans that are originated to borrowers in CRA-target
tracts are lower by additional 3.4 points, resulting in a decline of about 7 points, compared to an
average FICO score of 713.9. Likewise, we find no economically meaningful change in interest
rates or loan-to-value ratio loans offered in the vicinity of the CRA exam. One exception in our
results is the proportion of low-documentation mortgages originated around the CRA exam. The
increase in low-documentation loans is economically large with a coefficient of 0.048
(significant at the 5 percent level), representing an increase in low-documentation loans of 23.4
percent relative to the unconditional mean. The change in low-documentation loans seems
consistent with the lending institution’s elevating lending primarily on unobservable dimensions
to convince regulators that loans extended to meet CRA criteria are not overtly risky. In
unreported regressions we have also used other dependent variables such as the probability of
being a balloon loan, an interest-only mortgage, a jumbo mortgage, and a buy-down mortgage.
The inference on these variables is the same – there are no economically meaningful changes for
these dimensions as well.
19

We now complement the analysis by analyzing the types of borrowers in the treatment
and control groups three quarters before a CFA exam. In this analysis, we use the same sample
as before but also employ HMDA data that have loan and applicant characteristics of loan
applications. We first use the loan application data from HMDA and present the results in figures
8(a) and 8(b). In figure 8(a) we compare the kernel density of applicant income as of three
quarters before the CRA exam date for both treatment group banks and control group banks,
while figure 8(b) compares the kernel density of loan amount requests. As can be seen, both
applicant income as well as loan amount distributions are very similar across treatment and
control groups.19
Similar patterns are found when we use approved loans available in the HMDA data
matched with the loan-level data instead of just loan applications in HMDA data. In particular, in
figures 8(c) and 8(d), we plot the kernel density of FICO scores and loan-to-value ratios of
approved loans in the matched data. Again, the treatment and control group loans are quite
similar before the CRA examination.20
Overall, taken together with the evidence on higher delinquency rates presented in table
5, the results in table 6 suggest that the reduction in loan standards associated with elevated
lending around CRA exams must be based primarily on unobservable characteristics. We argue
that this pattern is consistent with banks’ strategic attempts to convince regulators that the loans
they extend that meet CRA criteria are not overtly risky. This behavior is likely to help these
banks comply with the CRA’s overarching mandate of “encouraging financial institutions to
help meet the credit needs of the local communities in which they are chartered, consistent with
safe and sound operation” (Section 802).21

C. Further Tests
1. Time Series Evidence
19

For instance, focusing on applicant income in the HMDA data, the coefficient on the treatment dummy variable is
0.503, implying an economically insignificant $503 difference between treatment and control groups, or 0.58
percent of the approximately $86,000 sample mean.
20
For instance, the average FICO scores across treatment and control groups are not economically or statistically
significant. In the FICO score specification, the coefficient on the treatment dummy variable is an insignificant 0.891 compared to a mean FICO score of 714.12. Similarly, in the LTV ratio specification, the coefficient on the
treatment dummy variable is an insignificant -0.09 compared to a mean LTV ratio of 71.82.
21
Another potential interpretation of these findings is that treatment group banks did not change their screening
standards relative to control group banks, granting loans to borrowers of similar quality around the CRA exam.
Rather, the reason for elevated defaults is that borrowers who receive loans around the CRA exam change their
behavior strategically after they receive the loan. This is highly unlikely since we know of no particular benefit to
the borrowers who received loans closer to the CRA exam from treatment group banks relative to those from control
group banks, or relative to borrowers from treatment group banks further away from the exam. See Mayer et al.
2011 for an example of strategic behavior of borrowers in response to benefits due to a legal settlement.

20

We now turn to investigate whether banks’ responses to the CRA examinations have changed
over time. Our analysis here is motivated by the fact that securitization – the act of originating
loans and selling them to investors – changed dramatically during our sample period. In
particular, the private securitization market – in which loans from lenders are packaged and sold
to private investors – heated up especially between 2004 and 2006 (Keys et al. 2012). In contrast,
the period 2007–2009 saw a drastic contraction of private securitization market but a concurrent
expansion in the government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) securitization market – in which loans
from lenders are packaged and sold to GSEs in adherence with GSE underwriting standards. We
conjecture that banks are more likely to originate loans to risky borrowers around CRA
examinations when they have an avenue to securitize and pass these loans to private investors
after the exam. There are at least two reasons why banks may be less likely to originate risky
loans under the CRA when GSE securitization is the primary avenue for loan sales. First, GSEs
have stricter underwriting guidelines than private investors for lenders (Keys et al. 2012).
Second, GSEs tend to face more scrutiny from regulators and market participants given their
large role in the mortgage market (e.g., in the aftermath of the crisis). Thus, we expect banks that
are subject to CRA examination to originate more risky loans in times of examinations especially
during the 2004–2006 period.
We test the effects of the private securitization market on the origination of loans to risky
borrowers around CRA evaluations by estimating our original model but including interactions
of different time periods with the dummies that capture vicinity of the CRA exam for treatment
group banks. We use three two period dummies that capture whether the time period is between
2004 and 2006 or between 2007 and 2009 (1999–2003 is the omitted category). Our focus is on
the differential behavior between treated and control bank groups during the 2004–2006 period.
This allows us to extend our previous analysis that hinged on the differential behavior between
treatment group and control group banks. We now add another layer of identification that is
based on the time-series variation in the market for securitization. As before, our analysis
controls for tract*month fixed effects as well as four quarter dummies to capture general
seasonality in lending and loan characteristics. For ease of presentation, we estimate this model
with just the pre-exam and post-exam quarters (i.e., an average effect across CRA and non-CRA
tracts). The results of this estimation are presented in figure 9(a), in which we estimate the
regression using HMDA data and loan originations as the dependent variable. Figure 9(b)
presents an analogous specification using 90-day delinquencies as dependent variable and
employing the matched data.
21

The results presented in figure 9(a) confirm our earlier finding that banks in the treatment
group are more likely to originate mortgages relative to control group banks around CRA exams.
More important, we find a differential increase in the elevated lending around the CRA exams
during the 2004–2006 period and to some extent in the 2007–2009 period relative to the1999–
2003 period.22 One reason for this behavior could be that the boom in securitized lending in the
private markets during 2004–2006 and to the GSEs during 2007–2009 gave banks an avenue to
park “potentially risky” loans off their balance sheets. However, at the same time, originating
these loans near the time of a CRA exam would allow these banks to maintain their CRAinduced lending goals, since it takes a few months to securitize loans after they have been
originated (Keys et al. 2012).
The more interesting part of the analysis relates to the nature of the performance of loans
around the CRA exam. The results in figure 9(b) show that our earlier findings that pertain to
worse performance of loans originated by the treatment group banks are driven in a large part by
the 2004–2006 period. In particular, the performance worsens for the loans originated by
treatment banks during the years 2004 to 2006.23 Interestingly, while we did find some evidence
of elevated lending during the 2007–2009 period, the performance of loans originated during this
period is no different than those originated during the 1999–2003 period. This could potentially
reflect stringent securitization practices employed by GSEs during the 2007–2009 period in the
aftermath of the crisis.
Taken together, we find evidence for elevated lending by banks in the treatment group
around the CRA exam during the 2004–2006 period. Moreover, there is concurrent evidence that
the performance of loans originated by the treatment group banks around the CRA exam are in
particular worse than those originated by the control group banks during the 2004–2006 period.
This is also the period when private securitization boomed and might therefore reflect an
unexplored channel through which this market induced risky lending in the economy.
2. Auxiliary Findings
We now discuss several results that confirm the robustness of our findings. For brevity, we
discuss most of these results without reporting them in the paper.24 First, we conduct our analysis
22

Note that we also estimate specifications where we assess changes in lending in CRA and non-CRA tracts similar
to specification in figure 6. We find that the differential change in pattern of elevated lending across years is driven
by non-CRA tracts. It suggests that most banks in our sample were already exploiting demand in the CRA tracts that
tend to be smaller. The additional demand for loans that would meet CRA lending criteria the banks were able to
cater more in the larger non-CRA eligible tracts.
23
Similar to the pattern in elevated lending in 2004–2006 being driven by non-CRA tracts, this increase in defaults
during 2004–2006 is also largely driven by non-CRA tracts.
24
These results are available from the authors on request.

22

on the loan performance using a dataset of private-label securities of MBS/ABS market, which
has a better coverage of subprime and Alt-A loans. As explained in Section III, we are unable to
separate regions into CRA-eligible and non-CRA-eligible tracts. Moreover, the analysis can be
conducted for only a handful of banks (74) over a limited time period (2001–2006). Regardless
of these disadvantages, table 7 shows that there is a deterioration in the performance of loans
originated by treatment group banks relative to control group banks in the period around the
CRA exam. Note that we conduct the analysis combining the CRA and non-CRA tracts since the
data do not allow us to obtain information at a finer geographical unit than zip codes. However,
given this constraint, we also interpret the magnitudes of these results with caution since the
identification using these data is not as tightly accounting for local demand conditions as the
matched sample employed earlier (zip*month versus tract*month fixed effects).
Second, we complement the analysis on the heterogeneity of lending across bank size
(table 4) by examining the delinquencies of these elevated loans. Recall that we find that
elevated lending around the quarters of a CRA exam was concentrated in large banks. Figure 10
reports the results on 90-day delinquency within the two-year horizon for the banks in the largest
size tercile.25 As can be observed, there is a clear pattern of increased defaults for loans made by
these banks in quarters around the exam. Moreover, the effects are larger for loans made within
CRA tracts. In unreported tests we find no such pattern for banks in the middle and lower-size
tercile. These patterns are consistent with our results on elevated lending discussed earlier.
Third, we consider alternative definitions of the CRA exam dates. Rather than use the
actual exam date to mark the quarter when the exam occurs, we repeat our analysis using the date
on which the exam report is officially submitted by the regulators. In particular, we re-estimate
the regressions of Table 2, assessing lending volume around the report dates by effectively using
the date at which the official report is completed and submitted as the “pseudo” exam date.
Because of the large time lag between the exam date and the official report date – as shown in
Figure 5 – it is not surprising that we find a much weaker pattern of elevated lending around
official exam report-dates relative to those described in Table 2. Similarly, we repeat the analysis
in Table 5 using report dates instead of exam dates, and find that the pattern of defaults is
reversed for many of the coefficients of interest. Specifically, when conducting our analysis
around the report dates, we find that loans made by treatment banks are less likely to default.
This pattern is likely driven by the long lag between exam dates and report dates as banks in the
treatment group may begin countering the distortion in their lending around actual CRA exams

25

We obtain similar inferences with delinquencies defined within one year from origination.

23

by originating less risky loans once exam ends In addition, this pattern could as well arise
because some of the banks in the control group start facing CRA exams – and as a result
originate riskier loans – as we move further away from the actual exam date of banks in the
treatment group.
Finally, we assess the robustness of our findings in two additional ways. First, we extend
the HMDA sample to include all the banks in the data. Therefore, at a given point in time, the
control set of banks includes not only those facing a CRA exam during the sample period but
also those that never face a CRA exam (e.g., are not depository institutions). Including these
banks allows us potentially to better account for a richer set of loan applicants in a given tract
and month. We document a pattern similar to our earlier findings in both loan origination and
delinquency. Relative to control banks, those in the treatment group originate more mortgages
around CRA exams and these loans are also worse performing. Additionally, we assess the
robustness of the estimates by clustering on different units. In particular, we cluster at statequarter and state levels and find that the nature of our findings remains unchanged.

VI.

Conclusion

We use exogenous variation in banks’ incentives to conform to the standards of the Community
Reinvestment Act around regulatory exam dates to trace out the effect of the CRA on lending
activity. Our empirical strategy compares the lending behavior of banks undergoing CRA exams
within a given census tract in a given month to the behavior of banks operating in the same
census tract-month that do not face these exams. We find that adherence to the act leads to riskier
lending by banks: in the six quarters surrounding the CRA exams, lending is elevated on average
by about 5 percent and these loans default about 15 percent more often. These patterns are
accentuated in CRA-eligible census tracts and are concentrated among large banks. The effects
are strongest during the time period when the market for private securitization was booming.
We note that our estimates do not provide an assessment of the full impact of the CRA.
This is because we are examining the effect of CRA evaluations relative to a baseline of banks
not undergoing an exam. To the extent that there are adjustment costs in changing lending
behavior, this baseline level of lending behavior itself may be shifted toward catering to CRA
compliance. Because our empirical strategy nets out the baseline effect, our estimates of CRA
evaluations provide a lower bound to the actual impact of the Community Reinvestment Act. If
adjustment costs in lending behavior are large and banks can’t easily tilt their loan portfolio

24

toward greater CRA compliance, the full impact of the CRA is potentially much greater than that
estimated by the change in lending behavior around CRA exams.

References

Agarwal, Sumit, Yan Chang, and Abdullah Yavas. 2012. “Adverse Selection in Mortgage
Securitization.” J.F.E. 105 (3): 640–660.

Agarwal, Sumit, David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi. 2012. “Inconsistent Regulators:
Evidence from Banking.” Working Paper no. 17736, NBER.

Barlevy, Gadi and Jonas Fisher, 2010, “Mortgage Choices and Housing Speculation”, FRB
Chicago Working Paper.

Barr, Michael S. 2005. “Credit Where It Counts: The Community Reinvestment Act and Its
Critics.” N.Y.U. L. Rev. 80 (2): 513.

Ben-David, Itzhak, 2011, Financial Constraints and Inflated Home Prices during the Real-Estate
Boom, AEJ: Applied, 3(3), 55-78

Bhutta, Neil. 2012. “The Community Reinvestment Act and Mortgage Lending to Lower Income
Borrowers and Neighborhoods.” J. L. Econ., forthcoming.

Bostic, Raphael and Breck Robinson. 2003. “Do CRA Agreements Influence Lending Patterns.”
R. E. Econ., 31(1): 23-51.

Calomiris, Charles. 2008. “The Subprime Turmoil: What’s Old, What’s New, and What’s Next,”
Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s
Jackson Hole Symposium, 19-110.

Calomiris, Charles. 2011. “An Incentive-Robust Program for Financial Reform", Cato J. 31,
561-90.

25

Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison. 1997. “Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
Incentives.” J.P.E. 105 (6): 1167–1200.

Dahl, Drew, Douglass Evanoff, and Michael Spivey. 1999. “The Response of Banks to
Regulatory Enforcement: The Community Reinvestment Act.” In Bank Problems: A Global
Perspective, ed. George Kaufman. Vol. 11. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Dahl, Drew, Douglass Evanoff, and Michael Spivey. 2000. “Does the Community Reinvestment
Act Influence Lending? An analysis of Changes in Bank Low-Income Mortgage Activity”
Working Paper no.2000-06. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago

Dinardo, John, and Jack Johnston. 1996. Econometric Methods, 4th ed. New York: McGrawHill.

Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC). 2010. Final Report of the National Commission on
the Causes of the Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States. Internal Report.

Hernandez-Murillo, Ruben, Andra C. Ghent, and Michael T. Owyang. 2012. “Did Affordable
Housing Legislation Contribute to the Subprime Securities Boom?” Working paper.

Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy K. Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. 2010. “Did
Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans.” Q.J.E. 125 (1): 307–
362.

Keys, Benjamin J., Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. 2012. “Lender Screening and Role of
Securitization: Evidence from Prime and Subprime Mortgage Markets.”

Rev. Fin. Stud.,

forthcoming.

Kroszner, Randall (2008), “The Community Reinvestment Act and the Recent Mortgage Crisis,”
speech at the Confronting Concentrated Poverty Policy Forum, December 3, 2008.

Krugman, Paul. 2010. “Things Everyone in Chicago Knows.” Krugman.blogs.nytimes.com, June
3.
26

Liebman, Jeffrey, and Neale Mahoney. 2012. “Do Expiring Budgets Lead to Wasteful Year-End
Spending? Evidence from Federal Procurement.” Working paper.

Loutskina, Elena and Philip E. Strahan, 2011, “Informed and Uninformed Investment in
Housing: The Downside of Diversification,” Rev. Fin. Stud., 24(5).

Mayer, Christopher, Edward Morrison and Tomasz Piskorski, 2009, “A New Proposal for Loan
Modifications”, Yale J. on Reg. 26, 417-429.

Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence, and Shane Sherlund. 2009. “The Rise in Mortgage Defaults.”
J Econ Perspect. 23(1): 27-50

Mayer, Christopher, and Karen Pence. 2009. “Subprime Mortgages: What, Where, and to
Whom?” In Housing Markets and the Economy: Risk, Regulation, and Policy, ed. Edward
Glaeser and John Quigley. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Land Institute.

Mayer, Christopher, Edward Morrison, Tomasz Piskorski, and Arpit Gupta. 2011. “Mortgage
Modification and Strategic Behavior: Evidence from a Legal Settlement with Countrywide”,
Working Paper no. 17065, NBER

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis.” Q.J.E. 124 (4): 1449–1496.

Oyer, Paul. 1998. “Fiscal Year Ends and Non-Linear Incentive Contracts: The Effect on
Business Seasonality.” Q.J.E. 113 (1): 149–185.

Rajan, Raghuram. 2010. “Bankers Have Been Sold Short by Market Distortions.” Financial
Times, June 2.

27

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
This table presents summary statistics of the different variables used in our analysis. Panel A presents the
statistics related to the CRA exam data in our sample. Panel B presents statistics related to loan
applications in the HMDA data for lenders that are also present in the CRA exam data. Panel C presents
statistics related to loans in the HMDA data matched with loan-level data. Panel D presents statistics
related to loans in the private-label ABS/MBS loan sample. Data reported span 1999–2009.
Panel A. CRA exam schedule, 19992009
Observations
12880
5651
12877
10768

CRA rating
CRA exams per bank
Bank assets
Quarters between CRA exams

Mean
2.78
2.28
1.28
15.25

Std. Dev.
0.70
1.04
10.99
5.56

Panel B. Loan application for banks that participate in CRA exams, 1999–2009, in HMDA

Approved loans
Fraction CRA target tracts
Fraction of applications in CRA exam
Fraction conventional loans
Fraction refinance loans
Fraction owner-occupied
Bank assets, millions
Applicant income, $1000s
Loan amount, $1000s
Applicant income, $1000s (excludes 1% tails)
Loan amount, $1000s (excludes 1% tails)
Fraction minority applicants
Fraction female applicants

28

Observations
94499633
94499633
94499633
94499633
83640103
93932830
94499633
88999329
94499633
87061417
92564677
80254097
84981435

Mean
0.72
0.17
0.05
0.93
0.62
0.91
222.69
89.03
152.26
80.98
141.36
0.17
0.29

Std. Dev.
0.45
0.38
0.23
0.26
0.49
0.29
353.32
142.03
290.07
61.48
120.53
0.38
0.46

Panel C. Loans originated in HMDA data matched with loan-level data, 1999–2009

Fraction CRA target tracts
Fraction of applications in month of CRA exam or
3 months before
Fraction conventional loans
Fraction refinance loans
Fraction owner-occupied
Bank assets, millions
Applicant income, $1000s
Loan amount, $1000s
Applicant income, $1000s (excludes 1% tails)
Loan amount, $1000s (excludes 1% tails)
Fraction minority applicants
Fraction female applicants
30 days’ delinquent within 1 year of origination
60 days’ delinquent within 1 year of origination
90 days’ delinquent within 1 year of origination
30 days’ delinquent within 2 years of origination
60 days’ delinquent within 2 years of origination
90 days’ delinquent within 2 years of origination
Balloon flag
Buy-down flag
Interest only flag
Jumbo flag
Pre-payment penalty flag
Loan term (months)
ARM flag
Low documentation flag
Grade B or C flag
FICO score at origination
LTV ratio
FICO score (excludes 1% tails)
LTV ratio (excludes 1% tails)

29

Observations
15222189

Mean
0.15

Std. Dev.
0.36

15222189
15222189
15162597
15207979
15222189
14220468
15222189
13927138
14907780
13544586
14349548
15222189
15222189
15222189
15222189
15222189
15222189
15222089
15222189
14875134
15222189
14218853
15222150
15210316
5653792
15222189
13018311
14916491
13017444
14673676

0.04
0.88
0.51
0.90
260.43
100.34
184.11
91.74
175.49
0.15
0.28
0.07
0.02
0.01
0.12
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.01
0.06
0.08
0.11
320.59
0.17
0.20
0.04
713.85
82.47
713.88
71.82

0.19
0.33
0.50
0.30
340.11
147.77
172.42
69.55
124.94
0.36
0.45
0.26
0.15
0.11
0.33
0.22
0.19
0.14
0.09
0.24
0.27
0.31
76.97
0.38
0.40
0.19
64.05
10170.08
63.89
20.62

Panel D. Loans originated in private-label ABS/MBS loan-level data for lenders who undergo CRA
exam, 1999–2009

Fraction CRA target tracts
Fraction of applications in month of CRA exam or 3
months before
Bank assets, millions
30 days’ delinquent within 1 year of origination
60 days’ delinquent within 1 year of origination
90 days’ delinquent within 1 year of origination
30 days’ delinquent within 2 years of origination
60 days’ delinquent within 2 years of origination
90 days’ delinquent within 2 years of origination
Low documentation flag
Back-end DTI ratio
FICO score
Balloon mortgage flag
Interest only flag
Pre-payment penalty flag
Negative amortization flag
LTV ratio

30

Observations
3075002

Mean
0.26

Std. Dev.
0.44

3075002
787092
3075002
3075002
3075002
3075002
3075002
3075002
3070253
2598255
3066161
3075002
3030762
3025608
2223413
3075002

0.02
149.25
0.23
0.10
0.06
0.37
0.22
0.16
0.49
39.44
654.08
0.15
0.22
0.57
0.08
82.54

0.13
249.09
0.42
0.30
0.24
0.48
0.42
0.37
0.50
9.47
68.29
0.36
0.42
0.50
0.27
13.66

Table 2. Elevated Lending in CRA and Non-CRA Tracts
This table presents results from a specification that evaluates dynamics of elevated lending in CRAeligible tract as well as non-CRA-eligible tracts for three quarters on either side of the exam. The
dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes a value one if the loan application is accepted. Preexam 1, Pre-exam 2, and Pre-exam3 equal one if the loan application is submitted to a bank that will
undergo a CRA exam in one, two, and three quarters, respectively. CRA target tract is a dummy that
equals one for tracts with median income less than 80% of median income at the MSA level. Data used in
from HMDA and spans 1999–2009. Standard errors are clustered at state*year level, and p-values are
reported in squared brackets. ***, **, and * represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.
Y= 1 if a loan is originated
Mean
SD
Pre-exam 1

0.7203
0.4488
0.051***
[0.000]

0.060***
[0.000]

0.056***
[0.000]

0.040***
[0.000]

0.050***
[0.000]

0.023***
[0.000]
0.048***
[0.000]
0.013***
[0.000]

0.040***
[0.000]

0.050***
[0.000]

Pre-exam 1 * CRA target tract
Pre-exam 2
Pre-exam 2 * CRA target tract
Pre-exam 3
Pre-exam 3 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 1

0.063***
[0.000]

Post-exam 1 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 2

0.058***
[0.000]

Post-exam 2 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 3

0.033***
[0.000]

0.047***
[0.000]
0.016***
[0.000]
0.060***
[0.000]
0.022***
[0.000]
0.054***
[0.000]
0.021***
[0.000]

Observations

94397692

94397692

0.032***
[0.000]
0.010***
[0.000]
94397692

Years:
Tract*month fixed effects:
Quarter fixed effects:
# of banks

1999-2009
Y
Y
6028

1999-2009
Y
Y
6028

1999-2009
Y
Y
6028

Post-exam 3 * CRA target tract

31

Table 3. Elevated Lending in CRA and Non-CRA Tracts – Stratification by Applicant
Income
This table presents results from a specification that evaluates dynamics of elevated lending in CRA-eligible
tracts as well as non-CRA-eligible tracts for three quarters on either side of the exam in samples stratified by
income of applicant. The dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes a value one if the loan
application is accepted. Pre-exam 1, Pre-exam 2, and Pre-exam3 equal one if the loan application is submitted
to a bank that will undergo a CRA exam in one, two, and three quarters, respectively. CRA target tract is a
dummy that equals one for tracts with median income less than 80% of median income at the MSA level. Data
are from HMDA and span 1999-2009. Standard errors are clustered at state*year level, and p-values are
reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

Y=1 if loan originated
Mean

0.6247

0.7348

0.7991

SD

0.4842

0.4415

0.4007

0.060***
[0.000]
0.004

0.054***
[0.000]
0.011**

0.035***
[0.000]
0.017***

[0.120]
0.044***
[0.000]
-0.004
[0.213]
0.042***

[0.031]
0.044***
[0.000]
0.001
[0.791]
0.046***

[0.000]
0.033***
[0.000]
0.014***
[0.000]
0.033***

[0.000]
-0.001
[0.791]
0.059***
[0.000]
0.003

[0.000]
0.002
[0.490]
0.054***
[0.000]
0.010***

[0.000]
0.017***
[0.000]
0.039***
[0.000]
0.015***

[0.423]
0.055***
[0.000]
0.002
[0.665]
0.032***

[0.001]
0.051***
[0.000]
0.010***
[0.005]
0.023***

[0.000]
0.035***
[0.000]
0.014***
[0.000]
0.021***

[0.000]
-0.008*
[0.066]

[0.000]
-0.003
[0.435]

[0.004]
0.011***
[0.000]

Observations

28655911

28996311

29314983

Income tercile
Years:
Tract*month fixed effects:
Quarter fixed effects:

Bottom
1999-2009
Y
Y

Medium
1999-2009
Y
Y

Top
1999-2009
Y
Y

5844

5877

5948

Pre-exam 1
Pre-exam 1 * CRA target tract
Pre-exam 2
Pre-exam 2 * CRA target tract
Pre-exam 3
Pre-exam 3 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 1
Post-exam 1 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 2
Post-exam 2 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 3
Post-exam 3 * CRA target tract

# of banks
32

Table 4. Elevated Lending in CRA and Non-CRA tracts – Stratification by Bank Size
This table presents results from a specification that evaluates dynamics of elevated lending in CRA-eligible tracts as
well as non-CRA-eligible tracts for three quarters on either side of the exam in samples stratified by lender size. The
dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes a value one if the loan application is accepted. Pre-exam 1,
Pre-exam 2, and Pre-exam3 equal one if the loan application is submitted to a bank that will undergo a CRA exam
in one, two, and three quarters, respectively. CRA target tract is a dummy that equals one for tracts with median
income less than 80% of median income at the MSA level. Data are HMDA data matched with loan-level data and
span 1999-2009. Standard errors are clustered at state*year level, and p-values are reported in square brackets. ***,
**, and * represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

Y=1 if loan originated
Mean
SD
Pre-exam 1
Pre-exam 1 * CRA target tract
Pre-exam 2
Pre-exam 2 * CRA target tract
Pre-exam 3
Pre-exam 3 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 1
Post-exam 1 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 2
Post-exam 2 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 3
Post-exam 3 * CRA target tract
Observations
SUBSAMPLES
Tract*month fixed effects:
Quarter fixed effects:
Bank fixed effects
# of banks

0.8491
0.3580

0.7397
0.4388

0.6900
0.4625

0.6900
0.4625

0.012***
[0.000]
0.005
[0.185]
-0.045***
[0.000]
-0.030***
[0.000]
-0.055***
[0.000]
-0.031***
[0.000]
0.025***
[0.000]
0.017***
[0.000]
0.022***
[0.000]
0.016***
[0.000]
0.017***
[0.000]
0.014**
[0.010]

-0.015***
[0.009]
0.004
[0.385]
-0.011*
[0.099]
-0.003
[0.538]
-0.013
[0.112]
-0.004
[0.236]
-0.010
[0.123]
0.005
[0.277]
-0.023***
[0.001]
0.004
[0.539]
-0.012**
[0.034]
0.006
[0.178]

0.071***
[0.000]
0.041***
[0.000]
0.054***
[0.000]
0.024***
[0.000]
0.064***
[0.000]
0.031***
[0.000]
0.078***
[0.000]
0.039***
[0.000]
0.065***
[0.000]
0.031***
[0.000]
0.018**
[0.044]
0.010***
[0.000]

0.070***
[0.000]
0.030***
[0.000]
0.050***
[0.000]
0.013***
[0.010]
0.052***
[0.000]
0.023***
[0.000]
0.085***
[0.000]
0.024***
[0.000]
0.062***
[0.000]
0.021***
[0.000]
0.041***
[0.000]
0.020***
[0.000]

9752230

25888791

49436963

49436963

Bank Assets < $1 Bank Assets > Bank Assets >
Billion
$1B but < $50B
$50B
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
5647
33

225

49

Bank Assets >
$50B
Y
Y
Y
49

Table 5. Elevated Delinquencies in CRA and Non-CRA Tracts
This table presents results from a specification that evaluates dynamics of elevated delinquencies in CRA-eligible
tracts as well as non-CRA-eligible tracts for three quarters on either side of the exam. The dependent variable is an
indicator variable which takes a value one if the loan application is 30, 60, or 90 days’ delinquent within a particular
horizon from origination. Pre-exam 1, Pre-exam 2, and Pre-exam3 equal one if the loan application is submitted to a
bank that will undergo a CRA exam in one, two, and three quarters, respectively. CRA target tract is a dummy that
equals one for tracts with median income less than 80% of median income at the MSA level. Data are HMDA data
matched with loan-level data and span 1999-2009. Standard errors are clustered at state*year level, and p-values are
reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * represent significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.

Mean
SD
Pre-exam 1

Delinquent within 1 year of origination
30 days
60 days
90 days
0.072
0.023
0.012
0.258
0.148
0.111

Delinquent within 2 years of origination
30 days
60 days
90 days
0.127
0.055
0.038
0.333
0.228
0.192

0.008***
[0.000]
0.008**
[0.013]
0.007***
[0.000]
0.004
[0.237]
0.004**
[0.018]
0.008**
[0.031]
0.007***
[0.000]
0.005
[0.112]
0.007***
[0.000]
0.008**
[0.032]
0.010***
[0.000]
0.017***
[0.000]

0.003***
[0.000]
0.004**
[0.041]
0.002***
[0.002]
0.000
[0.793]
0.001
[0.330]
0.003*
[0.095]
0.002**
[0.010]
0.003*
[0.086]
0.003***
[0.000]
0.006**
[0.014]
0.004***
[0.000]
0.010***
[0.000]

0.002***
[0.000]
0.003**
[0.011]
0.002***
[0.003]
0.001
[0.367]
0.000
[0.376]
0.000
[0.695]
0.001***
[0.003]
0.003**
[0.030]
0.002***
[0.000]
0.007***
[0.000]
0.004***
[0.000]
0.009***
[0.000]

0.009***
[0.000]
0.010***
[0.005]
0.009***
[0.000]
0.005
[0.255]
0.005**
[0.015]
0.008
[0.129]
0.008***
[0.000]
0.007**
[0.036]
0.010***
[0.000]
0.012**
[0.035]
0.012***
[0.000]
0.021***
[0.000]

0.003***
[0.000]
0.005**
[0.026]
0.002*
[0.054]
-0.000
[0.920]
0.000
[0.747]
0.004
[0.136]
0.001
[0.152]
0.005**
[0.029]
0.005***
[0.000]
0.008**
[0.016]
0.006***
[0.000]
0.014***
[0.000]

0.002**
[0.023]
0.005**
[0.028]
0.002**
[0.034]
-0.001
[0.713]
-0.000
[0.757]
0.002
[0.324]
0.001*
[0.068]
0.007***
[0.004]
0.005***
[0.000]
0.009***
[0.008]
0.006***
[0.002]
0.012***
[0.000]

Observations

13012460

13012460

13012460

13012460

13012460

13012460

Years:
Tract*month fixed effects:
Quarter fixed effects:
Controls
# of banks

1999-2009
Y
Y
Y
4434

1999-2009
Y
Y
Y
4434

1999-2009
Y
Y
Y
4434

1999-2009
Y
Y
Y
4434

1999-2009
Y
Y
Y
4434

1999-2009
Y
Y
Y
4434

Pre-exam 1 * CRA target tract
Pre-exam 2
Pre-exam 2 * CRA target tract
Pre-exam 3
Pre-exam 3 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 1
Post-exam 1 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 2
Post-exam 2 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 3
Post-exam 3 * CRA target tract

34

Table 6. Mortgage and Borrower Characteristics in Vicinity of CRA Exam
This table presents results from a specification that evaluates dynamics of mortgage and borrower characteristics in
CRA-eligible tracts as well as non-CRA-eligible tracts for three quarters on either side of the exam. The dependent
variable takes the characteristic of the mortgage or borrower. Pre-exam 1, Pre-exam 2, and Pre-exam3 equal one if
the loan application is submitted to a bank that will undergo a CRA exam in one, two, and three quarters,
respectively. CRA target tract is a dummy that equals one for tracts with median income less than 80% of median
income at the MSA level. Data are HMDA data matched with loan-level data and span 1999-2009. Standard errors
are clustered at state*year level, and p-values are reported in squared brackets. ***, **, and * represent significance
at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.

Mean
SD
Pre-exam 1
Pre-exam 1 * CRA target tract
Pre-exam 2
Pre-exam 2 * CRA target tract
Pre-exam 3
Pre-exam 3 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 1
Post-exam 1 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 2
Post-exam 2 * CRA target tract
Post-exam 3
Post-exam 3 * CRA target tract
Observations
Years:
Tract*month fixed effects
Quarter fixed effects
Banks

FICO score
713.883
63.894
-3.657***
[0.001]
-3.339***
[0.000]
-2.164*
[0.055]
-2.116**
[0.028]
-1.338
[0.253]
-2.750***
[0.002]
-1.981*
[0.054]
-2.757***
[0.007]
-3.511***
[0.003]
-3.555***
[0.001]
-4.684***
[0.001]
-6.344***
[0.000]
13017444
1999-2009
Y
Y
4434

Low doc
0.205
0.403
0.021
[0.181]
-0.002
[0.890]
0.048**
[0.012]
0.005
[0.680]
0.028
[0.181]
-0.012
[0.340]
0.006
[0.675]
0.004
[0.781]
0.011
[0.617]
0.004
[0.817]
0.008
[0.585]
0.003
[0.825]
5653792
1999-2009
Y
Y
3747

35

Interest Rate
6.114
1.3
0.005
[0.798]
-0.009
[0.495]
0.000
[0.991]
-0.001
[0.968]
0.027*
[0.060]
0.018
[0.300]
0.011
[0.563]
0.004
[0.780]
0.001
[0.942]
-0.009
[0.385]
0.028
[0.261]
-0.015
[0.142]
14673676
1999-2009
Y
Y
4434

LTV ratio
71.817
20.616
0.376
[0.190]
0.062
[0.749]
0.437
[0.110]
-0.324*
[0.078]
0.028
[0.913]
-0.122
[0.653]
0.537**
[0.041]
-0.111
[0.566]
0.540*
[0.078]
0.213
[0.408]
0.273
[0.288]
0.172
[0.507]
14673676
1999-2009
Y
Y
4434

Table 7. Elevated Delinquencies Using Private-Label ABS/MBS Loan-Level Data
This table presents results from a specification that evaluates dynamics of elevated delinquencies for three quarters
on either side of the exam. The dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes a value one if the loan
application is 30, 60, or 90 days’ delinquent within a particular horizon from origination. Pre-exam 1, Pre-exam 2,
and Pre-exam3 equal one if the loan application is submitted to a bank that will undergo a CRA exam in one, two,
and three quarters, respectively. Data cover the private-label ABS/MBS loan market and span 1999-2009. Standard
errors are clustered at state*year level, and p-values are reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * represent
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

Delinquent within 1 year of origination

Delinquent within 2 years of origination

30 days

60 days

90 days

30 days

60 days

90 days

Mean

0.243

0.110

0.064

0.391

0.238

0.175

SD

0.429

0.313

0.245

0.488

0.426

0.380

0.040***

0.011***

0.014***

0.032***

0.007*

0.015***

[0.000]

[0.002]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.089]

[0.000]

0.022***

0.008**

0.009***

0.014**

0.012***

0.019***

[0.000]

[0.041]

[0.007]

[0.035]

[0.001]

[0.000]

-0.004

-0.006***

-0.006***

0.005

0.001

-0.002

[0.258]

[0.003]

[0.002]

[0.253]

[0.855]

[0.448]

0.038***

0.013***

0.012***

0.040***

0.020***

0.023***

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.064***

0.029***

0.021***

0.058***

0.038***

0.036***

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

0.058***

0.043***

0.042***

0.052***

0.060***

0.070***

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

2776308

2776308

2776308

2776308

2776308

2776308

2001-2006

2001-2006

2001-2006

2001-2006

2001-2006

2001-2006

Zip*month fixed effects:

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Quarter fixed effects:

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

# of banks

74

74

74

74

74

74

Pre-exam 1
Pre-exam 2
Pre-exam 3
Post-exam 1
Post-exam 2
Post-exam 3
Observations
Years:

36

Figure 1. Distribution of Quarters Between Exams
This figure plots the kernel density of quarters between CRA exams for banks in our sample. Data span the period
1999–2009.

Figure 2. Number of Exams per Bank
This figure plots the number of CRA exams for each banks in our sample. Data span the period 1999–2009.

.

37

Figure 3. Distribution of CRA Ratings
This figure plots the distribution of CRA ratings for each of the exams in our sample. The rating is on a five-point
scale with a grade of one associated with an “Outstanding” rating and a grade of five associated with a “Substantial
Non-compliance” rating. Data span the period 1999–2009.

Figure 4. Time Series Evolution of CRA Exams
This figure plots the quarterly evolution of the number of CRA bank examinations over our sample period. Data
span the period 1999–2009.

38

Figure 5. Time Gap Between Examination and Report Completion
This figure plots the months between the CRA bank examination and completion of the examination report over our
sample period. Data span the period 1999–2009.

Figure 6. Elevated Lending in CRA and Non-CRA Tracts
This figure plots the dynamics of elevated lending in CRA-eligible tracts as well as non-CRA-eligible tracts for
three quarters on either side of the exam. Coefficients on the pre- and post-exam dummies and on the interaction of
these dummies with CRAtract from table 3 are on the Y axis, and the quarters around the CRA exam are on the X
axis. Data span 1999-2009.
0.09
Non CRA-target Tracts
CRA-target Tracts
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
-3

-2

-1

1

39

2

3

Figure 7. Elevated Lending in CRA and Non-CRA Tracts
This figure plots the dynamics of elevated lending in CRA-eligible tracts as well as non-CRA-eligible tracts for four
quarters on either side of the exam. Coefficients on the pre- and post-exam dummies and on the interaction of these
dummies with CRAtract are on the Y axis, and the quarters around the CRA exam are on the X axis. Data span
1999–2009.
0.09
Non CRA-target Tracts
CRA-target Tracts
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
-4

-3

-2

-1

1

2

3

4

Figure 8(a). Borrower Income for Treated and Control Banks Three Quarters Before
Exam
This figure plots the kernel density of applicant income as of three quarters before the CRA exam date for both
treatment group banks (facing exams in three quarters) and control group banks. Data span 1999–2009.

40

Figure 8(b). Loan Amount for Treated and Control Banks Three Quarters Before Exam
This figure plots the kernel density of loan amount as of three quarters before the CRA exam date for both treatment
group banks (facing exams in three quarters) and control group banks. Data span 1999–2009.

Figure 8(c). Borrower FICO in Treatment and Control Group Banks Three Quarters
Before Exam
This figure plots the kernel density of borrower’s credit score three quarters before the CRA exam date for both
treatment group banks (facing exams in three quarters) and control group banks. The data correspond to —HMDA
data matched with loan-level data for the period 1999–2009.

41

Figure 8(d). Mortgage LTV in Treatment Group and Control Group Bank Three Quarters
Before Exam
This figure plots the kernel density of borrower's loan-to-value three quarters before the CRA exam date for both
treated banks (facing exams in three quarters) and control banks. The data corresponds to HMDA data matched with
loan-level data for the period 1999–2009.

Figure 9(a). Elevated Lending Around CRA exams – Time Series Evolution
This figure plots the dynamics of average elevated lending in CRA-eligible and non-CRA-eligible tracts. We plot
coefficients on pre- and post-exam dummies interacted with three period dummies (1999–2003, 2004–2006, 2007–
2009) on the Y axis, and the quarters around the CRA exam date are on the X axis. Data span 1999–2009.
0.14

0.12

1999-2003
2004-2006
2007-2009

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
-3

-2

-1

1

42

2

3

Figure 9(b). Elevated Defaults Around CRA Exams – Time Series Evolution
This figure plots the dynamics of elevated delinquencies in CRA-eligible and non-CRA-eligible tracts. We plot
coefficients on pre- and post-exam dummies interacted with three period dummies (1999–2003, 2004–2006, 2007–
2009) on the Y axis, and the quarters around the CRA exam date are on the X axis. Data span 1999–2009.
1.4
1.2

1999-2003
2004-2006
2007-2009

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-3

-2

-1

1

2

3

-0.2
-0.4

Figure 10. Elevated Defaults Around CRA Exams – Large Banks
This figure plots the dynamics of elevated delinquencies in CRA-eligible and non-CRA-eligible tracts for lending by
large banks. This complements the analysis on elevated lending in column 3 of table 4. Coefficients on the pre- and
post-exam dummies and on the interaction of these dummies with CRAtract are on the Y axis, and the quarters
around the CRA exam are on the X axis. The delinquency is 90 days tracked two years from a loan’s origination.
Data span 1999–2009.
0.04
Non CRA-target Tracts
CRA-target Tracts

0.03

0.02

0.01

0
-3

-2

-1

1

43

2

3

