NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MISCONDUCT IN CREDENCE GOOD MARKETS
Jennifer Brown
Dylan B. Minor
Working Paper 18608
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18608
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

We thank Luciano de Castro, Tim Feddersen, Craig Garthwaite, Tom Hubbard, Bruno Jullien, Mike
Mazzeo, Nicola Persico, Mike Powell, Max Schanzenbach and seminar participants at the Harvard
Business School, Haas School of Business at UC-Berkeley, Kellogg School of Management, Florida
State University, NYU Stern, 2012 NBER Law & Economics Summer Institute, Center for Research
in Economics and Strategy Conference, 2013 IIOC, and LMU Munich Workshop on Natural Experiments
and Controlled Field Studies for helpful comments. We are grateful to Eric Zhang and Tongtong Shi
for excellent research assistance. We also thank individuals at the Texas Department of Insurance
for their help in acquiring the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18608.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jennifer Brown and Dylan B. Minor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Misconduct in Credence Good Markets
Jennifer Brown and Dylan B. Minor
NBER Working Paper No. 18608
December 2012, Revised October 2013
JEL No. D8,G2,L15,M5
ABSTRACT
We examine misconduct in credence good markets with price taking experts. We propose a market-level
model in which price-taking experts extract surplus based on the value of their firm's brand and their
own skill. We test the predictions of the model using sales complaint data for exclusive and independent
insurance agents. We find that exclusive insurance agents working for large branded firms are more
likely to be the subject of a justified sales complaint, relative to independent experts, despite doing
substantially less business. In addition, more experienced experts attract more complaints per year.
Jennifer Brown
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
jen-brown@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Dylan B. Minor
Kellogg School of Management (MEDS)
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, Il 60208
d-minor@kellogg.northwestern.edu

“... will people push the envelope and pitch lucrative and complicated products
to clients even if they are not the simplest investments or the ones most directly
aligned with the client’s goals? Absolutely. Every day, in fact.”
- Greg Smith, former executive at Goldman Sachs
New York Times Op-Ed (March 14, 2012)
Expert services …rms often advise customers in markets with substantial asymmetric
information problems; however, with these asymmetries comes the potential for expert misconduct. Speci…cally, while experts bene…t from customers trusting their recommendations,
they may also face incentives to provide misleading advice for their own gain. For example,
investment or insurance advisors can recommend products that o¤er customers less bene…t,
but provide themselves with greater revenue than the customers’ideal products.
This paper explores misconduct in markets with price-taking experts. In particular, we
explore di¤erences in the incentives for misconduct for experts working exclusively for large
branded …rms versus those working as independent sellers. Our interest in these settings is
motivated by their empirical prevalence— many …nancial services experts face …xed prices
and commission rates while operating under one of the two prominent organizational forms.
We also consider the relationship between misconduct and expert experience.
Existing studies have shown that misconduct in the …nancial services market is more
than just a theoretical possibility. Mullainathan, Noeth, and Schoar (2012) conduct a …eld
audit study in a U.S. market and …nd that …nancial advisors often recommend self-serving
products. Anagol, Cole, and Sarkar (2012) conduct an audit study of insurance sales agents
in India and …nd similar results. Even …nancial experts themselves acknowledge the ethical
quandary of their …eld. In Cooper and Frank (2005), a survey of insurance agents …nds that
agents consistently identify ethical issues relating to the con‡icts between customer bene…ts
and opportunities for personal …nancial gain. We contribute to the discussion of misconduct
in these markets by providing a stylized market-level model of misconduct that provides
predictions that we can test empirically using data from life insurance sales.
While our empirical work focuses on the life insurance market, the …ndings may be of
wider interest— …nancial services fall broadly into the category of credence goods. With
credence goods, it is di¢ cult for a customer to determine whether the product or service is
the best match for his or her needs. Because of this, an expert who both advises and receives
revenue based on his advice faces con‡icting incentives. High quality advice may improve
the customer’s payo¤; yet, when taken by the customer, inappropriate advice may lead to
higher expert revenue.
In the paper, we use the simple market-level framework to consider the role of organizational form. We argue that, for a given level of malfeasance, customers working with
1

exclusive agents at large …rms fare better in expectation relative to customers using independent experts. Several features of our industry of interest— life insurance and annuities
sales— support this notion. For example, experts working exclusively for large branded companies may o¤er additional services and support, experts working as representatives of large,
hierarchical organizations may be more heavily monitored by supervisors, or customers may
simply value working with a branded insurance expert for reasons beyond the tangible features of their service. Because the experts are price takers, those who provide larger expected
consumer bene…ts cannot adjust their prices to extract this surplus directly; instead, the exclusive experts extract surplus through greater misconduct.
The model provides similar intuition for understanding the role of expert experience.
If more experienced experts are less prone to mistakes, then their customers enjoy higher
expected payo¤s. In turn, however, experienced experts may try to appropriate these bene…ts
through greater misconduct.
We test these two main predictions using data on life insurance and annuities’consumer
sales complaints. Although complaints are an imperfect measure of misconduct, complaints
data summarizing accusations investigated by a state insurance regulator o¤er us a window into actual misconduct and allow us to explore the impact of di¤erent organizational
structures on expert behavior. In general, studies of misconduct face a trade-o¤: direct
observation of misconduct through …eld experiments is necessarily limited in scale, while
administrative data on reported misconduct may su¤er from selection biases. In this paper,
we use data on misconduct that has been reported to and investigated by a state regulator.
Thus, we can take advantage of the observation of both accusations of misconduct and con…rmed cases to consider the role of reporting and selection biases. We match life insurance
licensing data with company a¢ liations and detailed sales practice complaint records from
the Texas Department of Insurance. From company a¢ liation data, we identify two types
of experts: agents who work exclusively for large, branded companies and agents who work
independently.
Our …ndings are consistent with the predictions of the market-level model. Speci…cally,
we …nd that exclusive agents face more justi…ed complaints than independent agents, despite
enjoying lower market share. We also …nd that more experienced agents have greater per
year complaint rates than less experienced agents.
The information asymmetries in our theoretical and empirical settings cannot be fully
resolved through reputation building. Indeed, the nature of credence good markets means
that misconduct is seldom observed; therefore, the signals required for reputation building
on this dimension are not su¢ ciently informative (Mailath and Samuelson 2001). As a
result, it is not possible to build a reputation explicitly for ethical behavior. Curiously,
2

we still observe strong branding by …rms in many credence good settings— for example,
insurance companies, wirehouses, and hospital networks are often heavily advertised. Our
results provide an interesting counter to the conventional view of brand. While branding
and reputation solve informational asymmetry in many markets, in our empirical setting, the
correlation between strong branding and higher additional surplus leads to the prediction
that experts from large, branded …rms are actually more likely to engage in misconduct.
Related Literature
Our work contributes to the literature on credence goods, established by Darby and Karni
(1973). Much of the work that followed modeled experts who could adjust both quality and
price. In contrast, we explore a credence good market with price-taking experts. Pitchik and
Schotter (1987) isolate the problem of the expert honestly suggesting a mode of treatment
and provide comparative statics results comparing price and quality controls and the level of
honesty. Pessendorfer and Wolinsky (2003) study the …rst stage of a similar problem: the need
to provide incentives for the expert to expend enough e¤ort to identify and provide a correct
solution. Sulzle and Wambach (2005) explore how changing physician and patient incentives
through higher coinsurance levels may (or may not) induce patients to increase physician
search and encourage physicians to reduce fraud. Alger and Salanie (2006) also consider the
role of the client and …nd that a patient’s ability to reject an expert’s recommendation creates
a market failure. Emons (1997) shows that market equilibria with honest expert behavior
exist when customers can infer sellers’ incentives for fraud from market data. Gennaioli,
Shleifer, and Vishny (2012) study the behavior and market outcomes of trusted investment
managers when investors’beliefs are misguided.
The literature has also carefully considered the importance of customer heterogeneity.
Fong (2005) shows that cheating arises when …rms target high-valuation and high-cost customers. Feddersen and Gilligan (2001) …nd that third parties, namely activists, can ameliorate the credence good problem. Taylor (1995) examines multi-period contracts and warranties as another solution. Inderst and Ottaviani (2009, 2012a, 2012b) study …rms trying
to induce agents to provide advice to imperfectly informed customers. They …nd that misselling depends on …rm asymmetries, customer awareness, and agents’ utility from giving
suitable recommendations. Broadly, in their models, agents provide honest advice when
…rms are symmetric or there are su¢ ciently many aware customers in the market. Lightle
(2009) considers the opposing case where an expert attempts to maximize his customer’s
payo¤. Dulleck and Kerschbamer (2006) present a model that uni…es the extant literature
and rationalizes many of the previous theoretical …ndings. Our work complements these
studies by adapting our market-level model of price-taking experts to explore the role of
customer heterogeneity.
3

Despite the challenges, several empirical studies have examined experts decisions about
what quality to provide and what price to charge their relatively uninformed customers.
Hubbard (1998) explores empirically the incentives faced by experts in automotive repair
services. He …nds that private …rms are more likely than state inspectors to help vehicles
pass emissions tests. Moreover, he …nds that independent experts are more likely to provide
favorable inspection reports, relative to branded “chain” shops with non-owner managers.
Hubbard (2002) suggests that the possibility of many future transactions provides incentives
for experts to o¤er more favorable advice, particularly where experts are residual claimants.
Free-riding may also dampen individual experts’ incentives, as …rms with more inspectors
tend to help vehicles pass less frequently. Levitt and Syverson (2008) …nd that real estate
agents invest more e¤ort and secure a higher price for the sale of their own property, relative
to their customers’homes. Similar to the mechanism proposed by Hubbard (2002), Levitt
and Syverson argue that the absence of frequent and repeated interactions limits customers’
abilities to verify their agents’ service quality. They also …nd that the di¤erence between
agent-owned and non-agent-owned sale prices is increasing in the degree of asymmetric information about property values.
We build on these empirical papers by exploring another important industry setting in
which, unlike with vehicle inspectors and real-estate agents, experts face rigid commission
rates. While we focus on life insurance sales, other examples of price-taking experts include
physicians with limited scope to adjust prices for speci…c patients and experts facing formally
regulated prices.
The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we propose a market-wide model of
expert misconduct that considers the role of both organizational form and expert experience.
In Section 2, we provide an overview of some important institutional features of the insurance
industry. In sections 3 and 4, we describe our data and provide evidence of a di¤erence
between the complaints against exclusive and independent insurance salespeople. In section
5, we consider several alternative explanations for the empirical …ndings. The …nal section
discusses how our …ndings relate to policies proposed after the recent …nancial crisis.

1

A model of price-taking experts

In this section, we present a market-level model of consumers and experts. The model is
inspired by the unifying model in Dulleck and Kerschbamer (2006), hereafter DK; however,
we adapt the framework to consider price-taking experts. In DK, di¤erent outcomes are
driven by experts o¤ering services at di¤erent prices (e.g. mechanics choose quality and
prices for auto repairs). In fact, virtually all of the aforementioned theory papers studied
4

price-setting …rms or advisors.
We develop the model to generate predictions about two dimensions of many expert services markets. First, we aim to understand if and how market-level misconduct varies across
two common organizational forms— in particular, we compare misconduct from experts who
work exclusively for large companies and independent experts who form their own small
…rms. Second, we consider how misconduct varies across experts with di¤erent levels of
experience.
Our model is stylized, allowing us to focus on the two dimensions of interest. In Section
2, we explore one particular empirical setting and map the details of that industry to the
following theory.

1.1

Model set-up

Consider an interaction between an expert and a customer that can result in two outcomes:
the expert can recommend either an appropriate or inappropriate product. For convenience,
we will use the index “” and “ ” as mnemonics for the “right” and “wrong” products,
respectively. We assume that the expert knows which product is appropriate for the customer, but the customer does not. After the expert makes his product recommendation, the
customer must chose to buy or not to buy.
Suppose that  and  are the payo¤s to an expert for selling the appropriate and
inappropriate products, respectively. Payo¤  is a reduced form representation of the net
payo¤ (i.e., gross revenue minus business expenses) of selling product  2 f  g before
any possible penalty for mis-selling to a customer (i.e., recommending  ).
As depicted below, the timeline for the expert-customer interaction is sequential.

An expert’s private cost of misconduct, penalty  can be framed as his willingness to
take advantage of a customer. Let  be drawn from a commonly known distribution  ( ) 
In equilibrium, there is some chance  that the expert will face a customer who will act on
his recommendation. Thus, taking  as given, the probability that any given expert suggests
 to a customer is
¬
Pr b



¬

b



¬¬
=   ¬



()

where  () is the market-wide misconduct rate. To allow for the possibility of misconduct,

5

we assume  (0) = 0
Now suppose that the customer earns a net payo¤ of   from buying  and   from
buying  , where    0    . If the customer decides not to buy the product, then her
payo¤ is 0 (her normalized outside option). Hence, a customer will buy if
  + (1 ¬ )  

0





 0), which is distributed
We de…ne a customer’s payo¤ ratio as ¬
 (recall that 
according to  ( )  Hence, the probability that a particular customer buys is

¬
Pr   + (1 ¬ )  

0

=


¬ 

Pr

=) 1 ¬ 


(1 ¬ )


(1 ¬ )

()

where  () is the market-wide buy rate.
To …nd the market equilibrium, we …nd the …xed point such that ( ()) = 

1.2

Exclusive vs. independent experts

We …rst enrich the model by considering two di¤erent organizational structures: experts may
work exclusively for a large companies or as independent experts who form their own small
…rms. We index these experts with  2 f g.
We assume that the price-taking experts face similar payo¤s across organizational forms
(  =  =  ) and the payo¤s to customers vary across …rm types— this is consistent with
features of our empirical setting. In particular, customers gain additional payo¤ from working
with a branded …rm using exclusive experts.
To capture the wedge between customers’payo¤s from di¤erent organization forms, we



assume that ¬ = ¬   ¬   where  1 With this parameterization, the probability



that a customer purchases from an exclusive expert is
1 ¬ 


(1 ¬ )

 ()

and the probability that a customer purchases from an independent expert is
1 ¬ 


(1 ¬ )

 ()

This parameterization can be motivated by assuming customers have some valuation of
6

brand in addition to the intrinsic product features. In a survey on brand equity, Keller and
Lehmann (2006) note that while brand can communicate tangible aspects of a product or
service, a brand can also represent important intangible attributes that di¤erentiate those
goods. According to the authors, these attributes “transcend physical products” and may
be supported by both words and images. These intangibles can create positive associations
between the good and the company that produces it— further, this value need not be based on
objective usage experience. Cobb-Walgren et al. (1995) compare goods that have virtually
identical objective values, but di¤er in terms of brand equity. They …nd that the good with
greater brand equity is associated with more positive features and fewer negative features,
relative to the good with a weaker brand. In short, successful branding can prompt customers
to value a good beyond its objective, tangible value.
Beyond brand, it could be that customers particularly value some exclusive products
available only through the branded …rm. Other features that can support the disparity
between the value o¤ered by the two organizational forms include di¤erences in the breadth
of services o¤ered, multi-product discounts, online account access, 1-800 telephone support,
or multiple service locations that large, branded …rms o¤er. Finally, it could also be that
customers take comfort in working with an expert who is placed in an organizational structure
with a branch manager charged with overseeing expert conduct. That is, the possibility and
severity of misconduct for a given level of attempted misconduct may be lessened in working
with such a branded organization.
With these preliminaries, we can now describe market-wide outcomes for exclusive and
independent experts. The market-wide equilibria can most easily be identi…ed through a
graphical analysis. A formal proof, along with additional intuition, is available in the Appendix. In Figure 1, we plot expert misconduct against customer buy rates. As expected,
buy rates are decreasing functions of the market-wide misconduct. Speci…cally, the solid
downward sloping line,  ()  plots the buy rate for customers of independent experts. The
dotted line,  ()  plots the buy rate for customers of exclusive experts. For all interior
points,  () lies above  (). Intuitively, for a given level of market-wide misconduct, customers will buy at a higher rate from exclusive experts because, in expectation, they receive
a higher expected payo¤. The upward sloping line,  ()¬1  is the inverse of the market-wide
misconduct rate. It slopes up because there is more market-wide misconduct when customers are more likely to purchase— more experts will …nd it pro…table to take advantage of
customers when customers are keen to purchase. The intersections of these curves identify
the equilibria and lead to our …rst prediction in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1 Exclusive experts are more likely to engage in misconduct than independent
experts:  ( )   ( ) .
7

Proof. See Appendix.

1.3

Observable Di¤erences in Expert Skill

In this section, we consider the e¤ect of experts’skill di¤erences on market-wide misconduct.
Consider a version of the model where, on occasion, experts inadvertently recommend the
inappropriate product. Thus, we assume that an expert makes harmful mistakes.1 As we
detail in Section 2.2, in practice, regulators often view intentional and unintentional actions
di¤erently— unintentional mistakes are not considered misconduct. Of course, the expert is
also able to choose to recommend the inappropriate product, since that may increase his
revenue at the customer’s expense. These acts are considered professional misconduct by
the regulator.
Let  be the commonly known probability that an expert makes an error. Now, the
probability that a particular customer buys is
¬
Pr   + (1 ¬ ) (1 ¬ )   +  

0

 + (1 ¬ ) 
(1 ¬ ) (1 ¬ )
 + (1 ¬ ) 
=) 1 ¬ 
(1 ¬ ) (1 ¬ )
=



 ()

We describe the market-wide consequence of error-prone experts in Figure 2. Let  be
experts’ error rate. The customer buy rate from experts who makes errors, presented as
the downward-sloping solid line = () lies above the buy rate for experts with an error
rate greater than  shown as the downward-sloping dotted line  () All else equal, a
customer is less likely to buy from a more error-prone expert. Consequently, in equilibrium,
experts with lower error rates engage in more misconduct, as can be seen in Figure 2. We
summarize this …nding in our next proposition:
Proposition 2 More error-prone experts are less likely to engage in misconduct. That is,
 is decreasing in the error rate 
Proof. See Appendix.
Corollary 3 If the error rate is negatively correlated with experience, more experienced experts engage in more misconduct.

1

For simplicity, we assume that experts cannot intend to recommend  and mistakenly recommend .

8

2

Life insurance: Industry background

The model above generates two predictions about markets with price-taking experts: exclusive experts are more likely to engage in misconduct than independent experts and more
experienced experts are more likely to engage in misconduct. We take these predictions to
data from the life insurance and annuities market. This empirical setting is appealing on
several dimensions: the industry is economically important, there exist information asymmetries between experts and customers, agents operate under two di¤erent organizational
forms, and sales agents are price-takers. Moreover, data on experts and observed agent-level
misconduct are available from the regulator.
The life insurance and annuities (LA) sales experience …ts into the broad category of credence goods. Products are complicated and multidimensional, and it is very di¢ cult for even
sophisticated consumers to identify the appropriate product for their needs. Insurers o¤er
multiple “riders”and introduce modi…cations to policies that may be opaque to customers.
For example, life insurance policies can be term, universal, whole, variable and variable universal, with terminal illness and disability waivers, long-term care provisions, and accidental
death bene…ts.2 Consequently, a customer may be sold an inappropriate product, but may
never become aware of the seller’s misconduct or mistake. The customer will never experience how well the life insurance policy serves his expected needs. Moreover, the insured
customer and his bene…ciaries may never learn whether there existed a superior product in
the market at the time of purchase.
Insurance agents cannot adjust the prices faced by individual customers— this practice
called “rebating” is illegal in most jurisdictions.3 Instead, an insurance agent can enhance
his commissions by recommending the wrong product to a customer. This increased revenue
can come from simply “overselling”the level of insurance or riders, or from selling a product
with a higher commission rate and lower bene…ts to the buyer.
Commission rates vary signi…cantly across and within product types. For example, commissions from annuities typically range between 2 and 10% of the invested amount.4 Typically, commissions are not disclosed to customers. In general, the tradeo¤ between the
bene…ts to the policyholder and the revenue for the seller is substantial. For example, a
so-called “bonus” annuity pays the customer an additional interest rate in the …rst year;
2

The National Association of Insurance Commissions publishes a buyers’ guide that describes some of
the product complexities (http://www.naic.org/documents/consumer_guide_life.pdf).
3
Importantly, rebating is illegal in our data environment (Texas Insurance Code Chapter 1806, Section
53).
4
Our commission rate estimates and discussion of monitoring within …rms are based on personal communication with professional insurance agents working as both exclusive and independent sellers (see Section
2.1 for a description of these organizational forms).

9

however, the bonus rate and the commission rate are negatively correlated.

2.1

Organizational forms

Life insurance salespeople work primarily under the two di¤erent organizational structures
considered in Section 1: (1) sellers may work exclusively for large, branded insurance companies; or (2) sellers may work as independent experts who are not a¢ liated with any single
insurance company.
Exclusive agents
Exclusive company agents are typically a¢ liated with only one insurance company and
may market only approved products from that company.5 In practice, these product lists
are quite large, and there is little concern that exclusive agents are too constrained. Insurance companies using this organizational form may o¤er employment bene…ts packages and
provide introductory training to inexperienced agents. In many cases, new agents receive
guaranteed salaries that phase out as they build up “books”of business, typically over 12 to
24 months.
Multiple exclusive agents in a city or region often share the same o¢ ce space and administrative sta¤. Hierarchy within these o¢ ces provides some level of supervision— for example,
branch managers may oversee and approve large or complicated transactions.
Exclusive agents may earn 50 to 70% of the gross commissions of their sales, depending
on the type of insurance product. State Farm, Farmers Insurance, Allstate, Northwestern
Mutual and New York Life are examples of …rms using the exclusive agent model (A.M. Best
2011); in general, these …rms have well-known, easily-recognized brand names.6 We include
a list of insurance companies using exclusive agents in the Appendix.
Independent agents
Independent agents are not a¢ liated with a single insurance company. While independent
agents are not restricted to selling insurance from any particular company, they usually
cannot market products from insurance companies that use exclusive agents— for example,
an independent agent cannot sell any State Farm products.
Independent agents are often “one agent shops,”and their transactions are not overseen
by managers or supervisors. Typically, independent agents are responsible for all of their
expenses; however, they generally earn close to 100% of the gross commissions on their sales.
After accounting for business expenses, both company and independent agents earn roughly
5

These agents may also be authorized to market selected products from other companies through agreements between their primary company and other …rms.
6
In 2010, State Farm, AXA, Allstate and Metropolitan Life appeared in Brandz’s report on
the top eight most valuable global brands in the insurance industry (report available online at
http://c1547732.cdn.cloud…les.rackspacecloud.com/BrandZ_Top100_2010.pdf).

10

the same net commissions (Carson et al. 2007), consistent with the assumption in the theory
in Section 1.

2.2

Misconduct

Both exclusive and independent agents can engage in various types of misconduct. In this
paper, we focus on sales-level misconduct over which individual agents have control. Note
that we are not considering misconduct by the insurance company, such as the unfair denial
of claims.
Sales misconduct can take many forms. For example, agents can pocket the policy
premium and provide the customer with fraudulent insurance documents (“conversion”).
Misleading advertising about policy features and the misrepresentation of insurance-related
information by an agent are also considered misconduct.
Since the bulk of total commissions for many products is earned in the …rst year of the life
insurance policy, agents bene…t from frequent policy changes. “Churning”describes the case
where the agent induces a customer to (unnecessarily) cash out his existing policy in order
to purchase a new policy from the same insurance company. “Twisting”is similar in nature,
but involves an unnecessary switch to a new policy from a di¤erent insurance company.
Agents may also o¤er unauthorized rewards— in the form of payments, favors, or advantages—
to induce a client to purchase a new policy or product. Agents may illegally bundle products
by refusing to sell or renew a customer’s policy unless the client agrees to purchase additional
line of coverage (e.g. life insurance tied to home or auto insurance).
These examples of misconduct are not exhaustive: Unauthorized acts and other agentlevel mishandling are other broad categories of agent-level misconduct. The second column
of Table 1 summarizes common categories of misconduct and complaints.
Liability
Under U.S. law, insurance advisors are legally bound by “duty of care” and “duty of
loyalty”; the former requires the agent to recommend an appropriate product for the client
and the latter restricts the agent from enriching himself at the expense of his client. Under
these duties, an advisor holds greater liability in the case of an intentional mistake, relative
to the case in which he inadvertently o¤ered his client a sub-optimal product. Under the
“best e¤ort”rule, advisors who present themselves as more experienced may also be hold to
a higher standard.7
Misconduct and Complaints
The Texas Department of Insurance (TDI) regulates insurance-related business in the
7

For an illustrative legal case, see Bloor v. Falsta¤ Brewing Corp., 601. F.2d 614 (2d Cir. 1979).

11

state, including life insurance and annuities sales. Among its many duties, the TDI is
charged with enforcing state insurance laws and ensuring the fair treatment of consumers.8
Complaints against insurance agents, agencies and companies can be …led with the TDI
through a web-based form or by mail, fax, or email.9 Complainants are asked for detailed
information about their policies, the individuals or companies involved in the complaint, and
the nature of the complaint. While some of the complaint detail is considered public record,
information that is protected by state and federal law remains con…dential (e.g. medical
records and …nancial information).
Upon receipt of a complaint, the TDI noti…es the subject of the complaint and requests
a detailed response. With that response, the TDI determines whether the individual agent
or insurance company violated the terms of the contract or broke state insurance law. If the
complaint is deemed justi…ed, the TDI can levy penalties as outlined in the state insurance
code.
State insurance code (Texas Insurance Code, Title 13, Chapter 4005, Section 101) requires
intentionality in violations of the law— indeed, the code states that willful violations of
insurance law will be disciplined. The word “knowingly” is used throughout the code to
describe actions that are subject to penalty. For example, regarding the misrepresentation
of policy terms, the code states that it is “...an unfair or deceptive act or practice in the
business of insurance to knowingly permit the making of, o¤er to make, or make a life
insurance contract... other than as plainly expressed in the issued contract...”
Thus, the TDI considers the intentions of agents who have acted against the interests of
their customers— unintentional errors are not generally considered justi…ed sales complaints,
while intentional misrepresentation or mistreatment leads to justi…ed complaints. This distinction is important in terms of the empirical prediction based on the propositions above,
since we assume that justi…ed complaints re‡ect misconduct.

3

Data

Our Texas insurance dataset was compiled from multiple public sources and consists of
licensing, appointment, complaint, and market share information. Broadly, the data cover
the population of agents operating in the state and characterize both …rm a¢ liations and
reported incidents of misconduct in Texas’s insurance industry.

8

A complete version of the code is available at http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us under “Insurance
code.”
9
Telephone conversations with representatives at the TDI suggest that most complaints come from
individual customers.

12

3.1

Agents

The licensing data were acquired from the TDI and cover all agents who were licensed to sell
insurance in the state of Texas in 2010. Overall, the data describe 174,792 agents licensed
to sell LA. The licensing data include unique agent identi…ers and the date on which each
agent was …rst licensed in the state.
To identify the organizational form under which individual agents operate, we match
company and appointments data from two sources. Company-level data were acquired from
A.M. Best (2011) and allow us to identify insurance companies that use exclusive agents
and those that sell through independent agents.10 We then obtained appointments data
from the TDI for …rms employing exclusive sales agents. Appointments data list all agents
designated to sell a …rm’s products. Using agents’license numbers, we match license holders
to …rms and, thus, characterize individual agents’ a¢ liations. Through this process, we
identify 56,314 individuals who work as exclusive agents (32% of licensees in the state); we
assume that the balance, 118,478 individuals, work as independent agents.
We also acquired marketshare data from the TDI describing the in-state total premiums
written for all insurance companies operating in Texas. Table 3 reports premium and marketshare statistics separately for companies using exclusive and independent agents in Texas.
Firms using independent agents hold the majority of the marketshare in LA.11

3.2

Complaints

The TDI maintains a public directory of complaints against insurance companies, agents
and agencies. We accessed data describing more than 500,000 complaints …led between 1996
and 2010. The directory reports the date and nature of the complaint, the line of coverage,
the license number of the subjects of the complaint, and whether the complaint was deemed
“justi…ed”or “unjusti…ed”by the TDI.
Complaints vary considerably, from claims disputes to accusations about unfair cancellations. Many complaints, even those leveled at agents, relate to actions under the control
of insurance companies (e.g., denial of claims and premium-related complaints).
To focus on misconduct in the sales of products with strong “credence” qualities, we
narrow our analysis to the subset of complaints relating to individual agents’sales practices
10

A.M. Best describes this variable as a company’s “marketing type.”
In their seminal work on property rights theory, Grossman and Hart (1986) apply their model to the
insurance industry. They predict that company …rms (those using exclusive agents) will hold the majority
of marketshare in LA. Their predictions align with the insurance industry structure in the early 1980s, when
independent …rms has only 12% marketshare in LA. These marketshares are the opposite of what we …nd in
Texas using more recent data.
11

13

and consider only complaints about LA sales.12 In total, we identify 5,406 accusations of
sales misconduct leveled against 3,707 individuals present in our 2010 LA licensing data. In
total, 1,962 LA sales complaints (approximately 36% of the total) were found to be justi…ed.
Figure 4 presents graphically the distribution of total and justi…ed complaints per agent
by agent type. There are several things to note in the …gure: First, as predicted by the
theory model presented in Section 1.2, exclusive agents face more total and more justi…ed
complaints than independent sellers— 1,133 of the justi…ed complaints were against exclusive
agents, while 829 justi…ed complaints were against independent agents. One might wonder
if exclusive agents accumulate more complaints as a result of a higher volume of business;
however, this does not appear to be the case. As noted above and in Table 2, …rms using
exclusive agents actually have much lower total marketshare by premiums written, relative to
independent …rms. Firms with exclusive agents represent approximately 11% of the market
and …rms with independent agents represent the remaining 89%. That is, exclusive agents
are the subject of roughly 35% more complaints, yet they do only one-eighth of the business.
Second, complaints (justi…ed or not) are rare events for both exclusive and independent
agents. Only 2.75% of exclusive agents and 0.91% of independent agents have been the
subject of any complaint …led with the TDI; only 1.44% of exclusive agents and 0.53% of
independent agents have been named in a justi…ed complaint.
Third, conditional on being the subject of any justi…ed complaint, most agents receive
only one complaint— 82% of exclusive agents and 84% of independent agents with any con…rmed misconduct have faced only one complaint in the sample. These summary statistics
support the notion that agents cannot easily build a reputation for ethical behavior in this
context.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of complaints by the agents’ experience for exclusive
and independent agents, as measured by the years between when they were …rst licensed to
sell LA products and when they received a justi…ed complaint. We excluded agents with
less than three years experience as of 2010, since their complaints may not yet have been
processed by the TDI. The distributions indicate that exclusive and independent agents do
not face justi…ed complaints only in their …rst years of service; instead, relatively experienced
agents are still subject to justi…ed complaints, even after more than 20 years in the industry.
Figure 5 also suggests that exclusive agents receive more complaints later in their careers,
relative to independent agents. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test con…rms that the distributions
of complaints against exclusive and independent agents are not equal (  001).
While these …gures are suggestive— complaints seems to vary systematically with agent
12

We exclude complaints relating to property and casualty products, medicare supplements and employment insurance sales. We also drop complaints that were referred to other agencies for investigation.

14

type and experience— summary statistics do not capture other di¤erences. We account for
more factors in our next section of regression results, and we explore alternative explanations
in Section 5.

4

Results

Are exclusive agents more likely to have been the subject of a justi…ed complaint, relative
to independent agents?13 To address this question, we estimate the following equation:
Pr ( = 1) =

1
1 + ¬

(1)

where  equals 1 when agent  has been the subject of at least one justi…ed
complaint and where
 =  + 
where  equals 1 when agent  is an exclusive agent ( = 0 if the agent
is independent) and matrix  contains the agent-speci…c controls described below.
Complaints against insurance agents occur very infrequently in the data— as described
in section 3.2, fewer than 2% of LA agents in Texas have been the subject of a justi…ed
complaint. Since typical econometric techniques, including logistic regressions, may underestimate the probability of rare events, coe¢ cient and variance estimates are corrected using
a rare-events correction suggested by King and Zeng (2001a, 2001b).
Although the main thrust of our analysis is concerned with di¤erences between exclusive and independent agents (coe¢ cient ) our predictions also speak to the role of agent
experience.
We include the following controls in   summarized in Table 3 for exclusive and independent agents:
Years since …rst licensed: As a proxy for agent experience, we calculate the years
since an agent was …rst licensed to sell insurance in Texas. If agents were licensed in other
states prior to licensing by the TDI, we will underestimate their professional experience;
if agents allowed their licenses to lapse in some interim periods, we will overestimate their
experience.14 On average, exclusive agents have been licensed longer than independent agents
(  001), holding licenses for roughly 10.5 years and 7 years, respectively.
13

This question captures most misconduct— as shown in Figure 1, only 16% of LA sales agents receive
multiple complaints.
14
The date of licensing was not available for approximately 1.5% of LA agents. We exclude these agents
from the analysis.

15

Out-of-state agent: All agents who market insurance to consumers in Texas must be
licensed by the TDI; however, they may be physically located in another state. We use the
address on agents’licenses to determine residency and include a dummy variable to indicate
when an agent resides outside of Texas. There are more independent agents with out-of-state
business addresses, relative to exclusive agents (  001).
Professional designation: Insurance agents may seek certi…cation from several professional organizations. In general, these organizations require members to complete course
work, pass exams, and participate in continuing education. We matched agents to member
lists for 11 designations.15 In our empirical analysis, we include a dummy variable indicating whether the agent holds any professional designation. Overall, very few sellers have
these professional credentials. However, slightly more exclusive agents hold an accreditation,
relative to independent agents (  001)— roughly 2% versus 0.8%, respectively.
Number of Licenses : While most agents are licensed to sell only one type of insurance,
we include a dummy variable to indicate whether an agent is licensed to sell other products
along with LA products (e.g. property and casualty insurance). Independent agents are
more likely to specialize in LA products (  001)— approximately 72% of exclusive agents
and 83% of independent agents sell only LA products.
Local population: Using a distance algorithm, we calculate the distance between the
geographic centroid of all Texas ZIP codes and match ZIP codes to population data from
the U.S. Census Bureau. We identify all ZIP codes within 25 miles of every agent’s business
address (for Texas residents) and aggregated the ZIP code populations. Unfortunately, we
are not able to map non-resident agents to any speci…c geographic region of Texas. For
residents, there is little di¤erence between the average local populations faced by exclusive
and independent agents.

4.1

Exclusive vs. independent agents

Table 4 reports estimation results from equation (1) with the rare events correction. To
ease interpretation, we transform our estimated coe¢ cients and report odds ratios. Each
observation represents a unique agent.
Column 4.1 includes all agents in the data for whom information is available and controls for agents’experience, professional credentials, residency, and licensing. The estimates
suggest that exclusive agents are more likely to have received a justi…ed complaint than
independent agents (  001). Even before adjusting for the very unequal marketshares
of …rms using exclusive and independent agents— recall that, in total, exclusive agents do
15

The designations are: CFP, ChFC, CLU, CAP, CASL, CLF, FSS, LUTCF, MSFS, MSM, and REBC.

16

nearly eight times less business than independent agents— the odds of an exclusive agent
being the subject of a justi…ed complaint are roughly 73% higher, relative to an independent
agent.
In Column 4.2, we exclude agents with less than three years of experience as of 2010, since
these inexperienced agents may be still in their training period, may be paid a guaranteed
“training”salary, and may not yet be responsible for generating their own sales. Excluding
these agents does little to change the coe¢ cient of interest— the di¤erence between exclusive
and independent agents is large and statistically signi…cant (  001).
Both local and out-of-state agents can be licensed to market insurance products in Texas.
Column 4.3 includes only agents who reside in Texas. Again, the coe¢ cient on the indicator
for exclusive agents is statistically signi…cant and similar in magnitude to the other speci…cations (  001).
Agents may di¤er in terms of their geography and, as a result, face di¤erent volumes of
business. Although agent-level data on the volume or value of transaction are not available,
we proxy for these measures using ZIP code-level U.S. Census population data. Results are
reported in Column 4.4. This measure of business volume is statistically signi…cant and very
small in magnitude (  001) However, its inclusion has little e¤ect on the coe¢ cient of
interest.

4.2

Years of experience

Across the speci…cations in Table 4, one additional year of agent experience is associated
with a roughly 4 to 7 percentage points increase in the odds of receiving a complaint. Of
course, agents with more experience have had more opportunities to receive a complaint. In
this section, we present results suggesting that longevity alone cannot explain the estimated
e¤ect of experience.
In Table 5, we present results of a Tobit speci…cation with a measure of misconduct
normalized by agents’experience— complaints per licensed year— as the dependent variable.
Column 5.1 excludes agents with less than three years of experience. In column 5.2, because
we have only …fteen years of complaints data, we consider only agents with three to …fteen
years of experience. In column 5.3, we include only Texas resident agents with licenses for
three to …fteen years. Column 5.4 includes the measure of local population describe in the
previous subsection.
Similar to the results in Table 4, exclusive agents are subject to more complaints per
year of experience (  001). Complaints per year also increases with years of experience
(  001). In terms of magnitude, without controlling for agents’marketshare, one addi-

17

tional year of experience is associated with an additional 0.01 to 0.02 complaints per year of
experience.
We expect our estimates to be a lower bound on the true e¤ect of experience. The longer
an agent has been in business, the greater the proportion of “bad apples”in his cohort that
has been weeded out through disciplinary actions. Because we observe complaints only for
agents licensed as of 2010, complaints against these “bad apples” are not included. As a
result, our estimates of the e¤ect of experience could be biased towards zero. Client attrition
may also attenuate estimates of the e¤ect of agent experience.16

5

Alternative Explanations

While our results are consistent with the simple model of price-taking experts presented in
Section 1, several alternative hypotheses may be proposed to explain our …ndings. Speci…cation, in this section, we consider the following alternatives: (1) agent sorting between …rm
types; (2) consumer heterogeneity; and (3) …rms’“deep pockets”and reporting rates.

5.1

Agent sorting

One might ask: Do …rms using exclusive agents systematically hire less honest agents?
This seems unlikely given that these …rms have established screening processes for their
salespeople (e.g. applications, background checks, and interviews). In contrast, independent
agents establish their own practices and are not subject to this initial screening. Moreover,
dishonest exclusive agents who are …red are unlikely to gain employment at another …rm using
exclusive agents, but can readily move into independent sales. Thus, the pool of independent
agents may include former exclusive agents who were terminated due to misconduct.
Do honest exclusive agents become independent operators after building up experience
in the industry? If true, this could drive the di¤erence in complaint rates between exclusive

16

The following example illustrates this potential: Assume for now that there is no client attrition and an
agent acquires ten clients per year. In ten years, a new agent has acquired a hundred clients. Suppose that
the chance of receiving a complaint is 1% per client per year. This means that an agent with ten years of
experience should (in expectation) receive one complaint. In an agent’s twentieth year, he has two hundred
clients and should expect two complaints. Thus, without attrition, complaints per year does not depend on
experience. Now consider the role of client attrition. Over the past ten years, an agent with twenty years of
experience has acquired the same number of clients as an agent with only ten years of experience. However,
due to attrition, the number of clients that he retained from his …rst ten years is now less than the number
of clients from the more recent decade. Thus, assuming that the chance of a complaint is still 1% per client
per year, we would expect the ratio of complaints per year of the agent with twenty years of experience to
be less than the ratio of the agent with ten years of experience. Thus, we underestimate the true e¤ect of
experience on complaints.

18

and independent agents. In the data, this movement might lead to disparity between experience levels, with relatively young exclusive agents and relatively old independent experts.
However, on average, exclusive agents have actually been licensed signi…cantly longer than
independent agents (  001).
Are out-of-state agents— individuals whose misconduct may be hard to detect because of
distance— driving the disparity between exclusive and independent agents’complaint rates?
Empirical evidence suggest that this is not the case. There are signi…cantly more outof-state agents acting as independent sellers rather than exclusive agents (Table 3;  
001). Moreover, the regression presented in column 4.3 excludes out-of-state agents and
still estimates a large and statistically signi…cant di¤erence between agent types (  001).
One might also wonder if bad agents are being detected and …red by the …rms using exclusive agents. Although our data do not allow us to observe this directly, this sorting would
work against our predicted e¤ect. That is, we would expect to observe higher complaint
rates for independent agents if these …rms included former “bad”company agents.
Agents might also sort geographically— one might worry that the di¤erences in exclusive
and independent agents’behavior results from di¤erences in the local competitive landscape.
An average ZIP code in Texas contains 31 independent agents (standard deviation of 52)
and 19 exclusive agents (standard deviation of 34), and approximately 84% of ZIP codes in
Texas contain at least one of each type of agent. Given that both agents and customers are
likely to transact across ZIP codes, we constructed another measure of local competition.
Using a distance algorithm, we calculated the distance between the geographic centroid of
all Texas ZIP codes. We identi…ed all ZIP codes within 25-miles of an agent’s business
address and counted the total number of agents within that radius. Overall, exclusive and
independent agents face similar numbers and types of competitors: for both independent
and exclusive agents, approximately 38% of agents within a 25-mile radius are exclusive and
62% are independent.

5.2

Customer heterogeneity

We …nd little evidence to support agent sorting as the source of the disparity between the
misconduct of exclusive and independent agents. However, one might be concerned that
customer heterogeneity is driving the e¤ect. That is, one might worry that the matching
of particularly savvy customers to independent agents (or vice versa) could be leading to
the observed misconduct rates. In the following section, we consider both theoretical and
empirical arguments relating to customer sorting.
To consider the impact of savvy consumers on the market equilibrium, we introduce

19

“connoisseur” consumers into the model and, for the moment, hold the agents’types …xed.
Connoisseurs are de…ned as consumers who are perfectly informed about the appropriateness of the recommended product and, therefore, only and always buy from an expert who
recommends . We assume that experts cannot distinguish a connoisseur from a regular
customer— otherwise, the expert would always suggests  to those consumers, and regular
consumers would be una¤ected. Note that adding connoisseurs is equivalent to introducing
some exogenous probability that a consumer knows the appropriate product for herself.
Suppose that there is a mass of connoisseurs in the market. Now, experts enjoy a higher
expected payo¤ for suggesting  and lower expected payo¤ for suggesting  . Consider the
probability of misconduct in a market with connoisseurs:
¬
Pr (1 ¬ ) b



¬ ¬ 

(1 ¬ ) b





+

¬
¬
=  (1 ¬ )   ¬



¬



 ()

As expected, holding the buy rate …xed, misconduct is decreasing in .
Now, the buy rate for non-connoisseur consumers is
¬
Pr   + (1 ¬ )  

0 =1¬


(1 ¬ )

 ()

Figure 3 plots the market-wide misconduct and buy rate when we introduce some mass
of connoisseur consumers, and we compare this market against one with no such customers
(i.e., when = 0) In this setting, it is the misconduct curve— the inverse of the market-wide
supply  ()— that changes. Intuitively, with the introduction of connoisseur consumers, the
expected payo¤ to misconduct is reduced in two ways: …rst, experts face a greater chance of
being caught when suggesting  ; and, second, experts are more likely to be rewarded with a
purchase when they suggest  That is, the presence of connoisseur consumers provides both
a stick and carrot to entice more experts towards appropriate recommendations. Graphically, the line representing the inverse of market-wide level of misconduct in the presence of
¬
connoisseur consumers  >0 ()¬1 lies above the misconduct curve when connoisseurs are
¬
not in the market  =0 ()¬1  As can be seen in Figure 3, the new equilibrium with connoisseur consumers is characterized by less overall misconduct and a higher market-wide buy
rate. This yields the following proposition:
Proposition 4 Increasing the mass of connoisseur consumers

decreases misconduct  () 

Proof. See Appendix.
Unfortunately, data on individual agents’ clientele is not available, as it is proprietary
information. However, we can use location information in the licensing data and gather
demographic information on the populations near agents’business addresses.
20

For this empirical exercise, we consider the proportion of the local population that is
employed in the …nancial sector; we assume that employment in the …nance, banking or
insurance industry is correlated with knowledge of insurance needs. We used the distance
algorithm described above and matched ZIP codes to 2010 County Business Pattern data
from the U.S. Census Bureau.17 After identifying all ZIP codes within 25-miles of an agent’s
business address, we aggregated the employment statistics.18
Note that the sample size for this analysis is necessarily smaller than for many of the
previous regressions, since we cannot include potential client employment statistics for agents
without a Texas business address. However, the regression results in Table 6 can be compared
to those in Table 4, columns 4.3 and 4.4.
Columns 6.1 to 6.4 presents results from the regression on an indicator of any justi…ed
complaints. Columns 6.1 and 6.3 include the measure of informedness and columns 6.2 and
6.4 add a measure of the local population. Across these four columns, the coe¢ cients on employment in …nance are positive and vary in terms of magnitude and statistical signi…cance.
In the columns of Table 6, the inclusion of the employment measures has little impact on the
main coe¢ cients of interest— exclusive agents are the subject of more justi…ed complaints
than independent agents. We note that, holding …xed the level of misconduct, if more savvy
customers are more likely to report a complaint, then observed complaint rates should be
greater for experts working in more …nance-oriented areas.

5.3

Deep pockets and reporting rates

One might be concerned that customers of branded companies are more likely to …le a
complaint due to the perceived “deep pockets” of these large …rms. In this section, we
explore this possibility and argue that it cannot fully rationalize the observed di¤erences
between the complaints against exclusive and independent agents.
If the cost of …ling is very low, then almost every discovered abuse should be reported—
indeed, even customers who fail to detect any misconduct should contact the regulator for a
costless (to them) review of the transaction.19 However, if there exists some material cost of
…ling a complaint, then customers of exclusive experts will report suspected misconduct more
often if they expect a higher payo¤ from a successful complaint, relative to the payo¤ from
17

We also consider consumers’ education levels using the percentage of the nearby population with a
college education. Results are similar.
18
We multiplied the mid-point of the employment size class with the number of establishments in that
class.
19
Empirically, the reporting cost is expected to be quite low, but not zero. Customers can go online to the
TDI website and …ll out a form in a matter of minutes. Insurance policies also must list contact information
for …ling a complaint.

21

complaining about an independent seller. In this case, even if exclusive and independent
experts are equally ethical, exclusive experts will face more complaints.
To illustrate, consider a mass of experts indexed by  where  2 [0 1] A customer reports
an expert when she has an expected positive return from doing so. This happens when the
expert is su¢ ciently likely to be guilty and thus convicted of misconduct. Denote  such
that for all 
  the customer reports suspected misconduct; hence, the market-wide
report rate is 1 ¬  
Suppose that, for any given  the probability of misconduct is Pr ()    where
 2 (0 1)20 The expected market-wide conviction rate for all reported experts is

Pr(j) =

Z1

  

Pr( \ )

=

Pr()
1¬

For exclusive agents in our data, the empirical complaint rate is 0.04 and the conditional
conviction rate is 0.38. Hence,

Pr(j ) =

Z1

  

096

004

= 038

and, therefore,
 ' 5914
For independent agents in our data, the complaint rate is approximately 0.01. Now, assume for a moment that both exclusive and independent experts have the same unconditional
guilty rate— that is, assume that it is di¤erences in the reporting rates (and not underlying
misconduct) that drives the observed disparity in complaints. Under this assumption, the
conditional conviction rate for independent agents would be

Pr (j ) =

Z1

 5914 

099

001

= 075

Recall that the observed conditional conviction rate for independent experts is 0.40—
under the assumption of similar guilt, the simulated conditional conviction rate is almost
20

Note that this parameter space allows us to consider conviction rates under which, in the limit, no
agent, some agents, or every agent is guilty.

22

twice the actual rate. Hence, it is unlikely that independent experts are equally guilty, but
subject to less reporting. Moreover, the conditional conviction rates are in fact quite similar:
0.38 for exclusive vs. 0.40 for independent experts. If anything, the conditional conviction
rates should be much higher for independent experts since they may be reported only in the
most extreme cases.
There is another dimension to “deep pockets”that also works against the argument that
the empirical …nding is being driven by reporting rates. Firms with extensive resources might
be particularly unwilling to concede to accusations of misconduct or settle a lawsuit— indeed,
their large co¤ers may serve as evidence that they can credibly outlast their accusers in any
legal …ght.
Finally, according to the TDI, insurance companies may work directly with unhappy
customers to resolve their issues and discourage them from taking the complaints to the
regulator.21 Insurance companies using exclusive agents have a structure that is particularly
well-suited for diverting these complaints— in general, branch and regional managers, as
well as telephone customer service agents, can adjust policies or payments in response to
customers’ claims. In contrast, customers of independent experts may have little recourse
before contacting the regulator. As a result, in the data, we might expect observed complaint
rates for exclusive agents to represent a lower bound on actual misconduct.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we explore how the level of misconduct in credence good markets with pricetaking experts varies across organizational forms. We propose a market-wide model that
shows that price-taking experts extract surplus based on the value of their …rm’s brand
and services‘or their own skill through increased malfeasance. We …nd empirical evidence
that these markets operate di¤erently than in standard asymmetric information problem
settings. In particular, rather than experts with strong reputations behaving more ethically,
exclusive experts working for large branded …rms are actually more likely to be the subject
of a complaint, relative to independent experts. Similarly, experts who survive over time
and become more skilled exhibit the greatest levels of misconduct.
Our research relates to the current discussion of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act of 2010. Currently, regulations distinguish between two types of
investment experts and hold them to di¤erent standards of conduct. Registered investment
advisors are held to a “…duciary standard” that requires them to disclose all con‡icts and
provide the client with the most appropriate recommendation. In contrast, investment bro21

We learned this through telephone conversations with sta¤ at the TDI.

23

kers are held to a lower “suitability standard”that requires them to provide the client with
a recommendation that is consistent with their needs, but not necessarily the most appropriate. According to SEC research, many customers are unaware of the di¤ering standards
and believe that both advisors operate under the higher standard of conduct (U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission 2011).
Our research about the relationship between misconduct and organizational form can
inform the debate. Brokers often work for large branded companies, whereas registered
investment advisors are often independent. We …nd that experts working in large branded
…rms are already likely to extract additional surplus through misconduct. Thus, holding
these brokers to a lower standard may exacerbate consumer harm.
In the same report, the SEC suggests that investor education is needed. Our model
highlights the potential bene…ts of increased consumer awareness— the presence of many informed customers can reduce market-wide misconduct. Finally, if more experienced advisors
are more likely to take advantage of customers, the standards of conduct could vary across
experience levels; however, to our knowledge, this aspect of the professional standards has
not yet been explicitly discussed by the regulator.

24

References
[1] Alger, Ingela and Francois Salanie. 2006. “A Theory of Fraud and Overtreatment in
Experts Markets.”Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 15(5): 853-881.
[2] A.M. Best Company. 2011. “Best’s Key Rating Guide: Life/Health United State &
Canada.”Oldwick, New Jersey.
[3] Anagol, Santosh, Shawn Cole, and Shayak Sarkar. 2012. “Understanding the Incentives
of Commissions Motivated Agents: Theory and Evidence from the Indian Life Insurance
Market.”Working paper.
[4] Carson, James, Randy Dumm, and Robert Hoyt. 2007. “Incentive Compensation and
the Use of Contingent Commissions: The Case of Smaller Distribution Channel Members.”The Journal of Insurance Regulation, 25(4): 53-67.
[5] Cobb-Walgren, Cathy J., Cynthia A. Ruble and Naveen Donthu. 1995. “Brand Equity,
Brand Preference, and Purchase Intent.”Journal of Advertising, 24(3): 25-40.
[6] Cooper, Robert, and Gary Frank. 2005. “The Highly Troubled Ethical Environment of
the Life Insurance Industry: Has It Changed Signi…cantly from the Last Decade and If
so, Why?”Journal of Business Ethics, 58(1): 149-157.
[7] Darby, Michael and Edi Karni. 1973. “Free Competition and the Optimal Amount of
Fraud.”Journal of Law and Economics, 16(1): 67-88.
[8] Dulleck, Uwe and Rudolf Kerschbamer. 2006. “On Doctors, Mechanics, and Computer
Specialists: The Economics of Credence Goods.” Journal of Economic Literature, 47:
5-42.
[9] Emons, Winand. 1997. “Credence Goods and Fraudulent Experts.”The RAND Journal
of Economics, 28(1) Spring: 107-119.
[10] Feddersen, Timothy and Thomas Gilligan. 2001 “Saints and Markets: Activists and
the Supply of Credence Goods.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 10(1)
Spring: 149-171.
[11] Fong, Yuk-fai. 2005. “When Do Experts Cheat and Whom Do They Target?” The
RAND Journal of Economics, 36(1): 113-130.
[12] Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 2012. “Money Doctors.”
NBER Working Paper No. 18174.
25

[13] Grossman, Sanford, and Oliver Hart. 1986. “The Costs and Bene…ts of Ownership: A
Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration.”Journal of Political Economy, 94(4) August:
691-719.
[14] Hubbard, Thomas N. 1998. “An Empirical Examination of Moral Hazard in the Vehicle
Inspection Market.”RAND Journal of Economics, 29(2) Summer: 406-426.
[15] Hubbard, Thomas N. 2002. “How Do Consumers Motivate Experts? Reputational Incentives in an Auto Repair Market.”Journal of Law and Economics, 45 October: 437468.
[16] Inderst, Roman and Marco Ottaviani. 2009. “Misselling through Agents.” American
Economic Review, 99(3): 883-908.
[17] Inderst, Roman and Marco Ottaviani. 2012a. “How (not) to pay for advice: A framework.”Journal of Financial Economics, 105 August (2): 393-411.
[18] Inderst, Roman and Marco Ottaviani. 2012b. “Competition through Commissions and
Kickbacks.”American Economic Review, 102(2) April: 780-809.
[19] Keller, Kevin and Donald Lehmann. 2006. “Brands and Branding: Research Findings
and Future Priorities.”Marketing Science, 25(6): 740-759.
[20] King, Gary and Langche Zeng. 2001a. “Logistic Regression in Rare Events Data.” Political Analysis, 9(2): 137-163.
[21] King, Gary and Langche Zeng. 2001b. “Explaining Rare Events in International Relations.”International Organization, 55(3) August: 693-715.
[22] Levitt, Steven D. and Chad Syverson. 2008 “Market Distortions When Agents Are
Better Informed: The Value of Information in Real Estate Transactions.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 90(4): 599-611.
[23] Lightle, John. 2009. “The Paternalistic Bias of Expert Advice.”Florida State University
working paper.
[24] Mailath, George J., and Larry Samuelson. 2001. “Who Wants a Good Reputation?”
Review of Economic Studies, 68 (2) April: 415-441.
[25] Mullainathan, Sendhil, Markus Noeth, and Antoinette Schoar. 2012. “The Market for
Financial Advice: An Audit Study.”NBER Working Paper No. 17929.

26

[26] Pessendorfer, Wolfgang and Asher Wolinsky. 2003.“Second Opinions and Price Competition: Ine¢ ciency in the Market for Expert Advice.”The Review of Economic Studies,
70(2): 417-437.
[27] Pitchik, Carolyn and Andrew Schotter. 1987. “Honesty in a Model of Strategic Information Transmission.”American Economic Review, 77(5): 1032-1036.
[28] Sulzle, Kai and Achim Wambach. 2005. “Insurance in a Market for Credence Goods.”
The Journal of Risk and Insurance, 72(1): 159-176.
[29] Taylor, Curtis R. 1995. “The Economics of Breakdowns, Checkups, and Cures”Journal
of Political Economy, 103(1) February: 53-74.
[30] U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2011. “Study on Investment
Advisers and Broker-Dealers.” Available online as of 20 Sept. 2013:
http://www.sec.gov/news/studies/2011/913study…nal.pdf

27

7

Appendix

7.1

Insurance companies using exclusive agents in Texas

.

Allstate Life Insurance Company
American General Life And Accident Insurance Company
American National Insurance Company
Axa Equitable Life Insurance Company
Baltimore Life Insurance Company
Bene…cial Life Insurance Company
Farmers Insurance Exchange
First Acceptance Insurance Company
Guideone Mutual Insurance Company
Kansas City Life Insurance Company
Liberty Mutual Insurance Company
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company
Modern Woodmen Of America
Monumental Life Insurance Company
MONY Life Insurance Company Of America
Mutual Of Omaha Insurance Company
National Life Insurance Company
Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company
New York Life Insurance Company
Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company
Penn Mutual Life Insurance Company
Pennsylvania Life Insurance Company
Physicians Life Insurance Company
Provident American Life & Health Insurance Company
State Farm Life Insurance Company
Thrivent Financial For Lutherans
Western And Southern Life Insurance Company
A list of insurance companies licensed in Texas that use independent agents is available
upon request.

28

7.2

Proofs

Proposition 1: Exclusive experts are more likely to engage in misconduct than independent
experts:  ( )   ( ) .
Proof. This proof formalizes the results from Figure 1. Recall that  ( ) is the same for
both …rm types and that, since  1  ( )   ( ) for all  2 (0 1) 
For any expert type, note that  () is strictly decreasing in ; in a market without
misconduct, customers always buy ( (0) = 1) ; and in a market in which experts always
engage in misconduct, customers never buy ( (1) = 0) 
De…ne the inverse of the misconduct function:  ( )
 ()¬1  Since  () is strictly
increasing and continuous, so too is  ( )  In addition, if customers never buy, then experts
never engage in misconduct ( (0) = 0) and if customers always buy, then experts engage in
at least some misconduct ( (1)  0) 
A unique, interior equilibrium follows from these three features: (1) continuity of  ( ) and
 ( ); (2) the ordering of end point values,  (0) = 1  (0) = 0 and (1) = 0   (1) ; and (3)
strict monotonicity of  ( ) and  ( ).
To compare organizational forms, recall that  ( )   ( ) for all interior values of .
That is, for all interior points and for a given level of misconduct, exclusive experts face
a higher buy rate than independent experts (   )  which implies that the misconduct
rate of exclusive experts is higher than that of independent experts ( ( )   ( )) because
 () is strictly increasing.
Proposition 2: More error-prone experts are less likely to engage in misconduct. That
is,  is decreasing in the error rate 
Proof. This proof formalizes the results from Figure 2. First note that  ( ) is increasing
in the error rate  Holding the misconduct rate  constant, the buy rate  () is decreasing
in  for   1
The misconduct rate is una¤ected by the introduction of error-prone experts since
¬
¬
¬¬
Pr b  ¬  (1 ¬ ) b  +  b  ¬  =    ¬ 
 () = ()
Following arguments provided in Proposition (1)  equilibrium misconduct  ( ) is decreasing in the error rate 

Proposition 3: Increasing the mass of connoisseur consumers decreases misconduct
 () 
Proof. This proof formalizes the results from Figure 3. Recall from the text that describes
the mass of connoisseur consumers in the market. De…ne the inverse of the market-wide misconduct function  ( )  ()¬1 , and note that  ( ) is strictly increasing and continuous
in 
Also note the following: the buy rate in the presence of connoisseur consumers ( ())
is strictly decreasing in ; if experts never engage in misconduct, then customers always
buy ( (0) = 1) ; and if experts always engage in misconduct, then customers never buy
( (1) = 0) 
29

Consider the condition
which experts would not engage in misconduct:  () = 0
¬  under

requires that (1 ¬ ) 
¬
¬  = 0 since  (0) = 0 This implies that   0 and,
therefore, when the market includes some connoisseur consumers, even some positive buy
rate yields a market with no misconduct.
The inverse of the market-wide misconduct function with connoisseur consumers lies
everywhere to the left of the original misconduct function  >0 (0)   =0 (0) for all values
of  However, conditional on a given level of misconduct, the buy rate is unchanged by
the presence of connoisseurs ( >0 () =  =0 ()). Hence, in equilibrium, the market-wide
misconduct declines with the inclusion of more connoisseur consumers.

30

