                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    EXTERNAL IMBALANCES AND FINANCIAL CRISES

                                            Alan M. Taylor

                                         Working Paper 18606
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18606


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




The author gratefully acknowledges financial support through a grant from the Institute for New
EconomicThinking (INET) administered by the University of Virginia. This is a revised version of
a paperpresented at the IMF Conference on Financial Crises: Causes, Consequences and Policy
Responses,September 14, 2012. I thank all conference participants and the IMF research team for
very helpfulcomments and suggestions. This paper draws on recent work with collaborators, whom
I thank; butthe views expressed are those of the author alone, and the responsibility for interpretation,
and anyand all errors, is mine. Alan Taylor served as a Senior Advisor at Morgan Stanley in 2010–11,
andhas received compensation for presenting research findings at private and public sector meetings.
Theviews expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
NationalBureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
External Imbalances and Financial Crises
Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 18606
December 2012
JEL No. E3,E4,E5,F3,F4,N1

                                            ABSTRACT

In broad perspective, there have been essentially two competing views of the global financial crisis,
albeit there are some complementarities among them. One view looks across the border: it mainly
blames external imbalances, the large-scale mix of unprecedented pattern current account deficits and
surpluses which entailed massive and growing net and gross international financial flows in the last
decade. The alternative view looks within the border: it finds more fault in the domestic arena of the
afflicted countries, attributing the problems to financial systems where risks originated in excessive
credit booms in local banks. This paper uses the lens of macroeconomic and financial history to confront
these dueling hypotheses with evidence. Of the two, the credit boom explanation stands out as the
most plausible predictor of financial crises since the dawn of modern finance capitalism in the late
nineteenth century. Historically, we find that global imbalances are not as important as a factor in
financial crises as is often perceived, and they have much less correlation with subsequent episodes
of financial distress compared to direct indicators like credit drawn from the financial system itself.


Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Monroe Hall
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
alan.m.taylor@virginia.edu
1.	  Introduction:	  External	  Imbalances	  versus	  Credit	  Booms	  

Did	   “global	   imbalances	   helped	   to	   fuel	   the	   financial	   crisis”?	   In	   the	   years	   since,	  
imbalances	   have	   muted,	   but	   endogenously,	   as	   trade	   collapsed	   and	   EM	   economies	  
outgrew	  the	  US	  and	  other	  DM	  economies.	  But	  prior	  to	  2008	  these	  flows	  were	  much	  
larger.	   Many	   prominent	   policymakers,	   commentators,	   and	   economists	   had	   focused	  
on	  large	  current	  account	  imbalances,	  in	  the	  United	  States,	  but	  also	  in	  other	  countries	  
with	   pronounced	   booms,	   and	   had	   warned	   about	   the	   potential	   for	   a	   jarring	   shock	  
should	  those	  flows	  see	  adjustments	  due	  to	  incipient	  changes	  in	  portfolio	  allocation,	  
and	  concomitant	  shifts	  in	  interest	  rates,	  growth	  rates,	  perceived	  country	  or	  currency	  
risks.	   Harsh	   adjustments,	   sudden	   stops,	   or	   reversals,	   it	   was	   thought,	   could	   wreak	  
serious	  havoc.	  Much	  attention	  was	  given	  to	  the	  role	  of	  the	  large	  lenders/creditors	  in	  
Emerging	  Asia	  (especially,	  China)	  causing	  a	  “savings	  glut”	  whilst	  others	  focused	  on	  
savings	  shortfalls	  in	  large	  borrowers/debtors	  like	  the	  United	  States.	  

In	  these	  arguments,	  the	  public	  or	  official	  sectors	  tended	  to	  attract	  the	  most	  scrutiny,	  
be	   it	   the	  official	   reserve	   accumulation	   trends	   in	   developing	   countries,	   or	   the	   path	   of	  
government	   deficits	   and	   debt	   in	   the	   United	   States.1	  But	   those	   focusing	   on	   the	   public	  
sector	   dimensions	   of	   the	   flows	   ended	   up	   missing	   the	   main	   story.	   Without	  
minimizing	   fiscal	   challenges	   going	   forward	   (many	   of	   them	   a	   result	   of	   the	   crisis),	   the	  
kind	  of	  crisis	  we	  ended	  up	  having	  was	  in	  almost	  all	  cases	  not	  a	  fiscal	  crisis	  at	  all.	  In	  
the	  United	  States,	  where	  large-­‐scale	  financial	  pressure	  was	  first	  seen,	  the	  dollar	  has	  
rallied	  on	  the	  flight	  to	  safety,	  as	  have	  Treasuries,	  notwithstanding	  what	  credit	  rating	  
agencies	  have	  said.	  In	  Europe,	  intraregional	  imbalances	  are	  now	  seen	  to	  have	  been	  a	  
source	  of	  instability,	  but	  ex	  ante	  (with	  the	  exception	  of	  Greece)	  these	  cross-­‐border	  
flows	   were	   largely	   private	   sector	   debt	   flows,	   much	   of	   them	   flowing	   through	   bank	  
channels	   from	   savers	   in	   the	   “North”	   to	   finance	   real	   estate	   or	   consumption	   booms	   in	  
the	  “South”;	  public	  debts	  and	  deficits	  in	  places	  like	  Ireland	  and	  Spain	  only	  exploded	  
later,	  as	  harsh	  recessions	  and	  banking	  rescues	  ate	  resources.	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  The	  opening	  quote	  is	  from	  a	  speech	  by	  the	  Governor	  of	  the	  Bank	  of	  England	  (King	  2011).	  The	  term	  

“savings	  glut”	  is	  credited	  to	  the	  Chairman	  of	  the	  Federal	  Reserve	  Board	  (Bernanke	  2005).	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1	     	  
Of	   late,	   thanks	   to	   scholars	   taking	   a	   more	   granular	   view	   of	   the	   data,	   we	   can	   see	   more	  
revealing	  trends.	  It	  is	  clear	  for	  example,	  that	  China	  and	  other	  EM	  purchases	  of	  U.S.	  
assets	  focused	  on	  (truly)	  safe	  AAA	  assets	  like	  Treasuries,	  or	  GSE	  issues;	  in	  contrast,	  
it	   was	   “advanced”	   country	   investors,	   notable	   in	   Europe,	   who	   crowded	   into	   the	  
securitized	  products	  channeling	  funds	  to	  the	  real	  estate	  bubble.	  Within	  Europe,	  the	  
growing	   debt	   exposure	   between	   countries	   is	   now	   seen	   to	   have	   been	   a	   two-­‐way	  
street,	  with	  gross	  flows	  much	  larger	  than	  net	  flows.	  The	  cross-­‐sectional	  experience	  
of	   the	   Eurozone	   economies,	   and	   also	   U.S.	   regions	   and	   counties,	   also	   strongly	  
suggests	   that	   even	   in	   a	   currency	   union,	   where	   balance-­‐of-­‐payments	   problems	   and	  
currency	  risk	  are	  in	  theory	  absent,	  or	  defined	  away,	  the	  threat	  of	  a	  macro-­‐financial	  
crisis	   via	   private	   debt	   dynamics	   is	   still	   very	   much	   present.	   In	   light	   of	   these	  
experiences,	  the	  answer	  to	  “does	  the	  current	  account	  matter?”	  is	  probably	  still	  yes;	  
but	   in	   a	   world	   where	   bank-­‐driven	   expansions	   in	   private	   sector	   leverage	   have	  
reached	  historically	  unprecedented	  levels	  in	  advanced	  economies,	  it	  is	  no	  longer	  the	  
only,	   or	   even	   necessarily	   the	   most	   important,	   question	   one	   might	   ask	   when	  
evaluating	  macroeconomic	  and	  financial	  risks.2	  

	  

2.	  Historical	  Perspective:	  Ebb	  and	  Flow	  of	  Finance	  Across	  and	  Within	  Borders	  

Historically,	  there	  has	  been	  a	  broad	  correlation	  between	  the	  prevalence	  of	  external	  
imbalances	  and	  the	  frequency	  of	  financial	  crises,	  something	  that	  is	  all	  too	  apparent	  
in	  the	  data,	  but	  which	  needs	  to	  be	  subject	  to	  careful	  causal	  interpretation.	  

It	   is	   a	   stylized	   fact	   that	   international	   capital	   mobility	   has	   followed	   a	   U-­‐shape	   over	  
the	   course	   of	   recent	   history	   (Obstfeld	   and	   Taylor	   2004).	   Under	   the	   classical	   gold	  
standard	  until	  1913	  there	  were	  virtually	  no	  policy	  barriers	  to	  cross-­‐border	  financial	  
flows,	   and	   the	   last	   serious	   technological	   impediments	   were	   broken	   down	   by	   the	  
arrival	  of	  the	  cable.	  The	  interwar	  period,	  and	  especially	  the	  1930s,	  saw	  policies	  veer	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2See,	  
      inter	   alia,	   Schularick	   and	   Wachtel	   (2012)	   on	   the	   private	   versus	   public	   financing	   of	   the	   US	  
lending	  boom;	  Shin	  (2012)	  on	  the	  “global	  banking	  glut”	  and	  Lane	  (2012)	  and	  Obstfeld	  (2012)	  on	  the	  
importance	  of	  gross	  versus	  net	  positions.	  


	                                                                                                           2	                                        	  
towards	   autarky,	   and	   this	   configuration	   persisted	   until	   the	   1970s,	   as	   governments	  
reconfigured	  their	  responses	  to	  the	  trilemma	  when	  confronted	  by	  shocks	  like	  wars	  
and	   depressions.	   Only	   since	   the	   1980s	   has	   consensus	   moved	   back	   toward	   freer	  
capital	   movements,	   as	   a	   tolerance	   for	   floating	   exchange	   rates	   accommodated	  
ongoing	   monetary	   policy	   autonomy.	   This	   trend	   has	   gone	   furthest	   in	   the	   advanced	  
economies.	   Documenting	   these	   trends,	   Figure	   1	   shows	   both	   policy-­‐based	   and	  
outcome-­‐based	  indicators	  of	  capital	  mobility	  over	  the	  last	  two	  centuries.	  

	  

                                                              Figure	  1.	  Capital	  Mobility	  in	  the	  Last	  Two	  Centuries	  

                                                              (a) Quantities                                                                                          (b) Policies
                                                                                                                                           100
                                          150




                                                                                                       Index of capital mobility (0–100)
       External assets to GDP ratio (%)




                                                                                                                                           80
                                          100




                                                                                                                                           60
                                          50




                                                                                                                                           40
                                          0




                                                1870 1890 1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 2010                                                          1870 1890 1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 2010
                                                   1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000                                                               1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000

                                                      World         Industrial       Nonindustrial                                                     World              OECD       Non-OECD

                                                                                                                                                                                                	  
Notes	   and	   source:	   Foreign	   assets	   to	   GDP	   ratio	   from	   Obstfeld	   and	   Taylor	   (2004)	   up	   to	   1970	   and	   from	   Lane	  
and	  Milesi-­‐Ferreti	  (2007)	  thereafter.	  Capital	  account	  openness	  from	  index	  used	  by	  Quinn	  and	  Voth	  (2007).	  

	  

	  




	                                                                                                  3	                                                        	  
Coincidentally	   or	   not,	   a	   similar	   historical	   pattern	   characterizes	   financial	   crisis	  
events	   (Reinhart	   and	   Rogoff	   2009,	   155–56).	   Financial	   instability	   was	   a	   normal	  
feature	  of	  all	  advanced	  economies	  in	  late	  nineteenth	  century	  period,	  a	  feature	  that	  
continued	   into	   the	   1930s	   when	   the	   intensity	   of	   crises	   reached	   an	   all-­‐time	   high	  
during	  the	  Great	  Depression.	  But	  from	  the	  1940s	  onward	  until	  the	  early-­‐1970s,	  the	  
world	  was	  virtually	  free	  of	  financial	  crises,	  with	  a	  few	  crises	  witnessed	  in	  emerging	  
markets,	   but	   none	   seen	   at	   all	   in	   advanced	   economies.	   This	   unusually	   prolonged	  
period	   of	   financial	   calm	   really	   stands	   out	   from	   what	   went	   before,	   and	   what	   has	  
happened	   since	   (Bordo	   et	   al.	   2001).	   In	   the	   1980s	   and	   1990s	   emerging	   markets	  
experience	   many	   financial	   crises;	   there	   were	   a	   also	   few	   in	   advanced	   economies,	  
followed	   by	   one	   of	   histories	   worst	   globally-­‐synchronized	   financial	   crises	   in	   2008	  
across	  large	  swathes	  of	  the	  so-­‐called	  advanced	  economies.	  To	  show	  these	  patterns,	  
Figure	  2	  shows	  financial	  crisis	  indicators	  over	  the	  last	  two	  centuries.	  

Looking	   at	   the	   only	   economic	   laboratory	   we	   have—that	   is,	   history—these	   two	  
summary	   charts	   would	   appear	   on	   the	   surface	   to	   support	   the	   notion	   that,	   at	   least	  
empirically,	   international	   financial	   integration	   (the	   scope	   for	   external	   imbalances)	  
go	   hand	   in	   hand	   with	   financial	   instability	   (the	   prevalence	   of	   banking	   crises).	   But	  
correlation	   isn’t	   causation,	   and	   such	   inferences	   may	   not	   be	   justified	   for	   various	  
reasons.	   For	  example,	   we	   have	   not	  performed	  any	  statistical	  controls	  here,	  nor	  have	  
we	  addressed	  concerns	  about	  possible	  simultaneity	  and	  the	  role	  of	  omitted	  common	  
factors	  driving	  both	  patterns.	  

One	   obvious	   area	   for	   concern	   with	   respect	   to	   proper	   statistical	   control	   would	   be	  
changes	  in	  other	  aspect	  of	  the	  macroeconomic	  and	  financial	  policy	  regime	  over	  time	  
and	  across	  countries.	  For	  example,	  when	  we	  consider	  the	  period	  of	  unusual	  calm	  in	  
the	  1940–70	  period,	  we	  also	  know	  that	  it	  coincided	  with	  what	  was	  historically	  the	  
most	  stringent	  era	  of	  capital	  controls	  (imposed	  under	  IMF	  auspices	  as	  the	  very	  basis	  
of	  the	  Bretton	  Woods	  fixed	  exchange	  rate	  regime),	  and	  thus	  the	  era	  in	  which	  global	  
imbalances	   were	   at	   their	   all	   time	   nadir.	   However,	   it	   also	   coincided	   with	   a	   very	  
stringent	   era	   of	   domestic	   financial	   regulation	   in	   most	   countries	   around	   the	   world.	  



	                                                                4	                      	  
Policymakers	  reacted	  strongly	  to	  the	  bank	  panics	  and	  financial	  distress	  of	  the	  1930s	  
with	   a	   combination	   of	   rules	   and	   supervision,	   plus	   backstops	   and	   insurance	   (in	   the	  
U.S.	   case,	   for	   example,	   Glass-­‐Steagall	   ring-­‐fencing,	   supervisory	   agencies,	   reserve	  
requirements,	  FDIC	  deposit	  insurance,	  and	  Fed	  lender-­‐of-­‐last-­‐resort	  actions).	  

	  

                                                                         Figure	  2.	  Banking	  Crises	  in	  the	  Last	  Two	  Centuries	  
            Cumulative share of economies in a financial crisis

                                                 40        50
                      (10 year moving average, %)
            0        10       20       30




                                                                  1800                  1850                      1900                     1950           2000

                                                                                                     Emerging                         Advanced
                                                                                                                                                                 	  
Notes	   and	   source:	   The	   chart	   shows	   the	   cumulative	   percentage	   of	   economies	   in	   a	   banking	   crisis	   in	   each	  
year	  from	  1800	  to	  2008,	  ten-­‐year	  moving	  average.	  Data	  from	  Qian,	  Reinhart,	  and	  Rogoff	  (2010).	  

	  

Even	   absent	   the	   move	   toward	   financial	   autarky	   in	   this	   period,	   changes	   in	   the	  
domestic	   financial	   landscape	   also	   pushed	   economies	   toward	   a	   less	   risky,	   less	  
leveraged	   macroeconomic	   and	   financial	   regime.	   It	   would	   be	   a	   mistake,	   without	  
further	   careful	   analysis,	   to	   claim	   that	   one	   or	   the	   other	   set	   of	   policies	   played	   a	  
primary	   role	   in	   creating	   that	   stable	   environment.	   If	   we	   are	   to	   learn	   from	   the	   past,	  




	                                                                                                            5	                        	  
such	   work	   is	   needed	   as	   we	   sit	   at	   another	   historical	   turning	   point	   when	   the	   policy	  
architecture	  is	  again	  under	  heated	  discussion	  and	  under	  pressure	  to	  be	  redesigned.	  

	  

3.	  Event	  Studies:	  Correlates	  of	  Crises	  

One	   clear	   and	   simple	   way	   to	   begin	   to	   explore	   at	   least	   the	   proximate	   causes	   of	  
financial	   crises	   is	   to	   use	   event	   study	   techniques.	   In	   this	   approach	   we	   can	   look	  
systematically	  at	  the	  behavior	  of	  key	  variables	  in	  the	  run	  up	  to,	  and	  in	  the	  aftermath	  
of,	  financial	  crisis	  events,	  with	  the	  goal	  of	  identifying	  systematic	  differences	  between	  
tranquil	  periods	  or	  “normal”	  times”	  outside	  the	  window,	  and	  what	  happens	  in	  time	  
periods	   close	   to	   a	   financial	   crisis.	   The	   purpose	   of	   such	   analysis	   serves	   several	  
purposes:	   overall	   patterns	   discipline	   economic	   models	   designed	   to	   account	   for	  
crises	   theoretically	   by	   providing	   patterns	   that	   such	   a	   theory	   needs	   to	   match;	  
precrisis	   patterns	   may	   lead	   to	   “early	   warning	   signals”	   of	   use	   to	   policymakers	   and	  
others	   wishing	   to	   avert	   or	   anticipate	   problems;	   and	   postcrisis	   patterns	   should	   set	  
appropriate	   historical	   benchmarks	   for	   the	   evaluation	   of	   conditional	   economic	  
performance	  (e.g.,	  disputes	  over	  whether	  a	  recovery	  is	  sluggish	  or	  not).	  

A	   number	   of	   works	   in	   the	   economic	   literature	   have	   followed	   this	   approach	  
successfully,	  such	  as	  Cerra	  and	  Saxena	  (2008),	  Reinhart	  and	  Rogoff	  (2009),	  Reinhart	  
and	   Reinhart	   (2010),	   Claessens	   et	   al.	   (2010),	   Gourinchas	   and	   Obstfeld	   (2011),	  
Schularick	   and	   Taylor	   (2012),	   Reinhart,	   Reinhart,	   and	   Rogoff	   (2012),	  among	   many	  
others,	  and	  the	  technique	  is	  also	  widely	  used	  in	  the	  policy	  world,	  for	  example	  in	  IMF	  
analyses	   for	   the	   WEO	   and	   other	   publications	   since	   the	   2008	   crisis.	   Other	   related	  
works	   in	   this	   vein	   include	   Chamon	   and	   Crowe	   (2012)	   focusing	   on	   a	   range	   of	  
indicators;	   Goldstein	   (2010)	   on	   the	   link	   between	   fundamentals	   and	   panics;	  
Dell’Ariccia	  et	  al.	  (2012)	  looking	  at	  credit	  boom	  warning	  signal;	  and	  Claessens	  et	  al.	  
(2012)	  who	  look	  at	  the	  coherence	  of	  business	  and	  financial	  cycles.	  




	                                                                  6	                        	  
Most	   of	   this	   literature	   is	   on	   broad	   agreement.	   For	   representative	   evidence	   from	   a	  
recent	   sample	   that	   includes	   both	   advanced	   and	   emerging	   economies	   using	   annual	  
data	   from	   1973	   to	   2010,	   Figure	   3	   shows	   empirical	   regularities	   for	   nine	   key	  
macroeconomic	   and	   financial	   variables	   in	   ±5-­‐year	   windows	   surrounding	   banking	  
crisis	  events	  drawn	  from	  Gourinchas	  and	  Obstfeld	  (2011).	  

The	  estimates	  of	  conditional	  means	  of	  each	  variable,	  relative	  to	  ‘tranquil	  times’	  are	  
reported	   on	   the	   vertical	   axes.	   The	   horizontal	   axes	   represent	   the	   number	   of	   years	  
before	   (negative	   sign)	   and	   after	   a	   crisis	   of	   a	   given	   type	   (in	   the	   different	   columns).	  
Estimates	   in	   the	   top	   row	   are	   for	   emerging	   market	   economies;	   in	   the	   bottom	   row	   for	  
advanced	   economies.	   The	   dots	   denote	   a	   95%	   confidence	   interval	   for	   each	  
conditional	   mean.	   The	   results	   can	   be	   summed	   up	   as	   follows,	   with	   some	   tentative	  
hypotheses	  which	  we	  can	  carry	  forward:	  

•      Output	   is	   slightly	   above	   normal	   just	   before	   a	   crisis,	   but	   collapses	   dramatically	  
       afterwards.	  The	  boom	  may	  be	  slightly	  larger	  in	  emerging	  economies.	  Advanced	  
       fare	  no	  better	  than	  emerging	  in	  the	  aftermath.	  A	  long	  recession	  is	  typical.	  
•      Inflation	   is	   close	   to	   normal	   just	   before	   a	   crisis,	   but	   collapses	   dramatically	  
       afterwards.	   Real	   interest	   rates	   are	   not	   atypical	   before	   a	   crisis,	   but	   can	   rise	  
       afterwards,	   with	   the	   effect	   seemingly	   stronger	   in	   emerging	   countries.	  
       Deflationary	  pressures	  are	  strong.	  
•      Public	   debt	   levels	   are	   normal	   just	   before	   a	   crisis,	   but	   increase	   dramatically	  
       afterwards,	  with	  a	  wide	  range.	  Crises	  have	  adverse	  fiscal	  consequences.	  
•      Domestic	  credit	  expansion	  is	  typically	  much	  high	  than	  normal	  before	  a	  banking	  
       crisis	  event.	  The	  shift	  is	  very	  strong	  in	  advanced	  countries	  and	  highly	  statistically	  
       significant.	  Credit	  booms	  tend	  to	  precede	  banking	  crises.	  
       	                                             	  




	                                                                    7	                         	  
                        Figure	  3.	  Empirical	  Regularities	  during	  Banking	  Crises,	  1973–2010	  
                                                                                           	  




                                                                                                                                                                           	  
                                                                                           	  
Notes	   and	   source:	   The	   estimates	   of	   conditional	   means	   of	   each	   variable,	   relative	   to	   ‘tranquil	   times’	   are	  
reported	  on	  the	  vertical	  axes.	  The	  horizontal	  axes	  represent	  the	  number	  of	  years	  before	  (negative	  sign)	  
and	   after	   a	   crisis	   of	   a	   given	   type	   (in	   the	   different	   columns).	   Estimates	   in	   the	   top	   row	   are	   for	   emerging	  
market	   economies;	   in	   the	   bottom	   row	   for	   advanced	   economies.	   The	   dots	   denote	   a	   95%	   confidence	  
interval	  for	  each	  conditional	  mean.	  Charts	  from	  Gourinchas	  and	  Obstfeld	  (2011).	                                                                            	  




	                                                                                        8	                                	  
Looking	   at	   external	   indicators,	   external	   leverage	   (gross	   positions)	   and	   the	   current	  
account	   do	   not	   seem	   out	   of	   line	   in	   the	   window,	   although	   in	   advanced	   economies	  
these	  variable	  gets	  close	  to	  borderline	  significance.	  Real	  exchange	  rates	  tend	  to	  be	  
strong	   before	   a	   crisis,	   and	   weaken	   a	   lot	   afterwards,	   compared	   to	   normal.	   Foreign	  
reserves	  show	  no	  unusual	  precrisis	  trend	  but	  tend	  to	  accumulate	  afterwards	  as	  the	  
currency	   weakens	   and	   the	   external	   accounts	   move	   more	   to	   surplus.	   Thus	   external	  
imbalances	  and	  currency	  appreciation	  may	  also	  be	  indicative	  of	  added	  crisis	  risk.	  

	  

4.	  Credit	  and	  the	  Current	  Account:	  Two	  Sides	  of	  the	  Same	  Coin?	  

The	   main	   argument	   in	   this	   paper	   will	   be	   that	   it	   is	   unusually	   high	   rates	   of	   credit	  
growth	  that	  tend	  to	  be	  the	  main	  warning	  signal	  of	  incipient	  financial	  crises.	  But	  as	  
the	  preceding	  discussion	  indicates,	  some	  other	  indicators	  could	  also	  be	  relevant,	  and	  
one	  goal	  of	  this	  paper	  is	  to	  relate	  these	  perspectives	  to	  external	  imbalances,	  which	  
have	  been	  such	  a	  focus	  of	  debate	  in	  the	  last	  decade.	  

From	   a	   simple	   accounting	   perspective,	   and	   thinking	   in	   conventional	   theoretical	  
terms,	   it	   might	   be	   expected	   that	   there	   could	   be	   simultaneous	   correlation	   between	  
higher	   credit	   growth	   and	   external	   deficits	   in	   open	   economies.	   Countries	  
experiencing	   booms	   tend	   to	   have	   higher	   investment,	   and	   may	   also	   have	   lower	  
savings,	   if	   consumption-­‐smoothing	   motives	   are	   at	   work.	   The	   investment	   may,	   to	  
some	   degree,	   be	   finance	   via	   bank	   lending	   channels,	   suggesting	   that	   loan	   growth	   and	  
current	  accounts	  might	  have	  a	  negative	  correlation.	  

However,	   in	   the	   data,	   this	   correlation	   is	   far	   from	   perfect.	   Consider	   the	   long-­‐run	  
advanced	  country	  dataset	  of	  Schularick	  and	  Taylor	  (2012).	  If	  we	  were	  to	  regress	  the	  
change	   in	   credit	   to	   GDP	   ratios	   on	   change	   in	   current	   account	   to	   GDP	   ratio	   in	   every	  
year,	   then	   this	   bivariate	   relationship	   has	   significance	   (an	   F-­‐stat	   over	   5)	   in	   about	   1	  
out	   of	   every	   6	   years	   over	   the	   course	   of	   history	   since	   1870.	   Some	   panel	   tests	   over	  
multi-­‐year	  samples	  are	  shown	  in	  Table	  1.	  



	                                                                    9	                         	  
        Table	  1.	  Credit	  Booms	  and	  External	  Imbalances:	  Only	  Weakly	  Correlated	  since	  1870	  
Dependent	  variable	                                                              Change	  in	  credit/GDP	  
	                                                     (1)	                         (2)	                   (3)	                                     (4)	  
	                                                All	  years	                  Post-­‐1980	           Pre-­‐1914	                              1914–1980	  

Change	  in	  CA/GDP	                         -­‐0.122**	                       -­‐0.311*	                     -­‐0.184**	                       -­‐0.0731	  
	                                                  (-­‐2.83)	                       (-­‐2.31)	                      (-­‐2.80)	                       (-­‐1.38)	  

N	                                                  1531	                            392	                                 412	                         727	  
Notes	  and	  source:	  The	  t	  statistics	  in	  parentheses	  *	  p<0.05,	  **	  p<0.01,	  ***	  p<0.001.	  Data	  from	  Jordà,	  Schularick,	  and	  
Taylor	  (2011a).	  


	  

Over	  the	  entire	  sample,	  in	  column	  1,	  the	  coefficient	  on	  the	  external	  imbalance	  is	  only	  
–0.12,	   reflecting	   the	   fact	   that	   capital	   inflows	   can	   come	   in	   a	   variety	   of	   forms,	  
including	   FDI	   or	   private	   portfolio	   securities,	   or	   sovereign	   loans,	   which	   have	   nothing	  
to	   do	   with	   the	   destination-­‐country	   banking	   sector.	   Indeed,	   this	   “pass	   through”	  
coefficient	   suggests	   that	   about	   90%	   of	   the	   time,	   such	   flows	   have	   bypassed	   banks.	  
This	  coefficient	  rises	  to	  –0.31	  in	  the	  recent	  post-­‐1980	  era	  of	  financial	  globalization,	  
suggesting	  that	  the	  conduits	  of	  external	  imbalances	  in	  recent	  decades	  have	  shifted	  
more	  towards	  banking	  channels;	  but	  even	  then	  70%	  of	  flows	  appear	  to	  be	  moving	  
outside	  bank	  channels.	  

These	  results	  caution	  that	  the	  nexus	  of	  financial	  crises,	  the	  domestic	  banking	  sector,	  
is	   only	   partially	   coupled	   to	   the	   external	   balance	   of	   payments	   imbalances	   of	   any	  
country,	   an	   obvious	   point.	   Countries	   can	   experience	   capital	   inflows	   that	   take	   non-­‐
bank	  forms,	  so	  the	  causation	  from	  external	  to	  internal	  is	  not	  a	  given;	  and	  they	  can	  
have	   credit	   booms	   driven	   by	   expansion	   of	   leverage	   in	   domestic	   banks	   that	   need	   not	  
be	  related	  to	  any	  new	  financing	  flows	  from	  abroad,	  so	  the	  causation	  from	  internal	  to	  
external	  is	  not	  a	  given	  either.	  

The	   historical	   data	   back	   up	   this	   idea	   that	   the	   two	   measures	   are	   for	   the	   most	   part	  
distinct,	  and	  should	  therefore	  not	  be	  expected	  to	  necessarily	  play	  the	  same	  role	  with	  
respect	  to	  crisis	  risk,	  a	  point	  we	  now	  examine	  in	  greater	  detail.	  




	                                                                                 10	                               	  
5.	  Let	  the	  Data	  Speak	  1:	  Predictive	  Ability	  Tests	  

Up	  to	  now	  we	  have	  documented	  some	  basic	  empirical	  regularities,	  but	  in	  that	  kind	  
framework	  we	  can	  only	  achieve	  so	  much.	  The	  comparisons	  are	  just	  one	  variable	  at	  a	  
time	   and	   ultimately	   we	   need	   a	   more	   formal	   analysis	   to	   evaluate	   which	   variables	  
really	  do	  seem	  to	  have	  distinct	  dynamics	  in	  crisis	  times,	  as	  compared	  to	  their	  normal	  
behavior.	   Given	   the	   focus	   of	   this	   paper,	   and	   the	   results	   of	   the	   last	   section,	   I	   focus	   on	  
the	   competing	   hypotheses	   relating	   to	   whether	   it	   is	   external	   imbalances	   or	   credit	  
booms	  that	  are	  the	  main	  feature	  of	  crisis	  events.	  

Research	   has	   therefore	   turned	   to	   the	   question	   of	   predictive	   modeling,	   that	   is,	  
attempting	   to	   establish	   whether	   certain	   past	   variables	   may	   contain	   ex	   ante	   “early	  
warning”	  information	  about	  the	  likelihood	  of	  a	  financial	  crisis	  today.	  In	  the	  wake	  of	  
the	   2008	   crisis,	   which	   caught	   most	   economist	   and	   policymakers	   by	   surprise,	   the	  
need	   for	   careful,	   robust,	   and	   replicable	   work	   in	   this	   area,	   is	   urgent,	   but	   this	   is	   not	   to	  
say	   important	   prior	   work	   did	   not	   exist.	   Work	   on	   the	   determinants	   of	   emerging	  
market	   financial	   crises	   certainly	   existed	   (e.g.,	   inter	   alia,	   Kaminsky	   and	   Reinhart	  
1999).	  And	  some	  work	  on	  financial	  crises	  in	  samples	  including	  advanced	  economies	  
had	  also	  been	  undertaken,	  although	  this	  was	  not	  heeded	  by	  many	  (e.g.,	  BIS	  studies,	  
including	  famously	  Borio	  and	  White	  2004;	  Eichengreen	  and	  Mitchener	  2004).	  This	  
literature	  tended	  to	  find	  that	  credit	  booms,	  meaning	  faster	  growth	  in	  bank	  lending	  
relative	   to	   “normal	   times”	   was	   indicative	   of	   elevated	   crisis	   risk.	   There	   was	   also	  
evidence	  that	  higher	  levels	  of	  foreign	  reserves,	  in	  emerging	  markets,	  could	  perhaps	  
mitigate	  risks,	  all	  else	  equal.	  

These	   finding	   have	   been	   echoed	   in	   more	   recent	   work,	   for	   example	   in	   the	   logit	  
predictive	   models	   presented	   by	   Gourinchas	   and	   Obstfeld	   (2011)	   and	   Schularick	   and	  
Taylor	  (2012).	  The	  former	  employs	  a	  short-­‐wide	  annual	  panel	  of	  both	  advanced	  and	  
emerging	   economies	   since	   the	   1970s;	   the	   latter	   constructs	   a	   long-­‐narrow	   annual	  
panel	  from	  a	  historical	  dataset	  for	  the	  advanced	  countries	  going	  back	  to	  1870.	  




	                                                                         11	                           	  
In	   the	   context	   of	   this	   paper,	   however,	   it	   is	   important	   to	   ask	   whether	   in	   these	   and	  
other	   works	   one	   can	   find	   any	   role,	   much	   less	   an	   independent	   role,	   for	   external	  
imbalances	  as	  crisis	  determinants.	  The	  answer,	  so	  far	  at	  least,	  seems	  to	  be	  no.	  In	  the	  
Gourinchas	  and	  Obstfeld	  (2011)	  study,	  the	  current	  account	  is	  unrelated	  to	  banking	  
crisis	  risk	  in	  both	  the	  advanced	  country	  sample	  and	  the	  emerging	  country	  sample,	  
once	  other	  controls	  are	  included,	  the	  most	  important	  of	  which	  is	  the	  credit	  variable.	  	  

Similar	   results	   were	   found	   by	   Jordà,	   Schularick	   and	   Taylor	   (2012),	   using	   the	   long-­‐
wide	  panel	  of	  advanced	  economies,	  and	  a	  concise	  exposition	  of	  their	  tests	  is	  shown	  
in	   Figure	   4,	   using	   a	   tool	   referred	   to	   as	   the	   Correct	   Classification	   Frontier,	   or	   CCF.3	  
Using	   any	   one	   of	   a	   family	   of	   competing	   logit	   models,	   such	   as	   those	   described	   above,	  
the	  CCF	  curve	  plots	  the	  frontier	  of	  true	  positives	   TP	  and	  true	  negatives	  TN	  that	  each	  
model	  delivers	  depending	  on	  how	  its	  trigger	  threshold	  is	  set.	  In	  a	  given	  set	  of	  data,	  
with	   any	   model,	   a	   low	   enough	   threshold	   gets	   100%	   TP	   but	   0%	   TN;	   a	   high	   enough	  
one	   scores	   the	   opposite.	   An	   uninformative	   model	   (a	   random	   signal)	   will	   achieve	   a	  
CCF	   curve	   of	   TP	   and	   TN	   scores	   on	   the	   diagonal	   simplex	   between	   these	   points.	  
Statistical	   tests	   are	   need	   to	   evaluate	   whether	   a	   model	   can	   be	   judged	   to	   be	  
informative,	  which	  amounts	  to	  having	  a	  CCF	  curve	  which	  lies	  above	  the	  diagonal.	  

A	  straightforward	  test,	  which	  requires	  no	  modeling	  of	  preferences,	  would	  be	  to	  look	  
at	  the	  “area	  under	  the	  curve”	  or	  AUC	  as	  a	  test	  statistic.	  Under	  the	  uninformative	  null	  
AUC	   equals	   0.5	   and	   hypothesis	   tests	   are	   simplified	   by	   the	   asymptotically	   normal	  
distribution	   of	   this	   statistic.	   Among	   other	   results,	   Jordà,	   Schularick	   and	   Taylor	  
(2012)	  present	  tests	  based	  on	  the	  AUC	  for	  four	  models	  using	  the	  long	  panel:4	  

•                          A	  model	  with	  country	  fixed	  effects	  only	  (CFE,	  a	  better-­‐than	  random	  null);	  
•                          A	  model	  with	  the	  lagged	  credit	  variable	  (5y	  MA	  change)	  plus	  CFE;	  
•                          A	  model	  with	  the	  lagged	  current	  account	  variable	  (5y	  MA	  change)	  plus	  CFE;	  
•                          A	  model	  with	  both	  the	  lagged	  credit	  and	  current	  account	  variables	  plus	  CFE.	  


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3	  The	  CCF	  is	  a	  variant	  of	  the	  Receiver	  Operating	  Characteristic	  or	  ROC	  curve.	  
4	  The	  discussion	  draws	  on	  Taylor	  (2012).	  




	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12	     	  
        Figure	  4.	  Using	  Lagged	  Credit	  Growth	  plus	  Current	  Accounts	  or	  Public	  Debts	  as	  a	  
            Classifier	  to	  Forecast	  Financial	  Crises:	  The	  Correct	  Classification	  Frontier	  


                      1.00    0.75
             True positive rate
          0.25     0.50
                      0.00




                                     0.00           0.25                       0.50                                       0.75                        1.00
                                                                         True negative rate

                                            Null, FE only (AUC = 0.641)                               Credit + FE (AUC = 0.750)
                                            CA + FE (AUC = 0.685)                                     Credit + CA + FE (AUC = 0.767)
                                            Reference
                                                                                                                                                                 	  
                                                                                    	  
Notes	  and	  source:	  See	  Figure	  8	  and	  Jordà,	  Schularick,	  and	  Taylor	  (2011a)	  and	  Taylor	  (2012).	  “CA”	  uses	  a	  5-­‐
year	  lagged	  moving	  average	  of	  change	  in	  the	  current	  account	  to	  GDP	  ratio.	  In	  this	  chart,	  for	  all	  models,	  the	  
predictions	   of	   separate	   prewar	   and	   postwar	   country-­‐fixed-­‐effects	   logit	   models	   are	   combined.	   Relative	  
either	   to	   the	   “Null”	   or	   the	   “Credit”	   model,	   the	   addition	   of	   “CA”	   does	   not	   significantly	   improve	   the	  
classifier.           	  
	  

As	   Figure	   4	   shows,	   adding	   the	   current	   account	   variable	   to	   the	   model	   slightly	  
improves	   predictive	   ability	   relative	   to	   the	   country-­‐fixed-­‐effects	   null	   (AUC	   rises	   from	  
0.641	  to	  0.685,	  p=0.0165),	  but	  adding	  the	  credit	  variable	  improves	  predictive	  ability	  
much	  more	  (AUC	  rises	  to	  0.745,	  p=0.0010).	  Once	  credit	  is	  in	  the	  model,	  adding	  the	  
current	  account	  on	  top	  achieves	  little.	  Why?	  As	  history	  has	  shown,	  over	  the	  long	  run	  
economies	  can	  have	  credit	  booms	  “fueled”	  by	  external	  imbalances,	  but	  that	  they	  can	  
also	   have	   home-­‐grown	   credit	   booms	   that	   are	   unrelated	   to	   shifts	   in	   the	   current	  
account.	  Either	  type	  can	  be	  potentially	  dangerous	  in	  terms	  of	  banking	  crisis	  risk,	  so	  
moves	  in	  the	  balance	  of	  payments	  may	  not	  be	  all	  that	  informative.	  


	                                                                               13	                              	  
5.	  Let	  the	  Data	  Speak	  2:	  Beyond	  Binary	  Classification	  

Finally,	   it	   is	   worth	   noting	   the	   relevance	   of	   the	   credit	   cycle,	   not	   just	   for	   the	   rare	  
events	   called	   “financial	   crises”	   but	   for	   all	   recessions	   (Jordà,	   Schularick,	   and	   Taylor	  
2011b).	  To	  underscore	  this	  point	  we	  can	  classify	  all	  recession	  events	  in	  all	  countries,	  
and	   classify	   them	   as	   normal	   recessions	   or	   financial	   recessions	   based	   on	   coincidence	  
(±2	   years)	   with	   a	   crisis	   event.	   In	   around	   140	   years	   for	   14	   countries	   from	   1870	   to	  
2008	  we	  observe	  50	  financial	  recessions,	  173	  normal	  recessions,	  and	  223	  recessions	  
in	  total.	  The	  corresponding	  event	  frequencies	  are	  3.3%	  for	  financial	  recessions	  and	  
11.4%	  for	  normal	  recessions	  (approximately	  1	  in	  30	  years	  versus	  1	  in	  9).5	  

Figure	   5	   shows	   that	   there	   is	   a	   more	   generalized	   echo	   of	   a	   credit	   boom	   in	   all	  
recessions.	  A	  larger	  run-­‐up	  in	  credit	  each	  year	  during	  the	  prior	  expansion	  years	  (in	  
percent	   of	   GDP	   per	   year)	   can	   be	   traced	   to	   weaker	   performance	   (lower	   levels	   of	   real	  
GDP	   per	   capita)	   in	   the	   subsequent	   recession/recovery	   phase	   out	   to	   a	   horizon	   of	   5	  
years	   beyond	   the	   cyclical	   peak.	   Thus,	   unusually	   rapid	   credit	   growth	   poses	   extra	  
dangers.	   Not	   only	   does	   it	   raise	   the	   likelihood	   of	   a	   once-­‐in-­‐a-­‐generation	   financial	  
crisis	   event,	   as	   the	   binary	   prediction	   analysis	   shows.	   It	   is	   also	   systematically	   related	  
to	   weaker	   recession	   paths	   in	   all	   peak-­‐trough	   episodes,	   whether	   the	   country	   falls	  
prey	  to	  a	  financial	  recession	  or	  a	  normal	  recession.	  

To	   put	   the	   “marginal	   effects”	   of	   the	   excess	   credit	   treatment	   in	   Figure	   5	   into	  
perspective,	   the	   slope	   is	   ½	   for	   normal	   recessions	   and	   ¾	   for	   financial	   recessions.	  
Excess	   credit	   has	   a	   historical	   mean	   of	   about	   1¼	   percent	   of	   GDP	   per	   year	   in	   financial	  
recessions	  (s.d.	  =	  2½)	  and	  a	  mean	  of	  ¼	  in	  normal	  recessions	  (s.d	  =	  2).	  This	  implies	  
that	  a	  +1	  standard	  deviation	  increase	  in	  the	  credit	  variable	  during	  a	  “high	  leverage”	  
expansion	  might	  later	  create	  a	  5-­‐year	  drag	  of	  –1%	  of	  the	  level	  of	  real	  GDP	  per	  capita	  
after	  the	  peak	  in	  a	  normal	  recession,	  or–2%	  in	  the	  event	  of	  financial	  recession.	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5	  To
    cleanse the effects of the two world wars from the analysis, the war windows 1914–18 and
1939–45 are excluded, as are data corresponding to peaks which are within 5 years of the wars
looking forwards, or 2 years looking backwards (since these leads and lags are used in the
analysis below).



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14	     	  
These	  are	  nontrivial	  costs:	  credit	  booms	  sow	  the	  seeds	  of	  future	  deleveraging	  pain	  
in	   all	   cycles.	   Monitoring	   credit	   is	   therefore	   a	   legitimate	   concern	   of	   policymakers	  
concerned	  with	  overall	  macroeconomic	  stability	  at	  business-­‐cycle	  frequencies,	  that	  
is,	  even	  in	  more	  typical	  cycles	  when	  crises	  are	  averted	  and	  the	  economy	  suffers	  only	  
a	  “normal”	  recession	  (see,	  e.g.,	  Drehmann	  et	  al.	  2011,	  Turner	  2011).	  

	  

       Figure	  5.	  Credit	  Bites	  Back:	  “Excess”	  Credit	  Growth	  in	  the	  Expansion	  Phase	  and	  the	  
         Deviation	  of	  Real	  GDP	  per	  Capita	  in	  the	  5-­‐year	  Next	  Recession/Recovery	  Phase	  


                                                                                             Normal recessions                                                                                                                    Financial recessions

                                                                                                                                                    Level of log real GDP per capita in year 1-5, orthogonal component
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                            10
       Level of log real GDP per capita in year 1-5, orthogonal component
                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                            -10
                                                                            -20




                                                                                                                                                                         -20
                                                                            -30
                                                                            -40




                                                                                                                                                    -40




                                                                                  coef = -.50628744, se = .17115664, t = -2.96                                                                                           coef = -.76393738, se = .22300767, t = -3.43

                                                                                     -4          -2           0            2           4                                                                                    -2             0         2            4          6
                                                                                  Excess credit in prior expansion, orthogonal component                                                                                 Excess credit in prior expansion, orthogonal component



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  	  
Source:	   Based	   on	   the	   data	   in	   Jordà,	   Schularick,	   and	   Taylor	   (2011b).	   The	   charts	   show	   simple	   added-­‐	  
variable	   plots	   (partial	   scatters)	   between	   the	   deviation	   of	   the	   level	   of	   log	   real	   GDP	   per	   capita	   in	  
recession/recovery	  years	  1-­‐5	  after	  a	  normal	  or	  financial	  peak,	  and	  the	  annual	  rate	  of	  change	  of	  credit-­‐to-­‐
GDP	   in	   the	   prior	   expansion.	   The	   left	   chart	   shows	   financial	   crisis	   recessions	   only,	   the	   right	   chart	   normal	  
recessions	  only.	  In	  the	  underlying	  regression,	  additional	   control	  variables	  include	   5-­‐year	  time	  fixed	  effects	  
interacted	   with	   normal	   and	   financial	   recession	   dummies.	   Both	   partial	   correlations	   are	   statistically	  
significant	  at	  the	  1%	  level.	  

	                                                                                                                  	  



	                                                                                                                                         15	                                                                                         	  
6.	  Conclusions	  

The	   history	   of	   “advanced”	   countries	   shows	   that	   credit	   booms	   and	   busts	   can	   be	  
driven	  just	  as	  easily	  by	  domestic	  savings	  as	  foreign	  saving.	  Gross	  stocks	  and	  flows	  
can	   often	   be	   delinked	   from	   net	   flows	   across	   border,	   so	   balance	   sheets	   can	   expand	  
even	  if	  no	  cross	  border	  flows	  are	  recorded.	  At	  a	  disaggregated	  level,	  current	  account	  
flows	  can	  be	  composed	  of	  a	  widely	  varying	  mix	  of	  bank,	  debt,	  equity,	  FDI	  and	  other	  
claims,	   and	   each	   type	   has	   very	   different	   risk	   characteristics,	   with	   bank	   and	   debt	  
flows	  being	  the	  ones	  at	  risk	  of	  rollover	  risk	  (stops,	  flight).	  

Thus	  there	  is	  absolutely	  no	  a	  priori	  reason	  why	  any	  $1	  of	  gross	  or	  net	  capital	  flows	  
should	   make	   a	   difference	   to	   the	   risk	   of	   a	   financial	   crisis	   in	   the	   home	   country.	   It	   is	  
highly	  likely	  instead	  that	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  flow,	  and	  its	  route	  into	  the	  local	  economy,	  
will	   matter	   far	   more.	   It	   is	   when	   financial	   flows	   of	  local	  or	  foreign	  origin	   build	   up	   into	  
large	  credit	  exposures	  in	  the	  domestic	  financial	  system,	  that	  the	  risks	  of	  a	  financial	  
crisis	  are	  elevated,	  and	  the	  likelihood	  of	  future	  deleveraging	  costs	  is	  increased.	  

We	   need	   to	   move	   beyond	   monocausal	   stories	   where	   the	   current	   account	   is	   relied	  
upon	  as	  a	  unique,	  special	  indicator.	  Evidence	  shows	  that	  domestic	  credit	  conditions	  
are	   a	   more	   salient	   feature	   of	   crisis	   dynamics,	   and	   even	   the	   dynamics	   of	   normal	  
business	  cycles.	  

Going	  forward,	  a	  natural	  dichotomy	  is	  emerging.	  An	  “external	  variable”	  like	  current	  
accounts	  may	  make	  sense	  as	  a	  key	  indicator	  in	  the	  analysis	  of	  proximate	  causes	  of	  
“external	   crisis”	   —	   meaning	   capital	   market	   access,	   bad	   spreads,	   default,	   or	   recourse	  
to	   IMF	   programs	   (Catão	   and	   Milesi-­‐Ferretti	   2012).	   But	   an	   “internal	   variable”	   like	  
credit	  might	  make	  much	  more	  sense	  as	  a	  key	  indicator	  in	  the	  analysis	  of	  proximate	  
causes	   of	   “internal	   crisis”	   meaning	   distress	   in	   the	   domestic	   financial	   system,	   bank	  
panics	  and	  failures	  and	  so	  forth.	  




	                                                                       16	                           	  
Future	   economic	   and	   policy	   analysis	   may	   benefit	   greatly	   if	   we	   can	   move	   beyond	   the	  
narrow	  and	  simplistic	  “global	  imbalance”	  framework	  which	  all	  too	  often	  dominated	  
discussions	  in	  the	  last	  decade.6	  

	  

References	  

Arcand,	   Jean-­‐Louis,	   Enrico	   Berkes,	   and	   Ugo	   Panizza.	   2012.	   Too	   Much	   Finance?	   IMF	   Working	  
   Paper	  No.	  12/161,	  June.	  
Bernanke,	  Ben	  S.	  2005.	  The	  Global	  Saving	  Glut	  and	  the	  U.S.	  Current	  Account	  Deficit.	  Remarks	  
   at	  the	  Sandridge	  Lecture,	  Virginia	  Association	  of	  Economists,	  Richmond,	  Va.,	  March	  10.	  
Bordo,	   Michael,	   and	   Barry	   Eichengreen,	   Daniela	   Klingebiel,	   and	   María	   Soledad	   Martínez-­‐
   Pería.	  2001.	  Is	  the	  Crisis	  Problem	  Growing	  More	  Severe?	  Economic	  Policy	  16(32):	  51–82.	  
Borio,	  Claudio,	  and	  William	  R.	  White.	  2004.	  Whither	  Monetary	  and	  Financial	  Stability?	  The	  
   Implications	  of	  Evolving	  Policy	  Regimes.	  In	  Monetary	  Policy	  and	  Uncertainty:	  Adapting	  to	  
   a	   Changing	   Economy.	   Proceedings	   of	   a	   symposium	   sponsored	   by	   the	   Federal	   Reserve	  
   Bank	  of	  Kansas	  City,	  Jackson	  Hole,	  Wyo.,	  28–30	  August,	  2003,	  pp.	  131–211.	  

Catão,	   Luis	   A.	   V.,	   and	   Gian	   Maria	   Milesi-­‐Ferretti.	   2012.	   External	   Liabilities	   and	   Crisis	  
    RiskInternational	  Monetary	  Fund.	  Unpublished.	  
Chamon,	   Marcos	   and	   Christopher	   Crowe.	   2012.	   Evidence	   on	   Financial	   Globalization	   and	  
   Crisis:	   “Predictive”	   Indicators	   of	   Crises	   –	   Macroprudential	   Indicators,	   Institutional	  
   Environment,	  Micro.	  International	  Monetary	  Fund.	  Unpublished.	  
Claessens,	   Stijn,	   Giovanni	   Dell'Ariccia,	   Deniz	   Igan,	   Luc	   Laeven.	   2010.	   Cross-­‐Country	  
    Experiences	   and	   Policy	   Implications	   from	   the	   Global	   Financial	   Crisis.	   Economic	   Policy	  
    25:	  267–293.	  
Claessens,	   Stijn,	   M.	   Ayhan	   Kose,	   Marco	   E.	   Terrones.	   2012.	   How	   do	   Business	   and	   Financial	  
    Cycles	  Interact?	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics	  87(1):	  178–190.	  
Dell’Ariccia,	   Giovanni,	   Deniz	   Igan,	   Luc	   Laeven,	   and	   Hui	   Tong.	   2012.	   Policies	   for	  
    Macrofinancial	  Stability:	  Options	  to	  Deal	  with	  Credit	  Booms.	  IMF	  Staff	  Discussion	  Note	  
    SDN/12/06.	  




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6	  See,	   for	   example,	   Lane	   (2012)	   and	   Obstfeld	   (2012)	   for	   suggestions	   as	   to	   the	   way	   ahead.	   See	   also	   the	  

IMF	  (2011)	  postmortem	  into	  the	  global	  financial	  crisis,	  viz.:	  “For	  much	  of	  the	  period	  [2004–07]	  the	  
IMF	   was	   drawing	   the	   membership’s	   attention	   to	   the	   risk	   that	   a	   disorderly	   unwinding	   of	   global	  
imbalances	   [and	   inflation]….	   The	   IMF	   gave	   too	   little	   consideration	   to	   deteriorating	   financial	   sector	  
balance	   sheets,	   financial	   regulatory	   issues,	   to	   the	   possible	   links	   between	   monetary	   policy	   and	   the	  
global	   imbalances,	   and	   to	   the	   credit	   boom	   and	   emerging	   asset	   bubbles.	   It	   did	   not	   discuss	   macro-­‐
prudential	  approaches	  that	  might	  have	  helped	  address	  the	  evolving	  risks.”	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17	     	  
Drehmann,	  Mathias,	  Claudio	  Borio,	  and	  Kostas	  Tsatsaronis.	  2011.	  Anchoring	  Countercyclical	  
   Capital	  Buffers:	  The	  Role	  of	  Credit	  Aggregates.	  International	   Journal	   Of	   Central	   Banking.	  
   7(4):	  189–240.	  
Eichengreen,	   Barry,	   and	   Kris	   James	   Mitchener.	   2004.	   The	   Great	   Depression	   as	   a	   Credit	  
    Boom	  Gone	  Wrong.	  Research	  in	  Economic	  History	  22:	  183–237.	  
IMF.	   2011.	   IMF	   Performance	   in	   the	   Run-­‐Up	   to	   the	   Financial	   and	   Economic	   Crisis:	   IMF	  
   Surveillance	  in	  2004–07.	  Washington,	  D.C.:	  International	  Monetary	  Fund.	  
Jordà,	  Òscar,	  Moritz	  Schularick,	  and	  Alan	  M.	  Taylor.	  2011a.	  Financial	  Crises,	  Credit	  Booms,	  
    and	  External	  Imbalances:	  140	  Years	  of	  Lessons.	  IMF	  Economic	  Review	  59(2):	  340–78.	  
Jordà,	   Òscar,	   Moritz	   Schularick,	   and	   Alan	   M.	   Taylor.	   2011b.	   When	   Credit	   Bites	   Back:	  
    Leverage,	  Business	  Cycles,	  and	  Crises.	  NBER	  Working	  Papers	  17621.	  
Kaminsky,	   Graciela	   L.,	   and	   Carmen	   M.	   Reinhart.	   1999.	   The	   Twin	   Crises:	   The	   Causes	   of	  
   Banking	   and	   Balance-­‐of-­‐Payments	   Problems.	   American	   Economic	   Review	   89(3):	   473–
   500.	  
Lane,	  Philip	  R.	  2012.	  Financial	  Globalisation	  and	  the	  Crisis.	  Paper	  presented	  at	  the	  11th	  BIS	  
   Annual	   Conference	   on	   The	   Future	   of	   Financial	   Globalisation.	   Lucerne,	   June	   21–22.	  
   http://www.bis.org/events/conf120621/lane.pdf	  
Obstfeld,	  Maurice.	  2012.	  Does	  the	  Current	  Account	  Still	  Matter?	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  
   102(3):	  1–23.	  
Reinhart,	  Carmen	  M.,	  and	  Kenneth	  S.	  Rogoff.	  2009.	  This	  Time	  is	  Different:	  Eight	  Centuries	  of	  
   Financial	  Folly.	  Princeton,	  N.J.:	  Princeton	  University	  Press.	  
Reinhart,	   Carmen	   M.,	   Vincent	   R.	   Reinhart,	   and	   Kenneth	   S.	   Rogoff.	   2012.	   Debt	   Overhangs:	  
   Past	  and	  Present.	  NBER	  Working	  Papers	  18015.	  
Reinhart,	   Carmen	   M.,	   and	   Vincent	   R.	   Reinhart.	   2011.	   After	   the	   Fall.	   In	   Macroeconomic	  
   Challenges:	   The	   Decade	   Ahead.	   Proceedings	   of	   a	   symposium	   sponsored	   by	   the	   Federal	  
   Reserve	  Bank	  of	  Kansas	  City,	  Jackson	  Hole,	  Wyo.,	  26–28	  August,	  2010,	  pp.	  17–60.	  
Rajan,	  Raghuram	  G.,	  and	  Luigi	  Zingales.	  1998.	  Financial	  Dependence	  and	  Growth.	  American	  
    Economic	  Review	  88(3):	  559–86.	  
Schularick,	   Moritz,	   and	   Alan	   M.	   Taylor.	   2012.	   Credit	   Booms	   Gone	   Bust:	   Monetary	   Policy,	  
   Leverage	   Cycles,	   and	   Financial	   Crises,	   1870–2008.	   American	   Economic	   Review	   102(2):	  
   1029–61.	  
Schularick,	   Moritz,	   and	   Paul	   Wachtel.	   2012.	   The	   Making	   of	   America’s	   Imbalances.	   Free	  
   University	   of	   Berlin,	   School	   of	   Business	   &	   Economics,	   Discussion	   Paper	   Economics	  
   2012/16.	  
Shin,	  Hyun	  Song.	  2012.	  Global	  Banking	  Glut	  and	  Loan	  Risk	  Premium.	  IMF	  Economic	  Review	  
    60:	  155–192.	  
Taylor,	  Alan	  M.	  2012.	  The	  Great	  Leveraging.	  NBER	  Working	  Papers	  18290.	  
Turner,	   Adair.	   2011.	   Debt	   and	   deleveraging:	   Long	   term	   and	   short	   term	   challenges.	  
   Presidential	   Lecture:	   Centre	   for	   Financial	   Studies,	   Frankfurt,	   November	   21.	  
   http://www.fsa.gov.uk/library/communication/speeches/2011/1121_at.shtml	  



	                                                                 18	                        	  
