NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONCORDING EU TRADE AND PRODUCTION DATA OVER TIME
Ilke Van Beveren
Andrew B. Bernard
Hylke Vandenbussche
Working Paper 18604
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18604

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

We are grateful to Danny Delcambre, Karo Nuortila and Jussi Ala-Kihnia from Eurostat for providing
us with supplementary files and clarifications related to the concordances and to Catherine Fuss (NBB)
for her comments and insights. This paper was written while Ilke Van Beveren and Hylke Vandenbussche
were visiting the National Bank of Belgium. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bank of Belgium. All remaining errors are
our own. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bank of Belgium or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ilke Van Beveren, Andrew B. Bernard, and Hylke Vandenbussche. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time
Ilke Van Beveren, Andrew B. Bernard, and Hylke Vandenbussche
NBER Working Paper No. 18604
December 2012
JEL No. C81,F1,L2
ABSTRACT
This paper provides concordance procedures for product-level trade and production data in the EU
and examines the implications of changing product classifications on measured product adding and
dropping at Belgian firms. Using the algorithms developed by Pierce and Schott (2012a,b), the paper
develops concordance procedures that allow researchers to trace changes in coding systems over time
and to translate product-level production and trade data into a common classification that is consistent
both within a single year and over time. Separate procedures are created for the eight-digit Combined
Nomenclature system used to classify international trade activities at the product level within the European
Union as well as for the eight-digit Prodcom categories used to classify products in European domestic
production data. The paper further highlights important differences in coverage between the Prodcom
and Combined Nomenclature classifications which need to be taken into account when generating
combined domestic production and international trade data at the product level. The use of consistent
product codes over time results in less product adding and dropping at continuing firms in the Belgian
export and production data.

Ilke Van Beveren
KU Leuven, Lessius
Department of Business Studies
Korte Nieuwstraat 33
2000 Antwerp, Belgium
ilke.vanbeveren@kuleuven.be
Andrew B. Bernard
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
Andrew.B.Bernard@dartmouth.edu

Hylke Vandenbussche
Université Catholique de Louvain
Department of Economics
Place Montesquieu 3
1348 Louvain-la-neuve
Belgium
hylke.vandenbussche@econ.kuleuven.be

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

1

Introduction

In recent years there has been a rapid increase of research using product-level data to
study both international trade and domestic production. Increasingly this research considers changes over time within and across detailed product categories. However, product
classiﬁcation systems are constantly being modiﬁed by government authorities charged with
data collection and, as a result, underlying physical goods may be classiﬁed in diﬀerent categories in diﬀerent years and in some cases may not be part of the classiﬁcation system in
all years. Pierce and Schott (2012a,b) address these concerns for US data and provide a
methodology for creating consistent product codes across and between trade and production
data. In this paper, we modify their concordance methodology for use with EU production
and trade data at the product-level.1
A number of recent papers either employ longitudinal EU trade and production data or
link trade and production data at the product-level. Alvarez et al. (2006) follow prices of
individual products from distinct establishments over time to examine price stickiness in the
Euro area. Colantone and Crinò (2011) employ European data on production and imports
at the product level over time to examine the role of imported inputs on the introduction of
new products. Bernard et al. (2012) use domestic production and international trade data
for Belgium in 2005 to examine the relationship between produced and exported products
by manufacturing ﬁrms. Méjean and Schwellnus (2006) use a panel of international trade
data at the ﬁrm-product-country level to examine whether price convergence in the euro
area is driven by within-ﬁrm or ﬁrm composition eﬀects.
In this paper, we provide insights into the coverage and structure of the EU production
and trade classiﬁcations and the variation of those classiﬁcations over time. We highlight
issues related to the development of a common classiﬁcation that allows researchers to
compare product-level production and trade data. Data sets requiring these concordance
procedures might cover product-level trade data over time, product-level production data
over time, or linked trade and production data by product for individual years or over time.
Using the algorithms developed by Pierce and Schott (2012a,b) we develop general concordance programs that allow individual researchers to create internally-consistent product
1

Alternative concordance procedures can be used to keep track of changes in classiﬁcation systems over
time. For instance, Fuss and Zhu (2012) use the methodology developed by E. Dhyne (NBB) to concord the
domestic production data for Belgium over time by assuming constant production shares over time, i.e. if
a ﬁrm produces a particular product in t that has been split into more than one product category in t+1,
they split production into the diﬀerent categories in t by applying the production shares of t+1 (ﬁrm-level
or average across ﬁrms if the ﬁrm no longer produces any of the product categories in t+1). They convert
the data to the product classiﬁcation observed in the last year of the sample.

1

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

classiﬁcations that are appropriate to the countries and years in their data. All the programs
and product classiﬁcation ﬁles discussed in this paper are available for download.2
We examine the implications of using data without adjustments for variation in the
trade and production classiﬁcations for Belgian ﬁrm-level data from 1995-2003. Ignoring
changes in the product classiﬁcations results in a substantial overstatement of product
adding and dropping for continuing exporters. Employing consistent export product codes
causes the number of added and dropped export products to fall by more than 5 percent
while the value of exports in added and dropped products decreases by more than 50
percent. Using consistent product codes for production also substantially reduces product
adding and dropping, more than 10 percent for the number of products and more than a
third for the value of production.
Perhaps most important are the year-by-year changes. Years with major revisions to the
export or production classiﬁcation systems also appear to be years with disproportionately
large amounts of product adding and dropping. However, the large amount of product
churning is almost entirely a result of the classiﬁcation changes themselves. The use of
consistent codes shows that product adding and dropping is not abnormally high in such
years.
Section 2 describes the classiﬁcation systems used in the EU to record domestic production and international trade activities and provides insights into the diﬀerences in coverage
between the domestic production and trade classiﬁcations. Section 3 describes the generic
concordance algorithm, developed by Pierce and Schott (2012a) and then applies this algorithm to EU international trade and production data. Section 4 applies the concordances
developed to ﬁrm-product level production and trade data for Belgium and Section 5 concludes.

2

Classification systems for international trade and domestic
production in the European Union

In this section, we introduce the product classiﬁcation systems used in the European Union
for trade and production. While the two systems are designed to be similar there are important diﬀerences between the two at a point in time and across years. All the concordances
developed below rely on classiﬁcation lists and concordance tables provided by Eurostat.3
2

www.sites.google.com/site/ilkevanbeveren/Concordances.
Most classiﬁcations and concordance tables are available for download on the European Union’s classiﬁcation metadata server, i.e. the Ramon server (http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ramon/). Supplementary
ﬁles have been provided by Danny Delcambre, Karo Nuortila and Jussi Ala-Kihnia from Eurostat.
3

2

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

2.1

International trade activities: The Combined Nomenclature classification

EU Statistics on the international trade of goods register the value and quantity of goods
traded (i) between Member States of the EU (intra-EU trade) and (ii) by EU Member
States with non-EU countries (extra-EU trade). When goods are declared to customs in the
European Union, they have to be classiﬁed according to the 8-digit Combined Nomenclature
or CN8. The ﬁrst six digits of the CN8 codes correspond to the (international) Harmonized
System (HS6) nomenclature. The Harmonized System is established and maintained by
the World Customs Organization (WCO). This systematic list of commodities forms the
basis for international trade negotiations, and is applied by most trading nations. The
European CN8 classiﬁcation system is an (8-digit) extension of the HS6 classiﬁcation system,
analogous to the ten-digit extensions (HS10) employed by the US.
The CN8 classiﬁcation was developed to meet, at the same time, the requirements both
of the Common Customs Tariﬀs and of the external trade statistics of the European Union
(extra-EU trade). The CN8 classiﬁcation is also used to record intra-Community trade
statistics (intra-EU trade). In 2010 there were 9443 CN8 products but the number varies
across years, reaching a peak of 10606 CN8 products in 1997.
The structure of the CN8 classiﬁcation is illustrated in Table 1. The table lists the
number of CN8 products in each year since 1988, when it was implemented for the ﬁrst
time.4 The ﬁrst six digits of the CN8 products correspond to (international) 6-digit Harmonized System (HS6) products. The Harmonized System also undergoes periodical revisions,
between 1988 and 2010 it has been updated four times (in 1992, 1996, 2002 and 2007).
Revision years for the Harmonized System tend also to be years of substantial changes in
the Combined Nomenclature classiﬁcation.
It is important to note that the coverage of the CN8 classiﬁcation has not changed over
time, i.e. the types of goods that are covered by the CN8 classiﬁcation have not changed.
However, the CN8 classiﬁcation is updated on an annual basis so that a good may receive
a diﬀerent CN8 code from one year to the next. Such updates can be motivated by changes
that have been agreed at the international level, either at the World Customs Organization
with regard to the nomenclature at HS6 level, or within the framework of the WTO with
regard to conventional rates of duty. Other changes may be required to reﬂect the evolution
of commercial policy, technology or statistical requirements. Updates entail changes in the
4

The CN8 classiﬁcation was established by Council Regulation (EEC) 2658/87 and amended by Commission Regulation (EU) 1006/2011.

3

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

coding system and necessitate a concordance procedure to be able to compare product-level
EU trade data across years.
Although regulation on external trade statistics is EU-based, the trade data are maintained and collected by the National Statistical Institutes (NSIs)5 of the member states.6
Member states are required to report country-product-level aggregated data to Eurostat.
These country-product-level data come from a combination of mandatory ﬁrm surveys and
customs records. Whether ﬁrms have to report their trade transactions depends on the
value and destination/origin of trade ﬂows.
Speciﬁcally, for intra-EU trade ﬂows, ﬁrms have to report their product-country level
trade ﬂows on a monthly basis, using an electronic submission system. EU member states are
allowed to exempt ﬁrms from reporting intra-EU trade to ease the burden of reporting, but
member states have to ensure that at least 97 percent of total trade is covered. Therefore,
diﬀerent EU countries can impose diﬀerent cutoﬀs for reporting (usually deﬁned in terms
of current or past trade value). Cutoﬀs have to be deﬁned annually by the member states,
hence they can increase in size.
For trade ﬂows destined for or originating in countries outside of the European Union
(extra-EU trade), data are collected from customs data. Usually these data are collected on
a transaction basis, though a few companies are exempt from this. Exempted companies ﬁle
a monthly declaration with their NSI. Customs declarations are collected on a daily basis
and aggregated by the NSIs. For extra-EU trade, all transactions whose value is higher
than e1,000 or whose weight is greater than 1,000kg have to be recorded. Since 2006, electronic reporting procedures have been more widely implemented for customs transactions,
resulting in very small transactions also being reported.
It should also be noted that the group of destination and origin countries in the intra-EU
and extra-EU declaration has changed over time due to changes in EU membership. For the
time period considered here (1988-2010), there are three such changes. In 1995, Austria,
Finland and Sweden joined the EU. In May 2004, ten new countries joined: Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia. In
2007, Bulgaria and Romania joined.
5
Collection and dissemination of statistics in the European Union is carried out by the “European Statistical System” (ESS), consisting of the European Commission (Eurostat), the national statistical institutes and
other national authorities of the member states. See http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/
portal/pgp_ess/about_ess for the list of NSIs and other national institutes involved in data collection.
6
See http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/International_trade_
in_goods for more detailed information regarding the collection of data on international trade in goods,
relevant EU regulation and other metadata.

4

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

If a country joins the EU, exports to and imports from that destination are no longer
reported in the extra-EU trade statistics (there is no customs declaration within the EU)
and have to be declared in the intra-EU trade statistics. However, due to the cutoﬀs for
reporting intra-EU trade, it is possible that a particular ﬁrm’s exports to the country may
no longer be recorded after the accession. The 2004 enlargement poses particular diﬃculties
for researchers as it occurred in the middle of the calendar year (May 1, 2004). Trade with
these ten countries is covered by diﬀerent rules before and after May 1, 2004 and numerous
ﬁrms that are probably trading continuously appear to be exiting these ten markets on that
date.

2.2

Domestic production activities: The Prodcom classification

The name Prodcom refers to “statistics on the production of manufactured goods”. Specifically, Prodcom refers to both a database that records data on the physical production of
manufactured products within EU countries and to a product classiﬁcation used to classify
physical production of manufactured goods. The term comes from the French “PRODuction
COMmunautaire” (Community Production).
In the Prodcom survey, EU ﬁrms are required to report their industrial production and
services in products that are on the Prodcom list. Although Prodcom regulation is EUbased, ﬁrm-product level Prodcom data are obtained by the NSIs of the member states.7
The member states are required to report product-level aggregated data to Eurostat. Member states can exempt ﬁrms from reporting to Prodcom to ease the reporting burden, but
they have to ensure that 90 percent of national production in each NACE 4d sector covered
by Prodcom is included in the Prodcom survey.8 Cutoﬀs for reporting can therefore diﬀer
in diﬀerent EU countries and can increase over time. The Prodcom survey is mandatory
for all qualifying ﬁrms. All EU member states, EFTA (European Free Trade Association)
countries Norway and Iceland and some future EU accession countries are bound by the
Prodcom reporting requirements (Eurostat, 2006a).
In the Prodcom declaration, which has to be ﬁled to the appropriate NSI on a monthly
basis, ﬁrms are required to record their production activities at the 8-digit Prodcom (PC8)
product level. Among other information, the Prodcom declaration includes (ﬁrm-)product
7

See http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/PRODCOM_statistics for
more detailed information regarding the Prodcom regulation and other metadata. PRODCOM was established by Council Regulation (EEC) 3924/91, ammended by Regulation (EC) 1882/2003 and 1893/2003 of
the European Parliament and the Council.
8
The NACE classiﬁcation is the statistical classiﬁcation of economic activities in the European Union,
cfr. infra.

5

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

level data on the physical volume and value of production sold during the survey period.
Products are deﬁned as Prodcom products, i.e. they are part of the European Prodcom
list. As with the EU trade data, the PC8 codes are also subject to annual changes, i.e. the
same good covered by the Prodcom survey in neighboring years might be reported under
diﬀerent PC8 codes.
In addition there are three major additional complications with using the Prodcom
data.9 First, while coverage of the CN8 classiﬁcation is constant across years, coverage of
the Prodcom list has changed over time. The coverage changes mean that a good may be
covered by a Prodcom code in one year but not covered by any Prodcom code in another
year. It is not possible to keep track of production in these codes over time, so they need
to be dropped from the production data when concording over time.
The second major issue with the Prodcom classiﬁcation system is the use of B-list and
N-list optional codes. These codes were either introduced at the request of member states
(B-list) or implemented by Eurostat (N-list), to allow for a ﬁner level of disaggregation of
production than that aﬀorded by the PC8 codes. While some countries used the optional
codes, many countries continued to report production in the more aggregated (mandatory)
codes, rendering calculation of EU totals for these optional products impossible. As a
consequence, optional products were gradually phased out and were eliminated completely
by 2005. Table 2 shows the large number of optional codes in 1993 and the elimination of
these same codes by 2005.
The third issue that needs to be taken into account when concording Prodcom codes
over time is the existence of more aggregated versions of mandatory PC8 codes. These codes
are listed in the Prodcom manual (year-speciﬁc). There are four types of more aggregated
Prodcom codes: Q-list, Z-list, T-list, and E-list. Q-list codes refer to aggregated versions of
certain textiles listings that were supposed to be reported on a quarterly basis. They were
dropped in 2005. The last three types of codes are more aggregated versions of the PC8
codes implemented to match more closely the CN8 classiﬁcation. These issues need to be
adequately addressed when concording domestic production data, see Section 3.3.
As can be seen in Table 2, the ﬁrst six digits of the eight-digit Prodcom codes correspond
to CPA6 products, or 6-digit products classiﬁed according to the Classiﬁcation of Products
by Activity. While PC8 codes are updated annually (with the exception of 1997, when no
changes were implemented in the PC8 classiﬁcation), CPA6 codes have been updated in
9

These issues will all be taken into account when developing a consistent concordance over time. Concordance ﬁles will allow researchers to identify the diﬀerent complications and to adequately address them
when concording data.

6

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

1996, 2002 and 2008. Not all CPA6 codes are covered by the PC list, so the total number of
CPA6 products is not directly comparable to the number of PC8 products. The ﬁrst four
digits of the PC8 code correspond to the NACE4 classiﬁcation. The NACE4 classiﬁcation
was revised in 2002 and 2008. It should be noted that the NACE4 classiﬁcation is not
a classiﬁcation of products, but rather a classiﬁcation of economic activities that create
products. The NACE4 classiﬁcation is often used to classify European ﬁrms into sectors
based on their (main) economic activities. Similar to the CPA6 products, some NACE4
activities are not covered by the Prodcom list.
Eurostat developed the Prodcom list with two principal goals in mind: (i) measure
production in the EU member states on a comparable basis and (ii) enable a comparison
between production and foreign trade statistics (Eurostat, 2006a). In light of the second aim,
the Prodcom list has a close relationship with the Combined Nomenclature classiﬁcation
which is used to record foreign trade statistics.
The Prodcom list (i.e. the list of PC8 products for which ﬁrms are required to report
their domestic production activities) is revised on a yearly basis (cfr. Table 2). Changes
include changes in the classiﬁcation system (two codes in 1998 are replaced by one new
code in 1999 for instance) and changes in coverage of the Prodcom list. The choice of
products included in the list generally depends on their economic importance; if a product
is considered as important either in value or volume it is included as a distinct item; if it
is (or becomes) less important it may be aggregated with other products. In general, the
Prodcom list covers production activities in Mining, Quarrying and Manufacturing: sections
C, D and E of the NACE4 (Rev. 1.1) classiﬁcation.
Products not included in the Prodcom list are products that, although they belong to
sections C, D or E of NACE, are not considered as manufactured products (for instance
waste, some agricultural products where the processing is not considered as manufacturing
etc.). The Prodcom list also does not cover Fuel products. The coverage of the Prodcom
list (and changes in coverage over time) has important implications for the translation of
European trade and domestic production data into a common classiﬁcation. We will come
back to these issues below.

2.3

Combining data on international trade and domestic production

When concording international trade and domestic production data at the (ﬁrm-)product
level, it is necessary to translate the CN8 product codes (used for international trade) and
PC8 product codes (used for domestic production) into a common classiﬁcation. Since

7

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

there are more CN8 codes than PC8 codes (i.e. the CN8 classiﬁcation is less aggregated),
the most straightforward correspondence maps the CN8 products into PC8 products.10
However, Prodcom codes are not used internationally (outside of Europe) which renders
international comparisons diﬃcult. Moreover, reported trade ﬂows and tariﬀs, which are
often used in international trade research, are often available only for HS6 product codes.
The current paper therefore focuses on the translation of CN8 and PC8 products into
six-digit Harmonized System (HS6) products. Since the ﬁrst six digits of the CN8 codes
correspond to the HS6 codes, EU concordance ﬁles between PC8 and CN8 can be adapted
for this purpose.
As noted above, Eurostat developed the Prodcom list with the speciﬁc goal to enable
comparison between production and foreign trade statistics. However, there are some important diﬀerences in coverage between the two classiﬁcations that need to be taken into
account. Figure 1 illustrates the concordance of the PC8 and CN8 classiﬁcations into a
common classiﬁcation system (HS6+) for a single year.11
A ﬁrst issue that needs to be addressed when concording trade and production data is
that not all CN8 products are covered by the Prodcom list. These CN8 codes therefore do
not feature in the concordance ﬁles provided by Eurostat and need to be excluded from the
international trade data. Since the Prodcom list changes every year, the list of CN8 codes
that do not feature in the Prodcom list is also year-speciﬁc. CN8 codes not covered by
the PC8 classiﬁcation in a particular year can be identiﬁed by comparing the list of CN8
codes present in Eurostat’s concordance ﬁles between CN8 and PC8 with the complete list
of CN8 codes for that year. All codes present in the CN8 classiﬁcation but not present in
the concordance from CN8 to PC8 are CN8 codes that are not covered by the Prodcom
list. These CN8 codes necessarily have to be excluded from the international trade data
when merging domestic production and trade data at the product level. The remaining
CN8 codes are all covered by the Prodcom List in that particular year and can hence be
translated into the HS6+ classiﬁcation, as can be seen in Figure 1.
Second, not all PC8 products are covered by the CN8 classiﬁcation. This is the case
for certain industrial services and for activities related to installation, maintenance, repair
or processing activities. PC8 codes not covered by the CN8 classiﬁcation in a particular
year can be identiﬁed by comparing the PC8 classiﬁcation in a particular year with the
10
The concordance between CN8 and PC8 codes is available at www.sites.google.com/site/
ilkevanbeveren/Concordances
11
We use the ”+” to refer to a classiﬁcation system where some of the original (HS6) categories have been
combined.

8

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

list of PC8 codes present in Eurostat’s concordance ﬁles between CN8 and PC8. Prodcom
codes that feature on the Prodcom list, but not in the concordance between CN8 and
PC8 are either PC8 codes not covered by the CN8 classiﬁcation (industrial services, waste
products, ...), or the disaggregated versions of codes on the Z-, T-, Q- or E-list (aggregated
PC8 products). These aggregated PC8 codes feature as disaggregated PC8 products in the
Prodcom list, but they appear as aggregated (Z-, Q-, T- or E-list) codes in the concordance
ﬁles between CN8 and PC8.12 Moreover, prior to 2005, the PC8 classiﬁcation will feature
optional codes (B- and N-list, cfr. Section 2.2).13 Like the disaggregated products, which
have to be recoded into their aggregate counterparts, the optional codes need to be recoded
into their mandatory counterparts prior to concording the data. After dropping industrial
services and recoding optional and disaggregated PC8 products into their mandatory and
aggregate counterparts, the PC8 classiﬁcation can be concorded into the HS6 classiﬁcation,
as shown in Figure 1. We will come back to these issues in Section 3.4.
Finally, when combining data on international trade and domestic production over time,
it is important to take into account changes in the coverage of the Prodcom list, diﬀerences
in coverage between the PC8 and CN8 classiﬁcation (industrial services, CN8 products not
covered by Prodcom) and changes in both classiﬁcation systems (CN8 and PC8) over time.

3

Concording data

3.1

Generic concordance procedure and terminology

The terminology used in this section largely follows the terminology of Pierce and Schott
(2012a, henceforth PS). Speciﬁcally, to develop consistent classiﬁcations over time, we will
refer to “eﬀyr” as the year in which a particular change in a classiﬁcation over time becomes
eﬀective. “Obsolete” refers to codes that are no longer used starting in the eﬀective year
(eﬀyr) and “new” refers to codes that will be used starting in the eﬀective year. When
we refer to concordances between two classiﬁcations (e.g. PC8 to HS6), we do not refer to
obsolete and new codes, but rather to source and destination codes.
Concordance ﬁles (between two years, or between two classiﬁcations) are always organized in a similar way. All codes that are subject to a change over time or that need to
12
For Q-, T-, and E-aggregates, both the aggregate and disaggregate codes feature in the concordance ﬁles
between PC8 and CN8, hence they do not have to be recoded. Z-codes only feature in their more aggregated
versions in the concordance ﬁle however.
13
Since optional codes were not consistently used in all countries, we provide PC8 classiﬁcation ﬁles that
only list mandatory and disaggregated PC8 codes. Optional codes can be recoded in the data using the
online ﬁles provided prior to concording.

9

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

be translated into another classiﬁcation are organized in “mappings”. Mappings can be
“simple” (one obsolete code is replaced by one new code, or one source code translates into
one destination code) or “complex” (one or more obsolete codes are replaced by one or more
new codes, or one or more source codes translate into one or more destination codes). We
distinguish between three types of concordance procedures (though they are related):
(i) Developing a consistent concordance between two years (e.g. between CN8 in 1995
and 1996) or between two classiﬁcations in a single year (e.g. between PC8 and HS6
in 2005);
(ii) Developing a consistent concordance over time, e.g. CN8 classiﬁcation for 1988 through
2010, this relies on the procedure in (i) plus an added procedure for the chains over
time;
(iii) Developing a consistent concordance between two classiﬁcations over time, e.g. PC8
and HS6 for 1995 through 2003. This relies on the procedures in (i) and (ii). When
concording between two classiﬁcations, additional issues need to be taken into account
related to coverage of both classiﬁcations to be discussed below when we deal with the
separate concordances.
To develop a consistent concordance (between two years, or between two classiﬁcations),
a unique identiﬁer needs to be assigned to all mappings present in a concordance ﬁle.
Speciﬁcally, if two obsolete codes in t-1 map into one new code in t, the two obsolete
codes and the new code need to be “grouped” in a synthetic code (indicated by “setyr” in
the terminology of PS). Similarly, if one source code maps into two destination codes in a
particular year, the source code and the two destination codes will be assigned a unique
“setyr”. Assigning this unique identiﬁer to complex mappings can be done by consecutively
sorting the data on source (obsolete) and destination (new) codes. By consecutively sorting
the data, it is possible to identify additional source (obsolete) and destination (new) codes
that need to be grouped in the synthetic codes. In the Stata code provided, the procedure is
executed using a sorting loop developed by PS. This is step 1 and 2 of the PS methodology.
The ﬁnal concordance ﬁle contains all source (obsolete) and destination (new) codes, as well
as the synthetic code (setyr) that keeps track of codes that need to be grouped together.
To develop a consistent concordance over time (e.g. CN8 between 1988 and 2010), it is
necessary to search for chains of code changes over time (PS terminology). Suppose that
obsolete codes a and b in t-1 map into new code c in t. Code c in turn maps into codes d, e
10

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

and f in t+3. Codes a, b, c, d, e and f then need to be grouped in all years. In other words,
consecutive changes in codes (new codes in some year become obsolete in a later year) need
to be chained together in “family trees”.
Depending on the beginning and end year of the concordance, the family trees can be
diﬀerent.14 Once a start and end year have been chosen, families can be identiﬁed. The Stata
code identiﬁes families by searching for updates of new codes in later years (“news” loop).
Speciﬁcally, for each new code in a particular year, the algorithm searches for matching
(identical) obsolete codes in later years. If a new code has become obsolete in later years,
the two families of which the code is part are chained together. These family trees can then
be merged back into the ﬁle with all obsolete and new mappings.15 The ﬁnal concordance
contains new and obsolete codes in all years, as well as the synthetic code (setyr) that keeps
track of codes that need to be grouped together.
To develop a consistent concordance between two classiﬁcations over time (e.g. PC8
to HS6 between 1995 and 2003), it is necessary to keep track of changes over time in
both the source and destination classiﬁcation and to take the mappings between the two
classiﬁcations into account. This can be done by merging the concordance ﬁles developed in
(i) and (ii). Speciﬁcally, if the source classiﬁcation is PC8 and the destination classiﬁcation
is HS6 for the period 1995-2003, step (i) will result in a list of PC8 codes in each year
and their corresponding synthetic code (setyr-pc8) and in a list of HS6 codes in each year
and their corresponding synthetic code (setyr-hs6).16 Step (ii) will result in a list of PC8
14

Essentially, the concordance procedure will result in a diﬀerent number of synthetic codes depending
on the time period chosen. Since synthetic codes group original products that were recorded either more
(shrinking family) or less (growing family) detailed in previous years, the number of synthetic codes and
hence the level of detail of the ﬁnal (synthetic) product classiﬁcation will be reduced as the time period
considered increases. For instance, expressed as a share of the average number of original yearly CN8
products, the average number of CN8+ products observed in the Belgian trade data drops from above 90%
when a time period of ﬁve years is considered to below 75% when a time period of 18 years is considered.
Similarly, for the Prodcom classiﬁcation, the average yearly share of PC8+ products observed in the Belgian
data, compared to the original number of yearly PC8 codes drops from above 95% for a period of ﬁve years
to below 90% for a period of 16 years. Intuitively, the ﬁnal (synthetic) product classiﬁcation becomes more
aggregated as the time period considered increases. The interested reader is referred to the online appendix
of this paper, which documents a sensitivity analysis for diﬀerent time periods. Alternative concordance
procedures, such as the one employed by Fuss and Zhu (2012), who concord Belgian production data to the
product classiﬁcation observed in the ﬁnal year by assuming identical production shares over time, have the
advantage that they would result in an identical number of (potential) products observed in the data (i.e.
the number of PC8 products in the classiﬁcation in the ﬁnal year of the concordance), regardless of the time
period chosen. However, the assumption of identical production shares is likely to become less realistic as
time increases, leading to other interpretation and measurement issues.
15
The news loop only retains codes that have undergone multiple changes over the time period considered,
hence the family trees have to be combined with the original mappings to obtain a ﬁnal unique identiﬁer
that keeps track of changes between two years and family trees over time.
16
A correspondence for HS6 codes over time can easily be derived from the CN8 classiﬁcation and cor-

11

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

and HS6 codes, as well as the synthetic code that keeps track of the complex mappings
between the two classiﬁcations in 2003. By merging the ﬁles resulting from steps (i) and
(ii) for the ﬁnal year of the concordance (2003 in this case), a list of PC8 and HS6 codes is
obtained with a corresponding synthetic code over time (setyr-pc8 and setyr-hs6), as well as
a synthetic code (HS6+) that keeps track of the mappings between the two classiﬁcations.
This ﬁle can be used to assign a unique (ﬁnal) identiﬁer to all codes that need to be grouped
due to (i) a change of PC8 codes over time, (ii) a change of HS6 codes over time and (iii)
a complex mapping between PC8 and HS6 in the ﬁnal year of the concordance that takes
diﬀerences in coverage in the PC8 and CN8 classiﬁcation in a single year as well as over
time into account.
In what follows, we will apply these concordance procedures to three speciﬁc situations. Section 3.2 will focus on concording international trade data over time, i.e. concording the CN8 classiﬁcation into CN8+, while section 3.3 discusses the concordance of
production data over time, i.e. concording the PC8 classiﬁcation into PC8+. Section 3.4
focuses on the translation of trade (CN8) and production (PC8) data into a common
classiﬁcation (HS6+) for a single year. All concordance ﬁles and Stata implementation
ﬁles can be downloaded from https://www.sites.google.com/site/ilkevanbeveren/
Concordances. Concordances for some other applications, such as translating CN8 into
PC8 for a single year and translating HS6 products over time, are also available online.

3.2

Combined Nomenclature (CN8) over time

As noted above, CN8 codes are subject to yearly revisions. Table 3 lists the yearly changes
in the CN8 classiﬁcation between 1988 and 2010.17 Changes in CN8 codes between t-1
and t can be simple (one obsolete CN8 code translates in a new CN8 code the next year)
or complex (involving more than one obsolete and/or new code). Complex mappings can
be one-many (one obsolete CN8 code maps into more than one new CN8 code), many-one
(more than one obsolete CN8 code maps into one new CN8 code) or many-many (multiple
obsolete codes translate into multiple new CN8 codes). If the mapping is many-one, the
family of codes is shrinking. If the mapping is one-many, the family is growing.
The six-digit Harmonized System codes are also subject to changes over time, speciﬁcally
in 1992, 1996, 2002 and 2007. While there are changes in the CN8 classiﬁcation in every
respondence ﬁles, since the ﬁrst 6 digits of the CN8 classiﬁcation correspond to the HS6 classiﬁcation.
Concordance ﬁles are available at https://www.sites.google.com/site/ilkevanbeveren/Concordances.
17
The CN8 classiﬁcation was ﬁrst implemented in 1988. The ﬁrst year in which changes to the classiﬁcation
became eﬀective (eﬀyr) is therefore 1989.

12

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

pair of years, the largest numbers of revisions tend to occur in years when the HS6 codes
are revised, in particular 1996, 2002 and 2007.
Depending on the start and end year chosen for the concordance, the concordance procedure will result in diﬀerent synthetic groups (CN8+ codes). The Stata code provided
allows for start and end years between 1988 and 2010. The ﬁnal concordance ﬁle generated by the procedure provides a year-speciﬁc list of all existing CN8 products and their
corresponding CN8+ code.18 This ﬁle can be merged with international trade data at the
year-CN8 product level to translate CN8 products into the consistent CN8+ classiﬁcation.
After concording, the data need to be aggregated to the CN8+ level, yielding comparable
product-level trade data for the time period chosen. Section 4.1 illustrates the importance of
concording the data in order to avoid spurious entry and exit dynamics at the product-level.

3.3

Prodcom (PC8) over time

Similar to the CN8 classiﬁcation, the Prodcom list (PC8 classiﬁcation) is also subject to
yearly revisions. Table 4 lists the yearly changes in the PC8 classiﬁcation between 1993
and 2010.19 Like the CN8 codes, changes in PC8 codes between t-1 and t can be simple
(one obsolete PC8 code translates in a new PC8 code the next year) or complex (involving
more than one obsolete and/or new code). However, unlike the CN8 classiﬁcation, the PC8
classiﬁcation has been subject to changes in coverage over time. This is illustrated in the
last two columns of Table 4, where the number of codes that enter or exit the Prodcom list
are listed. If a PC8 product is listed on the Prodcom list in some years, but not in others,
it needs to be excluded from the data and concordance procedure in all years to avoid
spurious dynamics. Speciﬁcally, if products that “enter” the list in a particular year are
included in the concorded data, this would (erroneously) be interpreted as product entry,
while products that “exit” the list would be interpreted as product exit. The concordance
procedure allows for identiﬁcation of these entry/exit codes as well as all the products that
map into these codes (in earlier or later years), retaining only PC8 products that are on
the PC list in every year.
Moreover, when concording Prodcom codes over time, it is important to take the existence of optional (B-list, N-list) and aggregated (Q-, T-, E-, Z-list) PC8 codes into account.
Yearly concordance ﬁles provided by Eurostat typically include (some) optional and aggre18

Concordance ﬁles for diﬀerent time periods are also available in comma-separated format for non-Stata
users.
19
The Prodcom list was ﬁrst implemented in 1993. The ﬁrst year in which changes became eﬀective is
therefore 1994.

13

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

gated codes. For instance, between 2004 and 2005, all existing optional codes are listed as
“exit” codes (no new code is provided, since the optional codes are no longer used after
2005) even though in the majority of cases the corresponding mandatory code still exists
in 2005. Similarly, it can occur that a particular Z-heading (more aggregated PC8 code)
disappears from the list, while the underlying (more disaggregated) PC8 product(s) is (are)
still covered by the PC8 list.20 Identifying these cases requires manual veriﬁcation of the
changes in PC8 codes over time (using the Prodcom structure ﬁles in adjacent years).21 We
provide concordance ﬁles for the period 1993-2010 that have been adjusted to adequately
deal with these issues (i.e. optional codes are replaced with mandatory codes and are only
considered as changes in coverage if the mandatory code drops from the Prodcom list) and
corrections are implemented for the aggregate codes if necessary. We further provide input ﬁles that allow for identiﬁcation of optional codes in the data (diﬀerent EU countries
have implemented diﬀerent sets of optional codes) and to reclassify them according to their
mandatory PC8 product code if they feature in the data.
Changes in the PC8 classiﬁcation vary over time, with no or very few changes in some
years (1997, 1998, 2006). Between 2007 and 2008, the Prodcom list, CPA classiﬁcation and
NACE classiﬁcation were completely revised, resulting in 4396 obsolete PC8 codes in 2008
and 3864 new codes. However, many of these changes were simple changes (3258).
Similar to the CN8 concordance, the PC8 concordance will result in diﬀerent groups
of PC8 products depending on the start and end year chosen. The Stata code provided
allows for start and end years between 1993 and 2010. Diﬀerent from the CN8 classiﬁcation
and concordance, coverage of the PC8+ classiﬁcation will drop somewhat as more years
are included in the concordance, due to the changes in coverage of the PC8 classiﬁcation.22
The ﬁnal PC8 concordance ﬁle provides a year-speciﬁc list of all existing PC8 products,
their corresponding PC8+ code and a dummy indicating whether the PC8 product should
be dropped for consistency over time.23 This ﬁle can be merged with production data at
the year-PC8 level to translate PC8 products into the consistent PC8+ classiﬁcation. After
concording and dropping all PC8 codes marked for exit, the data need to be aggregated
to the PC8+ level, yielding comparable product-level production data for the time period
20
This can occur for instance if the underlying PC8 products have been replaced by a “regular” more
aggregated PC8 product.
21
Prodcom structure ﬁles provide detailed lists of aggregated and optional codes in each year. Depending
on the year, these ﬁles can be available in PDF, Excel or Access format.
22
Cfr. Table 8 illustrates that the changes in coverage only account for a minor share of total sold
production value in the Belgian data for the time period 1995-2003.
23
Concordance ﬁles for diﬀerent time periods are also available in comma-separated format for non-Stata
users.

14

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

chosen. Section 4.2 illustrates the importance of concording the data in order to avoid
spurious entry and exit dynamics at the product-level.

3.4

Concording CN8 and PC8 in a single year to HS6

Concording the trade and production data for a single year introduces several additional
complications, due to diﬀerences in coverage between the PC8 and CN8 classiﬁcations.
Speciﬁcally, (i) some PC8 codes are not covered by CN8 (industrial services24 , waste, cfr.
supra), (ii) some PC8 codes are recorded as “aggregated” codes in the PC8-CN8 concordance, because there would otherwise be a large number of codes mapping into a single CN8
code.25 , (iii) not all CN8 codes feature in the Prodcom list, these include Fuel products for
instance.
The concordance procedure starts out from the yearly CN8-PC8 concordance ﬁles provided by Eurostat. Since the ﬁrst 6 digits of the CN8 classiﬁcation are Harmonized System
products (HS6), this concordance ﬁle can easily be modiﬁed to translate both the CN8 and
PC8 classiﬁcation into the HS6+ classiﬁcation. Moreover, the PC8-CN8 concordance ﬁles
allow for easy identiﬁcation of diﬀerences in coverage between the two classiﬁcations.
Speciﬁcally, for any particular year, it is necessary to merge the (mandatory) PC8
codes26 that feature in the Prodcom list with the PC8 codes that feature in the PC8CN8 concordance. Codes that feature in the concordance but not in the Prodcom list are
aggregated codes (Z-, T-, Q- and E-list). Codes that feature on the PC list, but not in the
concordance ﬁles between CN8 and PC8 are the disaggregated equivalents of the aggregatelist codes or industrial services. After recoding the disaggregated PC8 products into their
corresponding aggregates27 and dropping the industrial services from the PC8 classiﬁcation,
the PC8 classiﬁcation can be concorded to HS6.
Table 5 lists the number of PC8 products in 2005 as well as the corresponding number of
HS6 and HS6+ products. If a mapping between the PC8 and HS6 classiﬁcation is one-one
24

Examples of industrial services include: dyeing, ﬁnishing and printing of textiles, electronic books,
coating of metals and book binding services.
25
These codes can be identiﬁed (manually) in the Prodcom manual. These are the so-called Z-, T-, Qand E-aggregates. The Z-, T-, Q- and E-codes are the grouped PC8 codes, the underlying PC8 codes that
map into these codes are the codes that are on the PC list (cfr. supra). While the Prodcom structure
ﬁles are available in excel or access format in some years (in other years only PDF ﬁles are available), this
information is not structured in an easily accessible way. Files for PC8-CN8 and PC8-HS6 are available for
2003 and 2005 at https://www.sites.google.com/site/ilkevanbeveren/Concordances. Aggregate codes
are grouped in the structure ﬁles under headings 99.t, 99.z, 99.q and 99.e.
26
If optional codes feature in the data, they need to be recoded prior to concording the data.
27
Technically, recoding is only required for Z-list aggregates, as for the other aggregates both the aggregate
and disaggregate codes feature in the yearly concordance ﬁles between PC8 and CN8.

15

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

(simple) or many-one (complex), the PC8 product(s) translate(s) into a single HS6 product.
This is the case for the majority of PC8 products (3351 out of 4220), these products map
into 2563 HS6 products. The remaining PC8 products map into more than one HS6 code,
resulting in 606 HS6+ groupings. The table also illustrates the diﬀerences in coverage
between the two classiﬁcation. Out of a total of 5224 existing HS6 codes in 2005 (cfr. Table
1), 4784 HS6 products are covered by the Prodcom list. Similarly, out of 4489 mandatory
PC8 on the Prodcom list for 2005, 4242 are covered by the CN8 classiﬁcation and some
of these 4242 codes are recorded in aggregate (Z-)codes, resulting in 4220 PC8 categories
covered by the CN8 classiﬁcation.
Since the ﬁrst six digits of the CN8 products are identical to the Harmonized System
(HS6) products, concording international trade data in a single year to HS6 requires a
straightforward aggregation to the HS6+ level (where the HS6+ groupings are identical to
the groups used to concord the production data), after dropping all CN8 products that are
not covered by the PC8 classiﬁcation in that particular year. To identify these CN8 products, the list of CN8 products for a particular year has to be merged with the concordance
between CN8 and PC8 for that year to obtain a list of CN8 products that are not covered
by the PC8 classiﬁcation.
The concordance procedure and Stata code allows researchers to concord production
(PC8) and trade (CN8) data into a common HS6+ classiﬁcation that takes diﬀerences in
coverage between the two classiﬁcation systems adequately into account. The procedure
yields two ﬁnal concordance ﬁles, one for the translation of domestic production data into
the HS6+ classiﬁcation and a second ﬁle to concord CN8 products into the HS6+ classiﬁcation. In addition, auxiliary ﬁles are provided that allow for the identiﬁcation (and recoding
if applicable) of optional and disaggregated PC8 codes as well as industrial services in the
domestic production data. Once industrial services are dropped from the data and disaggregated/optional codes have been recoded, the domestic production data can then be
translated into the HS6+ classiﬁcation (by merging the data with the concordance using
the PC8 product code).
The concordance ﬁle for the international trade data includes a dummy “notpc”, which
identiﬁes CN8 products that are not covered by the Prodcom List. After merging this
concordance ﬁle with the data, all CN8 products marked by this dummy should be dropped
from the data. Note that this implies that some HS6 products are covered only partially
by the merged production and trade data, if one or more CN8 codes that map into the HS6
code are not covered by the Prodcom list. Both the domestic production and international

16

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

trade data then need to be aggregated to the HS6+ level, after which both databases can
be merged at the HS6+ level.

4

Applying concordances to Belgian trade and production
data

To assess the importance of appropriate handling of product classiﬁcation changes over
time, we consider ﬁrm-level trade and production data from Belgium from 1995-2003.28
Separately for export and production data, we focus on product adding and dropping by
continuing ﬁrms and examine the fraction of production and exports at these ﬁrms that is
accounted by new and dropped products. We show that the overall value of product adding
and dropping is overstated in the unconcorded data and that years of particularly high
product adding and dropping are largely artifacts of changes in the product classiﬁcation
systems.29

4.1

Exports at continuing firms

Table 6 documents characteristics of aggregate Belgian exports and imports over the period
as well as the number of products in both the unconcorded CN8 classiﬁcation and in the
concorded CN8+ codes.30 Both exports and imports increase substantially over time while
28
The choice of this interval avoids issues having to do with EU accession and includes only one relatively
small change in the cutoﬀ for recording intra-EU trade.
29
It should be noted that the amount of product adding and dropping in the concorded data is sensitive
to the time period chosen. Since the concorded (synthetic) product classiﬁcation becomes more aggregated
(less detailed, lower number of products compared to the original classiﬁcation system, cfr. Section 3), the
amount of product adding and dropping (and value associated with it) is likely to become smaller in any
given year as the time period considered for the concordance increases. We can illustrate this, speciﬁcally
for the Belgian trade data, by comparing the amount of adding and dropping (products and value) for
continuing ﬁrms in the concorded data for the year 1995, using the concordance for the years 1993-2010
(18 years) and alternatively using the concordance for the years 1995-1999 (only ﬁve years). Applying the
concordance for the longer period (93-10) results in a decrease in the amount of product adding (dropping) of
24% (24%) compared to the unconcorded data, while the concordance for the shorter period (95-99) results
in a decrease in the amount of product adding (dropping) of only 14% (14%) compared to the unconcorded
data. In terms of value associated with product adding (dropping), the concordance for 93-10 is associated
with a drop of 80% (81%) in export value, while the concordance for 95-99 results in a drop of 71% (78%)
of export value in added (dropped) products, each time compared to the dynamics in the unconcorded data
for 1995. Intuitively, as the number of CN8+ products relative to the number of original CN8 products
goes down (i.e. as longer time periods are being considered in the concordance procedure), the dynamics in
the sample due to product adding and dropping by continuing ﬁrms will be reduced. A similar exercise can
be performed for the domestic production data, although in this case matters are complicated by the fact
the coverage of the PC8 classiﬁcation changes over time, resulting in diﬀerent dynamics in the unconcorded
data for a speciﬁc year, depending on the time period chosen. The interested reader is referred to the online
appendix of this paper, which documents a sensitivity analysis for diﬀerent time periods.
30
Whether Belgian ﬁrms have to report their intra-EU trade transactions depends on the value of exports
and imports reported in the VAT returns in the previous year. Between 1995 and 1997, all ﬁrms that imported

17

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

in contrast there are no strong trends over time in the number of product codes, either
unconcorded or concorded. However the value of exports and imports aﬀected by coding
changes more than doubles. The share of export value in synthetic codes increases from
29.3 percent of total exports in 1995 to 37.0 percent in 2003 while the shares for imports
are 27.2 and 32.7 respectively.
In Table 7 we examine the eﬀect of product coding changes on the reported importance
of product adding and dropping in Belgian exports. Bernard et al. (2009) emphasize the
importance of within-ﬁrm margins of adjustment (both product and country) at continuing
exporters in explaining aggregate annual changes in exports and imports for the US. In
Belgium, as for other countries, the vast majority of exports are by continuing exporters.
More than 98 percent of exports in any given year are handled by ﬁrms that will remain
exporters in the following year; the net eﬀect of ﬁrms entering and exiting export markets
is relatively small.
Table 7 reports the number and value of added and dropped products at these continuing exporters for both concorded and unconcorded product codes. A large fraction of
products, more than a third, are added and dropped in every year. Not surprisingly the
value of exports in these added and dropped products is much smaller as average exports of
new and dropped products are much smaller than for continued products. Looking at the
unconcorded data, we ﬁnd that on average 40.2 percent of products are new in any given
year accounting for 7.7 percent of export value. For dropped products the corresponding
numbers are 38.8 and 6.7 percent. However there is substantial variation across years with
the share of value in both adding and dropping being much larger in 1995-1996 and 20012002 than in other pairs of years. Looking back to Table 3 we see that 1996 and 2002 were
years of unusually large changes in the CN8 product classiﬁcation system.
Columns 7-10 of Table 7 evaluate the importance of product adding and product dropping using the concorded data. Two important diﬀerences between the unconcorded and
concorded results stand out. First, the number and value of added or dropped products
are smaller in the concorded data, both in levels and as a percentage of the totals at the
continuing exporters. Changes in the export product mix are still substantial, more than a
third of the continuing exporters’ product mix is churned every year. However, using consistent product deﬁnitions over time, we ﬁnd that share of export value in added (dropped)
(exported) more than e104,115 were required to report their import (export) transactions. Between 1998
and 2003, all ﬁrms exporting (importing) more than e250,000 were required to report their export (import)
transactions. We use data for the population of exporters. All transactions with transfer of ownership are
included, with the exception of trade recorded in residual product categories speciﬁc to Belgium (accounting
for 4.7 percent of total export value and 1.4 percent of total import value).

18

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

products is less than half as large, only 3.5 (2.8) percent.
Second, the year-to-year variation is much lower in the concorded data. Years with
large number of coding changes no longer stand out as having unusually large values of
exports in added and dropped products. Both the number of churned products and their
associated export value is relatively stable across years. These results conﬁrm that correctly
classifying products over time can result in substantial diﬀerences in the magnitudes of
export activity and help reduce the possibility of spurious annual ﬂuctuations in product
adding and dropping.

4.2

Production at continuing firms

We now turn to the analysis of product adding and dropping in Belgian ﬁrm-level production data. Using US manufacturing census data, Bernard et al. (2010) report important
contributions of new and dropped products in total output for continuing ﬁrms over ﬁveyear intervals. Table 8 documents characteristics of produced sales at continuing ﬁrms in
the Belgian Prodcom survey from 1995-2003 as well as the number of products in both
the unconcorded PC8 classiﬁcation and in the concorded PC8+ codes.31 Produced sales
increase substantially over time (30.0 percent) while in contrast there is a modest decline
over time in the number of product codes, either unconcorded or concorded.
Using the EU production data over time involves an additional complication. The
coverage of products changes over time, i.e. the underlying production activity is not
necessarily present in all years. Columns 7-10 examine the importance of the changes in
coverage from 1995-2003. The magnitudes are relatively modest, annually 0.5 percent of
produced sales are in codes that are aﬀected by changing coverage. However, coding changes
that are distinct from coverage changes are more important, aﬀecting more than 10 percent
of product and 9 percent of produced sales on average. Looking across years we ﬁnd that
2003 is a substantial outlier in terms of the value of production in synthetic codes. As with
the export data, a quick look at the production codes changes in Table 4 shows that 2003
was a year of unusually large changes to the product classiﬁcation system.
31

Whether or not Belgian ﬁrms have to ﬁle a Prodcom declaration is based on their employment levels
as tabulated from the ﬁrm-level Social Security records of the previous years, their primary activity (in or
outside manufacturing) and their turnover in the previous year. In general, manufacturing ﬁrms with more
than ten employees and non-manufacturing ﬁrms (with some manufacturing activity) employing more than
20 people had to ﬁle a monthly Prodcom declaration in Belgium between 1995 and 2003. The Prodcom
survey records the value of production sold, which does not necessarily correspond with the actual value
produced in a particular period. All transactions with positive sold production value are included, with the
exception of sold production value recorded in unknown PC8 products (these are most likely coding errors,
they account for 0.06% of total value of production sold in the population).

19

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

We examine the eﬀect of product coding changes on the reported importance of product adding and dropping in Belgian manufacturing ﬁrms in Table 9. Product churning is
less extensive in the production data for continuing ﬁrms relative to the trade data. The
unconcorded data show that on average 8.8 percent of products are new and 9.6 percent
of products are dropped across years. Not surprisingly, as in the export data, the value
of these added and dropped products is much smaller, 2.9 and 2.2 percent respectively.
As with the export data, there is substantial variation across years with both adding and
dropping being more important in years with major changes in the product classiﬁcations,
see Table 4.
Looking at the concorded data, we ﬁnd a similar story to the export ﬁndings. Both the
number and values of added and dropped products is reduced and the year-to-year variation
is much lower in the concorded data. Years with large number of coding changes no longer
stand out as having a large value of output in added and dropped products.

5

Conclusion

This paper develops a set of procedures to produce consistent product-level classiﬁcation
codes (either over time and/or between trade and production data) for the EU. Based on
Pierce and Schott (2012a,b), we develop a set of concordance procedures, we develop a
set of Stata do-ﬁles to run these procedures and we make the associated ﬁles and ﬁnal
concordances available to researchers who wish to use and compare EU product-level data
over time and across classiﬁcations. The programs allow the product codes to be tailored
to the speciﬁc countries and year(s) of interest.
We also document the substantial variation that exists in EU product classiﬁcation
systems over time. For trade data, the set of products that is covered is constant over time
but the number of individual product codes varies from year to year; more than 10 percent
of products may see code changes in a given year. For EU production data, the changes
in the classiﬁcation system are equally pervasive (almost every code changes in 2008) and
there is the additional complication that the range of goods covered by the system changes
over time.
To evaluate the economic signiﬁcance of these changes, we examine Belgian export
and production data from 1995-2003, both prior to and after concording the data into a
consistent classiﬁcation system over time. Comparing the unconcorded and concorded data
shows that the degree of product adding and dropping by ﬁrms that continue from one
year to the next falls substantially when a consistent product classiﬁcation is employed
20

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

(i.e. after concording the data). In particular, years with unusually large changes in the
classiﬁcations systems are associated with spuriously high amounts of product churning
by ﬁrms in the unconcorded data, pointing to the importance of developing a consistent
product classiﬁcation over time.

21

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

References
Alvarez, Luis J., Emmanuel Dhyne, Marco M. Hoeberichts, Claudia Kwapil,
Herve Le Bihan, Patrick Lunnemann, Fernando Martins, Roberto Sabbatini,
Harald Stahl, Philip Vermeulen, and Jouko Vilmunen, “Sticky Prices in the
Euro Area: A Summary of New Micro Evidence,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, April-May 2006, 4 (2-3).
Bernard, Andrew B., Emily J. Blanchard, Ilke Van Beveren, and Hylke Vandenbussche, “Carry-Along Trade,” NBER Working Paper Series, 2012, 18246.
, J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, “The Margins
of US Trade,” American Economic Review, May 2009, 99 (2), 487–93.
, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, “Multiple-Product Firms and Product
Switching,” American Economic Review, March 2010, 100 (1), 70–97.
Colantone, Italo and Rosario Crinò, “New imported inputs, new domestic products,”
EFIGE Working Paper Series, 2011, 34.
Eurostat, Prodcom: Statistics on the production of manufactured goods, Luxembourg: Eurostat, 2006a.
Fuss, Cathérine and Linke Zhu, “Comparative advantage, multi-product ﬁrms and
trade liberalisation: An empirical test,” National Bank of Belgium Working Paper Series,
2012, 219.
Méjean, Isabel Jeanne and Cyrille Schwellnus, “Price Convergence in the European
Union: Within Firms or Composition of Firms?,” Journal of International Economics,
2006, 78 (1), 1–10.
Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott, “Concording US Harmonized System Categories
over Time,” Journal of Oﬃcial Statistics, 2012a, 28 (1), 53–68.
and

, “A concordance between ten-digit US Harmonized System codes and

SIC/NAICS product classes and industries,” Journal of Economic and Social Measurment, 2012b, 37 (1-2), 61–96.

22

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

Figure 1: Concording trade and production data in a single year

International trade
CN8 classification

Common classification
system: HS6+

CN8 products not
covered by Prodcom
List (e.g. Fuel)

CN8 products covered
by Prodcom List

Domestic production
PC8 classification
PC8 products not
covered by CN8
(industrial services)

HS6+
Covered by CN8 and
PC8

PC8 products
(mandatory +
aggregated)

Translate
Optional and
disaggregated PC8
products

23

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

Table 1: Structure of the Combined Nomenclature (CN8) Classiﬁcation

Combined Nomenclature
8-digit (CN8)
Year
# of CN8 products
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

9506
9579
9695
9743
9837
9906
10108
10448
10495
10606
10587
10428
10314
10274
10400
10404
10174
10096
9841
9720
9699
9569
9443

Harmonized System 6digit (HS6)

HS6 1988
(# HS6 = 5019)

HS6 1992
(# HS6 = 5018)

HS6 1996
(# HS6 = 5113)

HS6 2002
(# HS6 = 5224)

HS6 2007
(# HS6 = 5051)

All classification files are obtained from the Eurostat Ramon server, with the exception of
the files for 1988-1994, which were provided by Eurostat on request.

24

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

Table 2: Structure of the Prodcom (PC8) Classiﬁcation

Prodcom 8-digit

Year
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

# of
# of optional
mandatory PC8 products (BPC8 products
list + N-list)
4802
4830
4840
4807
4807
4809
4839
4832
4793
4764
4693
4683
4489
4487
4418
3864
3851
3832

1225
1183
1220
1216
1216
1212
1185
854
814
787
787
788
0
0
0
0
0
0

Classification of
Products by Activity
(CPA) 6-digit

Classification of
economic activities
(NACE)

CPA6 1993
(# CPA6 = 2303)

CPA6 1996
(# CPA6 = 2303)

NACE4 Rev. 1
(since 1990)
(# NACE4 = 503)

CPA6 2002
(# CPA6 = 2608)

NACE4 Rev. 1.1.
(# NACE4 = 514)

CPA6 2008
(# CPA6 = 3142)

NACE4 Rev. 2
(# NACE4 = 615)

All classification files are obtained from the Eurostat Ramon server. The number of CPA6 codes and NACE4 codes is
not directly comparable to the number of PC8 products, since not all CPA6 products and NACE4 industries are covered
by the Prodcom List, i.e. coverage of the PC8 classification is more limited than the coverage of the CPA6 and NACE4
classification. Optional codes provide a more detailed breakdown of (some) mandatory codes. B-list codes were
implemented at the request of the member states. B-list codes were gradually phased out, both B-list and N-list codes
have been dropped since 2005.

25

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

Table 3: Changes in the Combined Nomenclature Classiﬁcation over time

Effective year

Number of
obsolete codes

Number of new
codes

1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

76
122
85
128
276
233
531
1257
170
334
303
223
90
847
16
503
186
743
1202
96
257
381

149
238
133
222
345
435
871
1304
281
315
144
109
50
973
20
273
108
489
1080
75
127
255

Number of
families
(including simple Number of simple
changes)
(one-one) changes
58
111
64
85
171
197
383
792
130
175
132
96
42
504
12
211
95
281
630
54
111
151

1
11
8
2
14
11
31
435
0
0
3
0
1
311
0
7
5
11
387
2
0
1

The table shows the number of obsolete and new codes in each year, as well as the number of families
(shrinking, growing or simple) and the number of simple changes (one-one). The effective year refers to the
year in which the change becomes effective. HS6 codes have been revised in 1992, 1996, 2002 and 2007.
The changes in the CN8 classification over time are obtained from the Eurostat Ramon server.

26

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

Table 4: Changes in the Prodcom Classiﬁcation over time

Number of
Effective year obsolete codes
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

32
33
118
0
2
68
16
113
82
362
35
303
4
184
4396
28
45

Number of
new codes

Number of
families
(including
simple
changes)

46
52
80
0
0
90
12
76
54
294
24
105
2
131
3864
15
26

29
15
54
0
1
31
9
57
30
214
17
96
2
76
3651
15
23

Number of
Number of
Number of codes that are
simple (one- codes that are new on the list
(entry)
one) changes dropped (exit)
17
12
12
0
0
2
1
0
3
189
1
7
0
13
3258
1
4

4
19
14
0
2
3
0
0
0
1
1
65
0
3
52
1
0

3
29
15
0
0
60
0
0
3
12
2
1
0
9
19
1
0

The table shows the number of obsolete and new codes in each year, as well as the number of families (shrinking,
growing, simple, entry or exit) and the number of simple changes (one-one). The effective year refers to the year in which
the change became effective. Some PC8 codes are not covered throughout the whole sample period, resulting in new codes
(entry) appearing on the list and old codes (exit) disappearing from the list. All changes in the PC8 classification over time
are obtained from the Eurostat Ramon server, optional codes have been removed (or replaced by their mandatory
aggregates) to ensure comparability over time and across countries.

27

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

Table 5: Prodcom (PC8) to Harmonized System (HS6) - 2005

Type of match PC-HS
Simple (one-one) PC8-HS6
Many-one PC8-HS6
One-many PC8-HS6
Many-many PC8-HS6
Total

Number of PC8
products

Number of HS6
products

Number of HS6+
products

2140
1211
495
374
4220

2140
423
1750
471
4784

2140
423
606
3169

Overall, there are 5224 HS6 products in 2005 (HS2002 classification). However, only 4784 HS6
products are covered by the Prodcom List in 2005. Similarly, there are 4489 (mandatory) PC8 products
on the Prodcom List for 2005, 4242 of these are covered by the CN8 concordance. Some PC8 products
are aggregated into a Z- or T-aggregate for the purpose of concording them to the CN8 classification,
resulting in 4220 PC8 categories in the correspondence file between PC8 and CN8.

28

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

Table 6: Belgian Trade Data, 1995-2003

Panel A: Exports
Unconcorded data

Year
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

Value of
exports
(€mio)
103,962
112,554
129,891
133,869
141,411
163,421
169,210
180,678
182,158

# Codes
9,541
9,723
9,802
9,600
9,453
9,387
9,347
9,456
9,470

Average

146,351

9,531

Value in
synthetic
codes (€mio)
30,454
32,992
38,339
39,515
42,918
54,994
57,458
66,962
67,419
47,895

Concorded data
# Codes
% of value in replaced by
synthetic
synthetic
codes
codes
29.3
2,520
29.3
2,616
29.5
2,686
29.5
2,599
30.4
2,476
33.7
2,372
34.0
2,335
37.1
2,437
37.0
2,431
32.2

2,497

# Final CN8+
codes (original
+ sets)
8,426
8,542
8,540
8,408
8,378
8,420
8,420
8,435
8,451
8,447

Panel B: Imports
Unconcorded data

Year
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

Value of
imports
(€mio)
94,719
104,670
122,535
124,751
132,332
158,223
163,225
170,976
170,727

# Codes
10,098
10,144
10,215
10,183
10,012
9,911
9,873
9,976
9,968

Value in
synthetic
codes (€mio)
25,751
29,432
33,718
35,281
37,888
48,346
50,940
58,790
55,751

Concorded data
# Codes
% of value in replaced by
synthetic
synthetic
codes
codes
27.2
2,653
28.1
2,708
27.5
2,802
28.3
2,781
28.6
2,615
30.6
2,504
31.2
2,469
34.4
2,567
32.7
2,574

# Final CN8+
codes
(originals +
sets)
8,920
8,922
8,895
8,890
8,866
8,880
8,875
8,876
8,861

Average
138,018
10,042
41,766
29.8
2,630
8,887
Note: The Table shows the value of exports (panel A) and imports (panel B), as well as the number of CN8 and
CN8+ products for the population of Belgian exporters (in panel A) or importers (panel B) between 1995 and
2003. All transactions with transfer of ownership are included, with the exception of trade recorded in residual
product categories specific to Belgium (4.7% of total export value and 1.4% of total import value). Column 2-3
show the value of trade in the data and the number of unconcorded CN8 products. Columns 4-7 report the value
of trade grouped in synthetic (CN8+) codes, as well as the total number of synthetic codes and the total number
of products in the final CN8+ classification.

29

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

Table 7: Added and Dropped Products at Continuing Belgian Exporters, 1995-2003

Without Concordance
# Continuing
firms
(exports in t
Year
and t+1)
1995-1996
24,202

With Concordance

# Added
products in
t+1 by
continuing
firms
125,889
49.3%

Value of
exports in
added
products
(t+1) (€mio)
15,381
14.5%

# Dropped
products in
t+1 by
continuing
firms
113,906
44.6%

Value of
exports in
dropped
products (t)
(€mio)
14,056
13.3%

# Added
products in
t+1 by
continuing
firms
105,383
43.7%

Value of
exports in
added
products
(t+1) (€mio)
4,126
3.9%

# Dropped
products in
t+1 by
continuing
firms
95,599
39.6%

Value of
exports in
dropped
products (t)
(€mio)
3,030
2.9%

1996-1997

24,518

113,200
42.1%

11,064
9.4%

107,915
40.1%

8,755
7.4%

101,645
40.2%

5,084
4.3%

97,314
38.5%

3,279
2.8%

1997-1998

20,336

108,741
45.3%

9,261
7.2%

106,620
44.4%

8,175
6.4%

95,856
42.3%

5,049
3.9%

91,807
40.5%

4,199
3.3%

1998-1999

19,543

94,968
38.7%

6,971
5.2%

93,652
38.2%

5,778
4.3%

86,079
37.0%

4,539
3.4%

84,597
36.4%

3,536
2.6%

1999-2000

19,581

94,130
37.9%

8,024
5.4%

93,872
37.8%

6,910
4.7%

85,906
36.3%

4,555
3.1%

83,490
35.3%

4,314
2.9%

2000-2001

20,319

92,935
36.5%

5,112
3.1%

87,557
34.4%

4,269
2.6%

86,989
35.7%

4,608
2.8%

81,847
33.6%

3,671
2.2%

2001-2002

20,215

98,130
37.6%

22,912
13.3%

95,989
36.8%

20,461
11.9%

85,041
34.1%

5,923
3.4%

83,709
33.6%

5,539
3.2%

2002-2003

19,457

89,598
33.8%

5,924
3.3%

89,037
33.6%

5,636
3.2%

83,692
33.1%

5,198
2.9%

83,026
32.8%

4,895
2.8%

Average

21,021

102,199
40.2%

10,581
7.7%

98,569
38.8%

9,255
6.7%

91,324
37.8%

4,885
3.5%

87,674
36.3%

4,058
2.8%

Note: The Table shows the number of continuing Belgian exporters across pairs of years as well as the number of added and dropped firm-products and the value
of exports in added and dropped products. Columns 3-6 use the CN8 product classification with no concordance for product code changes across years, while
columns 7-10 use a CN8+ classification that uses consistent product codes across all years from 1995-2003. For added (dropped) products, the italicized
numbers indicate the percentage of average continuing firm export products or value in year t+1 and year t that is accounted for by added (dropped) products.

30

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

Table 8: Belgian Production Data, 1995-2003

Unconcorded data

Year
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
Average

Value of
produced
sales
(€mio)
91,676
91,639
100,385
103,528
102,078
115,361
116,544
114,106
118,903
106,025

# Codes
3,116
3,014
2,984
2,941
2,955
2,928
2,903
2,879
2,896
2,957

Value of Produced Sales
Concorded data
Value in
products that % of value in
# PC8
need to be products that products that
# Codes
dropped due need to be
have to be # Final PC8+
Value in
% of value in replaced by to changes in dropped due dropped due
codes
synthetic
synthetic
synthetic
coverage to changes in to changes in (original +
codes (€mio)
codes
codes
(€mio)
coverage
coverage
sets)
8,311
9.1
352
469.4
0.51
13
2,990
7,879
8.6
331
442.1
0.48
17
2,898
8,543
8.5
317
472.2
0.47
15
2,876
8,970
8.7
312
370.9
0.36
15
2,833
8,882
8.7
305
381.9
0.37
17
2,857
10,506
9.1
297
427.4
0.37
15
2,833
10,405
8.9
275
440.1
0.38
17
2,825
10,394
9.1
265
417.3
0.37
19
2,808
15,797
13.3
281
462.7
0.39
26
2,808
9,965
9.3
304
431.5
0.41
17
2,859

Note: The Table shows the value of sold production, as well as the number of PC8 and PC8+ products for the population of Belgian firms that have participated
in the Prodcom survey between 1995 and 2003. All transactions with positive sold production value are included, with the exception of sold production value
recorded in unknown PC8 products (coding errors, 0.1% of total production value in the population). The first two columns show the value of produced sales in
the data and the number of unconcorded PC8 products. Columns 3-7 report the value of produced sales grouped in synthetic (PC8+) codes, as well as the total
number of synthetic codes and the total number of products in the final PC8+ classification.

31

Concording EU Trade and Production Data over Time

Table 9: Added and Dropped Products at Continuing Belgian Manufacturers, 1995-2003

Without Concordance
# Added
# Continuing
products in
firms
t+1 by
(positive
continuing
production
firms
in t and t+1)
1995-1996
5,708
1,980
11.8%

With Concordance

Value in
added
products
(t+1) (€mio)
1,419
1.6%

# Dropped
products in
t+1 by
continuing
firms
2,316
13.8%

Value in
dropped
products (t)
(€mio)
1,052
1.2%

# Added
products in
t+1 by
continuing
firms
1,882
11.3%

Value in
added
products
(t+1) (€mio)
1,218
1.4%

# Dropped
products in
t+1 by
continuing
firms
2,221
13.3%

Value in
dropped
products (t)
(€mio)
837
0.9%

1996-1997

5,682

1,402
8.7%

2,984
3.2%

1,729
10.7%

1,650
1.8%

1,379
8.6%

2,981
3.2%

1,699
10.6%

1,650
1.8%

1997-1998

5,917

981
6.0%

860
0.9%

1,280
7.9%

1,230
1.2%

964
6.0%

860
0.9%

1,255
7.8%

1,227
1.2%

1998-1999

5,990

1,557
9.6%

2,202
2.2%

1,473
9.1%

2,075
2.1%

1,450
9.0%

1,940
1.9%

1,356
8.4%

1,833
1.8%

1999-2000

6,635

1,092
6.3%

2,508
2.4%

1,261
7.3%

1,522
1.4%

1,044
6.1%

1,468
1.4%

1,207
7.0%

982
0.9%

2000-2001

6,471

1,733
10.3%

5,278
4.7%

1,754
10.4%

4,990
4.4%

1,316
7.8%

1,866
1.7%

1,291
7.7%

2,006
1.8%

2001-2002

6,493

1,204
7.1%

1,736
1.5%

1,177
6.9%

1,441
1.3%

1,095
6.5%

863
0.8%

1,058
6.2%

587
0.5%

2002-2003

6,328

1,776
10.7%

7,407
6.6%

1,764
10.6%

4,771
4.3%

1,218
7.3%

4,298
3.8%

1,233
7.4%

1,781
1.6%

Average

6,153

1,466
8.8%

3,049
2.9%

1,594
9.6%

2,341
2.2%

1,294
7.8%

1,937
1.9%

1,415
8.6%

1,363
1.3%

Note: The Table shows the number of continuing Belgian producers across pairs of years as well as the number of added and dropped firm-products and the
value of produced sales in the added and dropped products. Observations that need to be dropped for consistency over time (changes in PC8 coverage) are
dropped in both the unconcorded and concorded samples. Columns 3-6 use the PC8 product classification with no concordance for product code changes across
years, while columns 7-10 use a PC8+ classification that uses consistent product codes across all years from 1995-2003. For added (dropped) products, the
italicized numbers indicate the percentage of average continuing firm produced products or value in year t+1 and year t that is accounted by added (dropped)
products.

32

