                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             EXPERIENCE MATTERS:
                  HUMAN CAPITAL AND DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNTING

                                           David Lagakos
                                           Benjamin Moll
                                          Tommaso Porzio
                                            Nancy Qian
                                          Todd Schoellman

                                        Working Paper 18602
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18602


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Mark Aguiar, Paco Buera, Francesco Caselli, Thomas Chaney, Sylvain
Chassang, Angus Deaton, Mike Golosov, Fatih Guvenen, Lutz Hendricks, Erik Hurst, Joe Kaboski,
Nobu Kiyotaki, Pete Klenow, Jonathan Parker, Richard Rogerson, Paul Romer, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl,
David Sraer, David Weil and Fabrizio Zillibotti for their insights; the participants at the Princeton
Macro Faculty Lunch, World Bank Macro Seminar, Rochester Macro Seminar, LSE Macro Seminar,
EIEF Summer Seminar, EUI Macro Seminar, Columbia Development Seminar, Harvard Macro Seminar,
Harvard/MIT Development seminar, Warwick Development Seminar, UQAM Macro Seminar, Laval
Macro Seminar, Chicago Applied Workshop, USC Macro Seminar, CUNY Macro Seminar, SED Annual
Meetings, NBER Summer Institute Growth Workshop, NBER Summer Institute EFG, BREAD, NEUDC,
DFG conferences and the Conference on Human Capital at Washington University in St. Louis for
useful comments. We thank Xin Meng for providing us with extracts from the Chinese Urban Household
Surveys; and Anne Case and the RPDS for sharing their data from Taiwan and South Africa. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by David Lagakos, Benjamin Moll, Tommaso Porzio, Nancy Qian, and Todd Schoellman.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Experience Matters: Human Capital and Development Accounting
David Lagakos, Benjamin Moll, Tommaso Porzio, Nancy Qian, and Todd Schoellman
NBER Working Paper No. 18602
December 2012, Revised October 2014
JEL No. O11,O4,O57

                                           ABSTRACT

We use international household-survey data to document that experience-wage profiles are flatter in
poorer countries than in richer countries. We find a quantitatively similar pattern when we estimate
returns to foreign experience by country of origin among U.S. immigrants. The most likely explanation
for both findings is that workers accumulate less human capital from experience in poorer countries.
Taking this into consideration in development accounting substantially increases the role of human
capital in accounting for cross-country income differences.


David Lagakos                                     Nancy Qian
Department of Economics, 0508                     Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego               Yale University
9500 Gilman Drive                                 27 Hillhouse Avenue
La Jolla, CA 92093                                New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER                                          and NBER
lagakos@ucsd.edu                                  nancy.qian@yale.edu

Benjamin Moll                                     Todd Schoellman
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Princeton University                              W.P. Carey School of Business
106 Fisher Hall                                   Arizona State University
Princeton, NJ 08544                               P.O. Box 873806
and NBER                                          Tempe, AZ 85287
moll@princeton.edu                                todd.schoellman@gmail.com

Tommaso Porzio
Yale University
28 Hillhouse Ave.
New Haven, CT 06520
tommaso.porzio@yale.edu
1   Introduction

    Understanding the determinants of cross-country income differences is one of the central

aims of growth and development economics. An important first step in addressing this

difficult question is development accounting, which assesses how much of these income

differences are due to observable factors of production, namely physical and human capital.

The consensus in this literature is that human and physical capital together account for

less than half of cross-country income differences (Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare, 1997; Hall

and Jones, 1999; Caselli, 2005; Hsieh and Klenow, 2010). In other words, more than half

of world income inequality is accounted for by residual total factor productivity (TFP).

    To measure aggregate human capital stocks, most existing studies have focused on

human capital acquired through schooling. A few studies have considered human capital

acquired through experience, but have concluded that it does not improve the explanatory

power of human capital (Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare, 1997; Bils and Klenow, 2000, 2002;

Caselli, 2005). The reason is that the data employed in these studies showed little difference

in the average level of experience across countries, and no relationship between the return

to experience and income per capita (Psacharopoulos, 1994; Bils and Klenow, 2000, 2002).

    This paper uses international household-survey data to document that experience-wage

profiles are flatter in poor countries than in rich countries. We find a similar pattern when

we estimate returns to foreign experience by country of origin among U.S. immigrants.

The most likely explanation of our findings is that workers in poor countries accumulate

less human capital from experience than their counterparts in rich countries. When we

integrate this into an otherwise standard development accounting exercise, we find that

human and physical capital now account for sixty percent instead of forty percent of cross-

country income differences.

    To document our finding that experience-wage profiles are flatter in poor countries than

in rich countries, we harmonize large-sample household-survey data from 35 countries from

all income levels. These data provide several important benefits relative to previous studies,

and, in particular, to the work of Psacharopoulos (1994) and those researchers relying on

his estimates (e.g., Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare, 1997; Hall and Jones, 1999 and Caselli,


                                              1
2005). First, the large sample sizes allow us to estimate the returns to experience with

minimal restrictions on functional form. Second, the comparable sampling frames across

countries facilitate international comparisons. Finally, the availability of multiple cross

sections spanning relatively long time periods in a number of countries allow us to control

for cohort effects or time effects in our estimates.1

       Throughout the paper, we follow the development accounting literature and focus on

the returns to potential experience (henceforth, experience), defined as the number of

years that have elapsed since an individual finished schooling. In our benchmark empirical

analysis, we allow the returns to experience to vary fully flexibly for each additional year of

experience. These estimates show that experience-wage profiles in poor countries typically

lie below those of rich countries, i.e., the profiles are flatter in poor countries. We then

demonstrate that this finding is robust to alternative sample restrictions, controls and

definitions of experience.

       A well-known challenge in estimating returns to potential experience is that, due to

collinearity, one cannot separately identify the effects of potential experience (or age), birth

cohort and time. Previous studies, such as Psacharopoulos (1994), abstracted from this

issue entirely, presumably because they only had access to one cross section of data for

most countries. We approach this challenge following the method proposed by Hall (1968)

and Deaton (1997) for estimating returns to experience using repeated cross sections. For

this exercise, we focus on the thirteen countries for which the data cover at least fifteen

years from the earliest to most recent surveys. We consider three different versions of

the Deaton-Hall approach, which make an additional assumption about whether growth is

driven by time effects, such as general improvements in technology, or by cohort effects,

such as improvements in the health of subsequent birth cohorts. We find that for some

countries, such as China, the estimated returns to experience vary significantly under

the different specifications. However, more importantly, we find that our main finding of

steeper experience-wage profiles in rich countries is present under all three versions.

       It is useful to divide interpretations of our cross-country findings into two categories.
   1
    Many of the surveys available to Psacharopoulos (1994) and his collaborators were based on small
sample sizes and/or non-representative samples. For example, his estimates for China and India are based
on 145 and 507 observations, respectively.


                                                   2
In the first category, differences in experience-wage profiles reflect different amounts of

human capital accumulation across countries. The common theme in this category is

that the profiles are informative about the productivity of workers across different levels of

experience. In contrast, in the second category, differences in profiles capture differences in

wage-setting institutions across countries. In other words, the profiles reflect characteristics

of the countries unrelated to how worker productivity varies with experience.

       To help distinguish between these two alternatives, we draw on evidence from U.S.

immigrants, who all work in the same labor market. The data allow us to estimate returns

to foreign experience, by country, for U.S. immigrants from 97 countries of all income levels.

We find that the estimated returns to foreign experience are substantially higher among

immigrants from rich countries than among those from poor countries. These patterns go

against interpretations in which differences in experience-wage profiles are driven by cross-

country differences in capture differences in factors such as wage-setting institutions, since

all immigrants are observed in the United States. Instead, they support interpretations

in which workers in poor countries accumulate less human capital from experience than

workers in rich countries.2

       We conclude by showing what our findings imply for development accounting. Relative

to the seminal work of Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997), Hall and Jones (1999) and

Caselli (2005), we relax only one assumption: we allow the returns to experience to vary

across countries. Using the estimated experience-wage profiles, we show that the implied

human capital due to experience is positively correlated with income and its cross-country

dispersion is similar in magnitude to the dispersion of human capital due to schooling.

Putting these together, we find that the contribution of physical and human capital to

accounting for income differences increases from forty percent to around sixty percent.3
   2
     In addition, data on the education and occupation of immigrants and non-migrants show little support
for the possibility that our findings for immigrants are driven by differential selection or skill loss between
immigrants from rich and poor countries. We discuss these data in Section 5.
   3
     Our study is related to several others that measure aggregate human capital stocks using a broader
definition than years of schooling. In particular, Weil (2007) and Shastry and Weil (2003) include the role
of health, and Barro and Lee (2001), Hanushek and Kimko (2000), Hendricks (2002), Erosa et al. (2010),
Schoellman (2012) and Manuelli and Seshadri (2014) include schooling quality. Jones (forthcoming) argues
that allowing for imperfect substitutability across skill types leads to a larger role of human capital in
development accounting. Gennaioli et al. (forthcoming) conduct a development accounting exercise for
sub-national regions from many countries, and find a large role for human capital.



                                                      3
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our household-survey data.

Section 3 documents that experience-wage profiles are flatter in poor countries than in

rich countries. Section 4 argues that there are two broad interpretations of our empiri-

cal finding: differences in human capital accumulation and differences in country-specific

factors unrelated to human capital. Section 5 estimates experience-wage profiles for U.S.

immigrants, which support the human capital interpretation. Section 6 conducts the devel-

opment accounting exercise. Section 7 discusses development accounting under alternative

assumptions. Section 8 concludes.

2   Data

    Our analysis uses large-sample household survey data from 35 countries. The surveys

we use satisfy two criteria: (i) they are nationally representative or representative of urban

areas, and (ii) they contain data on labor income for at least five thousand individuals. We

make use of multiple surveys for each country whenever data are available. The data cover

242 surveys, span the years 1970 to 2011, and cover 62,000 observations in the median

country. The complete list of countries and data sources is listed in Section A.1 of the

Appendix. The countries in our sample comprise a wide range of income levels, with the

United States, Canada and Switzerland at the high end and Bangladesh, Vietnam and

Indonesia at the low end. The main limitation in terms of data coverage is that we have

no data for the very poorest countries in the world, such as those in Sub-Saharan Africa.

    Our main outcome variable is an individual’s wage, which we define to be her labor

earnings divided by her hours worked. In most countries, we observe earnings over the

month prior to the survey and hours worked over the week prior to the survey. In the few

countries without hours data, we impute an individual’s number of hours worked as the

average number of hours across all other countries for that individual’s experience level.

We restrict attention to individuals with zero to forty years of experience who have positive

labor income and non-missing age and schooling information. In all surveys, we impute the

years of schooling using educational attainment data. For all countries, we express earnings

and wages in local currency units of the most recent year for which we have a survey, using

the price deflators provided by the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial


                                              4
Statistics. See Appendix A.1 of the for details on the data construction.

     In our main analysis, we restrict attention to workers that are full-time wage earners,

and exclude any workers with self-employed income. We exclude the self-employed for

several reasons. First, evidence suggests that self-employed individuals tend to mis-report

their income in surveys when asked directly (Deaton, 1997; Hurst et al., 2014). Second,

the income of the self-employed conceptually consists of payments to both labor and to

capital, which are difficult to distinguish in practice (Gollin, 2002). Third, self-employed

income often accrues to the household rather than the individual, which makes it difficult

to interpret self-employed income reported at the individual level. In Section 3.5, we show

that when we nonetheless include the self-employed in countries where our data allow, the

estimates of the returns to experience are similar.

     In our main analysis, we define potential experience as experience = age – schooling –

6 for individuals with eight or more years of schooling and as experience = age – 14 for

individuals with fewer than eight years of schooling. This definition implies that individuals

begin to work at age fourteen or after they finish school, whichever comes later. The cutoff

at age fourteen is motivated by the fact that we observe very few individuals with positive

wage income before the age of fourteen in our countries (see Figure A.3 of the Appendix).

Later, in Section 3.5, we show that our results are robust to several alternative definitions

of potential experience, and are similar when we estimate age-wage profiles or experience-

earnings profiles rather than experience-wage profiles.

3        Returns to Experience Across Countries

3.1       Conceptual Framework

     We use a simple model of human capital, similar to the one proposed by Bils and

Klenow (1998), to motivate our empirical estimation. Human capital of individual i, who

is born in year c and surveyed in time t, hict , depends on schooling, sict and experience,

xict :

                                hict = exp(g(sict ) + f (xict )).                         (1)




                                               5
We further impose f (0) = g(0) = 0, meaning that we normalize the human capital of a

worker with zero years of both schooling and experience to be one. Thus, we focus on the

part of human capital due to schooling or experience.4

       For now, follow the development accounting literature and assume that workers earn

their marginal products, supply their entire human capital to the labor market and that

human capital is valued in efficiency units up to a mean-zero error term. These assumptions

allow us to identify individual human capital stocks directly from individual wages. Later,

in Section 4, we discuss departures from these assumptions.

       Hence, an individual’s hourly wage is equal to the product of her human capital, a skill

price ωct , and an error term εict :


                                        wict = ωct hict exp(εict ).                                     (2)


We allow the skill price, ωct , to differ across cohorts and time periods:


                                         ωct = ω̄ exp(γt + χc ),                                        (3)


where γt and χc , represent time- and cohort-specific determinants of labor productivity

that are not captured by human capital due to schooling or experience. Time effects

represent factors like cohort-neutral technical change and capital accumulation, and cohort

effects reflect cohort-specific technical change and accumulation of cohort-specific capital.5

Substituting equations (1) and (3) into equation (2) and taking logs, we obtain


                       log wict = log ω̄ + g(sict ) + f (xict ) + γt + χc + εict .                      (4)


Thus, a worker’s wage is a function of: her years of schooling and experience, sict and xict ;
   4
     The choice of an additively separable specification in schooling and experience has the benefit that
the returns to schooling and experience are independent of each other. We find similar results to those
presented below when we allow interactions between schooling and experience; details are available upon
request. We also show later in the paper that separability between schooling and experience is not necessary
for identifying total human capital stocks.
   5
     Cohort effects can also capture things like cohort-specific changes in health status, i.e. determinants
of labor productivity that, as a matter of semantics, one may call “human capital.” As already noted,
however, the focus of our paper is on human capital due to schooling or experience. We therefore do not
include cohort effects in our definition of human capital in (1).



                                                     6
a vector of time-period dummy variables, γt ; a vector of cohort dummy variables, ψc ; and

a mean-zero error term, εict . In this section, we estimate the function f (·) and assess how

it varies across countries. Through the lens of the simple framework in this section, a flat

experience-wage profile f (·) reflects low human capital accumulation over the lifecycle. Of

course, experience-wage profiles may differ across countries for other reasons. We discuss

these in detail in Section 4. Our first empirical exercise is to estimate equation (4) for

each country under the assumption that there are no cohort or time effects, γt = χc = 0.

Afterwards, we turn to richer specifications that consider cohort and time effects.

3.2    Benchmark Results

    We begin our empirical analysis by allowing the relationship between experience and

wages to vary for each year of experience. This flexible functional form fully accounts for

changes in the slope of the experience-wage profile. We estimate

                                                        45
                                                        X
                                                                  x
                              log wict = α + θsict +          φx Dict + εict ,                        (5)
                                                        x=1

       x is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a worker has x years of
where Dict

experience. The coefficient φx estimates the average wage of workers with x years of

experience relative to the average wage of workers with zero years of experience. In terms

of our notation from the previous section, the φx terms represent f (x) such that the

coefficient estimate corresponding to each experience level, x, identifies the experience-

wage profile evaluated at point x.

    Figure 1 displays the experience-wage profiles for three large countries in our sample:

the United States, Mexico and India (see Figure A.2 for the estimated profiles for all

countries). For brevity, we will use “steepness” to refer to the average slope of the profiles

over all experience levels (as opposed to the point-wise slope at a given level of experience).

The steepest profile among these three countries is in the United States, which is also the

richest country of the three. Mexico has the next steepest profile, followed by India.6

    Figure 1 also shows that the cross-country differences in the profiles are mostly realized
   6
     The confidence intervals tend to be tight for most countries, so we omit them for brevity; see Figure
A.3 for the confidence intervals for India, Mexico and the United States. Note that our experience-wage
profiles for the United States are quite similar to others in the literature (e.g., Lemieux, 2006).


                                                    7
by twenty years of experience, which is also approximately the average experience level

of most countries in our sample. Therefore, to illustrate the relationship between the

steepness of the profiles and income for all of the countries in our sample, we plot the

height of the estimated profiles evaluated at twenty years potential experience against the

log of GDP per capita at PPP in 2010 in Figure 2. The figure shows the main empirical

finding of our paper, which is that the experience-wage profiles in poor countries are

systematically flatter than those in rich countries. The correlation between the height of

the profiles at twenty years on log GDP per capita is 0.60. The slope coefficient from a

regression of the height at twenty years potential experience and log GDP per capita is 0.20

and is statistically significant at the one percent level. In terms of economic significance,

the slope tells us that one log point higher GDP per capita – such as the United States

relative to Mexico – is associated with twenty percent higher returns to the first twenty

years of potential experience.7

3.3    Cohort and Time Effects

    The main challenge to estimating returns to experience (or age) is that one cannot

separately identify the effects of experience, birth cohort and time, due to collinearity. In

this section, we consider the effects of cohort and time controls following the approach

proposed by Hall (1968) and Deaton (1997) for estimating returns to experience using

repeated cross sections.8 We use data from the thirteen countries for which our data

cover at least fifteen years: Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Germany, India,

Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Mexico, the United Kingdom and the United States. The data

cover 142 surveys and span an average of 26 years per country; see Appendix A.1 for the

years employed for each country.

    We consider three different versions of the Deaton-Hall approach. The first version
   7
     We find a positive correlation between log GDP per capita and the heights of the profiles at ten, fifteen
and thirty years potential experience as well. We also find similar results when using log of per capita
GDP for the year which is the midpoint of the sample for each individual country, rather than 2010. These
results are available upon request.
   8
     Panel data afford no additional advantages relative to repeat cross sections as far as identifying expe-
rience, cohort and time effects is concerned. See for example Heckman and Robb (1985, p.140) who note
that “it is by now well known (e.g. Cagan, 1965) that [longitudinal] data do not solve the identification
problem,” and that “panel data and a time series of cross sections of unrelated individuals are equally
informative.”




                                                      8
attributes all labor productivity growth to cohort effects, and uses year dummies to cap-

ture only cyclical fluctuations. This is the assumption made in Deaton’s (1997) original

analysis and more recently by Aguiar and Hurst (2013). We implement this by estimat-

ing equation (5) with birth-cohort dummies and time dummies, with the restriction that

the time dummies are orthogonal to a time trend. See Appendix A.2 for a more formal

description of our methodology.

      Figure 3 plots the predicted height of the profiles at twenty years of experience based

on these estimates. As the figure shows, the correlation between income and steepness

of profiles is still present. Table 1 shows that the correlation between the height of the

profiles at twenty years of experience and log GDP per capita is still 0.42, compared to

0.60 in the benchmark cross-sectional estimates. The slope coefficient is 0.14 under this

version compared to 0.20 in the benchmark. Figure 3 also shows that the profiles for most

countries are steeper in this version than in the cross-sectional estimates (Figure 2). The

reason is that, in a growing economy, attributing all growth to cohort effects implies that

older cohorts are less productive than younger cohorts. Thus, controlling for cohort effects

causes experience-wage profiles to be steeper than in cross-sectional estimates.9

      The second version takes the “opposite” extreme and attributes all labor productivity

growth to time effects. We implement this by estimating equation (5) with cohort and

time dummies, but now we restrict the cohort effects to be orthogonal to a time trend.

Figure 4 plots the predicted profiles for the returns to experience. As the figure shows,

the results are very similar to the cross-sectional profiles in Figure 1. Table 1 shows that

the correlation between the height of the profiles at twenty years and income is 0.58, just

below the benchmark, and the slope coefficient is 0.13. The reason that the profiles in

this version appear more like the benchmark is that attributing all growth to time effects

implies that older and younger cohorts have similar productivity. Thus, controlling for

cohort effects has little impact on experience-wage profiles.

      The third takes the intermediate view that productivity growth is attributed in equal

parts to cohort and time effects. While we are agnostic on the most natural split between
  9
    In Appendix A.2 we walk through the case of China, which becomes particularly steep, and hence is
a useful case for understanding the mechanics of the controls.



                                                 9
time and cohort effects, the case of an equal split is nonetheless useful for illustrating how

estimated returns to experience across countries depend on the relative importance of the

two effects. Figure 5 plots the predicted returns to twenty years experience in this case. For

most countries, the experience-wage profiles lie somewhere between those in the previous

two versions of the Deaton-Hall method. The correlation between log GDP per capita and

the profile heights at twenty years of experience is 0.52, and the slope coefficient is 0.13.10

       We conclude that for some countries, such as China, the estimated returns to experience

vary significantly depending on the relative importance of cohort and time effects. However,

as in the cross sectional estimates, experience-wage profiles in rich countries are steeper

than those of poor countries in all three versions of the Deaton-Hall method we consider.

3.4      Parsimonious Functional Form for Experience-Wage Profiles

       While the fully flexible estimates are useful for revealing the true functional form of

the experience-wage relationship, a parsimonious approximation of the relationship is more

convenient for several exercises that we will conduct in this paper (e.g., examining com-

positional effects) and for comparing our results to the existing development accounting

literature. As can be seen in Figure 1, experience-wage profiles are highly non-linear,

particularly in rich countries. A quadratic specification, such as used by Psacharopoulos

(1994), therefore provides a poor approximation of the true profiles.11

       Thus, for parsimony, we will measure experience using a quintic polynomial:

                                                        5
                                                        X
                              log wict = α + θsict +          φk xkict + εict ,                       (6)
                                                        k=1


where the log wage of individual i of cohort c during year t is a function of her years of

schooling, sict , and her years of experience, xict . This is the special case of equation (4)

with g(s) = θs and f (x) = 5k=1 φk xk .
                             P

       The estimated returns to experience appear very similar using the quintic specification
  10
      We have also estimated profiles with either only time effects and no cohort effects, or only cohort
effects and no time effects. This approach has been taken by a number of papers in the literature,
including Guvenen (2007) and Huggett et al. (2011). The results here look quite similar to the first and
second variants of the Deaton-Hall method, respectively, and are available upon request.
   11
      The observation that a higher order polynomial is necessary for capturing the true profiles for rich
countries such as the United States was made by Murphy and Welch (1990).




                                                   10
as under the fully flexible specification. Furthermore, the cross-country relationship be-

tween returns to experience and log GDP per capita is almost the same using the quintic

and fully flexible specifications, with a correlation of 0.56 in the former and 0.60 in the

latter. Thus, we will mostly focus on the quintic specification henceforth.

3.5   Robustness

   This section investigates the robustness of the experience-profile estimates.

Inclusion of the Self-Employed In the main analysis of the paper, we keep only wage

earners and exclude any workers with self-employment income because of the measurement

concerns raised in Section 2. In this section, we relax this restriction and include all

workers with either wage income or self-employed income (or both), and take the income

data of the self employed as given. We find that when we include the self employed in the

twelve countries for which self-employed income data are available, the estimated returns

to experience are virtually identical with and without the self-employed. For brevity, the

results are shown in the Appendix, in Figure A.5.

   As an additional robustness check, we regress the steepness of the profiles at twenty

years of experience on GDP per capita and the fraction of workers that are self-employed

as reported by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. The coefficient on GDP

per capita is large (0.05) and statistically significant (standard error 0.0133), which means

that income is positively associated with the steepness of the profiles for two countries with

the same proportion of self-employed workers. Thus, the cross-country results are not only

an artifact of the possibility that there are more self-employed workers in poor countries

and self-employed workers have flatter profiles than other workers in poor countries. In

contrast, the coefficient on the fraction self-employed is small in magnitude (0.007) and

statistically insignificant (standard error 0.006). This means that for two countries with

the same income, there is no association between the share of self-employed workers and

the height of the experience-wage profiles.

Other Sample Restrictions Thus far, our results include all individuals earning a wage

and working full time, regardless of sex or sector of work. In addition, we do not restrict the

age of individuals in our sample other than through the restriction that potential experience


                                              11
is positive. One potential concern is that our results are driven by cross-country differences

in female labor supply, or the timing of female entry into or exit out of the labor force.

Another concern is that workers in the public sector may earn wages that are not closely

tied to market forces. Similarly, one may worry that wages for agricultural workers in poor

countries are mis-measured. Finally, one may worry that our findings are driven by the

inclusion of very young workers, or cross-country differences in the fraction of workers that

are below a certain age.

   To address these concerns, we repeat our estimates of the experience-wage profiles under

several different sample restrictions. The first includes part-time workers in addition to

full-time workers. The second and third restrict the sample to be only male workers and

male private-sector workers. The fourth restricts the sample to be only non-agricultural

workers. The last two restrict the sample by keeping only workers older than 18, and only

workers older than 22, respectively. Panel (a) of Table 2 presents the correlation between

the height of the experience-wage profile and GDP per capita, as well as the coefficient

from a regression of the former on the latter, under these alternative sample restrictions.

The correlation in the benchmark estimate from Section 3.2 is 0.60. Under the alternative

sample restrictions, the correlations range from 0.43 to 0.59 and are all significant at the

5% level or lower. The slope in the benchmark is 0.20 and significant at the one percent

level, while the slopes range from 0.14 to 0.24 under the alternative restrictions and all

significant at the five percent level or lower. We conclude that none of these restrictions

makes an appreciable difference to our main result.

Experience Definition Our main exercise assumes that individuals start work when

they finish schooling or reach fourteen years of age, whichever comes sooner. Panel (b) of

Table 2 reports the correlation for two alternative definitions of potential experience.

   The first of these makes the more standard assumption, made by Caselli (2005), that

all workers begin work at age six or whenever they finish schooling and hence sets ex-

perience = age - schooling – 6. The second assumes that all workers begin work at age

fifteen or whenever they finish schooling, which is another plausible assumption given our

observations in Figure A.3, and hence sets experience = age – schooling – 6 for all indi-



                                             12
viduals with nine or more years of schooling, and experience = age – 15 for other workers.

The correlations between the heights at 20 years of potential experience and log GDP per

capita are 0.50 and 0.59 in the two cases, and the slope coefficient of a regression of the

former on the latter are 0.17 and 0.21 respectively. Thus, our main result is not an artifact

of our choice of definition for potential experience.

Experience-Earnings Profiles and Age-Wage Profiles One widely studied alter-

native to experience-wage profiles are experience-earnings profiles. In our data, these

two variables are highly correlated and the the slope of the experience-earnings profiles

is steeper than that of the experience-wage profiles. Thus, cross-country differences in

experience-earnings profiles are even more substantial than cross-country differences in

experience-wage profiles. The reason for this is that hours worked increase over the lifecy-

cle at a faster rate in richer countries than poorer countries, at least in our set of countries.

Another alternative to experience-wage profiles are age-wage profiles. In our data, these

profiles are also flatter in poor countries than in rich countries.12

Returns to Schooling One concern is that our estimated returns to experience lead to

implausible returns to schooling, or returns to schooling that differ from the literature in

a substantial way. In the Appendix, we show that this is not the case.13

       Related is the question of whether our result for the returns to experience is an artifact

of our choice for estimating the returns to schooling. To investigate this, we first estimate

the returns to experience under the restriction that returns to schooling satisfy the non-

linear function used by Hall and Jones (1999). In particular, this is that the first four

years of schooling have a thirteen percent return, the next four have a ten percent return,

and all others have a seven percent return. We then estimate the returns to experience by

restricting the returns to schooling to be a constant ten percent, following the exercise of

Hsieh and Klenow (2010), which assumes this return in all countries. The slope coefficient
  12
     Appendix Figure A.11 plots the heights of experience-earnings profiles against log GDP per capita for
our set of countries. Appendix Figure A.12 plots the heights of the age-wage profiles at age forty.
  13
     See Appendix Figure A.8, which that shows the estimated returns to schooling for the countries in our
sample. They range from three percent to seventeen percent per year of schooling with a mean return of
nine percent. The figure also shows that the return to schooling is at best weakly correlated with GDP
per capita. This is consistent with previous estimates. See Hsieh and Klenow (2010) and the references
within.




                                                   13
from a regression of the heights at 20 years of experience and the log of GDP per capita

is 0.21 in both cases. For brevity, this is not presented in tables. This is quite similar to

the 0.20 found in our benchmark case. Thus, our main result does not appear to be an

artifact of the way we estimate returns to schooling relative to the literature.

Additional Sensitivity Tests In addition to the robustness checks presented in this

section, we conducted many others that we do not discuss for brevity. For example, we

provide evidence that our results are not driven by measurement error in age or schooling;

see Section A.4 of the Appendix. We also find that our results are robust to different

functional forms for estimating the returns to schooling, in particular higher order poly-

nomials and fully flexible returns to education; alternative imputation methods for hours

worked in countries with no hours data; restricting the sample to only include household

heads; restricting the maximum years of experience to be fifty years; and using the Current

Population Survey in the United States instead of the Census.14

4        Interpretation

         There are two categories of explanations for why experience-wage profiles are steeper

in richer countries. The first stipulates that workers tend to accumulate less human capital

from experience in poor countries than in rich countries. This could happen exogenously:

perhaps the characteristics of the work done, the technology used, or the way workers in-

teract leads to less human capital in poor countries.15 It could also happen endogenously:

perhaps institutions, credit constraints or low TFP lead workers to choose endogenously

lower investment in life-cycle human capital.16 Note that in this latter case human capi-
    14
      We also examine the extent to which the estimated cross-country differences in experience-wage profiles
are due to differences in worker compositions across countries. We find little support that our findings are
accounted for by differences in returns to experience among broad industry groups, schooling level, sex or
urban-rural status. See Appendix A.3.
   15
      For example, the models of Lucas (2009), Lucas and Moll (2011), and Perla and Tonetti (2011)
posit that human capital is accumulated through social interactions with others; all determinants of the
frequency or quality of such interactions are potential determinants of cross-country differences in returns
to experience.
   16
      In the models of Erosa et al. (2010) and Manuelli and Seshadri (2014), low TFP in poor countries
depresses the returns to the accumulation of human capital by raising the price of physical inputs to human
capital production. Similarly, extractive institutions in poor countries (emphasized by e.g. Acemoglu et
al. (2001)) may discourage workers from investing in human capital, since their returns be confiscated
in one way or another (Bhattacharya et al., 2013). This logic is consistent with recent evidence that
higher taxation of labor income in Europe can explain a substantial fraction of European-U.S. differences
in wage inequality and lifecycle wage growth (Guvenen et al., 2014). If workers cannot borrow to smooth
consumption, they may not take jobs that offer good training opportunities. This could be formalized in


                                                     14
tal from experience accounts for cross-country income differences only in the development

accounting sense; there can still be a deeper causal force that, in turn, explains why expe-

rience profiles in poor countries are flatter. Either way, all of these explanations emphasize

that flatter experience-wage profiles indicate lower rates of human capital accumulation.

    The second category of explanations does not rely on cross-country differences in hu-

man capital. Instead, they stipulate that differences in country-specific factors such as

wage setting institutions or matching frictions lead to different experience-wage profiles.17

What is important for our purposes is that any explanation in this category suggests that

experience profiles do not reflect human capital accumulation, and that they should not

be considered as explanatory factors for cross-country income differences, even in the de-

velopment accounting sense. Thus, it is important for our purposes to distinguish whether

our findings have an explanation in the first or the second category. In the next section

we provide evidence that helps us make this distinction.

5    Evidence from U.S. Immigrants

    In this section, we turn to U.S. immigrants to help interpret the returns to experience

we estimate above. Studying U.S. immigrants offers several advantages. First, the workers

are all observed in a common labor market, as opposed to a diverse set of economies with

varying labor market conditions and institutions. Second, data for all workers come from

a common source, the U.S. census, which alleviates potential concerns about cross-country

data comparability. At the same time, studying immigrants presents challenges as well,

since immigrants are selected non-randomly, and may not have their skills transfer well into

the U.S. labor market. We address these challenges below. We find that estimated returns
a framework in the spirit of Galor and Zeira (1993), but with on-the-job investment in human capital.
More generally, the same factors which cause firms to grow less quickly over the lifecycle in poor countries
(Hsieh and Klenow, 2012) may explain why workers’ earnings grow less quickly; Seshadri and Roys (2012)
propose such a theory.
   17
      In this category are theories in which workers and firms agree to long-term contracts where wages do
not equal workers’ marginal products (see e.g., Azariadis, 1988; Lazear, 1979; Michelacci and Quadrini,
2009). In many such theories, frictions such as moral hazard or limited commitment on the part of workers
lead firms to “backload” wages, leading experience-wage profiles to be steeper than the true relationship
between the marginal product of labor and experience. If these frictions are more pronounced in poor
countries, our estimates would understate the difference in lifecycle human capital accumulation between
rich and poor countries. But other theories of long-term contracting also suggest reasons for front-loading
of wage-contracts in poor countries. Also in this category are theories in which there are matching frictions
in labor markets (Burdett, 1978; Jovanovic, 1979; Burdett and Mortensen, 1998) that differ systematically
in rich and poor countries.


                                                     15
to experience among U.S. immigrants are substantially higher among workers from rich

countries than among those from poor countries, and that the most likely interpretation

is lower human capital accumulation from experience among workers in poor countries.

5.1      Data

       Our data on immigrants are from the 1980–2000 U.S. Population Censuses and the

2005–2012 American Community Surveys (ACSs), downloaded from IPUMS. Each of these

data sets includes a large, representative cross-section of the U.S. population. We identify

immigrants using the country of birth. Our datasets also include information on the year

of immigration, from which we can compute the number of years each immigrant has been

in the United States.18

       We construct potential experience using information on age and educational attain-

ment. We define experience and impute years of schooling from educational attainment

data exactly as in Section 2. For immigrants, we split their experience into foreign (birth

country) and domestic (U.S.) experience. As in the main analysis, we exclude workers with

more than 40 years of total experience. We also exclude those with 35 years of foreign

experience or more, or those who enter the United States before completing their schooling.

       As before, we restrict attention to full-time wage workers. We construct the hourly

wage using information on annual wage and salary income for the prior year, usual hours

worked per week, and weeks worked in the prior year. Finally, we use three Census-provided

controls in our analysis. The first is the state of residence, which is designed to help capture

the large cross-state differences in the cost of living that would otherwise bias our results.

The second is English-language ability. The Census has included a self-reported measure

of English language ability throughout this time, with five options ranging from “Does not

speak English” to “Yes, speaks only English.” We further parse the data by creating a

sixth category for U.S. born persons, so that the remaining categories all capture variation

within the immigrant population. The last control is a gender dummy. Further details

about our immigrant data and estimation are provided in Appendix A.5.
  18
    We find that most immigrants report being in their country of birth immediately before migrating: 87
percent report being in their birth country five years before migrating and 83 percent report being their
one year before migrating. There also appears to be no systematic relationship between this secondary
migration and GDP per capita.



                                                   16
5.2      Returns to Experience Among New Immigrants

       We begin by estimating returns to foreign experience among new immigrants, which

we define as immigrants that arrived in the United States in the year prior to a census.

The advantage of looking at new immigrants is that they have a negligible amount of U.S.

work experience. Thus we can estimate the returns to foreign experience, for each country,

without having to consider interaction effects between foreign and U.S. experience. To

ensure that we have enough observations on new immigrants, we consider all countries for

which we have at least 1,000 new immigrants.

       We posit that the wage wit for worker i in time period t satisfies

                                                    4
                                                    X
                          log (wit ) = α + θsit +         φk (xit )k + δZit + εit ,                      (7)
                                                    k=1

where sit are her years of schooling, xit are her years of foreign potential experience, and Zit

are other controls. We estimate this by pooling natives and immigrants from all countries,

allowing the following terms to vary by country: the constant, α, the return to schooling,

θ, the polynomial in foreign experience, φk , and dummies for the decade of arrival in the

United States. We also include dummies for sex, state and English language ability, and a

time effect. Note that since we include country fixed effects, the reference worker in each

country is an immigrant from the country in question with no foreign experience.19

       In Figure 6, we present the estimated returns to experience from equation (7) using one

simple summary statistic: the predicted return to the first twenty years foreign experience.

We plot this statistic for each country against the country’s GDP per capita in 2010. One

can see that the returns to foreign experience vary positively with GDP per capita. The

simple linear regression line has a slope of 0.25, and is significant at the one percent level.

We conclude that among new immigrants, returns to foreign experience are higher for

immigrants from richer countries than those from poorer countries. Of course, the number

of countries in our analysis is only 25; in the following section we include all immigrants,

not just new immigrants, which allows us to consider a larger set of countries.20
  19
     Our identification strategy uses the standard solutions found in the literature on immigrants. An
extended discussion is found in Appendix A.5.
  20
     While our paper is the first to estimate the returns to U.S. immigrant experience by income level of the



                                                     17
5.3    Returns to Experience Among All Immigrants

    We now consider returns to experience using the entire sample of immigrants in our

data. In general, these immigrants have potential experience that accrued in their source

county and potential experience that accrued in the United States. Our preferred approach

is to control separately for foreign experience and U.S. experience using a quadratic poly-

nomial for each, and include also a quadratic interaction term between U.S. and foreign

experience. This allows us to estimate the returns to foreign experience for immigrants

from each country, while parsimoniously controlling for U.S. experience. Because of the

large number of immigrants working in the United States, our sample contains over 1.5

million immigrants covering 97 countries for which we have at least 1,000 immigrants.21
    Letting xit and xU S
                     it be the amount of foreign experience and U.S. experience of worker

i in time t, we assume this worker’s wage satisfies:

                           4                                        2 X
                                                                       2
                           X            k                 k        X                  n           m
 log (wit ) = α + θsit +         φk (xit ) + φU
                                              k
                                                S
                                                  xU
                                                   it
                                                      S
                                                                 +             ψnm (xit )   xU
                                                                                             it
                                                                                                S
                                                                                                         + δZit + εit . (8)
                           k=1                                       n=1 m=1


As before, we estimate this equation by pooling natives and immigrants from all countries,

allowing the following terms to vary by country: the constant, α, the return to schooling, θ,

the quartic polynomial in foreign experience, φk , the quadratic interaction terms, ψnm , as

well as dummies for the decade of arrival in the United States. We again include dummies

(not country specific) for sex, state, time and English language ability.

    Figure 7 plots the predicted returns to twenty years of foreign experience (and no U.S.

experience) among immigrants for each countries in our data against the log of GDP per

capita. It shows that the returns to foreign experience are generally higher for immigrants

from rich countries than for immigrants from poor countries. The slope coefficient from
source country, our findings build on several prior studies. Chiswick (1978) uses earlier U.S. data and finds
that returns to experience tend to be lower for immigrants from poorer regions of the world. Coulombe et
al. (Forthcoming) find that in Canada there are also lower returns to experience for Canadian immigrants
from poorer countries. Schoellman (2012) estimates returns to schooling among U.S. immigrants and uses
that to draw inferences about quality of schooling around the world, but his paper does not consider
returns to experience. Note that the estimated country-specific returns to schooling of Schoellman (2012)
are virtually identical to the country-specific returns to schooling we estimate using equation (7) in the
current paper. Both sets of estimates show lower returns to schooling on average in poor countries than
in rich countries.
   21
      For most countries we have many more observations: we have 48 countries with at least 5,000 immi-
grants and 28 countries with at least 10,000 immigrants for example.



                                                      18
a regression of the return to twenty years foreign experience on log GDP per capita is

0.19, and is statistically significant at the one percent level. In Table A.2 in the Appendix,

we show that this positive and significant slope is present under a number of alternative

sample restrictions.

5.4   Comparing Returns to Experience for Immigrants and Stayers

   We now compare returns to experience for immigrants to individuals from the same

country that did not migrate abroad. For expositional purposes, we refer to these individ-

uals as stayers. Specifically, we compare the returns to experience that we estimate for

stayers in Section 3 to our returns estimated for immigrants from equation (8). There are

32 countries for which we have both sets of estimates.

   Figure 8 plots the predicted returns to twenty years experience against log GDP per

capita for the immigrants and stayers. Both estimates show a strong positive relationship

with GDP per capita, with higher returns to experience, on average, in the economies with

higher GDP per capita. Among immigrants, the slope coefficient is 0.19, with a P-value less

than 0.001. For stayers, the slope coefficient is 0.21 and the P-value is also less than 0.001.

One can also see that immigrant returns to foreign experience are on average somewhat

lower than returns of stayers. The correlation between the two sets of is 0.65.

   The simplest possible explanation of Figure 8 is that workers in poor countries ac-

cumulate less human capital from experience than workers in richer countries, since this

explanation can account for both the findings for stayers and immigrants simultaneously.

In contrast, theories of the findings for stayers working through country differences in

wage-setting institutions need to appeal to separate explanations for the two sets of find-

ings. For example, assume that we believe that workers in all countries accumulate similar

amounts of human capital from experience, but that labor-market institutions present in

poor countries lead high-experience workers there to earn less than their marginal prod-

ucts. Then this may potentially account for the lower measured returns to experience

among stayers in poor countries than stayers in rich countries. But it does not explain

the immigrant findings, and hence one needs a second explanation for them. In the next

section we examine two such potential explanations.



                                              19
5.5   Comparing Other Characteristics of Immigrants and Stayers

   Previous work in the immigration literature has considered two additional factors that

may affect returns to experience for immigrants: selection and skill loss. Our main concern

is that selection or skill loss works differently for immigrants from poor and rich countries,

and that this differential selection or skill loss explains why returns to experience vary

with GDP per capita. Appendix A.6 presents a simple model that formalizes these two

hypotheses; below we explain them each informally.

   To address each of these possibilities, we combine our evidence from immigrants with

data on non-migrants from a large set of countries for which appropriate data are available.

In particular, we use data on stayers from IPUMS, using nationally representative survey

data for all countries with internationally comparable data on years of schooling and oc-

cupation. The key difference between the data we use here and those used to estimate

experience-wage profiles earlier in the paper is that those in the current section do not

generally have information on wages.

   We begin by addressing the hypothesis of differential selection. In short, this theory

states that immigrants from rich countries are more positively selected (or less negatively

selected) on ability to learn than immigrants from poor countries, where ability to learn is

an individual trait that affects the human capital generated per year of potential experience.

To test this hypothesis, we consider the average years of schooling for immigrants and non-

migrants. Our underlying assumption is that ability to learn will be positively correlated

with duration of schooling, which allows us to make inferences about ability selection from

data on school selection.

   Figure 9 shows the results. The left-hand panel shows that average years of schooling

among stayers is strongly correlated with log GDP per capita, with less than five years

of schooling on average in the poorest countries and more than twelve years on average

in the richest. In contrast, the right-hand panel shows that immigrants from countries of

all income levels are highly educated on average, with the majority having roughly twelve

years of schooling. These data do not support the differential selection hypothesis, because

immigrants from poorer countries are actually much more positively selected on schooling



                                             20
attainment than are immigrants from richer countries.

    We now turn to the hypothesis of differential skill loss. Briefly, this theory says that

immigrants from rich countries can transfer more of their experience human capital to

the U.S. than can immigrants from poor countries. To test this hypothesis, we compare

rates of skill loss for immigrants and non-migrants. We define a worker to be experiencing

skill loss if they have a college education (our notion of “skilled”) but work in a low-skilled

occupation.22 For each country, we calculate the fraction of all college-educated immigrants

and stayers that work in high-skilled occupations.

    Figure 10 plots the results. The left-hand panel shows that among stayers, a high

fraction of college-educated workers are in high-skill jobs in countries of all income levels.

The trend is positive with GDP per capita, meaning that college-educated workers in rich

countries tend to work at high-skilled jobs with higher frequency. The right-hand panel

shows that a large fraction of college-educated immigrants are employed at high-skilled

jobs as well, and that the relationship is also increasing in GDP per capita of origin. It is

clear that immigrants are less likely to work at high skilled jobs than stayers in countries

of any income level. This is consistent with the presence of skill loss. However, the slopes

for immigrants and stayers appear similar, suggesting that skills loss is present to a similar

degree in countries of all income levels. This is evidence against the possibility that our

findings are explained by differential skill loss.

    We also investigate a more subtle form of differential selection or skill loss that operates

through an association with experience. The idea here is that immigrants with more

experience may be selected differently than those with less selection, and that the difference

in how selected they are may be correlated with GDP per capita; a similar story works for

skill loss. To test this, we compared selection or skill loss (as defined above) between low

and high experience immigrants in our sample. We find no evidence that the difference in

selection or skill loss between these groups is correlated with GDP per capita. These checks,

when combined with the fact that returns to experience patterns are strongly correlated
  22
     IPUMS has standardized occupation codes across all our data sources. We define high skilled to be
“professionals,” “technicians and associate professionals,” and “legislators, senior officials and managers,”
and low skilled to be “clerks, service workers and shop and market sales,” “skilled agricultural and fishery
workers,” “crafts and related trades workers,” “plant and machine operators and assemblers” and “elemen-
tary occupations.” We omit individuals in the armed forces or other unspecified or unreported occupations.


                                                     21
with the same patterns for non-migrants, suggest that cross-country differences in human

capital accumulation are the most plausible interpretation of the data.

6   Development Accounting

    In this section, we illustrate the economic significance of our findings by applying them

to a development accounting exercise. Our accounting exercise follows the previous litera-

ture, in particular the work of Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997), Hall and Jones (1999)

and Caselli (2005), in constructing measures of the aggregate physical and human capital

stocks across countries using data on the average quantities and returns to schooling and

potential experience. We depart from the previous literature by allowing the return to

experience to differ across countries. We show that this one change increases the impor-

tance of physical and human capital in accounting for income differences from around forty

percent to around sixty percent.

    Conceptually, we differ from existing studies in the following way. Existing studies

assume that the mapping between years of experience and human capital from experience

is the same in all countries. We allow the mapping between years of experience and human

capital from experience to vary across countries.

    To measure human capital, we assume that the human capital of individual i at time

t with schooling sit and experience xit is



                                 hit = exp(g(sit ) + f (xit )),                          (9)

which is the specification assumed by Bils and Klenow (2000). Studies such as those of

Hall and Jones (1999) and Caselli (2005) posit the same equation but ignore the f (xit )

term and focus just on schooling. Given country-specific estimates of the wage returns

experience, f , and schooling g, it is then easy to compute individual human capital stocks

and to aggregate them. This is what we do next.




                                              22
6.1   Aggregate Experience Human Capital

   We begin by decomposing individual human capital stocks into the components due to

experience and schooling hit = hSit hX
                                     it , where



                          hX
                           it = exp(f (xit )),        hSit = exp(g(sit )),


and g and f are estimated for each country in the wage regression (3). Analogously,

we define the aggregate experience human capital stock per worker as the average of the

individual stocks across individuals and over time

                                              T    Nt
                                      X     1X 1 X
                                  H       =           hX
                                                       it .                            (10)
                                            T   Nt
                                              t=1       i=1


Our estimates for aggregate experience human capital stocks are simply the integral of the

estimated experience-wage profiles from the previous section (i.e., the area beneath the

wage profiles) using the distribution of work experience from the data. Computing human

capital this way makes three assumptions that are standard in the development accounting

literature: (i) workers earn their marginal products, (ii) workers supply their entire human

capital to the labor market, and (iii) human capital is valued in efficiency units. These

assumptions imply that a worker’s human capital is proportional to his wage.

   Figures 11a - 11d plot the implied experience human capital against per capita GDP

for each country. For these figures, the experience human capital stocks are calculated

using the quintic specification in equation (6), and each figure corresponds to a different

restriction on cohort and year effects, analogous to Figures 1-5. These figures display a

strong and significant relationship between human capital from experience and income

levels. The estimates of experience human capital stocks for each country are available

upon request.




                                                 23
6.2    Aggregate Human Capital from Both Schooling and Experience

    We define the total human capital stock per worker (due to both schooling and expe-

rience) in a country to be the average of individual human capital stocks:

                                                 T    Nt
                                               1X 1 X
                                        H=               hit .                                         (11)
                                               T   Nt
                                                  t=1      i=1


The estimates of these human capital stocks are based on our estimated returns to schooling

and experience from the quintic specification. Compare (10) and (11) and note that we

are not decomposing the aggregate human capital stocks into a part due to schooling and

a part due to experience. In particular, H 6= H S H X (even though at the individual level

hit = hSit hX
            it ). Instead we are simply asking what human capital stocks would be if one

were to only take into account schooling or only take into account experience.

    Table 3 Panel (a) summarizes our country-specific estimates of aggregate human capital

stocks and presents two measures of the cross-country distribution of total human capital

stocks. The first measure we use is the log variation in human capital stocks and the

second measure is the slope of a linear regression of log human capital stocks on log GDP

per capita. The first measure is reported in column (1) and shows that simple dispersion

of human capital stocks, as measured by the log variation, is somewhat larger for schooling

than for experience, but both are of the same order of magnitude. The latter measure

is reported in column (2) and shows that a one-percent increase in log GDP per capita

corresponds to a 0.21-percent increase in human capital stock from experience. For the

sake of comparison, we also present the increase in the human capital stock from school-

ing, which is 0.15 percent. These results show that experience and schooling contribute

roughly equally to generate the differences in human capital stocks between rich and poor

countries.23

    Finally, the third row of Panel (a) in Table 3 reports the dispersion of total human
   23
      Note that while cross-country differences in human capital due to schooling and experience are similar
in magnitude, there is an important asymmetry in how those differences arise. In the case of schooling,
it is well known that returns to a year of school completed are roughly similar across countries, while
average years of schooling completed are higher in richer countries. For experience, as we document,
returns to a year of experience are higher in rich countries, while the average level of experience does not
vary substantially between countries (see Figure A.9 in the Appendix).



                                                    24
capital stocks, where we take into account both schooling and experience. It shows that

taking into account cross-country differences in returns to experience (going from row one

to three) roughly doubles both the dispersion in human capital stocks across countries and

the slope of the relationship between human capital stocks and GDP per capita. Panels

(b), (c) and (d) of Table 3 show that these numbers change somewhat when we use the

estimates from the three versions of the Deaton-Hall method, but that our main finding –

that allowing returns to experience to vary across countries increases cross-country human

capital gaps – is always present.

6.3      Development Accounting

    To make the development accounting exercise comparable to the existing development

accounting literature, we use the same accounting method as in the survey by Caselli

(2005). Our accounting procedure uses a Cobb-Douglas aggregate production function,

Y = K α (AH)1−α , where Y is a country’s real GDP per worker, K is its physical capital

stock per worker, A is total factor productivity, and H is our measure of the aggregate

human capital stock per worker. The capital share is assumed to equal one-third, α = 1/3,

which is standard in this literature.

    Following Caselli (2005), we calculate the measure:

                                                 var(ln YKH )
                                    success1 =                ,                        (12)
                                                  var(ln Y )

where YKH = K α H 1−α is the component of output due to factors of production. In-

tuitively, success1 represents the fraction of actual variation in log output per worker

that would be present if countries differed only by stocks of human and physical capital.

Note that this measure does not take into account the correlation between YKH and Y ,

and as such could be inflated by noisy estimates. For example, high measurement error

in YKH could be confounded with high explanatory power, since it artificially increases

var(ln YKH ). In light of this caveat, we also report the slope of a regression of ln YKH on

ln Y .

    Table 4 presents these measures when we calculate aggregate human capital stocks

either from only schooling, from only experience or from both schooling and experience.


                                                 25
Panel (a) shows the results using our cross-sectional estimates of human capital stocks.

When human capital is measured by only using schooling as in most of the literature,

success1 is equal to 0.40. Recall that in Table 3, we showed that cross-country differ-

ences in experience human capital are roughly as big as those in schooling human capital.

This is reflected in Table 4: the second row reveals that when human capital is measured

only using experience, success1 is 0.40. In other words, schooling and experience human

capital taken alone are roughly equally important determinants of cross-country income

differences. Finally, when both schooling and experience are taken into account, the mea-

sure of success increases substantially, up to 0.63. From the slope of the regression of

ln YKH on ln Y , reported in column (2), calculating human capital from both education

and experience increases not only the total variability of ln YKH across countries, but also

its correlation with ln Y . Panels (b), (c) and (d) show that similar findings apply when we

construct human capital using our estimates with controls for time or cohort effects.24

7        Development Accounting under Alternative Models of Human Capital

         In this section, we illustrate how our development accounting conclusions change quan-

titatively under alternative models of human capital. In particular, we consider two depar-

tures from the simple conceptual framework in Section 3.1, on which the accounting exercise

in the previous section is based. First, we consider how our development accounting results

change if time investment plays an important role in human capital accumulation as in

the Ben-Porath (1967) model. Second, we explore how imperfect substitutability between

workers of varying experience levels affects our results.

7.1        Experience-Wage Profiles with Time Investment

         The framework in Section 3.1 and our development accounting results are consistent

with a number of theories of human capital accumulation, and in particular with theories

in which human capital accumulates “passively” as a by-product of working. In contrast,

we show here that if workers’ time is an important investment into human capital accu-

mulation, our development accounting results provide an upper bound on the importance
    24
    In Appendix A.7 we illustrate the effects of each departure that we take from existing accounting
exercises and their influences on our final results. In short, our results differ almost entirely because we
allow returns to experience to differ across countries, and not because our data differ on other dimensions
with the data used by previous studies.


                                                    26
of lifecycle human capital differences across countries.

       Consider a simple model of human capital accumulation where individuals can invest

into human capital accumulation as in Ben-Porath (1967): ḣ = F (h, `), where ` are time

inputs into the production of human capital, h(0) = 1 and F is a smooth function. As-

suming that an individual has a time endowment of one, her wage is given by



                                   w(t) = ω̄(1 − `(t))h(t) exp(ε).                                   (13)

       The individual is considered to be in school if `(t) = 1. In Ben-Porath type models, the

time paths for `(t) are obtained from individuals’ optimizing behavior. Before discussing

the determinants of these choices, we begin with a simple case that takes these time paths

as given and is further instructive because it maps back to our empirical model in Sections

3 and 6 exactly:                                   
                                                   
                                                   θ(`)h,
                                                                 `=1
                                 ḣ = F (h, `) =                                                     (14)
                                                   
                                                   φ(`)h,
                                                                 ` < 1.

Here, θ(`) is the marginal return in terms of human capital during school and φ is the

return during school. It is easy to show that


                                       log h(t) = g(s) + f˜(x),                                      (15)


where s denotes years spent in school, x = t − s years of experience, and g(s) and f˜(x)

are the cumulative returns to schooling and experience.25 Substituting into equation (13)

yields an equation linking wages, schooling and potential experience that has the same

form as our estimating equation (3)



                         log w = log ω̄ + g(s) + log(1 − `(x)) + f˜(x) +ε,                           (16)
                                                 |        {z         }
                                                              f (x)

where f (x) is the estimated experience-wage profile. In Ben-Porath type models, there
  25
                                                    ´s      ˜                 ´x     ˜
    These cumulative returns are defined as g(s) ≡ 0 θ(`(s))ds̃  and f (x) ≡ 0 φ(`(x))dx̃.   Further note
that (15) is the same functional form as our “human capital production function” (1) which is also the one
used by Bils and Klenow (2000).




                                                   27
are two reasons for upward-sloping experience-wage profiles. The first is human capital

accumulation (f˜(x) increases with each year of experience). The second is that workers

may decrease the amount of time allocated towards human capital accumulation (`(x) is

decreasing with each year of experience). Empirically, one cannot separately identify these

two channels and our estimated experience-wage profiles, f (x), would reflect both.26 If, in

contrast, human capital investment took the form of goods investment rather than time

investment, or if human capital was simply accumulated passively as in learning-by-doing

models, this problem would not arise.

    The implication for development accounting is that in Ben-Porath type models with

time investment, one cannot infer increases in human capital from experience-wage profiles

alone. Thus, under these theories, the development accounting conclusions of the previous

section are an upper bound on the importance of lifecycle human capital differences.

7.2    Quantitative Role of Human Capital Investment Time

    The goal of this section is to quantitatively disentangle increases in human capital from

decreases in investment time through the lens of a Ben-Porath model. We can then re-do

our standard development accounting exercise using the human capital stocks implied by

the model, and ask whether there are still substantial differences in these stocks across

countries.

    For simplicity, we consider a simplified version of the model above in which time is

the only factor in producing human capital. In particular, we assume that human capital

accumulates according to ḣ = φ(`)h, where ` is the worker’s time spent investing in new

human capital. We assume further that φ(`) = B`γ − δ, where B and γ govern efficiency

and returns to scale in human capital investment and δ is the depreciation rate of existing

capital. Finally, we assume away human capital accumulation during schooling. Workers

solve the problem
                                      ˆT
                            max            e−rt [ω(1 − τ (t))h(t)(1 − `(t))] dt,                    (17)
                           `(t),t=0
                                      0
  26
     We thank Lutz Hendricks for first pointing this out to us. Relative to a standard development ac-
counting exercises like ours, the Ben-Porath model departs from the assumption that workers supply their
entire human capital to the labor market. See also Kuruscu (2006) who argues that, in the United States,
much of the steepness of experience-wage profiles is explained by a decreasing fraction of time allocated
towards human capital accumulation.


                                                       28
subject to ḣ = φ(`)h, where τ (t) is a “wedge” that determines the human capital accu-

mulation decision over time. These wedges can be thought of as any factor which gives

workers a disincentive to accumulate more human capital, and which potentially varies

with a worker’s potential experience (in this case, t ).

       To quantify the importance of human capital investment time for measuring cross-

country experience human capital stocks, we proceed as follows. We first assume that the

human capital production function is the same in all countries. Next, we pick the τ (t)

paths for each country to match the country’s experience-wage profile exactly. Finally,

we recover the implied paths for investment and human capital, `(t) and h(t), for each

country. In Section A.8 of the Appendix, we show how this can be done in the current

framework by using the fact that optimizing workers will choose not to invest in the final

period, i.e. `(T ) = 0.

       The parameter values we use in the quantitative exercise are B = 0.19, γ = 0.94 and

δ = 0, which are taken from Manuelli and Seshadri’s (2014) cross-country analysis of the

Ben-Porath model. Their efficiency and scale parameters are disciplined to be consistent

with the U.S. age-wage profiles and observed inputs to human capital production. Their

depreciation rate is chosen based on the observation that wage profiles do not systematically

decline at the end of the lifecycle.27

       Appendix Figure A.10 presents the human capital and investment profiles for the

United States, as an illustration. Early on, workers spend just over one-third of their

time investing in human capital. Over the lifecycle, their investment time declines steadily

until eventually reaching zero. Human capital increases rapidly over the lifecycle and then

eventually levels off. The wage rise is steeper than the rise in human capital, reflecting

both the increase in capital and the decrease in investment time. Countries with flatter

experience-wage profiles differ in that they have less investment and smaller increases in

human capital over the lifecycle.
  27
     The interpretation of their scale parameter and our parameter γ differs slightly. This is for two reasons:
first, their formulation features both time and non-time inputs into human capital accumulation, whereas
we abstract from the latter for simplicity. Second, we postulate an accumulation technology that is linear
in human capital rather than being subject to slight diminishing returns. Both departures are made
entirely for tractability, as they allow us to obtain analytic solutions for the time path of wages given time
allocation decisions.



                                                      29
   When we redo the development accounting results using the experience human capital

implied by the model, we find that success1 rises to 0.50, up from 0.40 in the world without

experience human capital. This is lower than the 0.63 of the benchmark calculations, but

still represents a substantial increase in the importance of factors. We also find that the

slope of a regression of ln YKH on ln Y increases from 0.52 to 0.59. This implies that adding

human capital from experience still increases the correlation between actual income and

income in a world with only factor differences.

   In summary, when human capital is measured through the lens of a Ben-Porath model

of human capital investment, the quantitative importance of experience human capital

is lower than in our benchmark analysis. However, the main qualitative point of our

study stands since importance of human capital in accounting for income differences is

still substantially increased.

7.3   Imperfect Substitutability Between Human Capital Types

   The development accounting exercise in Section 6 makes the assumption that human

capital is measured in efficiency units, i.e. different skill types are perfect substitutes.

Here, we briefly discuss how the introduction of imperfect substitutability would alter our

results. Similar to Jones (forthcoming), we come to the conclusion that it would likely

result in larger estimated cross-country gaps in human capital stocks. In our framework,

this is because imperfect substitutability changes the mapping from the Mincer regression,

equation (4), to the estimated human capital stocks. To see this, consider a variant of our

development accounting framework in which the aggregate human capital stock H depends

on the human capital stocks H̃(x, s) of different schooling- and experience-types as follows

                                                         !    σ
                                                             σ−1
                                  X                σ−1
                           H=           H̃(x, s)    σ              ,   1 < σ < ∞.
                                  x,s

   This results in a non-constant skill price ωct (x, s) . Under the assumption that different

skill types consist of an equal number of people, one can show that the Mincer regression

(4) becomes

                                            
                                         1
               log wict   = log ω̄ + 1 −         (g(sict ) + f (xict )) + γt + χc + εict .   (18)
                                         σ

                                                    30
         With imperfect substitutability, σ < ∞, estimated returns to experience (1 − σ1 )f (·)

are always strictly smaller than true returns to experience f (·). Hence, imperfect substi-

tutability would lead us to underestimate cross-country differences in returns to experience

and hence human capital stocks.28

8        Conclusion

         A large literature has concluded that human and physical capital account for less than

half of cross-country income differences (Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare, 1997, Hall and

Jones, 1999, Caselli, 2005). Probably because of data limitations, this literature has found

that taking into account human capital from experience does not change the explanatory

power of human and physical capital. This paper uses better data than what were available

to earlier studies and documents that experience-wage profiles are steeper in rich countries

than in poor countries. We also find that immigrants from richer countries have higher

returns to foreign experience than immigrants from poorer countries. This suggests that

the most plausible explanation for our cross-country results is that there are cross-country

differences in human capital from experience. To assess the economic significance of our

new finding, we conduct a development accounting exercise where we allow the return to

experience to vary across countries. We find human and physical capital now account for

sixty percent of income differences across countries, up from forty percent.
    28
     More generally, if we relax the assumption that different skill types consist of an equal number of
people, an additional term shows up in equation (18) capturing varying scarcity of different experience
types as experience accumulates. Because experienced individuals are usually scarcer in poor countries
this would likely lead us to underestimate cross-country differences in the true returns to experience even
further.




                                                    31
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, “The Colonial Origins
 of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review,
 December 2001, 91 (5), 1369–1401.

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, “Deconstructing Lifecycle Expenditure,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 2013, 97.

Azariadis, Costas, “Human Capital and Self-Enforcing Contracts,” Scandinavian Journal
 of Economics, 1988, 90 (4), 507–28.

Barro, Robert J and Jong-Wha Lee, “International Data on Educational Attainment:
 Updates and Implications,” Oxford Economic Papers, July 2001, 53 (3), 541–63.

Ben-Porath, Yoram, “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 1967, 75, 352.

Bhattacharya, Dhritman, Nezih Guner, and Gustavo Ventura, “Distortions, En-
 dogenous Managerial Skills and Productivity Differences,” Review of Economic Dynam-
 ics, January 2013, 16 (1), 11–25.

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow, “Does Schooling Cause Growth or the Other Way
  Around?,” NBER Working Papers 6393, National Bureau of Economic Research Febru-
  ary 1998.

   and , “Does Schooling Cause Growth?,” American Economic Review, December 2000,
  90 (5), 1160–83.

Borjas, George J., “Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality and the Earnings of Immi-
 grants,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1985, 3, 463–489.

Burdett, Kenneth, “A Theory of Employee Job Search and Quit Rates,” The American
 Economic Review, 1978, 68 (1), pp. 212–220.

   and Dale T Mortensen, “Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and Unemployment,”
  International Economic Review, May 1998, 39 (2), 257–73.

Cagan, Phillip, “Measuring Quality Changes and the Purchasing Power of Money: an
 Exploratory Study of Automobiles,” The National Banking Review: a Journal of Policy
 and Practice, 1965.

Carroll, Christopher D. and Lawrence H. Summers, “Consumption Growth Paral-
 lels Income Growth: Some New Evidence,” in “National Saving and Economic Perfor-
 mance” NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1991, pp. 305–348.

Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in Philippe
 Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1, Elsevier, 00
 2005, chapter 9, pp. 679–741.

Chiswick, Barry, “The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-Born Men,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 1978, 86 (5), 897–921.



                                         32
Coulombe, Serge, Gilles Grenier, and Serge Nadeau, “Quality of Work Experience
 and Economic Development–Estimates Using Canadian Immigrant Data,” Journal of
 Human Capital, Forthcoming.

Deaton, Angus, The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to
 Development Policy, The World Bank, 1997.

Erosa, Andres, Tatyana Koreshkova, and Diego Restuccia, “How Important Is Hu-
  man Capital? A Quantitative Theory Assessment of World Income Inequality,” Review
  of Economic Studies, October 2010, 77 (4), 1421–1449.

Friedberg, Rachel M., “The Labor Market Assimilation of Immigrants in the United
  States: The Role of Age at Arrival,” 1992. Unpublished Manuscript, Brown University.

Galor, Oded and Joseph Zeira, “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,” Review of
 Economic Studies, 1993, 60 (1), 35–52.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
 Shleifer, “Human Capital and Regional Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 forthcoming.

Gollin, Douglas, “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, April
 2002, 110 (2), 458–474.

Guvenen, Fatih, “Learning Your Earning: Are Labor Income Shocks Really Very Persis-
 tent?,” American Economic Review, June 2007, 97 (3), 687–712.

  , Burhanettin Kuruscu, and Serdar Ozkan, “Taxation of Human Capital and Wage
  Inequality: A Cross-Country Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (2), 818–
  850.

Hall, Robert E., “Technical Change and Capital from the Point of View of the Dual,”
 The Review of Economic Studies, 1968, 35 (1), pp. 35–46.

   and Charles I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per
  Worker Than Others?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1999, 114 (1),
  83–116.

Hanushek, Eric A. and Dennis D. Kimko, “Schooling, Labor-Force Quality, and the
 Growth of Nations,” American Economic Review, December 2000, 90 (5), 1184–1208.

Heckman, James and Richard Robb, “Using Longitudinal Data to Estimate Age,
 Period and Cohort Effects in Earnings Equations,” in William M. Mason and Stephen E.
 Fienberg, eds., Cohort Analysis in Social Research, Springer New York, 1985, pp. 137–
 150.

Hendricks, Lutz, “How Important Is Human Capital for Development? Evidence from
 Immigrant Earnings,” American Economic Review, March 2002, 92 (1), 198–219.

Herrendorf, Berthold and Todd Schoellman, “Why is Measured Productivity so Low
 in Agriculture?,” Working Paper 2011.



                                          33
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 7.0
 Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University
 of Pennsylvania May 2011.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, “Development Accounting,” American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2010, 2 (1), 207–23.

   and     , “The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico,” Working Paper, Stanford
  University 2012.

Huggett, Mark, Gustavo Ventura, and Amir Yaron, “Sources of Lifetime Inequal-
 ity,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 2923–54.

Hurst, Erik, Geng Li, and Ben Pugsley, “Are Household Surveys Like Tax Forms:
 Evidence from Income Underreporting of the Self Employed,” Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 2014, 96 (1), 19–33.

Jones, Benjamin F., “The Human Capital Stock: A Generalized Approach,” American
  Economic Review, forthcoming.

Jovanovic, Boyan, “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,” Journal of Political
  Economy, October 1979, 87 (5), 972–90.

Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii, “Accounting for the Changing Life-
 Cycle Profile of Earnings,” Working Paper 2009.

King, Miriam, Steven Ruggles, J. Trent Alexander, Sarah Flood, Katie
 Genadek, Matthew B. Schroeder, Brandon Trampe, and Rebecca Vick, Inte-
 grated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 3.0. [Machine-
 readable database], University of Minnesota, 2010.

Klenow, Pete and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
 Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?,” in “NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Volume
 12” NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1997, pp. 73–114.

Kuruscu, Burhanettin, “Training and Lifetime Income,” American Economic Review,
 June 2006, 96 (3), 832–846.

Lazear, Edward P, “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, December 1979, 87 (6), 1261–84.

Lemieux, Thomas, The “Mincer Equation" Thirty Years After “Schooling, Experience,
  and Earnings", Springer,

Lucas, Robert E., “Ideas and Growth,” Economica, 2009, 76 (301), 1–19.

   and Benjamin Moll, “Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of Time,” NBER Work-
  ing Papers 17495, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2011.

Manuelli, Rodolfo E. and Ananth Seshadri, “Human Capital and the Wealth of
 Nations,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (9), 2736–62.

Michelacci, Claudio and Vincenzo Quadrini, “Financial Markets and Wages,” Review
 of Economic Studies, 04 2009, 76 (2), 795–827.

                                          34
Minnesota Population Center, Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, International:
 Version 6.1 [Machine-readable database], University of Minnesota, 2011.

Murphy, Kevin M and Finis Welch, “Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles,” Journal of
 Labor Economics, April 1990, 8 (2), 202–29.

Perla, Jesse and Christopher Tonetti, “Endogenous Risk and Growth,” mimeo, NYU
 2011.

Psacharopoulos, George, “Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update,”
 World Development, 1994, 22 (9), 1325–43.

Schoellman, Todd, “Education Quality and Development Accounting,” The Review of
  Economic Studies, March 2012, 3 (1), 133–175.

Seshadri, Ananth and Nicolas Roys, “The Organisation of Production and Economic
  Development,” Working Paper, University of Wisconsin Madison 2012.

Shastry, Gauri Kartini and David N. Weil, “How Much of Cross-Country Income
  Variation is Explained By Health?,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
  04/05 2003, 1 (2-3), 387–396.

Weil, David N., “Accounting for The Effect of Health on Economic Growth,” The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 08 2007, 122 (3), 1265–1306.




                                        35
                     Table 1: Returns to Experience and GDP per Capita
                                                                  Corr(Height20, GDP) Slope(Height20, GDP)
                                                                          (1)                    (2)
Benchmark (No cohort or time effects)                                   0.60***               0.20***

Restriction 1: All growth is due to cohort effects                       0.42                   0.14
Restriction 2: All growth is due to time effects                        0.58**                 0.13**

Restriction 3: Growth is equally due to time and cohort effects          0.52*                 0.13*

Notes: Column (1) shows the correlation coefficient between the height of the experience-wage profile at 20
years of experience and log per capita GDP in 2010 at PPP. Column (2) presents the coefficient of from a
bivariate regression. Restrictions 1, 2 and 3 refer to the estimated returns to potential experience using the
Deaton-Hall method. The sample for the benchmark includes all 35 countries. The sample for the Deaton-
Hall estimates includes 12 countries. *,** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels.




                                                     36
 Table 2: Returns to Experience and GDP per Capita: Alternate Specifications
                                   Corr(Height20, GDP)          Slope(Height20, GDP)
                                            (1)                          (2)
Benchmark                                 0.60***                      0.20***
                                           (a) Alternative Sample Restrictions
Include Part-Time Workers                0.51***                        0.14***
Male Workers                             0.54***                        0.24***
Male Private Workers                     0.55***                        0.23***
Non-Agricultural Workers                 0.53***                        0.18***
Older than 18 Years Workers              0.59***                        0.19***
Older than 22 Years Workers               0.43**                         0.15**
                                   (b) Alternative Definitions of Potential Experience
Start Work at Age 6                       0.50***                      0.17***
Start Work at Age 15                      0.59***                      0.21***
Notes: Column (1) shows the correlation coefficient between the height of the experience-
wage profile at 20 years of experience and log per capita GDP in 2010 at PPP. Column (2)
presents the coefficient of from a bivariate regression. The sample for the benchmark
includes all 35 countries. *,** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and
1% levels.




                                           37
              Table 3: Variance of Human Capital Stocks Across Countries
                                         Var(log(H))                   Slope(log(H), log(GDP))
Human Capital Measure                        (1)                                  (2)
                                                          (a) Benchmark
Schooling                                   0.12                                 0.15
Experience                                  0.09                                 0.21
Schooling + Experience                      0.26                                 0.36
                                      (b) Restriction 1: All Growth is due to Cohort Effects
Schooling                                   0.11                                 0.11
Experience                                  0.14                                 0.04
Schooling + Experience                      0.40                                 0.16
                                       (c) Restriction 2: All Growth is due to Time Effects
Schooling                                   0.07                                 0.17
Experience                                   0.07                               0.18
Schooling + Experience                       0.17                               0.35
                               (d) Restriction 3: Growth is Equally due to Cohort and Time Effects
Schooling                                   0.08                                 0.14
Experience                                  0.08                                 0.11
Schooling + Experience                      0.24                                 0.25
Notes: Column (1) presents the cross-country variance in human capital stocks that take into account
human capital from schooling, experience and experience + schooling. Column (2) presents the
coefficient of the bivariate regression between the log of human capital and the log of 2010 GDP per
capita at PPP. In Panels (b)-(d), restrictions 1, 2 and 3 refer to the estimated returns to potential
experience using the Deaton-Hall method in countries with multiple cross-sections of data spanning
fifteen or more years. The sample in Panel (a) includes 35 countries. The samples used in Panels (b) -
(d) include 12 countries.




                                                   38
                              Table 4: Development Accounting
                                           Success1                    Slope(log(YKH), log(GDP))
Human Capital Measure                        (1)                                   (2)
                                                         (a) Benchmark
Schooling                                   0.40                                  0.53
Experience                                  0.40                                  0.56
Schooling + Experience                      0.63                                  0.65
                                     (b) Restriction 1: All Growth is due to Cohort Effects
Schooling                                   0.33                                  0.51
Experience                                  0.28                                  0.43
Schooling + Experience                      0.51                                  0.52
                                      (c) Restriction 2: All Growth is due to Time Effects
Schooling                                   0.34                                  0.56
Experience                                  0.31                                  0.53
Schooling + Experience                      0.49                                  0.66
                              (d) Restriction 3: Growth is Equally due to Cohort and Time Effects
Schooling                                   0.33                                  0.53
Experience                                  0.28                                  0.48
Schooling + Experience                      0.47                                  0.59


Notes: Column (1) presents the cross-country variance of log YKH (from from schooling, experience
and experience + schooling) divided by the cross-country variance in of log per capita 2010 GDP. YKH
is output per worker assuming that countries differ only in their stocks of human and physical capital
per worker. Column (2) presents the coefficient from a bivariate regression. In Panel (a), the sample
includes 35 countries. In Panels (b)-(d), restrictions 1, 2 and 3 refer to the estimated returns to
potential experience using the Deaton-Hall method. The samples include 12 countries.




                                                   39
Figure 1: Fully Flexible Experience-Wage Profiles – India, Mexico and the United States




                           1
     Relative Wages (in Logs)
              .5           0




                                                   0          5     10          15        20        25               30         35          40
                                                                             Years of Potential Experience
                                                                              India     Mexico                U.S.




                                                  Figure 2: Returns to Experience vs. GDP per Capita – All Countries


                                                                                                                                  NLD
                                                                                                                                   CHE
     Height at 20 Years of Potential Experience
                                           1.5




                                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                                                                 GER


                                                                                               THA
                                                                                                                           ITA
                             1




                                                                                             CHN
                                                                                                        URY               KOR        USA
                                                                                                                                      AUS
                                                                                                  BRA
                                                                            HND
                                                                              IDN                COL
                                                                                                 PER                             GBR
                                                                                                           CHL
                                                                                                                                FRA
                                                        BGD                   BOL                        ARG
                                                                                 EGY                    MEX
                                                                                             JAMPAN                        TWN
               .5




                                                                                  PRY   GTM ZAF
                                                                  NIC                    ECU
                                                                        VNM IND                               RUS
                           0




                                                   7                    8                9                           10                     11
                                                                               GDP per Capita (in Logs)




                                                                                        40
Figure 3: Returns to Experience vs. GDP per Capita – Restriction 1: All Growth is due
to Cohort Effects

                                                                                  CHN

         Height at 20 Years of Potential Experience
                                               1.5


                                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                               GER

                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                     IDN
                                 1




                                                                                    JAM
                                                                                                         ITA
                                                                                                                  USA
                                                                                    BRA      CHL


                                                                    IND
                   .5




                                                                                           MEX

                                                          BGD
                               0




                                                      7         8               9                   10                  11
                                                                      GDP per Capita (in Logs)




Figure 4: Returns to Experience vs GDP per Capita –Restriction 2: All Growth is due to
Time Effects
         Height at 20 Years of Potential Experience
                                               1.5




                                                                                                                CAN

                                                                                                               GER
                                                                                                         ITA
                                 1




                                                                                  CHNBRA                          USA
                                                          BGD        IDN                                       GBR
                                                                                              CHL
                                                                                           MEX
                                                                                    JAM
                   .5




                                                                    IND
                               0




                                                      7         8               9                   10                  11
                                                                      GDP per Capita (in Logs)




                                                                             41
Figure 5: Returns to Experience vs. GDP per Capita – Restriction 3: Growth is equally
due to Cohort and Time Effects


        Height at 20 Years of Potential Experience
                                              1.5

                                                                                            CHN
                                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                                                                 GER
                                1




                                                                                                                           ITA
                                                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                               IDN                                                  USA
                                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                                 JAM
                                                                                                          CHL


                                                         BGD                                            MEX
                  .5




                                                                           IND
                              0




                                                     7                 8                 9                          10                    11
                                                                               GDP per Capita (in Logs)




                                                     Figure 6: Returns to Experience Among New Immigrants
                              1.5




                                                                                                                               GER

                                                                                                                           JPN
        Height at 20 Years of Potential Experience




                                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                                           FRA

                                                                                            BRA
                                     1




                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                              POL        KOR
                                                                     VNM IND


                                                                                                  DOM
                    .5




                                                                                       PER
                                                               NIC       HND           COL
                                                                       PHL                         CUB
                                                                                     ECU
                                                                                                   MEX                     TWN
                                                                                     SLV    JAM
                                                                                     GTM

                                                                                           CHN
                              0




                                                     7                 8                 9                          10                    11
                                                                               GDP per Capita (in Logs)




                                                                                       42
                                                      Figure 7: Returns to Experience for All Immigrants
                                                                                                                                BEL NOR




                                            1.5
                                                                                                                           DNK
                                                                                                                          JPN
 Height at 20 Years of Potential Experience                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                                           GER
                                                                                                                             NLD
                                                                                                                       NZLFRA
                                                                                                                           GBR
                                                                                                                        ITA
                                                                                                                       ESP
                              1


                                                                                                                               AUS SGP
                                                                                    JOR               MYS             ISR
                                                                                              ZAF                            CAN
                                                                                                                            IRL
                                                                                                 TUR LTU
                                                                                                       HRV
                                                                                            BRA                KOR
                                                                                                                BRB
                                                                        SDN    SYR            ROMBGR LBN      GRC HKG
                                                                                                    CHL          TWN
                                                                                          DMA       ARG    PRT   TTO
                                                   LBR              NGA         IDN
                                                                              MAR              IRN
                                                                                CPVEGY
               .5




                                                   SOM                                     CHNVEN
                                                                                              BLZ      GRD
                                                                                                         POL
                                                                  HTI GHA
                                                         ETH SLE BGD    PAK                 THA          HUN
                                                                              IND      BIHUKRJAM
                                                              AFG                  IRQ ALB COL    PAN
                                                                KEN CMR    VNMHNDGUY            DOMCRI
                                                                                           PER     MEX
                                                                          UZB BOL
                                                                        NIC
                                                                             PHL       SLV
                                                                                     ARM
                                                                                      GTM          CUB
                                                                     KHM LAO                       URY
                                                                                       ECU
                                                                                 LKA
                                                                NPL
0




                                                                                                         BLR

                                                  6             7            8               9                       10                11
                                                                          GDP per Capita (in Logs)




                                                  Figure 8: Returns to Experience for Immigrants and Stayers
                                         2
Height at 20 Years of Potential Experience




                                                                                                                                 CHE

                                                                                                                                 NLD
                              1.5




                                                                                                                           GER
                                                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                                                              CHE
                                                                                                                           GER
                                                                                                                             NLD
                                                                                                                         FRA
                                                                                                                           GBR
                                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                       THA
                    1




                                                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                       ZAF    URY                      ITA CAN AUS
                                                                                                                              USA
                                                                          IDN       CHN BRA                          KOR FRA
                                                                           BOL         PER
                                                                                        BRA                          KOR GBR
                                                      BGD                              COL
                                                                       HND EGY                   CHL
                                                                                                 CHL
                                                                                       ZAF     ARG                        TWN
                                                                          IDN EGY ECU JAMPANMEX
          .5




                                                                NIC                 CHNTHA                                TWN
                                                      BGD
                                                                    VNM IND             JAM
                                                                                  GTM COL  PAN
                                                                    VNMHND             PER   MEX
                                                                NIC        BOL
                                                                                  GTM         URY
                                                                                   ECU
0




                                                  7                   8             9                          10                      11
                                                                          GDP per Capita (in Logs)

                                                                          Returns to Experience of Stayers
                                                                          Returns to Experience of U.S. Immigrants




                                                                                   43
                                                  Figure 9: Average Years of Schooling for Immigrants and Stayers

                                                                      Stayers                                                                                            U.S. Immigrants


                           15




                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                UKR
                                                                                                                                                                         CMR INDEGY ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                         NGA                        TWN
                                                                                                  IRL                                                                 KEN
                                                                                                   NLD                                                                           IDN                   CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                             ARM        HUN       CAN                                                                                   VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                         IRN        FRA
                                                                                                                                                                      NPL                  MYS    ISRGBR
                                                                                       BLR
                                                                                                                                                              LBR      BGDGHAPHLMAR          BLR KOR   NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      CAN
                                                                                                                                                                    SLE     SDN JOR UKRTURPAN          AUT
                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                             GRC AUS                                                                            BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                   ARM BRAARG
                                                                                                                                                                                      THA
                                                                                                                                                                                            CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                              HUN ESP IRL
                                                                                      CUB     ISR AUT
                                                                                                  CHE                                                                                PER
                                                                                                 GBR                                                                                   JAM URY
                                                                          JOR                KOR
                                                                                               ITA                                                                                   COL
                                                                                                                                                                                      CHNCRI
                                                                                CHN
                                                                                 JAM
                                                                                              ESP                                                                       HTI NIC
                                                                                                                                                                             VNM IRQECU CUB
                                                                                                TWN                                                                                              GRC
                                                                                PER CHL
                                                                                    ARG
                                                                                ZAFPAN                                                                                                             ITA
      Average Schooling Years




                                                                                                                   Average Schooling Years
                          10




                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                          EGY                                                                                                             DOM
                                                                            ECU
                                                                      PHL
                                                                                URY
                                                                               DOM          PRT                                                                           KHM                      PRT
                                                        NPL                   IRN                                                                                                     SLV
                                                                                CRI
                                                                  VNM IRQ VEN   MYS                                                                                                          MEX
                                                                     BOL        MEX
                                                                               TUR
                                                                      IDN SLV
                                                                           COL
                                                              NGA           BRA
                                                               GHA
                                                                NIC IND     THA

                                                            CMR
                                                         KENKHM
       5




                                                                                                                    5
                                                          BGD
                                                                         MAR
                                                 LBR
                                                             HTI

                                                       SLE
                                                                   SDN
                           0




                                                                                                                                        0

                                                 6       7      8        9       10                      11                                                   6       7      8        9       10             11
                                                          GDP per Capita (in Logs)                                                                                     GDP per Capita (in Logs)




Figure 10: Fraction of College Educated Workers in High-Skilled Occupations for Immi-
grants and Stayers

                                                                      Stayers                                                                                            U.S. Immigrants
                           1




                                                                                                                                        1




                                                                          JOR          HUN ITAAUT
                                                                                              CHE
                                                                    VNM               BLR
                                                                                    CRI
                                                                                    CUB
                                                                                         PRT NLD                                                                                       ZAF         ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ISRCAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHE
                                                                                 BRAMYS
                                                                                ZAF  CHL   ESP                                                                                  IND                  FRA
                                                                   EGY                                                                                                                                 AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                      IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ITA
                                                              CMR                                                                                                                           MYS GRC
      % of College Educated in High Skill Jobs




                                                                                                                   % of College Educated in High Skill Jobs




                                                              NGA    SLV                                                                                                                   TUR
                                                                NIC     VEN
                                                                         IRN
                                                                           URY                                                                                                            IRN  HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                 PRT
                                        .75




                                                                                                                                                     .75




                                                                          PAN                    IRL                                                                                    JAM
                                                                       THA
                                                                       JAM                   GRCFRA
                                                         KEN     BOL
                                                                 MAR      TUR                    CAN                                                                SLE           JOR        CHL
                                                                          DOM                 ISR                                                                     KENNGA             VEN
                                                 LBR      HTIGHA     ECU
                                                                      PER MEX                                                                                                       EGY    PAN
                                                                                                                                                                         CMRVNM PHLIRQ BRA BLR
                                                                   SDNPHL
                                                                       IND                                                                                                  GHA IDN         CRI
                                                       SLE
                                                                                                                                                                                            URY
                                                                          IRQ                                                                                 LBR
                                                                                                                                                                        HTI
                                                                                                                                                                          KHMSDN MAR    THA
                                                                                                                                                                                 BOL PER
                        .5




                                                                                                                                     .5




                                                               KHM                                                                                                                          CUB
                                                                                                                                                                                            MEX
                                                                         IDN                                                                                                          ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                           DOM
                                                                                                                                                                             NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                      SLV
        .25




                                                                                                                     .25
                           0




                                                                                                                                        0




                                                 6       7      8        9       10                      11                                                   6       7      8        9       10             11
                                                          GDP per Capita (in Logs)                                                                                     GDP per Capita (in Logs)




                                                                                                              44
                                                                  Figure 11: Implied Human Capital from Experience versus GDP per capita
                                                           (a) Benchmark                                                                                 (b) Restriction 1: All Growth Due to Cohort Effects

                                                                                                        CHE                                                                           CHN




                                4
                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                      GER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GER
                                                                                                       CAN




                       3
                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GBR
                                                                       THA                      ITA  NLDAUS
                                                                                                                                                                           IDN                                      NLD
                                                                     CHN       URY                    USA                                                                                                    ITA
                                                                                              KOR FRA                                                                                    JAM




            2
                                                                        BRA
                                                                       PER                         GBR                                                                                                                USA




                                                                                                                           2
                                                             BOL
                                                            IDN                                                                                                                          BRA      CHL
                                         BGD                    EGY               CHL
                                                         HND PRY        COL     ARG                                                                                       IND
                                                  NIC                    JAMPANMEX
                                                                     ECUZAF                    TWN
                                                      VNM IND       GTM
                                                                                   RUS                                                                    BGD                                  MEX




     Human Capital from Experience
                                                                                                                     Human Capital from Experience




     1
                                                                                                                    1




                    0
                                                                                                                                    0
                                     7               8               9                   10                    11                                    7                8               9                 10                  11
                                                           GDP per Capita (in Logs)                                                                                         GDP per Capita (in Logs)




45
                                         (c) Restriction 2: All Growth Due to Time Effects                                                           (d) Restriction 3: Half of Growth Due to Time Effects




                    4
                                                                                                                                    4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GER
                                                                                                      GER                                                                             CHN
                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CAN




                          3
                                                                                                                                         3




                                                                                                ITA    NLD                                                                                                         NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ITA GBR

                                                                        BRA                                                                                                IDN                                        USA
                                                                                                         USA




               2
                                                                                                                              2




                                                                     CHN                              GBR                                                                                BRA
                                         BGD              IDN                                                                                                                            JAM      CHL
                                                                                 CHL                                                                      BGD
                                                                        JAM   MEX                                                                                         IND
                                                         IND                                                                                                                                   MEX




      1
                                                                                                                     1




     Human Capital from Experience
                                                                                                                    Human Capital from Experience




                    0
                                                                                                                                    0




                                     7               8               9                   10                    11                                    7                8               9                 10                  11
                                                           GDP per Capita (in Logs)                                                                                         GDP per Capita (in Logs)
A     Online Appendix – Not for Publication

A.1    Data Sources

    The surveys we employ in our analysis are listed below for each country. All surveys
are nationally representative unless noted. We attempted to obtain data for every country
in the world with a population greater than one million people. We obtained a number of
surveys from the Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) Rural Income Generating Ac-
tivity (RIGA) database; these surveys are available here: www.fao.org/economic/riga/riga-
database/en/. We obtained a number of other surveys through the Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series (IPUMS) (Minnesota Population Center, 2011; King et al., 2010), which
can be found here: www.ipums.org. The remaining surveys were made available to us by
the statistical agencies of the countries in question or other sources, as listed below.


    • Argentina: Encuesta Permanente de Hogares, 2003, 2007 and 2010, from the Insti-
      tuto Nacional de Estadística y Censos; representative of urban areas.

    • Australia: Household Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia, yearly from 2001
      to 2009, from the Australian Department of Families, Housing, Community Services
      and Indigenous Affairs, available from the Cornell Department of Policy Analysis
      and Management.

    • Bangladesh: Household Income and Expenditure Survey, 1995, 2000, 2005 and 2010,
      from the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, available from the FAO RIGA database.

    • Bolivia: Encuesta de Hogares, 2005, from the Bolivian Instituto Nacional de Estadís-
      tica.

    • Brazil: Recenseamento Geral do Brasil, Censo Demográfico, 1970 (5% sample), 1980
      (5% sample), 1991 (5.8% sample), and 2000 (6% sample), from the Instituto Brasileiro
      de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE), available from IPUMS, and Pesquisa Nacional por
      Amostra de Domicilios, yearly from 2001 to 2010, from IBGE.

    • Canada: Census of Canada, 1971 (1% Sample), 1981 (2% Sample), 1991 (3% Sample)
      and 2001 (2.7% Sample), available from IPUMS.

    • Chile: National Socioeconomic Characterization Survey (CASEN), 1992, 1994, 1996,
      1998, 2000, 2003, 2006 and 2009, from the Chilean Ministry of Planning and Coop-
      eration.

    • China: Urban Household Surveys (0.01% of urban households, 27 cities), 1988 to
      2005 yearly; representative of urban areas.

    • Colombia: XIV National Population and III Housing Census by Departmento Ad-
      ministrativo Nacional de Estadística (DANE), 1973 (10% of households), available
      from IPUMS.

    • Ecuador: Estudio de Condiciones de Vida, 1995, from the Instituto Nacional de
      Estadística y Censos, available from the FAO RIGA database.



                                            46
• Egypt: Labor Market Panel Survey, 2006 from the Egyptian Central Agency for
  Public Mobilization and Statistics.

• France: Enquete Emploi, yearly from 1993 to 2001, from the Ministre de l’Économie
  de l’Industrie et de l’Emploi.

• Germany: German Socioeconomic Panel (SOEP), yearly from 1991 to 2009, from
  the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW Berlin).

• Guatemala: Encuesta Nacional de Condiciones de Vida, 2000 and 2006, from the
  Instituto Nacional de Estadistica.

• Honduras: Encuesta Permanente de Hogares de Propósitos Multiples, 2005, from the
  Secretaria de Trabajo y Seguridad Social.

• India: Socio Economic Survey by National Sample Survey Organization, 1983, 1987,
  1993, 1999 and 2004, available from IPUMS.

• Indonesia: Family Life Survey, National Labour Force Survey (SAKERNAS), 1988
  to 1994 and 1996 to 2011, from the Indonesia Badan Pusat Statistik

• Italy: Survey on Household Income and Wealth, 1991, 1993, 1995, 1998, 2000, 2002,
  2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, from the Bank of Italy.

• Jamaica: Population Census, 1982, 1991 and 2001, (10% samples) from the Statistical
  Institute of Jamaica, available from IPUMS.

• Mexico: XI General Population and Housing Census, 1990 (10% sample); Population
  and Dwelling Count, 1995 (0.4% of sample); XII General Population and Housing
  Census, 2000 (10.6% of sample), available from IPUMS.

• Netherlands: DNB Household Survey, yearly from 1994 to 2010, available from cen-
  tERdata.

• Nicaragua: Encuesta Nacional de Hogares sobre Medición de Nivel de Vida, 1998
  and 2001, from the Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos, available from the
  FAO RIGA database.

• Panama: Censo Nacional de Población y de Vivienda de Panamá, 1990 (10% sam-
  ple), available from IPUMS, and the Encuesta de Condiciones de Vida, 2003, from
  the Dirección de Estadística y Censos de Panamá, available from the FAO RIGA
  database.

• Paraguay: Encuesta Permanente de Hogares, 2011, from the Direccion General de
  Estadistica.

• Peru: Encuesta Nacional de Hogares, 2004 and 2010, from the from the Instituto
  Nacional de Estadística y Informática.

• Russia: Russia Longitudinal Monitoring Survey, yearly from 2000 to 2010, available
  from the Carolina Population Center at the University of North Carolina, Chapel
  Hill.

• South Africa: Labor Force Survey, 2000, 2001 and 2002 from Statistics South Africa.

                                       47
   • South Korea: Korea Labor and Income Panel Study, yearly from 1999 to 2008, from
     the Korea Labor Institute, available from the Cornell Department of Policy Analysis
     and Management.

   • Switzerland: Swiss Household Panel, yearly from 1999 to 2009, from the Swiss Foun-
     dation for Research in Social Sciences, available from the Cornell Department of
     Policy Analysis and Management.

   • Taiwan: Survey of Family Income and Expenditure, yearly from 1995 to 2003, avail-
     able from the Research Program in Development Studies at Princeton University.

   • Thailand: Thailand Socioeconomic Survey, 1990, 1992, 1994, 1996, 1998 and 1999,
     available from the Research Program in Development Studies at Princeton University.

   • United Kingdom: British Household Panel Survey, yearly from 1992 to 2009, from
     the Institute for Social & Economic Research at the University of Essex.

   • United States: Census of Population and Housing, 1960 (1% Sample), 1970 (1%
     Sample), 1980 (5% Sample), 1990 (5% Sample) , 2000 (5% Sample); American Com-
     munity Survey, 2005 (1% Sample); Current Population Survey, yearly from 1980 to
     2010; all available from IPUMS.

   • Uruguay: Extended National Survey of Households, 2006, from the Uruguay National
     Institute of Statistics, available from IPUMS.

   • Vietnam: Living Standards Survey, 1998 and Household Living Standards Survey,
     2002, both from the General Statistics Office of Vietnam, available from the FAO
     RIGA.


All calculations in our analysis are weighted using the applicable sample weights for each
survey. We express all earnings and wage data in local currency units of the most recent
year in the data using the consumer price index of the country in question, taken from the
IMF’s International Financial Statistics database. In each survey, we drop the top and
bottom 1% of earners to remove potential outliers, and to minimize the impact of potential
cross-country differences in top-coding procedures.
    For most countries, we measure hours as the actual hours worked in the past week
(or in some recent reference week.) For the United States, Brazil (the census data) and
Italy, we measure hours as the usual weekly hours worked (which is what is available).
For Colombia, China, India, Panama (the census data), Taiwan and Thailand, we have no
hours data available, and impute hours as the average hours worked in all other countries
for the individual’s level of experience. We define an individual to be a full-time worker
if she works more than 30 hours per week. As noticed, for few countries, namely China,
Colombia, India, Panama, and Thailand, we do not have hours data. For India, the data
report whether an individual is a full-time worker. We use this variable to restrict the
sample. For China, Colombia, Panama, and Thailand we have instead no information and
hence we are forced to keep all the workers. In order to be sure that the inclusion of these
countries is not driving our result, we recomputed all the analysis of the paper excluding
them. All the results are robust to this exclusion and are available upon request
    For most countries, labor earnings and hours worked are for both primary and secondary
jobs. In Argentina, Chile, France, South Korea and Uruguay, labor earnings and hours

                                            48
worked are for just the primary job. For Brazil (the census data) and Switzerland, we
measure labor income as the total income earned of individuals reporting to be primarily
wage earners (as opposed to self-employed.) In most countries, earnings are reported at
the monthly frequencies. The exceptions are Australia, Canada, Germany, Jamaica, South
Korea, and the United States, in which earnings are measured at the annual frequency,
and India, in which earnings are measured at the weekly frequency. In all surveys, earnings
are before taxes. The numbers for per capita GDP at PPP that we use in some of our
calculations and figures are taken from the Penn World Tables (Heston et al., 2011).
    When we use repeated cross sections in the paper to estimate experience-wage profiles,
we draw on data for all countries for which we have cross-sections spanning 15 years.
These countries are: Bangladesh (1995, 2000, 2005 and 2010), Brazil (1970, 1980, 1991,
2000-2010), Canada (1971, 1981, 1991, 2001), Chile (1990, 1992, 1994, 1996, 1998, 2000,
2003, 2006, 2009), China (1988 - 2005), Germany (1991 - 2009), India (1983, 1987, 1993,
1999, 2004), Indonesia (1988-1994, 1996-2011), Italy (1991, 1993, 1995, 1998, 2000, 2002,
2004, 2006, 2008, 2010), Jamaica (1982, 1991, 2001), Mexico (1970, 1980, 1990, 1995, 2000,
2005), United Kingdom (1992 - 2009), United States (1960, 1970, 1980, 2000, 2005).


A.2    Restrictions for Identification of Cohort and Time Effects

    This section adds some additional structure to our conceptual framework in Section
3.1 that gives more precise interpretations to cohort and time effects, and then uses it to
derive meaningful restrictions on cohort and time effects that can be used to separately
identify them using the Deaton-Hall method.

A Framework for Thinking about Cohort and Time Effects. Section 3.1 moti-
vated our main estimating equation (4) from a simple model of human capital but left
unspecified why the skill price ωct is cohort- and time-specific. Here, we provide a simple
model that fills this gap and is also consistent with the development accounting exercise
in Section 6. There is a representative firm with a constant returns production function
                                                          !
                                                X
                               Yt = F Kt , Zt       Xc Hct ,                           (19)
                                                     c∈Ct


PNct Yt denotes output, Kt capital, and Ct the set of cohorts working at time t. Hct =
where
  i=1 hict is the aggregate human capital of cohort c at time t and its efficiency depends on
two factors: cohort-neutral efficiency Zt , and cohort-specific efficiency Xc . This production
function can be usefully written as

                                     Yt = F (Kt , At Ht ) ,                               (20)
            P
where Ht = c∈Ct Hct is the aggregate human capital stock in year t and the efficiency of
aggregate human capital At has two determinants At = Zt X̄t where
                                              X           Hct
                                      X̄t ≡          Xc       .                           (21)
                                                          Ht
                                              c∈Ct

Note that At is what the development accounting literature refers to as TFP. Aggregate
human capital efficiency, At , can improve over time for two reasons: i) directly, due to


                                               49
increases in cohort-neutral human capital efficiency; and ii) indirectly, due to changes in
the composition of cohorts active in the labor market. For example, suppose that young
cohorts are more productive than old ones. Then human capital efficiency will improve
over time as old cohorts exit the labor force and young cohorts enter.
    From the profit maximization problem of firms, we can now derive an expression for
the skill price ωct in terms of the primitives of this simple model:
                                        ∂Yt
                                ωct =        = FL (κt , 1)Zt Xc ,                        (22)
                                        ∂Hct
where κt ≡ Kt /(At Ht ) is capital per units of “effective human capital”. On a balanced
growth path, κt would equal a constant. As in equation (3) this can be written as ωct =
ω̄ exp(γt + χc ) where the cohort and time effects are given by

                         ω̄ exp(γt ) ≡ FL (κt , 1)Zt ,     exp(χc ) ≡ Xc .               (23)

The time effect γt captures changes in cohort-neutral productivity Zt and capital accumu-
lation κt , and the cohort effect χc captures changes in cohort-specific productivity Xc .

Restrictions on Cohort and Time Effects. To impose meaningful restrictions on
cohort and time effects, consider the evolution of aggregate labor productivity (or more
precisely “aggregate human capital productivity”)

                          MPHt = FL (κt , 1) At = FL (κt , 1) Zt X̄t .                   (24)

First, note that on a balanced growth path, with κt constant, the growth rate of labor pro-
ductivity MPHt would simply equal that of aggregate labor efficiency At . Not surprisingly
then given our discussion above, labor productivity growth can also be decomposed into a
part “due to time effects”, i.e. economy-wide changes affecting everyone, and a part “due
to cohort effects”, i.e. improvements specific to individual cohorts. To see this use (23) to
write
                                   MPHt = ω̄ exp(γt + χ̄t ),                             (25)
where χ̄t ≡ log X̄t . Equation (25) is the key equation we use to derive meaningful restric-
tions on cohort and time effects. The basic idea is to decompose the time series for MPHt
into a trend component and a cyclical component and to make assumptions on whether the
trend component (“labor productivity growth”) is attributed to time or to cohort effects.
    In practice, this is executed in the following way. First, it isPconvenient to define time
periods in deviations from the sample mean, i.e. such that T1 Tt=0 t = 0, and similarly
renormalize γt and χ̄t such that T1 Tt=0 γt = T1 Tt=0 χ̄t = 0 (an appropriate choice of the
                                     P             P
constant ω̄ does the trick). Second, the series for γt and χ̄t can be decomposed into a trend
component and a cyclical component

                             γt = gγ t + uγ,t ,    χ̄t = gχ t + uχ,t ,

where                               PT                     PT
                                         γt t                      χ̄t t
                             gγ =   Pt=0
                                      T    2
                                              ,        gχ = Pt=0
                                                              T       2
                                                                           .             (26)
                                      t=0 t                   t=0 t
Intuitively, one simply runs a regression of γt and χt on time, thereby decomposing each


                                                  50
time series into a trend component and a component that is orthogonal to the time trend.
Finally, from (25), aggregate labor productivity is

                              log MPHt = log ω̄ + gM t + uM,t ,

where gM = gγ + gχ and uM,t = uγ,t + uχ,t . The different restrictions we use are then
simply different ways of splitting gM between gγ and gχ . The three restrictions for which
we present results in the main text are as follows.
    Restriction 1: the time trend in labor productivity growth is entirely due to cohort
effects:
                                    gM = gχ , gγ = 0.
From (26) this implies the linear restriction Tt=0 γt t = 0, i.e. that time effects are or-
                                               P
thogonal to a time trend and capture only cyclical variation. This is exactly the same
restriction as equation (2.94) in Deaton (1997).
    Restriction 2: the time trend in labor productivity growth is entirely due to year
effects:
                                    gM = gγ , gχ = 0.
From (26) this implies the linear restriction Tt=0 χ̄t t = 0 or
                                             P

                             T
                                                                   !
                             X               X               Hct
                                   log              exp(χc )           t = 0.          (27)
                                                             Ht
                             t=0             c∈Ct

Note that the human capital stocks Hct enter this restriction. Since the construction of
human capital stocks requires estimating equation (4), it is necessary to use an iterative
procedure.
    Restriction 3: a share θ of the time trend in labor productivity growth is due to year
effects:
                              gγ = θgM , gχ = (1 − θ)gM .
From (26), this implies the linear restriction
                                       T
                                       X                       T
                                                               X
                                   θ         χ̄t t = (1 − θ)         γt t.             (28)
                                       t=0                     t=0

It can be seen that restrictions 1 and 2 are the special cases θ = 0 and θ = 1. In the main
text, we represent results for the case θ = 1/2.
    Understanding Cohort and Time Controls: The Case of China
    To illustrate how our controls for cohort and time effects work in practice, we consider
the case of China in detail. Figure A.6 plots the estimated effects of experience, cohort
and time in China under Restriction 1. In this restriction, all labor productivity growth is
due to cohort effects, while time effects capture cyclical influences. The upper left panel
reproduces the cross-sectional returns to experience (i.e., no controls for either time or
cohort) for convenience. The bottom panels show the estimated cohort effects and time
effects. The upper right panel shows the experience-wage profile after controls for cohort
and time.
    Figure A.6 shows that the experience-wage profile for China is much steeper under
Restriction 1 than in the cross-sectional estimate. To see why, note that cohort effects


                                                      51
are steeply upward sloping (bottom left panel), meaning that younger cohorts are much
more productive than older cohorts. How then can one reconcile higher wages for more
experienced workers in the cross section (upper left panel) than less experienced workers?
The answer is that the return to experience must be very high (upper right panel).
    Figure A.7 plots the estimated effects of experience, cohort and time in China under
Restriction 2. In this restriction, all labor productivity growth is due to time effects,
while cohort effects have no time trend. Here, the experience-wage profiles are very similar
when controlling for cohort and time effects as in the cross-sectional estimates (upper two
panels). The reason is that when all productivity growth is due to time effects, cohort
effects have no overall trend. Thus, this restriction implies that older and younger cohorts
have similar producitivity levels. It follows that controlling for cohort effects does little to
estimated experience-wage profiles.

A.3     Composition Effects

Agriculture. A key difference between rich and poor countries is that poor countries
tend to have a much larger share of workers that engage in agriculture than rich countries.
This could affect our estimates of average experience-wage profiles for each country if
profiles are flatter for agricultural workers, which has been found to be true in the United
States (Herrendorf and Schoellman, 2011).
    To consider the role of this compositional difference, we estimate equation (4) separately
for the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors. The experience-wage profile of country j
is then simply a weighted average of the sectoral profiles

                          fj (x) = `A,j (x)fA,j (x) + (1 − `A,j (x))fN,j (x),                       (29)

where `A,j (x) is the employment share in agriculture in country j and A stands for agrscul-
ture and N for non-agriculture.29 Figure A.1a shows the height of the experience-wage
profile at twenty years of experience in agriculture plotted against that in non-agriculture.
It can be seen that all but a few countries lie below the 45-degree line. In other words, for
all but a few countries the experience-wage profiles in agriculture are flatter than those in
non-agriculture, though only modestly so.
    To assess the quantitative importance of the cross-country differences in the proportions
of workers engaged in agriculture for the differences in experience-wage profiles, we conduct
the following counterfactual exercise: we ask what would a country’s experience-wage
profile look like if that country had the United States’ employment share in agriculture.
We compute the following counterfactual experience-wage profiles for each country j

                       f˜j (x) = `A,U S (x)fA,j (x) + (1 − `A,U S (x))fN,j (x).                     (30)

If all of the cross-country differences in experience-wage profiles were due to sectoral dif-
ferences, then this counterfactual would eliminate all such differences. Figure A.1b graphs
the height of both the actual and counterfactual profiles at twenty years of experience
against per capita GDP (using the countries for which data allow us to identify a worker’s
sector). If composition effects explained all cross-country differences in the returns to ex-
perience, the counterfactual heights for all countries would lie on a straight horizontal line
  29
    To see this, note that by the law of iterated expectations, the projection of wages on experience, x,
and schooling, s, can be decomposed by sector, z, as E[log(w)|x, s] = Pr(z = A|s, x)E[log(w)|x, s, z =
A] + Pr(z = N |s, x)E[log(w)|x, s, z = N ].


                                                   52
at the level of the United States. Instead, the counterfactual profiles are very similar to
the actual ones. We calculate a slope coefficient of 0.19 in the counterfactual, compared
to 0.22 in the actual data. In other words, differences in employment shares between agri-
culture and non-agriculture explain a very small part of the cross-country differences in
experience-wage profiles.

Schooling. Another important compositional difference between rich and poor countries
is that workers in poor countries attain fewer years of schooling on average, which could
drive our cross-country results if more educated workers have steeper experience-wage
profiles than less educated ones. Several studies have pointed out that more educated
workers have steeper age-wage profiles (see, for example, Carroll and Summers (1991),
Kambourov and Manovskii (2009) and Guvenen (2007)).
    We explore the extent to which this difference drives our results by allowing the returns
to experience to vary by the different levels of schooling in the human capital production
function in equation (4). For simplicity, we use a simple cutoff specification that allows
for different returns to experience according to whether a worker has “high” (H) or “low”
(L) educational attainment, i.e. whether his years of schooling are larger or smaller than
some cutoff s̄ that is common across countries. We define the threshold to be at ten years
of schooling, s̄ = 10, which is approximately the average years of schooling in our set of
countries, and also a cutoff for which we have sufficient observations above and below in
all countries. When we plot the height of the experience-wage profile for workers with low
schooling (less than ten years) against the height for those with high schooling (more than
ten years), we find no systematic pattern between the steepness of profiles and educational
attainment across countries.
    Next, we conduct a similar counterfactual exercise as earlier and compute the implied
experience-wage profile if all countries had the same share of highly educated individuals as
the United States. We find that the relationship between the height of the counterfactual
profiles and log GDP per capita is identical in the counterfactual and actual exercise, with
a slope coefficient of 0.22 in each case. Thus, our results do not appear to be driven by
differences in the composition of workers across countries by educational attainment.

Other Composition Effects. Using the same basic approach as above, we have ex-
plored composition effects along other dimensions that may differ systematically between
rich and poor countries: services versus non-services, manufacturing versus non-manufacturing,
public- versus private-sector employment, male versus female, urban versus rural, and full-
versus part-time employment. We also explored compositional effects for different com-
binations of these categories. We find that none of these decompositions are important
for explaining cross-country differences in the returns to experience. These results are not
reported for brevity, and are available upon request.

A.4    Measurement Error in Age or Schooling Data

    In Bangladesh and India, two of the poorer countries in our sample, we observe “age
heaping” ’ in the data, where individuals seem to be rounding their ages to the nearest
five years. This is presumably due to survey respondents not knowing their true ages.
Since measurement error in age may lead to attenuation bias in our estimated returns to
experience, and since this problem may affect poor countries more than rich countries, one
may be concerned that our cross-country finding is due to measurement error in age data.


                                             53
    To investigate this further, we construct an auxiliary dataset for the United States in
which we replace the age of a certain percentage of workers with their age rounded to
the nearest five years. We then re-estimate the returns to experience with this auxiliary
dataset. We find that even in the extreme case when we allow ninety percent of the U.S.
population to mis-report their age, the profile is still far above that of (say) India. Thus,
our main cross-country results are not driven by biases induced through age heaping.
    One may have concerns about measurement error in schooling data as well since, in most
countries, direct measures of the years that individuals spent in school are not available. We
therefore rely on educational attainment data (e.g., “some secondary school” and “secondary
school completed”) in order to construct the “years of schooling” variable. Moreover, the
coarseness of the educational attainment categories differs across countries.
    To investigate this possibility further we create two auxiliary schooling variables for
the United States and use them to re-estimate the U.S. experience-wage profile. The first
auxiliary variable imputes schooling years using only information on degree attainment,
such as primary school completion, secondary school completion, and so forth. This is
similar to what we observe in some of the developing countries in our sample. The second
auxiliary variable classifies secondary school graduates or higher as having twelve years
of schooling and all others as having no schooling. This is meant to see how important
an extreme amount of measurement error in schooling years may be. When we compute
the actual and auxiliary profiles, however, we find that the differences are modest, and
that the auxiliary profiles are slightly steeper than the actual ones. We conclude that our
finding of flatter experience-wage profiles in poorer countries is unlikely to be driven by
mismeasured years of schooling.


A.5    Appendix to Section 5 “Evidence from U.S. Immigrants”

Estimating Returns to Experience Using U.S. Immigrants. Our data on immi-
grants draw on the 1980–2000 U.S. Population Censuses as well as the 2005–2012 American
Community Surveys (ACSs), downloaded via IPUMS. Each of these data sets includes a
large, representative cross-section of the U.S. population in a particular year. We choose
not to use data from earlier Censuses because their sample sizes were smaller (1 percent
instead of 5 percent) and immigrants were a much smaller share of the population before
1980. The 2000 Census was the last to include a long form with detailed questionnaires
sent to a subset of the population; the ACS, an annual 1 percent sample of the American
population, is the successor to the Census long form. Most questions and responses were
maintained in the transition, so that combining the data is straightforward.
    We identify immigrants using country of birth. The Census and ACSs provide detailed
responses that code the country of birth for most of the major source countries of U.S.
immigrants. We aggregate only a few categories, mainly combining the subregions of the
United Kingdom into a single country; otherwise, we maintain the Census responses. A
possible complication when considering experience is that an immigrant’s country of birth
may not correspond to where they worked, if they migrated to a third country before
immigrating to the United States. Fortunately, several years of the Census and the ACS
ask also questions about where people lived one or five years prior to the Census. For
those who were outside of the United States, we find that 87% report being in their birth
country five years before migrating and 83% report being their one year before migrating.
In an exercise that is available upon request, we also examined the relationship between


                                             54
this secondary migration and GDP per capita and find no systematic relationship.
    Our data also includes information on the year of immigration, which we need to
divide total potential experience into foreign (birth-country) and domestic (U.S.) potential
experience. In the 1980 and 1990 Censuses this information was provided in ranges (e.g.
1975–1979). This category coding is unfortunate for our analysis because we want to
compute years of foreign and domestic potential experience. We experiment with coding
these ranges to the midpoint and using them in our analysis. We acknowledge that this will
entail some small measurement error in foreign and domestic experience. To check whether
this measurement error is critical for our results, we compare below the baseline results to
those estimated using only data from 2000 onward, when the exact year of immigration is
recorded (see Table A.2). We find that the results are quite similar.
    We construct the hourly wage using information on annual wage and salary income
for the prior year, usual hours worked per week, and weeks worked in the prior year.
Weeks worked is coded into categories in 1980 and from 2008 onward. We use 1990 data
to compute the average weeks worked per category in 1990 and impose this on the 1980
data; we use the 2007 data to compute the average weeks worked per category in 2007
and impose this on the 2008–2012 data. In 1980, income was top coded; we multiply
all top-coded values by 1.4, in line with the literature. From 1990 onward, the Census
replaces all top-coded values with the mean of state income within the top-coded group,
so no adjustment is needed.
    We limit our attention to countries with at least 1,000 immigrants that meet all the
above sample restrictions. We want a relatively large sample of immigrants from each
country because our preferred estimation allows for 18 country-specific parameters: four
domestic experience terms; four foreign experience terms; four experience interaction terms;
returns to schooling; an intercept; and four cohort-decade dummies. A large sample allows
us to estimate precisely foreign experience profiles even with the flexibility implied by this
parameter heterogeneity. An advantage of working with the pooled U.S. Censuses is that
we maintain a large sample of over 1.5 million immigrants from 101 countries that meet
this strong cutoff. Furthermore, these immigrants are drawn broadly from around the
world. For example, we can estimate experience profiles for immigrants from 13 different
African countries.

Robustness of Results for U.S. Immigrants. In this subsection, we explore the
robustness of our stylized result shown in Figure 7 for immigrants to the details of our
estimation procedure. We show that our results are not sensitive to these details: changing
the sample selection criteria, looking at distinct subgroups, or changing the controls all
yields a similar finding. A parsimonious way to show this fact is to focus on the regression
lines plotted in that Figure. They capture the extent to which returns to experience vary
with (the log of) GDP per capita in the birth country. Table A.2 displays the coefficient
on log GDP per capita from these regressions. Focusing on the row “Baseline” shows that
there is a statistically significant and positive relationship for immigrants who get both
their schooling and experience abroad.
    The remaining rows show the same results for alternative robustness checks. For each,
we change our estimation in the listed manner; restrict our sample to countries with more
than 1,000 immigrants in the modified sample; estimated the returns to foreign experience;
calculate the height of the experience profile plotted at 20; and regress those heights against
the log of PPP GDP p.c. The figure given is the slope of that estimated line. For example,
the second row shows the relationship between steepness of experience profiles and birth

                                              55
country income is actually stronger if we limited our sample to only those with at least
a college degree. The third and fourth rows show that our pattern prevails and is highly
statistically significant if we focus on those with no more than a high school diploma or
exclude those with advanced degrees. The fifth row shows that allowing for nonlinear
returns to schooling (higher returns to a year of college than a year of non-college) for
every country in the sample does not substantially alter our result.
    The next five checks focus on subsamples defined by where they work. The pattern is
weakened for those who work for the government, but is essentially the same for manufac-
turing and service industry workers; there are too few immigrants who work in agriculture
to estimate a meaningful relationship. Likewise, the same pattern holds if we focus on
immigrants who work in occupations that are commonly licensed or not; see Schoellman
(2012) for the details of how this is constructed. The pattern also prevails if we focus on
those who speak only English or speak English well; on heads of household, on men; or on
those living outside of ethnic enclaves, defined as a public use micro data area with more
than 5 percent of the population sharing the same birth country or a metropolitan area
with more than 2.5 percent of the population sharing the same birth country; these restric-
tions eliminate around one-third of immigrants from our sample. Our results go through,
indicating that ethnic enclaves do not drive our results. We use only the data from 2000
and onward, which may be interesting because for these years the year of immigration is
coded as the exact year rather than an interval; the results are essentially identical to the
baseline. Finally, we try excluding some of the control variables and find that does not
change our results.

Identification Issues for U.S. Immigrants. This subsection briefly discusses the as-
sumptions needed to identify returns to experience for immigrants. The discussion borrows
heavily from the classic work by Borjas (1985) and Friedberg (1992).
    The first identification issue has to do with a linear dependency between domestic
experience, dataset year, and year of arrival: domestic experience is defined as dataset
year minus year of arrival. This means that we cannot estimate all three effects separately
without further assumptions. We follow Borjas (1985) by including natives and restricting
year effects to be the same for natives and immigrants. The underlying assumption is
that time effects capture aggregate economic conditions such as recessions or inflation that
affect immigrants and natives equally. In this case, natives allow us to identify the time
effects; we can then identify the effects of year of arrival and domestic experience using
immigrants.
    The second identification issue arises in a more general framework than we use in the
text. While our specification includes a number of country-specific effects, we exclude two
considered elsewhere, namely, assimilation effects (measured as years spent in the U.S.)
and age-at-arrival effects (intended to capture adaptability) (Friedberg, 1992).
    Each of these effects is collinear with the effects included in our model. Years in the
United States is the same as U.S. experience; each is calculated as the gap between year
of arrival to the U.S. and dataset year. Here, we have to acknowledge that it is not
clear whether our estimated effects of domestic experience actually represent experience
or a broader effect of assimilation. However, this distinction is not central to our study,
which concern the return to foreign experience. Age at arrival is closely related to foreign
experience: they differ only by the expected age at graduation. Once again, the implication
is that it is difficult to distinguish between the effects of foreign experience and a more
general effect for age at arrival due to, say, adaptability. However, given that our estimated

                                             56
experience profiles for immigrants look strikingly similar to the estimated profiles for non-
migrants, one natural interpretation is that the dominant effect can be attributed to foreign
experience.

A.6    Human Capital, Selection and Skill Loss: A Simple Model

     Here, we present a simple model to make two points. The first is a more precise
statement of what exact forms of selection and skill loss discussed in 5.5 can explain our
immigrant findings, and which ones cannot. The second is a more precise statement of
the argument that low human capital accumulation in poor countries is the only factor
that can simultaneously explain our findings on stayers and immigrants. Individuals are
indexed by i, countries by c. An individual may work either in his country of origin,
acquiring foreign experience or in the United States, acquiring U.S. experience. We denote
variables observed in the U.S. with asterisk superscripts. Within each country of origin,
individuals are heterogeneous in their initial human capital ηic and their learning ability
zic . We assume that E[ηic ] = E[zic ] = 1 for all c but migrants may be a selected part of
the population. We further denote by xic (t) and x∗ic (t) the amount of home-country and
U.S. experience an individual has accumulated up to time t. If an individual works in his
home country his human capital accumulates passively according to

                                  ḣic (t) = zic φc (xic (t))hic (t),                         (31)

with hic (0) = ηic , and when he works in the U.S. it accumulates according to ḣ∗ic (t) =
zic φ∗c (x∗ic (t))h∗ic (t). We allow for the possibility that “human capital accumulation tech-
nologies” differ across countries, and that, upon arrival in the U.S., immigrants gain access
to a different technology. The wage of individual i from country c with x years of home-
country experience is

                               wic (x) = ωc (1 − τc (x))hic (x)eεic ,                         (32)
where ωc is the skill price in country c and τc is a wedge that captures country-specific
labor market institutions. Similarly, the wage of immigrant i from country c with x
years of home-country experience and x∗ years of U.S. experience is wic       ∗ (x, x∗ ) = ω ∗ (1 −
                                                                                            c
  ∗      ∗      ∗
τ (x))hic (x, x )e .ε ic

    At some level of home-country experience x, workers from country c migrate to the
U.S.. Part of a individual’s human capital may be country-specific and therefore lost upon
migration: human capital after migration is h∗ic = mc (hic )hic where mc (hic) ≤ 1. It turns
out to be convenient to assume the functional form mc (hic ) = γc hθicc −1 so that human
capital upon arrival in the U.S. is h∗ic = γc hθicc . The parameter γc > 0 captures the average
“skill loss” incurred by a migrant from country c. The parameter θc > 0, in contrast
captures whether skill loss is more of a problem for high human capital types. There
may also be selection upon migration: denoting the set of individuals with experience
level x who migrate from country c to the U.S. by Mc (x) we allow for the possibility that
E[ηic |i ∈ Mc (x)] 6= E[ηic ] = 1 and E[zic |i ∈ Mc (x)] 6= E[zic ] = 1. Note that we allow
for fairly general types of selection: there may be selection on both initial ability ηic and
learning ability zic , and furthermore both types of selection may differ with the level of
experience.
    Given our assumptions, human     ´ x capital of stayers can be solved in closed form and
satisfies log hic (x) = log ηic + zic 0 φc (y)dy and a similar expression for immigrants. Com-

                                                 57
bining with (32), the wages of stayers and of new immigrants, i.e. those with zero years
of U.S. experience x∗ = 0, are


             log wic (x) = log ωc + log ηic + log(1 + τc (x)) + zic fc (x) + εic
             ∗
        log wic (x, x) = log ωc∗ + log γc + log ηic + log(1 + τ ∗ (x)) + θc zic fc (x) + εic
                              ´x
where we denote by fc (x) = 0 φc (y)dy the cumulative returns to home-country experience.
The regressions we run using data on stayers and immigrants are


log wic = αc + Rc (xic ) + εic ,          Rc (x) = log(1 − τc (x)) + fc (x)
     ∗
log wic   = αc +   Rc∗ (xic )   + εic ,   Rc∗ (x) = E[log ηic |i ∈ Mc (x)] + log(1 + τ ∗ (x)) + θc E[zic |i ∈ Mc (x)]fc (x)

    The measured return to stayers’ experience Rc (x) may differ across countries because of
country-specific labor market institutions τc or cross-country differences in human capital
accumulation fc . The measured returns to immigrants’ home country experience Rc∗ (x)
may differ across source countries for one of four reasons: first, human capital accumula-
tion fc ; second, experience-dependent selection on initial ability, i.e. E[log ηic |i ∈ Mc (x)]
decreases with x; third, selection on learning ability; fourth, experience-dependent skill
loss, θc < 1.
    Our first point is that only the types of selection and skill loss just mentioned can ex-
plain low immigrant returns. In contrast, selection on initial ability that is not experience-
dependent (i.e. Mc (x) = Mc with E[log ηic |i ∈ Mc ] < 1) and skill-loss that is not
experience-dependent and (γc < 1) cannot explain this fact. These simply show up as
country fixed effects αc . Furthermore section 5.5 provides evidence against the importance
of the types of selection and skill loss that can explain the facts. Our second point, which
can be seen clearly from the two equations, is that human capital accumulation fc is the
only factor that can simultaneously explain low measured returns to experience for both
stayers and U.S. immigrants.

A.7       Comparison of Development Accounting Results to Literature

    We now summarize our development accounting results by illustrating the effects of
each departure that we take from existing accounting exercises and their influences on our
final result. The results are shown in Table A.1, and all results use our data. We begin,
in Panel (a), with a specification similar to the one used by Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare
(1997), and proceed step-by-step to the specification in our benchmark exercise, in Panel
(e), making one change at a time.
    The specification in Panel (a) of Table A.1 computes human capital stocks using a
linear-quadratic Mincer specification and the average returns to schooling and experience as
in Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997). The first column presents the dispersion of human
capital across countries, measured as the variance of the logarithm of the stock of country-
specific human capital. The second column presents Success1 . It shows that taking
human capital due to both schooling and experience into account produces a measure of
0.44, which is similar to the value of 0.39 reported in Caselli (2005).
    Panel (b) of Table A.1 uses the same specification, but imposes diminishing returns
to schooling as in Hall and Jones (1999). This is also similar to Bils and Klenow (2000).


                                                      58
Success1 is essentially unchanged at 0.42. Panel (c) allows returns to experience to vary
across countries, but retains the quadratic specification for estimating the returns to expe-
rience. This increases success1 from 0.42 to 0.51. Panel (d) allows the returns to experience
to vary across countries and uses our main quintic functional form for estimating the re-
turns to experience. This causes success1 to further increase from 0.51 to 0.63. Panel
(e) additionally allows returns to schooling to vary across countries (estimated using a
linear control for the years of schooling). This produces our main results shown in Table
4: success1 is 0.63.

A.8    Ben-Porath Model of Human Capital Accumulation

    To measure human capital stocks through the lens of the Ben Porath model of Section
          ´ x as follows. Given h(0) = 1, the human capital at experience level x is
7.2, we proceed
log h(x) = 0 φ(`(s))ds. Since w = ω̄(1 − `)h exp(ε), the wage regression is
                                                                          ˆx
                                                      1 − `(x)
              log w = log(ω̄(1 − `(0))) + log                           +        φ(`(s))ds + ε.   (33)
                                                      1 − `(0)
                                                                            0

As mentioned above, we assume that the technology φ is known and the same across all
countries, and that all cross-country variation in investment decisions is driven by the
wedge τ (t). The time allocation, `(x), can then be identified as follows. First, we have an
experience-wage profile f (x) from the data, and we know that:

                                                             ˆx
                                            1 − `(x)
                          f (x) = log                      +        φ(`(s))ds.                    (34)
                                            1 − `(0)
                                                               0

Differentiating and rearranging, we obtain:


                            `0 (x) = φ(`(x)) − f 0 (x) (1 − `(x)).
                                                     


     In any Ben-Porath model, it will be true that just before retirement at x = T , people
do not invest in human capital: `(T ) = 0. So given functions f (x) and φ(`), this is a simple
differential equation in `(x) with a terminal condition at `(T ) = 0. It can be solved very
efficiently with a finite difference method.




                                                 59
                            Table A.1: Relation to Literature
                                            Var(log(H))                        Success1
Human Capital Measure                         (1)                                 (2)
                                 (a) Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare

Schooling                                    0.06                          0.39
Experience                                   0.01                          0.25
Schooling + Experience                       0.08                          0.44
              (b) Hall-Jones Schooling + Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare Experience
Schooling                                      0.05                              0.37
Experience                                     0.01                              0.25
Schooling + Experience                      0.07                             0.42
            (c) Hall-Jones Schooling + Country-Specific Quadratic Returns to Exp
Schooling                                      0.05                              0.37
Experience                                     0.03                              0.32
Schooling + Experience                      0.12                             0.51
             (d) Hall-Jones Schooling + Country-Specific Quintic Returns to Exp
Schooling                                      0.05                              0.37
Experience                                     0.08                              0.42
Schooling + Experience                         0.18                              0.63
       (e) Benchmark: Country-Specific Returns to Schooling (Linear) and Exp (Quintic)
Schooling                                   0.12                                 0.40
Experience                                  0.09                                 0.40
Schooling + Experience                      0.26                                 0.63
Notes: Column (1) presents the cross-country variance of the log of human       capital (from from
schooling, experience and experience + schooling). Column (2) presents the cross-country
variance of log YKH divided by the cross-country variance in of log per capita 2010 GDP, where
YKH is output per worker assuming that countries differ only in their stocks of human and
physical capital per worker. Panel (a) computes human capital stocks using a linear-quadratic
Mincer regression and the average returns to schooling and experience as in Klenow and
Rodriguez-Clare (1997). In our sample, the average coefficients on schooling, experience and
            2
experience are 0.092, 0.048 and -0.00076. Panel (b) uses the same specification except for
imposing diminishing returns to schooling using the methodology of Hall and Jones (1999):
assume that g(s), where s is the years of schooling, is piecewise linear with a slope of 0.13 for
s<=4, 0.10 for 4<s<=8 and 0.07 for 8<s. Panel (c) allows the returns to experience to vary
across countries, but retains a quadratic specification. Panel (d) is identical to panel (c), except
that it uses a quintic specification. Panel (e) additionally allows the returns to schooling to vary
(linearly) across countries.




                                                60
Table A.2: Returns to Immigrant Experience and GDP per capita: Robustness

      Sample                                     Estimate             Standard Error
      Baseline                                      0.200                  0.024
      College Graduate or More                      0.241                  0.037
      High School Graduate or Less                  0.146                  0.030
      No Advanced Degress                           0.145                  0.027
      Nonlinear School                              0.198                  0.031
      Public Employee                               0.137                  0.060
      Manufacturing                                 0.222                  0.052
      Service Industry                              0.180                  0.026
      Licensed Occupation                           0.111                  0.056
      Unlicensed Occupation                         0.193                  0.046
      Excellent English                             0.208                  0.024
      Head of Household                             0.232                  0.031
      Men                                           0.196                  0.026
      No Ethnic Enclaves                            0.188                  0.027
      Year 2000+                                    0.188                  0.026
      No State, Gender Controls                     0.218                  0.026
      Note: Each row in the table represents the slope coefficient and its standard error
      from a regression of the estimated returns to twenty years of potential experience on
      GDP per capita.




                                               61
Figure A.1: Returns to Experience in Agriculture and Non-Agriculture
                                                    (a) Height of Profiles at 20 Years of Experience by Sector

                         2.52




                                                                                                                 CHE
   Wage Premium Agriculture
                  1.5




                                                                             ITA                    CAN
           1




                                                                          FRAUSA
                                                                         CHN
                                                                            BRA AUS                  GER
                                                                  ZAF           THA
                                                         RUS                 URY
   .5




                                                              NIC          KOR
                                                                 PAN
                                                                  MEX
                                                                 JAM
                                                                   PRY IDN
                                                                TWN              COL
                                                              VNM
                                                             BGD ECU HND
                                                                    IND
                         0




                                                                     GTM

                                                0               .5             1          1.5                               2               2.5
                                                                         Wage Premium Non−Agriculture



                                                    (b) Counterfactual: U.S. Employment Share in Agriculture

                                                                                                                                      CHE
                                                                                                                                      CHE
   Height at 20 Years of Potential Experience
                                       1.5




                                                                                                                                  GER
                                                                                                                                  GER
                                                                                                                                    CAN
                                                                                                                                    CAN




                                                                                                                                      AUS
                          1




                                                                                                 THA                                  AUS
                                                                                                COL
                                                                                                           URY                ITA
                                                                                                                               ITA   USA
                                                                                                                                     USA
                                                                                              THA
                                                                                                BRA        URY
                                                                                                BRA                         KOR
                                                                                                                            KOR FRA
                                                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                             IDN            CHN
                                                                                            CHN
                                                                                              COL
                                                                         HNDIDN
                                                                                         GTM
                                                                          IND PRY
                                                                         HND   PRY
                                                                                         ECU ZAF
                                                                                             ZAF      MEX
                                                                                               JAM PANMEX
                                                                                         ECU JAM  PAN                           TWN
              .5




                                                                                                                                TWN
                                                                NIC VNM
                                                                NIC VNM
                                                       BGD
                                                                           IND          GTM
                                                      BGD
                                                                                                                 RUS
                                                                                                                 RUS
                         0




                                                7                    8                 9                               10                   11
                                                                             GDP per Capita (in Logs)
                                                                                   Counterfactual                 Actual




                                                                                        62
                                                           Figure A.2: Fully Flexible Experience-Wage Profiles by GDP-per-capita Quartile
                                                     (a) Top Quartile                                                                                            (b) Second Quartile




                                                                                                                                              1.5




                            1.5
                                                                                                                                  1




                 1
                                                                                                                       .5




      .5
     Relative Wages (in Logs)
                                                                                                                     Relative Wages (in Logs)




                   0
                                                                                                                                   0
                                    0   5   10         15       20       25      30                        35   40                                  0   5   10        15       20       25      30                               35   40
                                                   Years of Potential Experience                                                                                  Years of Potential Experience
                                             USA         Australia      Canada         France       Germany                                                       USA           Argentina          Chile              Mexico
                                             Italy       Netherlands    Switzerland    Taiwan       UK                                                            Panama        Russia             SouthKorea         Uruguay




63
                                                 (c) Third Quartile                                                                                              (d) Poorest Quartile




                              1.5
                                                                                                                                              1.5




                     1
                                                                                                                                   1




           .5
                                                                                                                        .5




     Relative Wages (in Logs)
                                                                                                                     Relative Wages (in Logs)




                   0
                                                                                                                                   0




                                    0   5   10         15       20       25      30                        35   40                                  0   5   10        15       20       25      30                               35   40
                                                   Years of Potential Experience                                                                                  Years of Potential Experience
                                             USA            Brazil     China(Urban)   Colombia       Ecuador                                                 USA        Bangladesh       Bolivia           Egypt       Honduras

                                             Guatemala      Jamaica    Peru           SouthAfrica    Thailand                                                India      Indonesia        Nicaragua         Paraguay    Vietnam
Figure A.3: Fully Flexible Experience-Wage Profiles with Confidence Intervals




                         1
            Relative Wages (in Logs)
                      .5 0




                                         0   5       10      15        20        25       30       35         40
                                                          Years of Potential Experience
                                                           India            Mexico         USA




       Figure A.4: Fraction of Individuals with Positive Wages by Age
                         .75
            Percentage of Wage Earners
                 .25     0     .5




                                         0            7               14                  21                  28
                                                                      Age




       Figure A.5: Returns to Experience Including the Self-Employed
                         1.5




                                                                                                 CAN
            Wage Premium Wage Workers
                            1




                                                                             USA
                                                                           CHN
                                                                           BRA
                                                                     IDN
                                                                     BGD
                                                                   CHL
                                                          ARG      MEX
                                                             PAN
               .5        0




                                         0               .5                   1                         1.5
                                                 Wage Premium Self−Employed and Wage Workers




                                                                   64
Figure A.6: Deaton-Hall Estimates for China: All Growth Due to Cohort Effects

                                 Cross−Sectional Profile                                          Profile with Deaton Method


      .5 1 1.5 2 2.5




                                                                          .5 1 1.5 2 2.5
     Experience Profile




                                                                         Experience Profile
              0




                                                                                  0
                           0        10          20        30   40                             0       10         20        30      40
                                          work experience                                                  work experience


                                     Cohort Effects                                                        Time Effects




                                                                                  .1
              2.5




                                                                                        .05
     .5 1 1.5 2
       Cohort Effect




                                                                               Time Effect
                                                                         −.1 −.05 0
              0




                          1920     1940        1960     1980   2000                           1990         1995          2000   2005
                                              cohort                                                              year




Figure A.7: Deaton-Hall Estimates for China: All Growth Due to Time Effects

                                 Cross−Sectional Profile                                          Profile with Deaton Method
                      1




                                                                                          1
     Experience Profile




                                                                         Experience Profile
           .5




                                                                               .5
              0




                                                                                  0




                           0        10          20        30   40                             0       10         20        30      40
                                          work experience                                                  work experience


                                     Cohort Effects                                                        Time Effects
              .4




                                                                                  .8
                 .2
      Cohort Effect




                                                                           Time Effect
                                                                                    .6
           0




                                                                              .4
     −.2




                                                                         .2
              −.4




                                                                                  0




                          1920     1940        1960     1980   2000                           1990         1995          2000   2005
                                              cohort                                                              year




                                                                    65
       Figure A.8: Estimated Returns to Schooling versus GDP per capita




           .2
                                                                 THA
                                                                 ZAF

                                                                 COL
                  .15


                                                           GTM
Returns to School




                                                                  JAM
                                                                  BRA
                                                HND BOL          PER
                                                 IND                        CHL              GBR
                                                                CHN
       .1




                                                   IDN                                   KOR    USA
                                                     PRY                                       CHE
                                                                       PANMEX           PRITWN
                                                                                                NLD
                                                                                                CAN
                                                                          ARGRUS                  AUS
                                                                                              GER
                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                            FRA
                              BGD     NIC
           .05




                                                           ECU           URY
                                                     EGY
                                            VNM
           0




                        7                   8                9                     10                    11
                                                   GDP per Capita (in Logs)




                            Figure A.9: Average Experience versus GDP per capita
           40
           35      30
Average Experience
              25




                                                                                                  NLD
                                                                                            ITA GER
        20




                                                                CHN  ARG                   TWNGBR AUS
                                                                                              FRA CHE
                                                             THA    URY RUS              KOR       USA
                                                                                                  CAN
                              BGD             IND   EGY GTM PER
                                                              BRA      CHL              PRI
                                                 BOL
                                                IDN
  15




                                      NIC VNM     PRY         JAMPANMEX
                                                             COL
                                                             ZAF
                                             HND         ECU
           10
           5
           0




                        7                   8                9                     10                    11
                                                   GDP per Capita (in Logs)




                                                           66
Figure A.10: Wages, Human Capital and Investment in Ben-Porath Model
                                                               (a) Profile of Investment

                                                0.4

                                        0.35
      Time Alloc at ion ℓ( x )


                                                0.3

                                        0.25

                                                0.2

                                        0.15

                                                0.1

                                        0.05

                                                  0
                                                   0          10             20              30         40
                                                               Ye ar s of Pot e nt ial Expe r ie nc e

                                                       (b) Profiles of Wages and Human Capital

                                                "&%                                                     )
                                                       *+,-./-01-ï234-)5.67/8-9)7:+;
                                                       <.=-)>=?30)@3,/A38)5.67/8-9)864:B:+;;
                                                "&#
                Re lat ive Wage s ( in Logs )




                                                 "


                                                !&(


                                                !&'


                                                !&%


                                                !&#


                                                 !)
                                                  !          "!             #!              $!          %!
                                                              Ye ar s of Pot e nt ial Expe r ie nc e




                                                                          67
Figure A.11: Height of Experience-Earnings Profiles versus GDP per capita
                                                                                                                      CHE
                                                                                                                   GER
                                                                                                                     NLD

  Height at 20 Years of Potential Experience
                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                     CAN
                                   1.5                                                                                USA



                                                                                      THA
                                                                                     CHN
                                                                                      COL
                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                                                  FRA
                       1




                                                                   HND                 BRA   URY              KOR GBR
                                                                                                                TWN
                                                   BGD                             PER PAN ARG
                                                                                             CHL
                                                                       IDN          JAM
                                                                     IND                 MEX
                                                                         PRY   GTM
                                                                        BOL        ZAF
                                                                           EGY
         .5




                                                         NIC
                                                                                                   RUS
                                                                                ECU
                                                               VNM
                        0




                                               7               8                 9                       10                     11
                                                                       GDP per Capita (in Logs)




                              Figure A.12: Height of Age-Wage Profiles versus GDP per capita


                                                                                                                     NLD
                        1.5




                                                                                                                     CAN
                                                                                                                      CHE


                                                                                                                   GER
   Height at 40 Years Old




                                                                                      ZAF
                 1




                                                                                                                          AUS
                                                                                     CHN                         FRA
                                                                                                                       USA
                                                                       BOL                                    KOR
                                                                                    PER
                                                                      IDN                  URY                  ITA GBR
                                                                          EGY        BRA
                                                                        PRY                 ARG
                                                                                    THA
                                                                                    COL
  .5




                                                                                        PAN                    TWN
                                                                                ECU       MEXCHL
                                                                                     JAM
                                                         NIC       IND
                                                   BGD         VNM                                 RUS
                                                                  HND           GTM
                        0




                                               7               8                 9                       10                     11
                                                                       GDP per Capita (in Logs)




                                                                                68
