                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INFORMAL JOB SEARCH
                   AND BLACK YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT




                         Harry J. Hoizer




                      Working Paper No. 1860




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             March 1986




I would like to thank Dan Hamermesh and John Bound for very helpful
comments, as well as seminar participants at Michigan, Michigan
State, and the NBER. Eric Krupka provided excellent research
assistance. Funding was provided by NSF Grant No. SES—84O8876.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                               NBER Working Paper #1860
                                                               March 1986




                   Infoxrral   Job Search and Black Youth    Unerrployrrent




                                         ABSTPACT


          In   this paper I analyze how young black and white unemployed jobseekers

use various methods of search, and the employment outcomes which result from

their use.        The focus is on distinguishing informal search methods (i.e.,

friends and relatives or direct application without referral) from more formal

ones in analyzing racial differences.

       The results show that the two informal methods of search account for

about 90% of the difference in employment probabilities between white and

black youth. This also accounts for 57—71% of the difference in unemployment

rates between the two. Furthermore, most of these results reflect differences

in the ability of these methods to generate job offers, as opposed to

differences in search effort or job acceptance rates. However, our ability to

explain        these   differences     through   personal,      family,       and   household

characteristics was generally quite limited.




                                                              Harry   J. Hoizer
                                                              Departnent of Economics
                                                              Michigan State University
                                                              East Lansing, MI 48824
I. Introduction

       The problem of unemployment among young blacks remains one of the

nation's most serious socioeconomic problems.   While recent research efforts

have contributed some new insights into this problem,1 many questions have

gone unanswered and many claims have been unsubstantiated to date.
Furthermore, policy approaches to the problem have had mixed success at best,

and new ideas on the topic are less than abundant.

       One potential source of the unemployment problem for young blacks which

has   long been suggested but rarely analyzed empirically               is   the

network of contacts available to them.2      The importance of such contacts

through friends and relatives for jobseekers in general has been stressed and

well—documented,3 but the issue of whether such contacts are less available or

effective for blacks and especially young blacks is less clear.

       There are many reasons for believing that blacks may enjoy fewer

benefits from such contacts than do whites.     For one thing, the number of

female—headed and welfare—dependent black families has risen substantially in

recent years; and young males in these homes may have greater difficulty

obtaining information and referrals from household members who are themselves

unemployed.4   Furthermore, the high unemployment rates of older blacks and

their low representation in skilled blue—collar positions may compound the

difficulties of younger blacks who look to them for help.         Even when such

older blacks are situated in attractive jobs, their recommendations might be

taken less seriously by white employers.

       Contacts through friends and relatives can be considered part of the

more general category of informal job search, which also includes direct

application to firms from walk—ins without referral.   More formal methods of
                                       2




search include state or private employment agencies, responding to newspaper

ads,   school or community placement services, and other institutional

activities.5   The hypothesis that blacks do relatively better with formal

methods than with informal ones has been frequently stated over the years.6

This might occur because informal methods involve fewer explicit or objective

criteria by which to judge applicants, and instead rely heavily on subjective

judgments by employers or references. While the latter may often contain more

accurate and extensive information about applicant qualifications, the

possiblities for discriminatory judgment also rise. This is particularly true

for direct applications from walk—ins, where the applicant's race might be

among his or her most salient features.

       The evidence to date that blacks do relatively better with formal

methods than with informal ones has consisted primarily of their higher use of

the former and lower use of the latter than whites.7 But direct evidence on

relative effectiveness of these methods for blacks and whites has not been

provided. Furthermore, there has been little evidence on use or effectiveness

of such methods for younger cohorts of blacks and whites; and possible links

between these issues and unemployment rates of black youth have not been

seriously analyzed.

       In this paper I hope to provide some evidence on these issues.       In

particular, I analyze data on the use of various methods of search by

unemployed young white and black males; and on the effectiveness of using

these methods for each group, as measured by the job offers and acceptances in

which they result.    The data are based on a unique set of questions which

appear in the 1981 and 1982 panels of the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS)

of Youth.
                                       3



       Using these data, we can test whether the hypothesized differences in

effectiveness of various search methods truly exist; and, if they do, we can

measure their effects on unemployment differentials between young whites and

blacks. Given the nature of the data, it is also possible to decompose the

total observed difference in employment probabilities into components

attributed to each method of search; and further into differences in use, job

offers, and job acceptances based on each method. These results might shed

some light on the important question of the extent to which the high rate of

black youth unemployment is based on individual search choices as opposed to

market constraints.    Finally, we can try to explain any observed racial

differences in search method outcomes to both personal and family background

or household characteristics of individuals.     In particular, we can see to

what extent family and household characteristics explain differences in

effectiveness of personal contacts between blacks and whites.

       The rest of the paper is organized into two sections.       The first

section presents the empirical evidence. It is subdivided into parts in which

we consider summary measures of search method use and outcomes for blacks and

whites, a decomposition of total differences, and explanatory equations for

observed outcomes. The second section discusses conclusion and implications.

       The major finding of this paper is that the two informal methods of

search, especially direct application, account for almost the entire

difference in employment probabilities between unemployed young black and

white males.    Furthermore, most of this difference reflects differences

between blacks and whites in the effectiveness of these methods in producing

job offers, as opposed to differences in search choices. However, family and

household characteristics appear to explain only a very limited part of these

observed racial differences in offer probabilities.
                                        4



II. Empirical Evidence

      A.   Data and Summary Results

       The 1981 and 1982 panels of the NLS each contain extensive information

on search method use and outcomes. The questions in the 1981 panel focused on

job search activities during the month preceding the survey date.         The

questions in the 1982 panel dealt with search methods used to obtain the

respondent's most recent job. The results based on data from each panel are

considered successively below.

       The 1981 panel asked a broad range of questions regarding job search

activities in the previous month. Anyone who had searched for work was asked

whether he or she had used each of about thirteen different methods.8 If so,

the respondent was then asked whether that method resulted in a job offer and

whether the offer had been accepted. Other questions included the time spent

using each method of search and any wage offers received.

       The sample used in the analysis below is limited to nonenrolled and

nonenlisted white and black males.9 The ages of the respondents range from 16

to 23 in this group.     Since the focus of the analysis is the jobseeking

behavior of the unemployed, it was necessary to develop a sample of
individuals who had been unemployed in the previous month, regardless of their

current employment status.       The sample used below therefore includes all

individuals who searched in the previous month and who are currently

unemployed or who are currently employed but whose duration of employment is

thirty days or less.

      Using this sample and the variables described above, it is possible to

analyze the probability of becoming employed for young white and black job

seekers. The overall probability for any person is based on the probabilities

of being employed through each method of search:
                                                     5




 1)     P(E) =       P(E.)   =       P(Use.)   .   P (Off.JUse.) .   P(Acc.jOff.)
                 J      J        3        3              3    3          3    J




where P(E) is the overall probability of becoming employed in a given period;

P(E) is the probability of becoming employed through the use of methods j;

P(Use) is the probability of using method j; P(OffJUsej) is the probability

of receiving an offer, conditional on the use of j; and P(AccIOff) is the

probability of accepting such an offer, conditional on receiving it.                      The

equation assumes that a maximum of one offer is accepted per period.'0 It

should also be noted that this equation is closely related to the standard

search formulation in which receiving offers depends on search effort and

labor demand factors while accepting offers depends on comparisons of
reservation and offered wages."

       The mean probabilities of becoming employed in the previous month, and

the underlying probabilities on which they are based, are shown for young

white and black jobseekers in Table 1.                    Five search methods are analyzed:

friends and relatives, direct contact without referral, state agencies,

newspaper ads, and a composite category that includes all other methods. The

probabilities listed for each method are the use, conditional offer, and

conditional acceptance ones described above, as well as the employment

probability for each method.              All means are weighted by sample weights, to

correct for the oversampling of low—income whites in the NLS.

       A number of important results appear in Table 1.                    For both white and

black youth, the most frequently used methods of search are checking with

friends and relatives and direct application without referrals.                     These are

also the two most productive methods, in terms of offers and acceptances

generated.   This is consistent with a model of search choices in which
                                                         Table   1



                                           Search Method Use and Outcomes

                                                   1981 NLS, Unemployed

                                                    Whites and Blacks



                      Friends/Rels.          Direct App.              State Agency     Newspaper           Other




Percent Using
Each Method in
Previous Month:       .862       .818       .808        .758         .548     .501   .584    .556   .528       .509


Percent of Users
Obtaining Offers:     .183       .156       .211        .094         .092     .079   .109    .065   .169       .130


Percent of Offers
Accepted:             .809       .801       .654        .649         .511     .633   .339    .800   .627       .546

Probability of
Gaining Employment:   .128       .102       .111        .049         .026     .025   .022    .029   .056       .036




                             NOTE:   Samples include nonenrolled and nonenlis ted males who were
                                     unemployed and searching for work one month prior to the survey.
                                     Sample sizes are 398 for whites and 211 for blacks.
                                         6




relative productivities of search methods determine their frequency of

use.'2 Overall, the two informal search methods account for over 60% of the

jobs obtained by both black and white youth.

          Furthermore, the conditional acceptance probabilities are highest for

the use of friends and relatives for both blacks and whites.            This is

consistent with the views expressed by several previous authors that friends

and relatives provide better information and better employment opportunities

for individuals than do other methods, given their skill levels and other

labor market factors.13

          As for comparisons between blacks and whites, we find the frequency of

search method use to be just a bit lower for blacks in each category.

However, most of these differences do not appear to be significant.'4 Much

more substantial are the differences in the probabilities of obtaining offers

between the two groups.      For each method, whites have significantly higher

probabilities of obtaining offers than do blacks.15 The largest difference,

in both absolute and percentage terms, occurs for the method of direct

application. The large racial difference in this category, compared to more

formal methods where criteria are likely to be more standard and objective,

suggests that discrimination may be a relevant explanation for a major part of

the difference in youth employment probabilities.

          Racial differences in the conditional probabilities of accepting job

offers also appear to be less significant than those for the probabilities of

receiving offers.         For the   two informal search methods, acceptance

probabilities are quite comparable between blacks and whites. For the formal

methods, acceptance rates are higher for blacks in some cases and lower in

others.
                                           7




       Finally, the employment probabilities of the last row show that racial

differences are largest for the two informal methods.        Among the formal

methods, higher acceptance rates outweigh lower offer probabilities for young

blacks to give them higher employment probabilities than whites from state

agencies and newspapers (though not from "other methods"). Summing across the

employment probabilities for different methods (and adjusting for the small

fractions who report accepting more than one job) results in overall monthly

employment probabilities of .298 for whites and .201 for blacks.

       The questions in the 1982 panel of the NLS dealt with search methods

used by the respondent to obtain his most recent job. All those who listed

having a job in the previous year were asked whether or not they were already

employed when they obtained this job; whether or not they had been searching

for work when they obtained it; if they had, what methods they used and how

many weeks they spent searching; and which method resulted in the obtaining of

this job.    Those without any jobs in the previous year remain in the sample,

which consist of nonenrolled and nonenlisted young males.

       To establish some degree of comparability between these questions and

those of the previous panel, we compute employment probabilities based on each

search method.    According to &yes' Rule, we can write the probability of

obtaining employment through search method j conditional on having had some

form of employment as follows:


                  P(EfE.) .   P(E.)     P(E.)
        'j
      P'E F '/ — ___________________ —
                       P(E)
                                     — _____
                                       P(E)


since P(EIE.) =   ,i6   Since all jobs held the previous year were achieved

through some method     we can write:
                                                     8



       E   P(E.)
                   =   1   or      P(E.) = P(E)




Using sample means we then calculate (approximate) ex—post monthly employment

probabilities based on each method, conditional on having held a job at same

time during the year which was obtained through that method:


                           P(E. )
4)                                  =
       P(EjmIEj) =         P(E.)        4/DN


where DN is the completed duration of unemployment (measured in weeks) for

any job obtained using search method j.17                          Finally, we can write the

relationship between overall monthly probabilities and those for particular

methods of search as follows:



           Em1 E) ——       P(E)      P(Ejm)
                       j   P(E)      P(E.)

                                        P(E. )            P(E. )
       or P(E) =       . P(E.)          P(E.)
                                                 = P(E)
                                                           P(E)


Thus the overall monthly probability reflects the sum of probabilities for

each method j, which in turn reflect the products of annual marginal

probabilities and conditional monthly probabilities for that method.

       The data used for these calculations appear in Table 2.                   For each of

the five search methods, we find the percentages of jobholders who obtained

their jobs through this method (i.e., P(EJE)) as well as the percentages of

all jobseekers who did the same (i.e., P(E)).                        The table also includes

monthly probabilities for those obtaining jobs through each method (i.e.,

P(EjmIEj)), monthly probabilities for each method among all jobseekers (i.e.,

P(Ejm)) and the percent of all jobseekers using each method.                        All data
                                                          Table 2


                                       Method of Obtaining Job in Previous Year

                                                    1982 NLS, Unemployed

                                                     Whites   and Blacks


                        Friends/Rels.          Direct App.          State &gency     Newspaper             Other




Percent of Jobholders
Who Obtained
Job Through:            .352       .329      .337        .257     .032     .048    .067    .036     .212       .330

Percent of Jobseekers
Who Obtained
Job Through:            .318       .255      .304        .199     .029     .037    .060    .028     .191       .256

Monthly Probability
of Employment
For Jobholders
Through:                .460       .332      .505        .412     .436     .428    .474    .563     .464       .326

Monthly Probability
of Employment
For Jobseekers
Through:                .146       .085      .154        .082     .013     .016    .028    .016     .089       .083

Percent of Jobseekers
Using Each Method:      .691       .669      .598        .481     .313     .418    .351    .335     .336       .391




                               NOTE:   Samples include nonenrolled and nonenlisted males who were unemployed
                                       and searching when they obtained their most recent (rows 1 and 3 jobs
                                       plus those who held no employment in the previous year (rows 2, 4 and 5).
                                       Sample sizes are 1269 and 472 for whites and blacks respectively
                                       who had jobs, and 1405 and 609 for the total sample.
                                         9




 reflect weighted means for whites and blacks separately.   As in Table 1, the

 sample is restricted to those who were unemployed when searching and who are

neithe'- enrolled nor enlisted.18

       The results show, as before, that friends and relatives and direct

applications produce the largest number of accepted jobs for both whites and

blacks. Also as in Table 1, the largest racial differentials exist for direct

applications.     However, the racialdifferentials for probabilities based on

friends and relatives are larger than they were in Table 1, especially when

conditional monthly probabilities are included.      It therefore appears from

this table that both informal search methods are important determinants of

differences in employment probabilities between young whites and blacks.

Summing across the monthly probabilities for all jobseekers in row 4 we obtain

.430 and .282 respectively for whites and blacks.      Finally, the percent of

seekers using each method show more use of direct application among whites and

more   use of state agencies among blacks,          consistent with relative

productivities that we expect here.

       Overall, then, the results from the two panels of the NLS are quite

consistent.     To the extent that some differences do exist between the two,

several possible explanations might be given. One of these is the problem of

length bias in the 1981 panel.19      The focus of that survey on a particular

month implies that longer unemployment spells are likely to be overrepresented

in this sample, compared to the 1982 panel which looks at spells over a year

or more. The higher monthly employment probabilities calculated from the 1982

data appear to confirm this viewpoint. Other advantages from using the 1982

data include larger sample sizes and an avoidance of the problem of multiple

job acceptances (since the questions in the survey focus on the individual's

most recent job).    Of course, certain problems may bias results in the 1982
                                        10




survey as well——e.g., measurement error in durations recalled from memory,

etc.    Therefore both sets of data are useful In analyzing the issues

considered here.



B. Decomposing Racial Employment Differentials

       The summary data of Tables 1 and 2 can be used to decompose the overall

racial difference in employment probabilities into fractions accounted for by

each search method. The fractions of this difference which are accounted for

by differences in search method use, offer probabilities and acceptance

probabilities can also be calculated.

       The decomposition of the overall difference in probability of

employment for the 1981 data appears in Table 3. The first row of this table

lists the absolute differences in overall employment probabilities based on

Table 1.       All other numbers in the table reflect fractions of these

differences.    The second row of the table represents the fractions of the

overall difference which are accounted for by differences in employment

probabilities for each method of search.       These are simply based on the

following equations derived directly from Equation 1):



6)     P(E) =   E   P(E.)


                                             AP(E.)
The numbers in the second row thus reflect            for each method j.

       In order to further decompose these percentages into components based

on use, offers, and acceptance, we take logs of the ratios of employment

probabilities for whites and blacks:
                                               11




                             P(Use.)w            P(Off.IUse.)w            p(Acc.Ioff.)'
       ln(           B ln(             B + ln(                  B + ln(                 B
             P(E.)           P(Use.)             P(Off.JUse.)             P(AccjOff.)
7)
                      E   A lnP(Use.) -1- Am   P(OffjUse.) +     A   lnP(Accjoff.)



Dividing each of the three components by the overall log ratio gives us the

percentage of each difference in employment probabilities accounted for by

use, offers, and acceptances. When, in turn, these percentages are multiplied
                     AP(E.)
by the respective AP(E)                percentages of the second row, we get the

percentages of the total difference in employment probabilities accounted for

by use, offers, and acceptances with each method. These last numbers appear

in the third, fourth and fifth rows respectively of Table 3.                     Given these

calculations, we can add across each row to obtain the percentages of the

total difference accounted for by use, offers, and acceptances from all search

methods. These numbers appear in the first column of Table 3. Likewise, we

can add across each column to obtain the percentages of the total difference

due to each method, which appear in the second row.

       The results of Table 3 show that the two informal search methods,

friends and relatives and direct applications, are the most important sources

of differences in youth employment probabilities between young blacks and

whites. Together these two methods account for about 90% of the total racial

difference in employment probabilities. Direct applications alone account for

almost 60%. The percentage of the total difference accounted for by friends

and relatives is second in magnitude, while the composite category of "other

methods" picks up the rest of the difference.

       It is also noteworthy that differences in the probabilities of

receiving offers for each method explain the vast majority of total
differences attributable to each method. Differences in the conditional offer
                                                              Table 3

                                             Decomposition of Racial Differences

                                            in Probabilities of Gaining Employment

                                                              1981 NLS




                                      TOT         Fr. /Rel.     Direct Contact State Agency            Newspaper   Other



Total Difference In
Employment Probability
in Previous Month:                  .104           .025              .065             .001             —.007       .020


Percentage of Difference
Due to Each Method:                1.000           .244              .628             .007             —.070       .192


Percentage Due    to
Differences In:


    Use of Methods:                 .154           .058             .046              .022              .012       .016

   Receiving Offers:               1.028           .176             .576              .037              .125       .114

   Accepting Offers:               —.181           .010             .006             —.052             —.207       .062




                       NOTE:   Calculations, based on data from Table       1,   are described   in   the text.
                                        12




probabilities for the two informal methods can together explain almost 75% of

the total difference in youth employment probabilities.           Furthermore,

differences in offer probabilities for the five methods together can explain

the entire racial difference in youth employment probabilities.         Though

differences in frequency of search method use could explain an additional 15%

of the total difference, this component is fully counteracted by the higher

conditional probabilities of accepting offers among young blacks. Thus, if we

consider frequency of use and conditional acceptance probabilities together as

choice variables while offer probabilities reflect market responses, we see

that market responses account for the entire difference in youth employment

probabilities while choice variables have no overall effect.

       Table 4 presents a decomposition of the racial differences in

employment probabilities based on data from the 1982 panel.     The first two

rows of this table are comparable to those of Table 3, in presenting absolute

and percentage differences in monthly employment probabilities attributable to

each method of search.    The third and fourth rows decompose the percentage

differences of row 2 into portions attributable to annual and conditional

monthly differences for each method, based on the following equation:




           P(E. )W
              jm           j
                                        P(E.jmj
                                             IE.)W

           P(E. )        P(E.)
8)            jm               j             jm j
                                        P(E. IE.)

                     Am P(E.) +    A in P(E. JE.)
                               J             jm   j

Dividing   each of these terms by the sum and multiplying by the percentage

differences in row 2 give us the percentages due to annual and monthly

probabilities of rows 3 and 4. As before these can be summed across to give
                                       13




us fractions of the total difference curve to differences in annual and

conditional monthly probabilities.

        Finally, rows 5 and 6 decompose the percentage differences in row 2 for

each method into components attributable to use and to receiving and accepting

offers from each method.    These are based on equations similar to those in

Equation 7 above except that the final row here reflects a residual difference

in monthly probabilities after differences in use have been accounted for.2°

        The results of Table 4 show that friends and relatives and direct

applications can account for about 90% of the difference in monthly employment

probabilities between young blacks and whites.       Direct application alone

accounts for almost half of the differential while friends and relatives

account for over 40%. Furthermore, both measures contribute substantially to

differentials at the annual level as well as the conditional probability

within a month.    All methods together account for about 44% at the annual

level and about 56% at the monthly level for those with employment.

        As for the distinction between use of method and outcomes, the results

show that differences in use account for about 8% of the total monthly

difference. While differences in direct applications account for almost 17%

of the total differential, part of this difference is overturned by higher use

of other methods by blacks.      As for the difference between receipt and

acceptance of offers, a formal breakdown between the two is not possible

here.    However, an additional question in the 1982 panel asked whether

individuals had rejected any offers before accepting their most recent job.

The evidence showed a higher rate of offer rejections among whites than among

blacks.2' Thus virtually the entire difference in employment probabilities is

accounted for by differences in probabilities of receiving offers, as was also

true in the 1981 panel.
                                          14



          A   number of comments are in order here before proceeding.     For one

thing, the distinction between offers and acceptances may not be quite so

distinct.       In particular, it is possible that reservation wages affect the

decisions of individuals to seek explicit offers from particular firms as well

as the decisions of whether to accept such offers; in other words, individuals

who believe that they could obtain jobs at certain low—wage firms may not

bother to apply since they know in advance that they would reject such

offers.       Thus, the fact that the entire black—white difference in employment

probabilities can be explained by offer probabilities does not necessarily

imply that reservation wages play no role here.       In fact, other evidence from

the NLS suggests that the reservation wages of young blacks are higher

relative to offered wages than are those of young whites; and that these

reservation wages help to explain some fraction (40% or less) of the higher

unemployment durations of young blacks.22

          The importance of informal job search, and especially friends and

relatives, for explaining racial differences in job—finding is underscored by

comparable data on employed jobseekers.        In this group, the magnitude of the

racial difference in offer probabilities for friends and relatives is larger

than for any other method, while direct application is also important.23

Therefore both types of informal job search are crucial for explaining racial

differences in overall employment outcomes.

        A final issue here concerns the contribution of racial differences from

using informal search methods to the overall racial difference in unemployment

rates among youth.

        To calculate this, we convert employment probabilities for a particular

month   into expected durations of unemployment, where the latter are merely
reciprocals of the former. The relationship between racial differences in
                                                          Table 4

                                            Decomposition of Racial Differences

                                           in Probabilities of Gaining Employment

                                                          1982 NLS




                                     TOT       Fr./Rel.       Direct App.      State Agency                Other
                                                                                              Newspaper



Total Difference in
Monthly Employment
Probability:                        .148          .061          .072            —.003           .012       .006

Percentage of Difference
T)ue to Each Method:

    Total:                        1.00            .412          .486            —.020           .081       .041

Probability of Holding
Job During Previous Year:          .443           .168          .327              .003          .110      —.165

Probability of Obtaining
This Job Within A Month:           .557           .244          .159            —.023         —.029        .206

Percent of Total Difference
Due to:

    Use of Methods:                .081          .024           .168            —.028           .007      —.090

   Receiving/Accepting
   Offers:                         .919          .388           .318             .008          .074        .131




                      NOTE:   Calculations, based on data from Table   2,   are described in the text.
                                        15




unemployment durations and unemployment rates can then be analyzed according

to the following identities:



  9) UF.D
          uB        FB
 10)   in(—)     in(—) + in (—)
          U'          F
               E A   in F +   A   mD


where U represents the steady—state unemployment rate, F represents frequency
of becoming unemployed, and D represents expected duration of unemployment.24

       The necessary data for these calculations appear in Table 5. The table

presents overall unemployment rates of young blacks and whites in the NLS, as

well as expected durations of unemployment that are based on the employment

probabilities of Tables 1 and 2.       Logs of the black—white ratios are also

presented, as are implied frequencies of unemployment for each group.

       The results show that differences in employment probabilities from

Tables 1 and 2 imply differences in expected durations which account for 65—

79% of the total differences in unemployment rates.25 The implied differences

in frequency presumably reflect racial differences in probability of job loss,

which have been documented and analyzed elsewhere.26

       These results therefore suggest that Informal search methods, by

accounting for 87—90% of racial differences in employment probabilities, also

account for 57—71% of the total difference in unemployment rates before the

two groups.    Differences in conditional offer probabilities from use of the

Informal search methods account for most of this effect.     The importance of

informal job search outcomes for exploring the high unemployment rates of

black youth relative to white youth therefore appears to be quite strong.
                                                         Table 5

                          Unemployment Rates, Durations and Implied Frequencies

                                   1981       and 1982 NLS, Whites and Blacks




                                       1981                                                1982

                      W            B            LOG(B/W)                        W         B       LOG(B/W)


Unemployment Rate:    .169        .279            .501                      .156         .299       .651

Expected Duration
In Months:           3.355       4.975            .394                     2.326        3.546       .422

Implied Monthly
Frequency:            .050        .056            .109                      .067         .084       .228




                          NOTE: Calculations,  based on data from Tables 1 and      2
                           (for expected duration), are described in the text.
                                       16




C.    Econometric Evidence
        The data and decompositions of the previous section established the

fact that the racial differences in offer probabilities from the use of

informal search methods account for a major part of the black—white difference

in youth unemployment.       To try to explain these differences, we turn to

estimated equations for conditional offer or employment probabilities for

these methods,     In particular, we hope to find out how much of the racial

differences can be explained by observed personal characteristics and by the

employment and occupational status of one's parents and household.

        The equations which are estimated are of the following form:



10)     °ij =                  +
                O(XR1Fam1)

where       is a dummy variable for whether or not the ith individual obtained

an offer or a job from using method j; Xi is a set of personal characteristics

which includes age, education, marital status, South, urban residence, and the

local unemployment rate; R is a dummy variable for race (Black =   1);   and Fan1

is a set of variables used to measure employment or occupational status of the

family or household. The dependent variables for the 1981 equations are the

conditional probabilities of receiving offers from the use of each search

method (i.e., P(OfflUse)); while for 1982 they are the conditional
probabilities of having obtained employment from each method in the previous

month (i.e., P(EjmFE,Usej)).

        The equations are estimated independently for friends and relatives,

and for direct applications.       Equations were also estimated for a third

category which combines all of the formal search methods, though these are not

included in the tables below. The samples in each case are limited to those
                                      17




who used the relevant search method in the previous month. The 1981 equations

and those in 1982 for annual probabilities are estimated using Prohit

techniques, while those in 1982 for ex—post monthly probabilities (which are

measured continuously) are estimated using OLS.

       The various sets of independent variables are added sequentially in

each equation, so we can see how much of the race effect can be explained by

each. Two sets of Fami variables are also used in different specifications.

They are:     1) Father's occupation, represented by dummy variables for

clerical/sales, crafts/operatives, and laborer/service,27 and    2) a set of

dummy variables for household structure and employment status——whether the

individual lives at home, whether the father lives at home and is employed,

whether the father lives at home and is unemployed, and whether other older

household members (male or female separately) are employed.28

       With any of these sets of variables, it is unclear whether estimated

effects are capturing human capital factors, correlation with unobserved

skills, or the actual effects of family and household factors on the

effectiveness of using informal networks.    If the last of these effects is

important, we would expect to see stronger effects of these variables in the

equations for friends and relatives than for the other methods.         Thus

comparisons across methods will be an important way of sorting out these

effects.

       Before moving on, the problem of self—selection into each of the

samples by the use of the relevant search method must be briefly mentioned.

Since the use of each method presumably reflects expected productivity of

using that method, the samples may not be random with respect to outcome

equations. Though the techniques for dealing with self—selection problems are

fairly well—known,29 these do not appear to be appropriate in a case such as
                                       18




this where the samples are not mutually exclusive (since individuals can

choose more than one method of selection). Fortunately, though, the summary

evidence in Table 1 and 2 suggests that self—selection should not create

serious biases on the estimates of interest here. In particular, the fairly

comparable frequencies of search method use between young blacks and whites

imply little bias in estimates of race effects in outcome equations.3°

       Table 6 presents results for the 1981 equations for conditional offer

probabilities from use of informal methods.      For those using friends and

relatives, the race effects are negative (though not significant) in all

specifications. The addition of household employment variables does little to

the magnitude of the race coefficient, and these coefficients show a

significant effect only from the presence of an unemployed father (relative to

an absent father), which is negative. The results thus cast some doubt on the

hypothesis that residence in female—headed households is a major cause of the

lower effectiveness of friends and relatives in obtaining offers for young

blacks. But as for father's occupation, these variables have a larger effect

on the race coefficient and show marginally significant negative effects for

those in blue—collar jobs.

       The race effect for use of direct application is significant in all

cases but is almost totally unaffected by the inclusion of household

employment status or father's occupation.   Furthermore, these variables show

no significant effects on the conditional probability of receiving an offer

from use of this method.     In other equations not reported for the formal

methods, a similar lack of effects on the race variable resulted.3'

       Table 7 presents results from the 1982 equations for conditional

monthly employment probabilities from the use of informal methods.       The

results show once again that household employment characteristics do not
                                       Table 6

                          Effects of Household Employment

                            and Father's Occupation on

                     Conditional   Offer Probabilities—i 981 NLS

                               Friends/Relatives             Direct Application




Race                        —.103     —.093    —.019        —.379   —.389    —.387
(1 =   Black):              (.147) (.150) (.153)            (.168) (.170) (.174)

Father's Occupation:

  Clerical/Sales                        ——     —.043                  —      —.129
                                               (.271)                        (.429)

  Craft/Operative                       —      —.311                  ——     —.020
                                               (.306)                        (.293)

  Laborer/Service                       ——     —.458                  ——      .120
                                               (.277)                        (.321)

Household
Characteristics:

  Father Employed:           ——        .075                  ——      .062
                                      (.162)                        (.176)

  Father Unemployed:         ——       —.712                  ——     —.225
                                      (.352)                        (.304)

  Other Males                ——        .017                  ——      .027
  Employed:                           (.163)                        (.170)

  Females                    ——       —.093                  —      —.065
  Employed:                           (.159)                        (.174)

  Not Living                 —         .117                  —      —.102
  At Home:                            (.216)                        (.251)


—2 Log L                  468.12 460.62 460.06            398.28 397.10 397.60


                 NOTE: All equations are estimated using Probit.
         Sample sizes are 516 for friends and relatives and 481 for direct
         application. Samples in each case are limited to those who used
          each method in the previous month. Control variables included
       in each equation are age, education, marital status, urban residence,
                      South, and the local unemployment rate.
                                      Table 7

                          Effects of Household Employment

                            and Father's Occupation on

                     Conditional Offer Probabilities——1982 NLS


                            Friends/Relatives               Direct Application




Race                        —.071   —.072    —.068          —.078   —.074    —.074
(1 =   Black):              (.029) (.030) (.030)            (.034) (.035) (.035)

Father's Occupation:

  Clerical/Sales              ——      ——
                                                .054          ——      ——
                                                                              .002
                                             (.060)                          (.068)

  Craft/Operative             ——      ——
                                                .031          ——     ——
                                                                              .004)
                                             (.042)                          (.047)

  Laborer/Service                     ——        .038          ——     ——      — .063
                                             (.049)                          (.057)

Household
Characteristics:

  Father Employed:            ——     .039                     ——     .005
                                    (.033)                          (.039)

  Father Unemployed:          ——    —.031                     ——    —.080
                                    (.060                           (.076)

 Other Males                  ——     .007                     ——    —.009
 Employed:                          (.033)                          (.038)

  Females                            .047                     ——     .065
  Employed:                         (.032)                          (.038)

  Not Living                  ——     .012                     —      .047
  At Home:                          (.040)                          (.046)


                             .010    .011       .008         .031    .031     .029



                   NOTE: All equations are estimated using OLS.
        Sample sizes are 1175 for friends and relatives and 967 for direct
         application. Samples in each case are limited to those who used
          each method in the previous month. Control variables included
       in each equation are age, education, marital status, urban residence,
                      South, and the local unemployment rate.
                                       19




explain the negative coefficients for blacks from use of either method. The

presence of an unemployed father again has negative (though not significant)

effects in both equations, while those for having employed females are

positive in both.   These effects were not observed in equations for use of

formal methods.32 Thus, while household employment characteristics may have

small effects on the effectiveness of informal job search, they do not account

for the strong racial differences in outcomes observed from using these

methods.

       The results for father's occupation in the 1982 data are also very weak

for both informal methods.    In neither case are there substantial effects on

the race coefficient, and the coefficients on the occupations themselves are

generally not significant. Thus, some inconsistencies appear between results

from the 1981 and 1982 panels with regard to use of friends and relatives.

But given the much larger sample sizes and larger time periods under

consideration in the 1982 data, the weaker results observed in these data are

probably the more accurate.

       The relatively weak explanatory power of the family and household

variables with regard to the race effect may reflect the limitations of those

variables as measures of one's family background and how it affects informal

networks.    Alternatively, they could indicate a more general kind of

discrimination against blacks from all backgrounds in which their referrals

are taken less seriously and their direct appearances are viewed more

skeptically than they are for whites.       The exact nature of the racial

difference in outcomes from using informal search thus remains a puzzle at

this time.
                                        20




C.   Conclusion

        In this paper I analyze how young black and white unemployed jobseekers

use different methods of search, and what outcomes result from these

methods.    The focus is on distinguishing informal search methods (i.e.,

friends and relatives or direct application without referral) from more formal

ones in analyzing racial differences.

       The results show that the two informal methods of search, especially

direct application, account for 87—90% of the difference in youth employment

probabilities between blacks and whites. This also accounts for 57—71% of the

difference in unemployment rates. Furthermore, most of these results reflect

differences in the ability of these methods to produce job offers, as opposed

to differences in search effort or job acceptance rates. However, our ability

to explain these differences through personal, family, and household

characteristics was generally quite limited.

       These findings have a number of potential implications. They suggest

that search choices play a limited role relative to market responses in

determining racial differences in youth employment (though search choices may

have some effects on conditional offer probabilities).       The finding that

informal job search accounts for almost all of the difference in employment

probabilities also raises some important questions about policy approaches

which stress more formal,       institutional mechanisms for placing job

applicants.33 To the extent that some recent youth employment programs have

stressed lessons in job search which may result in more effective direct

application procedures, some positive results may occur for young blacks. But

disadvantages in the network of friends and relatives facing blacks are not

likely to be overcome through this mechanism. More research on the causes of
                                      21




disadvantages for blacks who use informal search methods is necessary before

remedies for this problem can be promoted .,ith confidence.
                                         22




                                     FOOTNOTES



              volume of new papers on the topic has recently been edited by

Freeman and 1-loizer (1986).      Other important contributions include Cogan

(1982).



          2The suggestion that young blacks are at a disadvantage with respect to

informal networks has been made by Osterman (1980) and Freeman (1980), among

many others.



          3The lengthy literature on this topic dates back to Reynolds (1951) and

also includes Granovetter (1974) and Corcoran, et.al. (1980). An application

of this issue to the general problem of youth unemployment appears in Rees and

Gray (1982).



          4The higher rate of unemployment among young blacks in AFDC households

is documented by Lerman (1986), though the exact explanation for this

phenomenon is not clear.



          5me distinction between formal and informal search methods was first

emphasized in Rees (1966).       A similar (though not identical) distinction

between "direct" and "indirect" methods has since then been used by Chirinko

(1982) and Barron and Gilley (1981).



          6See Bradshaw (1973); also Bureau of Labor Statistics Report No. 1671

(1975).
                                       23




         7lbid.



         8The focus of this analysis is on the unemployed as opposed to the non

employed, where the latter also includes those out of the labor force. The

relevance of the distinction has    recently   been debated by Clark and Summers

(1982) and Flinn and Heckman (1983).           In these data, the percentage of

unemployed youth who have actively sought work in the previous month is very

similar among young whites and blacks, thereby leaving the results here

unaffected by this distinction.



         9me decision to focus on males reflects the huge differences in labor

force behavior and labor markets between young males and females. Differences

in behavior and markets for enrolled and nonenrolled youth led to a similar

decision to exclude the former. Non—black minorities (such as Hispanics) are

also omitted from the sample.



             small fraction of whites and blacks (13.1% and 16.6% respectively)

in the 1981 panel report accepting more than one offer in the previous

month.     Calculations of overall monthly employment probabilities reported

below correct for this by subtracting these percentages from the sums of

probabilities across methods.



         "In such an analysis, the probability of becoming employed in a given

time period is given by P(E) = 71 . (1 — F(Wr)), where w is the probability

of obtaining an offer, r is the reservation wage, and f(w) is the density

function of wage offers facing an individual.          (1 — F(Wr))   is thus the

conditional probability of accepting any offers received. The use of various
                                       24




 search methods is related to this framework by their relationship to total

 search effort SE =    T. where T. is the time spent on search method j.         In

many such models, search effort is an argument in the offer probability

function. See, for example, Barron and Mellow (1979).



        12Such a model appears in Hoizer (1986).



        13The argument that job offers obtained through friends and relatives

contain more reliable information about nonwage job characteristics first

appeared in Reynolds (1951) and might explain the high rate of job

acceptance. A comparable argument is made by Datcher (1982) in explaining the

low rate of quits out of jobs obtained through this method.



       '4Standard errors on the means of the use probabilities are in the

vicinity of .O1—.02 for whites and .02—.03 for blacks on most methods. Since

the samples of whites and blacks are independent, the standard errors on

differences in means are calculated by SE =   ( (S.E.)2 + (S.E.)   )1/2   •   Thus,
standard errors on differences in search method use are approximately .02—.04.



       15Standard errors     on   the conditional offer probabilities are

approximately .03 for whites and .04 for blacks, implying standard errors of

about .05 for the differences by the formula stated above.



       16Though the question in the survey referred to any jobs held In the

previous year, the vast majority (all but about 2%) were obtained during this

year as well. P(E) can thus be considered an annual probability of obtaining

employment.
                                           25




          17This formula is based on the assumption that transition probabilities

are constant and therefore that unemployment durations are geometrically

distributed. If so, then E(DN) =                      where DNj is measured in months
                                        '/P(EjmIEj)
and approximately equals 4/P(EiE.) when DN is measured in weeks. Given the

properties of the geometric distribution, the ex—post mean duration of the

sample          i    P(E111E)
                                and solving for the conditional monthly probability

we arrive at Equation 4).             These calculations are also adjusted so

that P(E.) (     1   for any individuals whose completed durations were under four

weeks.



          18Due to the sequencing of questions in the 1982 survey, we have no

data on the jobseeking activities of those without employment in the previous

year.      Since we are considering nonenrolled and nonenlisted young males, I

make the assumption that all such individuals spent some time searching for

work in the previous year.       However, those individuals who claim to have not

been searching when they obtained their most recent jobs are omitted from the

sample.



          '9The problem of "length bias" was first discussed by Kaitz (1970).



          20Due to the omission of data on jobseeking activities of those without

jobs in the previous year (Footnote #18), the calculations performed here

assume that this group of individuals used search methods in roughly similar

proportions to those with jobs in the previous year.



          211n response to the question, "Did you reject any offers achieved

through any of these methods," 21.0% of white jobholders and 11.8% of blacks
                                      26




answered yes. The higher rate of job rejection (conditional on having held a

job) among whites approximates that observed in the 1981 panel.



       22See Hoizer (1986a).   Results of that paper, based on data from the

1979 and 1980 panels of the NLS, showed that the ratio of reservation wages to

received wages was about 15% higher for unemployed blacks, although the levels

of reservation wages were comparable for the two groups.           The ratio of

reservation to received wages in the 1981 panel was 9.1% higher for blacks,

while in the 1982 panel it was 6.0% higher among the unemployed.



       23using data from the 1981 panel, we find that 8.5% of whites and 3.9%

of blacks who were employed and searching obtained jobs in the previous month

through friends and relatives. Employment probabilities from using all other

methods are as high or higher for blacks as for whites. Using data from 1982

we find 25.6% of whites and 23.6% of blacks who were employed when they

obtained their most recent jobs got them through friends and relatives.

Comparable numbers for those using direct application are 24.0% and 22.9%

respectively.



       24Again, these calculations assume constant transition probabilities

and geometrically distributed unemployment durations.



       25The estimated contributions of racial differences in duration to

differences in nonemployment are comparable to those presented in Clark and

Summers (1982) and in Ballen and Freeman (1986).
                                        27




        26See, for instance, Jackson and Montgomery (1986).



        27The omitted category here is professional/managerial occupations. An

 additional dummy variable was added to capture the effects of those whose

 fathers were either not alive or not employed, as well as those with missing

occupations. Since these data are based on questions which only appeared in

 the 1979 panel of the NLS, some additional measurement error might be caused

by changes over time in father's occupation status.



       28The employment status variables for family members are defined only

for individuals living at home.      Of those, the two variables for father's

employment status are defined relative to the omitted category of absent

father. The two variables for employment of other older males and females are

not exclusive with the variables for father's employment.



       29See Lee (1978) or Willis and Rosen (1979).



       30To the extent that whites use the informal methods a bit more

frequently than do blacks, their offer probabilities will be biased downward

relative to those of blacks.    The racial differences in offer probabilities

considered here are thus lower bounds to the true estimates for these methods.



       31A racial difference of —.248 in the offer probability equation for

formal methods declined to —.233 when father's occupation was added and to
— .233 when household employment variables were added.
                                        28




       32The coefficient on having an unemployed father present was .036

(standard error of .135), while that for employed females was —.066 ($tandard

error of .085) in the equation for formal methods.



       33me limitations in the usefulness of improving formal job search

mechanisms has   been noted by Rees (1966), among others.
                                         29




                                   REFERENCES

Ballen,   John and Richard Freeman.           "Transitions Between Employment and

          Nonemployment." In Richard B. Freeman and Harry J. Hoizer, eds., The

          Black Youth Employment Crisis, University of Chicago Press, 1986.



Barron, John and Otis Cilley.      "Job Search and Vacancy Contacts:      Note."

          American Economic Review, September 1981.



Barron, John and Wesley Mellow. "Search Effort in the Labor Market." Journal

          of Human Resources, Summer 1979.



Bradshaw, Thomas.    "Jobseeking Methods Used by Unemployed Workers." Monthly

          Labor Review, February 1973.



Bureau of Labor Statistics, Report No. 1671, 1975.



Chirinko, Robert.      "An Empirical Investigation of the Returns to Job

          Search." American Economic Review, June 1982.



Clark, Kim and Lawrence Summers.     "The Dynamics of Youth Unemployment." In

          Richard 13. Freeman and David A. Wise, eds., The Youth Labaor Market

          Problem, University of Chicago Press, 1982.



Cogan, John.    "The Decline in Black Teenage Employment: 1950—70." American

          Economic Review, September 1982.
                                        30




Corcorari, Nary et al.       "Most Workers Find Jobs Through Word of Mouth."

         Monthly Labor Review, August 1980.



Datcher, Linda.   "The Impact of Informal Networks on Quit Behavior." Review

         of Economics and Statistics, August 1983.



Flinn, Christopher and James Heckman.        "Are Unemployed and Out of the Labor

         Force Behaviorally Distinct States?"        Journal of Labor Economics,

         January 1983.



Freeman, Richard B.      "Why is There A Youth Labor Market Problem?" National

        Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 365, June 1979.



Freeman, Richard B. and Harry J. Holzer. The Black Youth Employment Crisis,

        University of Chicago Press, 1986.



Cranovetter, Mark S.      Getting a Job:      A Study of Contacts and Careers.

        Harvard University Press, 1974.



Hoizer, Harry J. "Search Methods Used by Unemployed Youth." Mimeo, 1986.



Hoizer, Harry J. "Reservation Wages and their Labor Market Effects for White

        and Black Male Youth." Journal of Human Resources. Spring 1986a,



Jackson, Peter and Edward Montgomery.           "Layoffs, Discharges, and Youth

        Unemployment." In Richard B. Freeman and Harry J. Hoizer, eds., The

        Black Youth Employment Crisis, University of Chicago Press, 1986.
                                        31




Kaitz, Hyman.    "Analyzing the Length of Spells of Unemployment." Monthly

         Labor Review, November 1970.



Lee, Lung—Fei. "Unionism and Wage Rates: A Simultaneous Equations Model with

         Qualitative and Limited Dependent Variables." International Economic

         Review, June 1978.



Osterman, Paul. Getting Started: The Youth Labor Market, MIT Press, 1980.



Rees.. Albert.   "Information Networks in Labor Markets."   American Economic

         Review, May 1966.



Rees, Albert and Wayne Gray.      "Family Effects in Youth Employment."     In

         Richard B. Freeman and David A. Wise, eds., The Youth Labor Market

         Problem, University of Chicago Press, 1982.



Reynolds, Lloyd. The Structure of Labor Markets. Harper and Row, 1951.



Willis, Robert and Sherwin Rosen. 'Education and Self—Selection," Journal of

         Political Economy, October 1979.
