NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VALUATION RISK AND ASSET PRICING
Rui Albuquerque
Martin S. Eichenbaum
Sergio Rebelo
Working Paper 18617
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18617
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

We benefited from the comments and suggestions of Fernando Alvarez, Ravi Bansal, Frederico Belo,
Jaroslav Borovika, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Lars Hansen, Anisha Ghosh, Ravi Jaganathan,
Tasos Karantounias, Howard Kung, Junghoon Lee, Dmitry Livdan, Jonathan Parker, Alberto Rossi,
Costis Skiadas, Ivan Werning, and Amir Yaron. We thank Robert Barro, Emi Nakamura, Jón Steinsson,
and José Ursua for sharing their data with us and Benjamin Johannsen for superb research assistance.
Albuquerque gratefully acknowledges financial support from the European Union Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement PCOFUND-GA-2009-246542. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. A previous version of this paper was presented under the title "Understanding the Equity
Premium Puzzle and the Correlation Puzzle," http://tinyurl.com/akfmvxb.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18617.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Rui Albuquerque, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Valuation Risk and Asset Pricing
Rui Albuquerque, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 18617
December 2012, Revised June 2015
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
Standard representative-agent models fail to account for the weak correlation between stock returns
and measurable fundamentals, such as consumption and output growth. This failing, which underlies
virtually all modern asset-pricing puzzles, arises because these models load all uncertainty onto the
supply side of the economy. We propose a simple theory of asset pricing in which demand shocks
play a central role. These shocks give rise to valuation risk that allows the model to account for key
asset pricing moments, such as the equity premium, the bond term premium, and the weak correlation
between stock returns and fundamentals.
Rui Albuquerque
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and Portuguese Catholic University
ralbuque@bu.edu
Martin S. Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu

Sergio Rebelo
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Finance
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
s-rebelo@northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
In standard representative-agent asset-pricing models, the expected return to an asset reflects the covariance between the asset’s payo§ and the agent’s stochastic discount factor.
An important challenge to these models is that the correlation and covariance between
stock returns and measurable fundamentals, especially consumption growth, is weak at both
short and long horizons. Cochrane and Hansen (1992), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and
Cochrane (2001) call this phenomenon the correlation puzzle. More recently, Lettau and Ludvigson (2011) document this puzzle using di§erent methods. According to their estimates,
the shock that accounts for the vast majority of asset-price fluctuations is uncorrelated with
consumption at virtually all horizons.
The basic disconnect between measurable macroeconomic fundamentals and stock returns underlies virtually all modern asset-pricing puzzles, including the equity-premium
puzzle, Hansen-Singleton (1982)-style rejection of asset-pricing models, violation of HansenJagannathan (1991) bounds, and Shiller (1981)-style observations about excess stock-price
volatility.
A central finding of modern empirical finance is that variation in asset returns is overwhelmingly due to variation in discount factors (see Campbell and Ammer (1993) and
Cochrane (2011)). A key question is: how should we model this variation? In classic
asset-pricing models, all uncertainty is loaded onto the supply side of the economy. In Lucas
(1978) tree models, agents are exposed to random endowment shocks, while in production
economies they are exposed to random productivity shocks. Both classes of models abstract
from shocks to the demand for assets. Not surprisingly, it is very di¢cult for these models
to simultaneously resolve the equity premium puzzle and the correlation puzzle.
We propose a simple theory of asset pricing in which demand shocks, arising from stochastic changes in agents’ rate of time preference, play a central role in the determination
of asset prices. These shocks amount to a parsimonious way of modeling the variation in
discount rates stressed by Campbell and Ammer (1993) and Cochrane (2011). Our model
implies that the law of motion for these shocks plays a first-order role in determining the
equilibrium behavior of variables like the price-dividend ratio, equity returns and bond yields.
So, our analysis is disciplined by the fact that the law of motion for time-preference shocks
must be consistent with the time-series properties of these variables.
In our model, the representative agent has recursive preferences of the type considered by
1

Kreps and Porteus (1978), Weil (1989), and Epstein and Zin (1991). When the risk-aversion
coe¢cient is equal to the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, recursive
preferences reduce to constant-relative risk aversion (CRRA) preferences. We show that, in
this case, time-preference shocks have negligible e§ects on key asset-pricing moments such
as the equity premium.
We consider two versions of our model. The benchmark model is designed to highlight the
role played by time-preference shocks per se. Here consumption and dividends are modeled
as random walks with conditionally homoscedastic shocks. While this model is very useful
for expositional purposes, it su§ers from some clear empirical shortcomings, e.g. the equity
premium is constant. For this reason, we consider an extended version of the model in which
the shocks to the consumption and dividend process are conditionally heteroskedastic. We
find that adding these features improves the performance of the model.1
We estimate our model using a Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) strategy, implemented with annual data for the period 1929 to 2011. We assume that agents make
decisions on a monthly basis. We then deduce the model’s implications for annual data, i.e.
we explicitly deal with the temporal aggregation problem.2
It turns out that, for a large set of parameter values, our model implies that the GMM estimators su§er from substantial small-sample bias. This bias is particularly large for moments
characterizing the predictability of excess returns and the decomposition of the variance of
the price-dividend ratio proposed by Cochrane (1992). In light of this fact, we modify the
GMM procedure to focus on the plim of the model-implied small-sample moments rather
than the plim of the moments themselves. This modification makes an important di§erence
in assessing the model’s empirical performance.
We show that time-preference shocks help explain the equity premium as long as the riskaversion coe¢cient and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution are either both greater
than one or both smaller than one. This condition is satisfied in the estimated benchmark
and extended models.
Allowing for sampling uncertainty, our model accounts for the equity premium and the
volatility of stock and bond returns, even though the estimated degree of agents’ risk aversion
is very moderate (roughly 1.5). Critically, the extended model also accounts for the mean,
1

These results parallel the findings of Bansal and Yaron (2004) who show that allowing for conditional
heteroskedasticity improves the performance of long-run risk models.
2
Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2013) pursue a similar strategy in estimating a long-run risk model. They
estimate the frequency with which agents make decisions and find that it is roughly equal to one month.

2

variance and persistence of the price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate. In addition, it
accounts for the correlation between stock returns and fundamentals such as consumption,
output, and dividend growth at short, medium and long horizons. The model also accounts
for the observed predictability of excess returns by lagged price-dividend ratios.
We define valuation risk as the part of the excess return to an asset that is due to the
volatility of the time-preference shock. According to our estimates, valuation risk is a much
more important determinant of asset returns than conventional risk. We show that valuation
risk is an increasing function of an asset’s maturity. So, a natural test of our model is whether
it can account for bond term premia and the return on stocks relative to long-term bonds.
We pursue this test using stock returns as well as real returns on bonds of di§erent maturity
and argue that the model’s implications are consistent with the data.
An important distinction between our model and leading alternatives lies in the predictions for the slope of the yield curve. With this distinction in mind, we discuss evidence on
the slope of the yield curve obtained using data for the U.S. and the U.K. We then assess the
quantitative implications of di§erent models for the slope of the yield curve. Finally, we show
that the estimated SDF for our model has the properties that Backus and Zin (1994) argue
are necessary to simultaneously account for the slope of the yield curve and the persistence
of bond yields.
There is a literature that models shocks to the demand for assets as arising from timepreference or taste shocks. For example, Garber and King (1983) and Campbell (1986)
consider these types of shocks in early work on asset pricing. Stockman and Tesar (1995),
Pavlova and Rigobon (2007), and Gabaix and Maggiori (2013) study the role of taste shocks
in explaining asset prices in open economy models. In the macroeconomic literature, Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Eggertsson (2004), model changes in savings behavior
as arising from time-preference shocks that make the zero lower bound on nominal interest
rates binding.3 Hall (2014) stresses the importance of variation in discount rates in explaining the cyclical behavior of unemployment. Bai, Rios-Rull and Storesletten (2014) stress the
importance of demand shocks in generating business cycle fluctuations.
Time-preference shocks can also be thought of a simple way of capturing the notion that
fluctuations in market sentiment contribute to the volatility of asset prices, as emphasized
by authors such as in Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) and Dumas, Kurshev and Up3

See also Huo and Rios-Rull (2013), Correia, Farhi, Nicolini, and Teles (2013), and Fernandez-Villaverde,
Guerron-Quintana, Kuester, Rubio-Ramírez (2013).

3

pal (2009). Finally, in independent work, contemporaneous with our own, Maurer (2012)
explores the impact of time-preference shocks in a calibrated continuous-time representative
agent model with Du¢e-Epstein (1992) preferences.4
Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we document the correlation puzzle using
U.S. data for the period 1929 to 2011 and the period 1871 to 2006. In Section 3, we present
our benchmark and extended models. We discuss our estimation strategy in Section 4. In
Section 5, we present our empirical results. In Section 6, we study the empirical implications
of the model for bond term premia, as well as the return on stocks relative to long-term
bonds. Section 7 concludes.

2. The correlation puzzle
In this section we examine the correlation between stock returns and fundamentals as measured by the growth rate of consumption, output, dividends, and earnings.
2.1. Data sources
We consider two sample periods: 1929 to 2011 and 1871 to 2006. For the first sample, we
obtain nominal stock and bond returns from Kenneth French’s website. We use the measure
of real consumption expenditures and real Gross Domestic Product constructed by Barro and
Ursúa (2011), which we update to 2011 using National Income and Product Accounts data.
We compute per-capita variables using total population (POP).5 We obtain data on real
S&P500 earnings and dividends from Robert Shiller’s website. We use data from Ibbotson
and Associates on the nominal return to one-month Treasury bills, the nominal yield on
intermediate-term government bonds (with approximate maturity of five years), and the
4

Normandin and St-Amour (1998) study the impact of preference shocks in a model similar to ours.
Unfortunately, their analysis does not take into account the fact that covariances between asset returns,
consumption growth, and preferences shocks depend on the parameters governing preferences and technology.
As a result, their empirical estimates imply that preference shocks reduce the equity premium. In addition,
they argue that they can explain the equity premium with separable preferences and preference shocks. This
claim contradicts the results in Campbell (1986) and the theorem in our Appendix B.
5
This series is not subject to a very important source of measurement error that a§ects another commonlyused population measure, civilian noninstitutional population (CNP16OV). Every ten years, the CNP16OV
series is adjusted using information from the decennial census. This adjustment produces large discontinuities
in the CNP16OV series. The average annual growth rates implied by the two series are reasonably similar:
1.2 for POP and 1.4 for CNP16OV for the period 1952-2012. But the growth rate of CNP16OV is three
times more volatile than the growth rate of POP. Part of this high volatility in the growth rate of CNP16OV
is induced by large positive and negative spikes that generally occur in January. For example, in January
2000, 2004, 2008, and 2012 the annualized percentage growth rates of CNP16OV are 14.8, −1.9, −2.8, and
8.4, respectively. The corresponding annualized percentage growth rates for POP are 1.1, 0.8, 0.9, and 0.7.

4

nominal yield on long-term government bonds (with approximate maturity of twenty years).
We convert nominal returns and yields to real returns and yields using the rate of inflation
as measured by the consumer price index. We also use inflation-adjusted U.K. government
bonds (index-linked gilts) with maturities 2.5, 5, 10, 15, and 25 years.
For the second sample, we use data on real stock and bond returns from Nakamura,
Steinsson, Barro, and Ursúa (2013). We use the same data sources for consumption, expenditures, dividends and earnings as in the first sample.
In our estimation, we use two measures of real bond returns. Our primary measure
is the ex-ante real return on nominal, one-year, five-year and twenty-year Treasury bonds
taken from Luo (2014). Luo (2014) constructs alternative models of expected inflation for
one, five and twenty-year horizons. He argues that the random walk model does a better
job at forecasting one-year inflation than more sophisticated models like time-varying VAR
methods of the sort considered by Primiceri (2005). It also does better than Bayesian vector
autoregressions embodying Minnesota priors. However, he argues that the latter does best
at forecasting inflation at the five- and twenty-year horizons.
We also report results for a second measure of real bond returns: the realized real return
on nominal one-year, five-year and twenty-year Treasury bonds. The one-year rate is the
measure of the risk-free rate used in Mehra and Prescott (1985) and the associated literature.
We compute dynamic correlations between stock returns and consumption growth for the
G7 and OECD countries. The data on annual real stock returns for the G7 and the OECD
countries are from Global Financial Statistics. The data on real per capita personal consumer
expenditures and real per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for these countries comes
from Barro and Ursúa (2008) and was updated by these authors until 2009. The countries
(beginning of sample period) included in our data set are: Australia (1901), Austria (1947),
Belgium (1947), Canada (1900), Chile (1900), Denmark (1900), Finland (1923), France
(1942), Germany (1851), Greece (1953), Italy (1900), Japan (1894), Korea (1963), Mexico
(1902), Netherlands (1947), New Zealand (1947), Norway (1915), Spain (1941), Sweden
(1900), Switzerland (1900), United Kingdom (1830), and United States (1869).
2.2. Empirical results
Table 1, panel A presents results for the sample period 1929 to 2011. We report correlations
at the one-, five- and ten-year horizons. The five- and ten-year horizon correlations are
computed using five- and ten-year overlapping observations, respectively. We report Newey5

West (1987) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors computed with ten lags.
There are three key features of Table 1, panel A. First, consistent with Cochrane and
Hansen (1992) and Campbell and Cochrane (1999), the growth rates of consumption and
output are uncorrelated with stock returns at all the horizons that we consider. Second, the
correlation between stock returns and dividend growth is similar to that of consumption and
output growth at the one-year horizon. However, the correlation between stock returns and
dividend growth is substantially higher at the five and ten-year horizons than the analogue
correlations involving consumption and output growth. Third, the pattern of correlations
between stock returns and dividend growth is similar to the analogue correlations involving
earnings growth.
Table 1, panel B reports results for the longer sample period (1871-2006). The oneyear correlation between stock returns and the growth rates of consumption and output
are very similar to those obtained for the shorter sample. There is evidence in this sample
of a stronger correlation between stock returns and the growth rates of consumption and
output at a five-year horizon. But, at the ten-year horizon the correlations are, once again,
statistically insignificant. The results for dividends and earnings are very similar across the
two subsamples.
Table 2 assesses the robustness of our results for the correlation between stock returns
and consumption using three di§erent measures of consumption for the period 1929 to 2011,
obtained from the National Product and Income Accounts. With one exception, the correlations in this table are statistically insignificant. The exception is the five-year correlation
between stock returns and the growth rate of nondurables and services which is marginally
significant.
Table 3 reports the correlation between stock returns and the growth rate of consumption
and output for the G7, and the OECD. We report correlations at the one-, five- and tenyear horizons. We compute correlations for the G7 and the OECD countries pooling data
across all countries. This procedure implies that countries with longer time series receive
more weight in the calculations. Again, there is also a relatively weak correlation between
consumption and output growth and stock returns at all the horizons we consider.
We have focused on correlations because we find them easy to interpret. One might
be concerned that a di§erent picture emerges from the pattern of covariances between stock
returns and fundamentals. It does not. For example, using quarterly U.S. data for the period

6

1959 to 2000, Parker (2001) argues that one would require a risk aversion coe¢cient of 379
to account for the equity premium given his estimate of the covariance between consumption
growth and stock returns.6
We conclude this subsection by considering the dynamic correlations between consumption growth and stock returns. Authors like Parker (2001), Campbell (2003), and Jaganathan
and Wang (2007) find that in the U.S. post-war quarterly data, stock returns are correlated
with future consumption growth.7 Figure 1 reports the correlation between returns at time
t and consumption growth at time t + τ , where τ ranges from −10 years to +10 years. The

dotted lines are the limits of the 95 percent confidence interval. The figure also reports the
analogue correlations involving output growth. Three key features are worth noting. First,
for the U.S. and Canada there does appear to be a significant correlation between returns
at time t and both consumption and output growth at time t + 1. Second, this result is
not robust across the other G7 countries. Third, there is no other value of τ for which the
correlation is significant for any of the countries. So, we infer that, even taking dynamic correlations into account, there is a weak correlation between stock returns and fundamentals,
as measured by consumption and output growth. Nevertheless, because we estimate our
structural model using U.S. data, we assess its ability to be consistent with the correlations
between stock returns at t and consumption growth at t + 1.
Viewed overall, the results in this section serve as our motivation for introducing shocks
to the demand for assets. Classic representative-agent models load all uncertainty onto the
supply-side of the economy. As a result, they have di¢culty in simultaneously accounting
for the equity premium and the correlation puzzle.8 This di¢culty is shared by the habitformation model proposed by Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and the long-run risk models
proposed by Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012). Rare-disaster
models of the type proposed by Rietz (1988) and Barro (2006) also share this di¢culty
because all shocks, disaster or not, are to the supply side of the model. A model with a timevarying disaster probability, of the type considered by Wachter (2012) and Gourio (2012),
6

Parker (2001) finds that there is a larger covariance between current stock returns and the cumulative
growth rate of consumption over the next 12 quarters. He shows that using this covariance measure, one
would require a risk aversion coe¢cient of 38 to rationalize the equity premium (see also Grossman, Melino
and Shiller (1987)).
7
In related work, Backus, Routledge, and Zin (2010) show that equity returns is a leading indicator of
the business-cycle components of consumption and output growth.
8
Lynch (1996) and Gârleanu, Kogan, and Panageas (2012) provide interesting analyses of overlappinggenerations models which generate an equity premium, even though the correlation between consumption
growth and equity returns is low.

7

might be able to rationalize the low correlation between consumption and stock returns
as a small-sample phenomenon. The reason is that changes in the probability of disasters
induce movements in stock returns without corresponding movements in actual consumption
growth. This force lowers the correlation between stock returns and consumption in a sample
where rare disasters are under represented. This explanation might account for the post-war
correlations. But we are more skeptical that it accounts for the results in Table 1, panel B,
which are based on the longer sample period, 1871 to 2006, which includes disasters such as
the Great Depression and two World Wars.
Below, we focus on demand shocks as the source of the low correlation between stock
returns and fundamentals, rather than the alternatives just mentioned. We model these
demand shocks in the simplest possible way by introducing shocks to the time preference of
the representative agent. Consistent with the references in the introduction, these shocks can
be thought of as capturing changes in agents’ attitudes towards savings or, more generally,
investor sentiment.

3. The model
In this section, we study the properties of a representative-agent endowment economy modified to allow for time-preference shocks. The representative agent has the constant-elasticity
version of Kreps-Porteus (1978) preferences used by Epstein and Zin (1991) and Weil (1989).
The life-time utility of the representative agent is a function of current utility and the cer∗
:
tainty equivalent of future utility, Ut+1
h
" ∗ #1−1/ i1/(1−1/ )
1−1/
+ δ Ut+1
,
Ut = max λt Ct
Ct

(3.1)

where Ct denotes consumption at time t and δ is a positive scalar. The certainty equivalent
∗
such that:
of future utility is the sure value of t + 1 lifetime utility, Ut+1

"

∗
Ut+1

The parameters

#1−γ

" 1−γ #
.
= Et Ut+1

and γ represent the elasticity of intertemporal substitution and the coef-

ficient of relative risk aversion, respectively. The ratio λt+1 /λt determines how agents trade
o§ current versus future utility. We assume that this ratio is known at time t.9 We refer to
9

We obtain similar results with a version of the model in which the utility function takes the form:
h
" ∗ #1−1/ i1/(1−1/ )
1−1/
Ut = Ct
+ λt δ Ut+1
. The assumption that the agents knows λt+1 at time t is made
to simplify the algebra and is not necessary for any of the key results.

8

λt+1 /λt as the time-preference shock. Propositions 6.9 and 6.18 in Skiadas (2009) provide a
set of axioms that applies to recursive utility functions with preference shocks.10
3.1. The benchmark model
To highlight the role of time-preference shocks, we begin with a very simple stochastic process
for consumption:
log(Ct+1 /Ct ) = µ + σ c "ct+1 .

(3.2)

Here, µ and σ c are non-negative scalars and "ct+1 follows an i.i.d. standard-normal distribution.
As in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), we allow dividends, Dt , to di§er from consumption.
In particular, we assume that:
log(Dt+1 /Dt ) = µ + π dc "ct+1 + σ d "dt+1 .

(3.3)

Here, "dt+1 is an i.i.d. standard-normal random variable that is uncorrelated with "ct+1 . To
simplify, we assume that the average growth rate of dividends and consumption is the same
(µ). The parameter σ d ≥ 0 controls the volatility of dividends. The parameter π dc controls
the correlation between consumption and dividend shocks.11

The variable Λt+1 = log(λt+1 /λt ) determines how agents trade o§ current versus future
utility. This ratio is known at time t. We refer to Λt+1 as the time-preference shock. This
shock evolves according to:
Λt+1 = ρΛ Λt + σ Λ "Λt ,

(3.4)

where, "Λt is an i.i.d. standard-normal random variable. In the spirit of the original Lucas
(1978) model, we assume, for now, that "Λt is uncorrelated with "ct and "dt . We relax this
assumption in Subsection 3.4.
The CRRA case In Appendix A we solve this model analytically for the case in which
γ = 1/ . Here preferences reduce to the CRRA form:
Vt = Et

1
X

1−γ
δ i λt+i Ct+i
,

(3.5)

i=0

10

Skiadas (2009) derives a parametric SDF that satisfies the axioms in proposition 6.9 and 6.18 (see his
equation 6.35). This SDF can be modified to obtain a generalized Epstein and Zin (1989) parametric utility
function with stochastic risk aversion, intertemporal substitution, and time-preference shocks. We thank
Soohun Kim and Ravi Jagannathan for pointing this result out to us.
11
The stochastic process described by equations (3.2) and (3.3) implies that log(Dt+1 /Ct+1 ) follows a
random walk with no drift. This implication is consistent with our data.

9

with Vt = Ut1−γ .
We denote the risk-free rate and the rate of return on a claim on consumption by Rf,t+1 ,
and Rc,t+1 , respectively. The unconditional risk-free rate depends on the persistence and
volatility of time-preference shocks:
E (Rf,t+1 ) = exp

&

σ 2Λ /2
1 − ρ2Λ

'

δ −1 exp(γµ − γ 2 σ 2c /2).

The unconditional equity premium implied by this model is proportional to the risk-free
rate:

(
"
#
)
E (Rc,t+1 − Rf,t+1 ) = E (Rf,t+1 ) exp γσ 2c − 1 .

(3.6)

Both the average risk-free rate and the volatility of consumption are small in the data.
Moreover, the constant of proportionality in equation (3.6), exp (γσ 2c ) − 1, is independent

of σ 2Λ . So, time-preference shocks do not help to resolve the equity premium puzzle when
preferences are of the CRRA form.
3.2. Solving the benchmark model
We define the return to the stock market as the return to a claim on the dividend process.
The realized gross stock-market return is given by:
Rd,t+1 =

Pd,t+1 + Dt+1
,
Pd,t

(3.7)

where Pd,t denotes the ex-dividend stock price.
It is useful to define the realized gross return to a claim on the endowment process:
Rc,t+1 =

Pc,t+1 + Ct+1
.
Pc,t

(3.8)

Here, Pc,t denotes the price of an asset that pays a dividend equal to aggregate consumption. We use the following notation to define the logarithm of returns on the dividend and
consumption claims, the logarithm of the price-dividend ratio, and the logarithm of the
price-consumption ratio:
rd,t+1 = log(Rd,t+1 ),
rc,t+1 = log(Rc,t+1 ),
zdt = log(Pd,t /Dt ),
zct = log(Pc,t /Ct ).
10

In Appendix B we show that the logarithm of the stochastic discount factor (SDF) implied
by the utility function defined in equation (3.1) is given by:
mt+1 = θ log (δ) + θΛt+1 −

θ

∆ct+1 + (θ − 1) rc,t+1 ,

(3.9)

where θ is defined as:
θ=

1−γ
.
1 − 1/

(3.10)

When γ = 1/ , the case of CRRA preferences, the value of θ is equal to one and the
stochastic discount factor is independent of rc,t+1 .
We solve the model using the approximation proposed by Campbell and Shiller (1988),
which involves linearizing the expressions for rc,t+1 and rd,t+1 and exploiting the properties
of the log-normal distribution.12
Using a log-linear Taylor expansion we obtain:
rd,t+1 = κd0 + κd1 zdt+1 − zdt + ∆dt+1 ,

(3.11)

rc,t+1 = κc0 + κc1 zct+1 − zct + ∆ct+1 ,

(3.12)

where ∆ct+1 ≡ log (Ct+1 /Ct ) and ∆dt+1 ≡ log (Dt+1 /Dt ). The constants κc0 , κc1 , κd0 , and

κd1 are given by:

κd0 = log [1 + exp(zd )] − κd1 zd ,
κc0 = log [1 + exp(zc )] − κc1 zc ,

κd1 =

exp(zd )
exp(zc )
, κc1 =
,
1 + exp(zd )
1 + exp(zc )

where zd and zc are the unconditional mean values of zdt and zct .
The Euler equations associated with a claim to the stock market and a consumption
claim can be written as:
Et [exp (mt+1 + rd,t+1 )] = 1,

(3.13)

Et [exp (mt+1 + rc,t+1 )] = 1.

(3.14)

We solve the model using the method of undetermined coe¢cients. First, we replace
mt+1 , rc,t+1 and rd,t+1 in equations (3.13) and (3.14), using expressions (3.11), (3.12) and
12

See Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008) for an alternative solution procedure.

11

(3.9). Second, we guess and verify that the equilibrium solutions for zdt and zct take the
form:
zdt = Ad0 + Ad1 Λt+1 ,

(3.15)

zct = Ac0 + Ac1 Λt+1 .

(3.16)

This solution has the property that price-dividend ratios are constant, absent movements
in Λt+1 . This property results from our assumption that the logarithm of consumption and
dividends follow random-walk processes. We compute Ad0 , Ad1 , Ac0 , and Ac1 using the
method of undetermined coe¢cients.
The equilibrium solution has the property that Ad1 , Ac1 > 0. We show in Appendix B
that the conditional expected return to equity is given by:
(3.17)
Et (rd,t+1 ) = − log (δ) − Λt+1 + µ/
+
*
(1 − θ)
(1 − γ)2 − γ 2 σ 2c /2 + π dc (2γσ c − π dc ) /2 − σ 2d /2
+
θ
,
+ (1 − θ) (κc1 Ac1 ) [2 (κd1 Ad1 ) − (κc1 Ac1 )] − (κd1 Ad1 )2 σ 2Λ /2.

Recall that κc1 and κd1 are non-linear functions of the parameters of the model.
Using the Euler equation for the risk-free rate, rf,t+1 ,
Et [exp (mt+1 + rf,t+1 )] = 1,
we obtain:
rf,t+1 = − log (δ) − Λt+1 + µ/ − (1 − θ) (κc1 Ac1 )2 σ 2Λ /2
+
*
(1 − θ)
2
2
(1 − γ) − γ σ 2c /2.
+
θ

(3.18)

Equations (3.17) and (3.18) imply that the risk-free rate and the conditional expectation
of the return to equity are decreasing functions of Λt+1 . When Λt+1 rises, agents value the
future more relative to the present, so they want to save more. Since risk-free bonds are
in zero net supply and the number of stock shares is constant, aggregate savings cannot
increase. So, in equilibrium, returns on bonds and equity must fall to induce agents to save
less.
The approximate response of asset prices to shocks, emphasized by Borovička, Hansen,
Hendricks, and Scheinkman (2011) and Borovička and Hansen (2011), can be directly inferred
12

from equations (3.17) and (3.18). The response of the return to stocks and the risk-free rate
to a time-preference shock corresponds to that of an AR(1) with serial correlation ρΛ .
Using equations (3.17) and (3.18) we can write the conditional equity premium as:
Et (rd,t+1 ) − rf,t+1 = π dc (2γσ c − π dc ) /2 − σ 2d /2

(3.19)

+κd1 Ad1 [2 (1 − θ) Ac1 κc1 − κd1 Ad1 ] σ 2Λ /2.
We define the compensation for valuation risk as the part of the one-period expected
excess return to an asset that is due to the volatility of the time preference shock, σ 2Λ . We
refer to the part of the one-period expected excess return that is due to the volatility of
consumption and dividends as the compensation for conventional risk.
The component of the equity premium that is due to valuation risk, vd , is given by the
last term in equation (3.19). Since the constants Ac1 , Ad1 , κc1 , and κd1 are all positive, θ < 1
is a necessary condition for valuation risk to help explain the equity premium (recall that θ
is defined in equation (3.10)).13
The intuition for why valuation risk helps account for the equity premium is as follows.
Consider an investor who buys the stock at time t. At some later time, say t + τ , τ > 0,
the investor may get a preference shock, say a decrease in Λt+τ +1 , and want to increase
consumption. Since all consumers are identical, they all want to sell the stock at the same
time, so the price of equity falls. Bond prices also fall because consumers try to reduce their
holdings of the risk-free asset to raise their consumption in the current period. Since stocks
are infinitely-lived compared to the one-period risk-free bond, they are more exposed to this
source of risk. So, valuation risk, vd , gives rise to an equity premium. In the CRRA case
(θ = 1) the e§ect of valuation risk on the equity premium is generally small (see equation
3.6)).
It is interesting to highlight the di§erences between time-preference shocks and conventional sources of uncertainty, which pertain to the supply-side of the economy. Suppose that
there is no risk associated with the physical payo§ of assets such as stocks. In this case,
standard asset pricing models would imply that the equity premium is zero. In our model,
there is a positive equity premium that results from the di§erential exposure of bonds and
13

As discussed in Epstein et al (2014), the condition θ < 1 also plays a crucial role in generating a high
equity premium in long-run risk models. Because long-run risks are resolved in the distant future, they are
more heavily penalized than current risks. For this reason, long-run risk models can generate a large equity
premium even when shocks to current consumption are small.

13

stocks to valuation risk. Agents are uncertain about how much they will value future dividend payments. Since Λt+1 is known at time t, this valuation risk is irrelevant for one-period
bonds. But, it is not irrelevant for stocks, because they have infinite maturity. In general,
the longer the maturity of an asset, the higher is its exposure to time-preference shocks and
the large is the valuation risk.
We conclude by considering the case in which there are supply-side shocks to the economy
but agents are risk neutral (γ = 0). In this case, the component of the equity premium
that is due to valuation risk is always positive as long as

< 1. The intuition is as follows:

stocks are long-lived assets whose payo§s can induce unwanted variation in the period utility
1−1/

of the representative agent, λt Ct

. Even when agents are risk neutral, they must be

compensated for the risk of this unwanted variation.
3.3. Relation to the long-run risk model
In this subsection, we briefly comment on the relation between our model and the long-runrisk model pioneered by Bansal and Yaron (2004). Both models emphasize low-frequency
shocks that induce large, persistent changes in the agent’s stochastic discount factor.14 To
see this point, it is convenient to re-write the representative agent’s utility function, (3.1),
as:

1/(1−1/ )

where C̃t = λt

h
" ∗ #1−1/ i1/(1−1/ )
1−1/
+ δ Ut+1
,
Ut = C̃t

(3.20)

Ct . Taking logarithms of this expression we obtain:
. /
log C̃t = 1/ (1 − 1/ ) log(λt ) + log (Ct ) .

Bansal and Yaron (2004) introduce a highly persistent component in the process for log(Ct ),
which is a source of long-run risk. In contrast, we introduce a highly persistent component
into log(C̃t ) via our specification of the time-preference shock. From equation (3.9), it is
clear that both specifications can induce large, persistent movements in mt+1 . Despite this
similarity, the two models are not observationally equivalent. First, they have di§erent
implications for the correlation between observed consumption growth, log(Ct+1 /Ct ), and
asset returns. Second, the two models have very di§erent implications for the average return
to long-term bonds, and the term structure of interest rates. We return to these points
when we discuss our empirical results in Section 6. There we present empirical evidence for
14

See Dew-Becker (2014) for a version of a long-run risk model in a production economy.

14

the implications of di§erent models for the slope of the yield curve. In addition, we assess
whether the SDFs of the di§erent models have the properties that Backus and Zin (1994)
argue are necessary for explaining the slope of the yield curve and the persistence of bond
yields.
3.4. The extended model
The benchmark model just described is useful to highlight the role of time-preference shocks
in a§ecting asset returns. But its simplicity leads to two important empirical shortcomings.15
First, since consumption is a martingale, the only state variable that is relevant for asset
returns is Λt+1 . This property means that all asset returns are highly correlated with each
other and with the price-dividend ratio. Second, and related, the model displays constant
risk premia and so it cannot generate predictability in excess returns.
In this subsection, we address the shortcomings of the benchmark model by allowing for
a richer model of consumption and dividend growth:
"
#
log(Ct+1 /Ct ) = µc + ρc log(Ct /Ct−1 ) + αc σ 2t+1 − σ 2 + π cΛ "Λt+1 + σ t "ct+1 ,

(3.21)

"
#
log(Dt+1 /Dt ) = µd +ρd log(Dt+1 /Dt )+αd σ 2t+1 − σ 2 +σ d σ t "dt+1 +π dΛ "Λt+1 +π dc σ t "ct+1 , (3.22)

and

#
"
σ 2t+1 = σ 2 + v σ 2t − σ 2 + σ w wt+1 ,

(3.23)

where "ct+1 , "dt+1 , "Λt+1 , and wt+1 are mutually uncorrelated standard-normal variables. We
restrict the unconditional average growth rate of consumption and dividends to be the same:
µd
µc
=
.
1 − ρc
1 − ρd
Relative to the benchmark model, equations (3.21)-(3.23) incorporate three new features.
First, motivated by the data, we allow for serial correlation in the growth rates of consumption and dividends. Second, as in Kandel and Stambaugh (1990) and Bansal and Yaron
(2004), we allow for conditional heteroskedasticity in consumption. This feature generates
time-varying risk premia: when volatility is high the stock is risky, its price is low and its
expected return is high. High volatility leads to higher precautionary savings motive so that
the risk-free rate falls, reinforcing the rise in the risk premium. Third, we allow for a correlation between time-preference shocks and the growth rate of consumption and dividends.
15

The shortcomings of our benchmark model are shared by other simple models like model I in Bansal
and Yaron (2004), which abstract from conditional heteroskedasticity in consumption and dividends.

15

In a production economy, time-preference shocks would generally induce changes in aggregate consumption. For example, in a simple real-business-cycle model, a persistent increase
in Λt+1 would lead agents to reduce current consumption and raise investment in order to
consume more in the future. Taken literally, an endowment economy specification does not
allow for such a correlation. Importantly, only the innovation to time-preference shocks enters the law of motion for log(Ct+1 /Ct ) and log(Dt+1 /Dt ). So, equations (3.21)-(3.23) do not
introduce any element of long-run risk into consumption or dividend growth.
Since the price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate are driven by a single state variable
in the benchmark model, they have the same degree of persistence. But, according to our
empirical estimates, the price-dividend ratio is more persistent than the risk-free rate. A
straightforward way to address this shortcoming of the benchmark model is to assume that
the time-preference shock is the sum of a persistent shock and an i.i.d. shock:
Λt+1 = xt + σ η η t+1 ,

(3.24)

xt+1 = ρΛ xt + σ Λ "Λt+1 .
Here "Λt+1 and η t+1 are uncorrelated, i.i.d. standard normal shocks. We think of xt as
capturing low-frequency changes in the growth rate of the discount rate. In contrast, η t+1
can be thought of high-frequency changes in investor sentiment that a§ect the demand for
assets (see, for example, Dumas et al. (2009)). If σ η = 0 and x1 = Λ1 , we obtain the
specification of the time-preference shock used in the benchmark model. Other things equal,
the larger is σ η , the lower is the persistence of the time-preference shock.

4. Estimation methodology
We estimate the parameters of our model using the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM).
Our estimator is the parameter vector Φ̂ that minimizes the distance between a vector of
empirical moments, ΨD , and the corresponding model moments, Ψ(Φ̂). Our estimator, Φ̂, is
given by:
Φ̂ = arg min [Ψ(Φ) − ΨD ]0 Ω−1
D [Ψ(Φ) − ΨD ] .
Φ

We found that, for a wide range of parameter values, the model implies that there is smallsample bias in terms of various moments, especially the predictability of excess returns. We
therefore focus on the plim of the model-implied small-sample moments when constructing
Ψ(Φ), rather than the plim of the moments themselves. For a given parameter vector, Φ, we
16

create 500 synthetic time series, each of length equal to our sample size. For each sample,
we calculate the sample moments of interest. The vector Ψ(Φ) that enters the criterion
function is the median value of the sample moments across the synthetic time series.16 In
addition, we assume that agents make decisions at a monthly frequency and derive the
model’s implications for variables computed at an annual frequency. We estimate ΨD using
a standard two-step e¢cient GMM estimator with a Newey-West (1987) weighting matrix
that has ten lags. The latter matrix corresponds to our estimate of the variance-covariance
matrix of the empirical moments, ΩD .
When estimating the benchmark model, we include the following 19 moments in ΨD : the
mean and standard deviation of consumption growth, the mean and standard deviation of
dividend growth, the contemporaneous correlation between the growth rate of dividends and
the growth rate of consumption, the mean and standard deviation of real stock returns, the
mean, standard deviation and autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio, the mean, standard
deviation and autocorrelation of the real risk-free rate, the correlation between stock returns
and consumption growth at the one, five and ten-year horizon, the correlation between stock
returns and dividend growth at the one, five and ten-year horizon. We constrain the growth
rate of dividends and consumption to be the same. In practice, when we estimate the
benchmark model we find that the standard deviation of the point estimate of the risk-free
rate across the 500 synthetic time series is very large. So here we report results corresponding
to the case where we constrain the median risk-free rate to exactly match our point estimate.
For the benchmark model, the vector Φ includes nine parameters: γ, the coe¢cient of
relative risk aversion, , the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, δ, the rate of time preference, σ c , the volatility consumption growth shocks, π dc , the parameter that controls the
correlation between consumption and dividend growth shocks, σ d , the volatility of dividend
growth shocks, ρΛ , the persistence of time-preference shocks, σ Λ , the volatility of the innovation to time-preference shocks, and µ, the mean growth rate of dividends and consumption.
In the extended model, the vector Φ includes nine additional parameters: ρc and ρd ,
which control the serial correlation of consumption and dividend growth, αc and αd , which
control the e§ect of volatility on the growth rate of consumption and dividends, respectively,
π cΛ and π dΛ , which control the e§ect of time preference shock innovations on consumption
and dividends, respectively, ν, which governs the persistence of volatility, σ w , the volatility
16
As the sample size grows, our estimator becomes equivalent to a standard GMM estimator so that the
usual asymptotic results for the distribution of the estimator apply.

17

of innovations to volatility, and σ η , the volatility of transitory shocks to time preference. In
estimating the extended model, we add to ΨD the following six moments: the first-order
serial correlation of consumption growth, the average yield for 5 and 20-year bonds, and the
slope coe¢cients from the regressions of the excess-equity returns over holding periods of 1,
3 and 5 years on the lagged price-dividend ratio.

5. Empirical results
In the main text, we discuss the results that we obtain estimating the models using the exante measures of real bond yields. In appendix D, we report the analogue results obtained
estimating the models with ex-post measures of real bond yields.
Table 4 reports our parameter estimates along with standard errors. Several features
are worth noting. First, the coe¢cient of risk aversion is quite low, 1.5 and 2.4, in the
benchmark and extended models, respectively. We estimate this coe¢cient with reasonable
precision. Second, for both models, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is somewhat
larger than one. Third, for both models, the point estimates satisfy the necessary condition
for valuation risk to be positive, θ < 1. Fourth, the parameter ρΛ that governs the serial
correlation of the growth rate of Λt is estimated to be close to one in both models, 0.991 and
0.992 in the benchmark and extended model, respectively. Fifth, the parameter ν, which
governs the persistence of consumption volatility in the extended model, is also quite high
(0.997). The high degree of persistence in both the time-preference and the volatility shock
are the root cause of the small-sample biases in our estimators.
Table 5 compares the small-sample moments implied by the benchmark and extended
models with the estimated data moments. Recall that in estimating the model parameters
we impose the restriction that the unconditional average growth rate of consumption and
dividends are the same. To assess the robustness of our results to this restriction, we present
two versions of the estimated data moments, with and without the restriction. With one
exception, the constrained and unconstrained data moment estimates are similar, taking
sampling uncertainty into account. The exception is the average growth rate of consumption,
where the constrained and unconstrained estimates are statistically di§erent.
Implications for the equity premium Table 5 shows that both the benchmark and
extended model give rise to a large equity premium, 5.81 and 3.88, respectively. This result

18

holds even though the estimated degree of risk aversion is quite moderate in both models.
In contrast, long-run risk models require a high degree of risk aversion to match the equity
premium.
Recall that in order for valuation risk to contribute to the equity premium, θ must be less
than one. This condition is clearly satisfied by both our models: the estimated value of θ is
−1.6 and −2.6 in the benchmark and extended model, respectively (Table 4). In both cases,

θ is estimated quite accurately. Taking sampling uncertainty into account, the benchmark
model easily accounts for the equity premium, while the extended model does so marginally.
We can easily reject the null hypothesis of θ = 1, which corresponds to the case of constant
relative risk aversion.
The basic intuition for why our model generates a high equity premium despite a low
coe¢cient of relative risk aversion is as follows. From the perspective of the model, stocks
and bonds are di§erent in two ways. First, the model embodies the conventional source of an
equity premium, namely a di§erential covariance of bonds and stocks with the SDF. Since γ
is relatively small, this traditional covariance e§ect is also small. Second, the model embodies
a compensation for valuation risk that is particularly pronounced for stocks because they
they have longer maturities than bonds. Recall that, given our timing assumptions, when
an agent buys a bond at time t, the agent knows the value of Λt+1 , so the only source of risk
are movements in the marginal utility of consumption at time t + 1. In contrast, the time-t
stock price depends on the value of Λt+j , for all j > 1. So, agents are exposed to valuation
risk, a risk that is particularly important because time-preference shocks are very persistent.
Implications for the risk-free rate A problem with some explanations of the equity
premium is that they imply counterfactually high levels of volatility for the risk-free rate
(see e.g. Boldrin, Christiano and Fisher (2001)). Table 5 shows that the volatility of the
risk-free rate and stock market returns implied by our model are similar to the estimated
volatilities in the data.
An empirical shortcoming of the benchmark model is its implication for the persistence
of the risk-free rate. Recall that, according to equation (3.18), the risk-free rate has the same
persistence as the growth rate of the time-preference shock. Table 5 shows that the AR(1)
coe¢cient of the risk-free rate, as measured by the ex-ante real returns to one-year treasury
bills, is only 0.52, with a standard error of 0.07. This estimate is substantially smaller than
the analogue statistic implied by the benchmark model (0.90). The extended model does a
19

much better job at accounting for the persistence of the risk-free rate (0.51). In this model
there are both transitory and persistent shocks to the risk-free rate. The former account for
roughly 44 percent of the variance of Λt .
Implications for the correlation puzzle Table 6 reports the model’s implications for
the correlation of stock returns with consumption and dividend growth.17 Recall that in
the benchmark model consumption and dividends follow a random walk. In addition, the
estimated process for the growth rate of the time-preference shock is close to a random walk.
So, the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth implied by the model is
essentially the same across di§erent horizons. A similar property holds for the correlation
between stock returns and dividend growth.
In the extended model, persistent changes in the variance of the growth rate of consumption and dividends can induce persistent changes in the conditional mean of these variables.
As a result, this model produces correlations between stock returns and fundamentals that
vary across di§erent horizons.
The benchmark model does well at matching the correlation between stock returns and
consumption growth in the data, because this correlation is similar at all horizons. In
contrast, the empirical correlation between stock returns and dividend growth increases with
the time horizon. The estimation procedure chooses to match the long-horizon correlations
and does less well at matching the yearly correlation. This choice is dictated by the fact that
it is harder for the model to produce a low correlation between stock returns and dividend
growth than it is to produce a low correlation between stock returns and consumption growth.
This property reflects the fact that the dividend growth rate enters directly into the equation
for stock returns (see equation (3.11)).
The extended model does better at capturing the fact that the correlations between
equity returns and dividend growth rises with the horizon for two reasons. When volatility
is high, the returns to equity are high. Since αd < 0, the growth rate of dividends is low. As
a result, the one-year correlation between dividend growth and equity returns is negative.
The variance of the shock to the dividend growth rate is mean reverting. So, the e§ect
of a negative value of αd becomes weaker as the horizon extends. The direct association
17

The moments reported in this table are slightly di§erent from those reported in Table 1. The reason is
that the moments in the two tables were computed using di§erent samples. In Table 6, we compute a leaded
and a lagged correlation, so we lose one observation in the beginning of the sample and another in the end
of the sample.

20

between equity returns and dividend growth (see equation (3.11)), which induces a positive
correlation, eventually dominates as the horizon gets longer.
An additional force that allows the extended model to generate a lower short-term correlation between equity returns and dividend growth, is that the estimated value of π dΛ is
negative. The estimation algorithm chooses parameters that allow the model to do reasonably well in matching the one- and five-year correlation, at the cost of doing less well
at matching the ten-year correlation. Presumably, this choice reflects the greater precision
with which the one-year and five-year correlations are estimated relative to the ten-year
correlation. Taking sampling uncertainty into account, the extended model matches the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth at di§erent horizons. Interestingly,
the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth increases with the horizon.
We conclude by highlighting an important di§erence between our model and two leading
alternatives. The first is the external-habit model proposed by Campbell and Cochrane
(1999).18 Working with their parameter values, we find that the correlation between stock
returns and consumption growth are equal to 0.53, 0.69, and 0.62 at the one-, five- and
ten-year horizon, respectively.
The second alternative is the long-run risk model proposed by Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron
(2012). Working with their parameter values, we find that the correlation between stock
returns and consumption growth are equal to 0.34, 0.49, and 0.54 at the one-, five- and
ten-year horizon, respectively. Their model also implies correlations between stock returns
and dividend growth equal to 0.64, 0.90, and 0.93 at the one-, five- and ten-year horizon,
respectively.
Our estimates reported in Table 1 imply that, for both models, the correlations between
fundamentals and returns are counterfactually high. The source of this empirical shortcoming
is that all the uncertainty in the long-run risk model stems from the endowment process.
Implications for the price-dividend ratio In Table 5 we see that both the benchmark
and the extended models match the average price-dividend ratio very well. The benchmark
model somewhat underpredicts the persistence and volatility of the price-dividend ratio. The
extended model does much better at matching those moments. The moments implied by
this model are within two standard errors of their sample counterparts.
18

As in Wachter (2005), we consider a version of the model in which equities are a claim to consumption.
We thank Jessica Wacher for sharing her program for solving the Campbell-Cochrane model with us.

21

Table 7 presents evidence reproducing the well-known finding that excess returns are
predictable based on lagged price-dividend ratios. We report the results of regressing excessequity returns over holding periods of 1, 3 and 5 years on the lagged price-dividend ratio.
The slope coe¢cients are −0.10, −0.27, and −0.42, respectively, while the R-squares are
0.07, 0.14, and 0.26, respectively.

The analogue results for the benchmark model are shown in the top panel of Table 7.
In this model, consumption is a martingale with conditionally homoscedastic innovations.
So, by construction, excess returns are unpredictable in population at a monthly frequency.
Since we aggregate the model to annual frequency, temporal aggregation produces a small
amount of predictability (see column titled “Model (plim)”).
Stambaugh (1999) and Boudoukh et al. (2008) argue that the predictability of excess
returns may be an artifact of small-sample bias and persistence in the price-dividend ratio.
Our results are consistent with this hypothesis. The column labeled “Model (median)”
reports the plim of the small moments implied by our model. The slope coe¢cients for the
1, 5, and 10 year horizons, are −0.05, −0.14 and −0.21, respectively. In each case, the

median Monte Carlo point estimates are contained within a two-standard deviation band of
the respective data estimates.
Table 7 also presents results for the extended model. Because of conditional heteroskedas-

ticity in consumption, periods of high volatility in consumption growth are periods of high
expected equity returns and low equity prices. So, in principle, the model is able to generate
predictability in population. At our estimated parameter values this predictability is quite
small. But, once we allow for the e§ects of small-sample bias, the extended model does quite
well at accounting for the regression slope coe¢cients. Finally, we note that the benchmark
model understates the regression R-squares. Taking sampling uncertainty into account, the
extended model does better on this dimension.
Cochrane (1992) proposes a decomposition of the variation of the price-dividend ratio
into three components: excess returns, dividend growth, and the risk-free rate.19 While this
decomposition is not additive, authors like Bansal and Yaron (2004) use it to compare the
importance of these three components in the model and data.
In our sample, the point estimate for the percentage of the variation in price—dividend
19
15
X

The fraction of the volatility of the price-dividend ratio attributed to variable x is given by

Ωj cov(zdt , xt+j )/var(zdt ), where Ω = 1/(1 + E(Rd,t+1 )). See Cochrane (1992) for details.

j=1

22

ratio due to excess return fluctuations is 102.2 percent, with a standard error of 30 percent.
Dividend growth accounts for −14.5 with a standard error of 13 percent. Finally, the risk-

free rate accounts for −20.4 percent with a standard error of 14.8 percent. These results are

similar to those in Cochrane (1992) and Bansal and Yaron (2004).

Based on the small-sample moments implied by the benchmark model, the fraction of
the variance of the price-dividend ratio accounted for by excess returns, dividend growth,
and the risk-free rate is 34.6, −2.8, and 54.2, respectively. So, this model clearly overstates

the importance of the risk-free rate and understates the importance of excess returns in
accounting for the variance of the price-dividend ratio.
The extended model does substantially better than the benchmark model. Based on the
small-sample moments implied by the extended model, the fraction of the variance of the
price-dividend ratio accounted for by excess returns, dividend growth, and the risk-free rate
is 51.2, −38.5, and 5.6, respectively. The fraction attributed to excess returns is just within
two standard errors of the point estimate. The fraction attributed to dividend growth is well
within two standard errors of the point estimate.
It is interesting to contrast these results to those in Bansal and Yaron (2004). Their
model also attributes a large fraction of the variance of the price-dividend ratio to excess
returns. At the same time, their model substantially overstates the role of dividend growth
in accounting for the variance of the price-dividend ratio.
Correlation between the price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate We now discuss the implications of our model for the correlation between the price-dividend ratio and
the risk-free rate. Table 5 reports that our estimate of this correlation is 0.27 with a standard error of 0.11. The benchmark model predicts that this correlation should be sharply
negative (−0.95). The intuition for this result is clear. When there is a shock to the rate of
time preference, agents want to save more, both in the form of bonds and stocks. So, the
price-dividend ratio must rise to clear the equity market and the risk-free rate must fall to
clear the bond market. The extended model does much better along this dimension of the
data (−0.20). Recall that a positive shock to "Λt drives the risk-free rate down. Since π dΛ is
negative, the same shock lowers the growth rate of dividends which causes the price dividend
ratio to fall. So the extended mode embodies a force that generates a positive correlation
between the risk-free rate and the price dividend ratio. This forces helps to substantially
lower the sharp negative correlation between these variables in the benchmark model.
23

It is interesting to compare our model with Bansal, Kiku and Yaron (2012). The long-run
risk shock in that model induces a counterfactually sharp positive correlation: 0.65. The
intuition is straightforward. A shock that induces a persistent change in the growth rate of
dividends causes stock prices to go up since equity now represents a claim to a higher flow of
dividends. Dividends do not change much in the short run, so the price-dividend ratio goes
up. At the same time, the shock causes agents to want to shift away from bond holdings and
into equity. So, the risk-free rate must rise to clear the bond market. Other things equal,
the long-run risk shock induces a positive correlation between the price-dividend ratio and
the risk-free rate. In contrast to our model, the Bansal, Kiku and Yaron (2012) does not
embody any forces that would lead to a negative correlation between the price-dividend ratio
and the risk-free rate. The net result is that their model overstates this correlation.
We are hesitant to use this correlation as a litmus test to choose between our model
and Bansal, Kiku and Yaron’s for two reasons. First, the point estimate of this correlation
is sensitive to sample period selection. The correlation is positive (0.17) before 1983 but
negative (−0.44) after 1983. Second, the sign of this correlation varies substantially across
the G7 countries and is again sensitive to breaking the sample in 1983 (see Table 8).

6. Bond term premia
As we emphasize above, the equity premium in our estimated models results primarily from
the valuation risk premium. Since this valuation premium increases with the maturity of an
asset, a natural way to assess the plausibility of our model is to evaluate its implications for
the slope of the real yield curve.
This section is organized as follows. First, we discuss evidence on the slope of the yield
curve obtained using data for the U.S. and the U.K. Second, we discuss the implications
of di§erent models for the yield curve. Third, we evaluate whether the estimated SDF in
our extended model has the properties that Backus and Zin (1994) argue are necessary to
simultaneously account for the slope of the yield curve and the persistence of bond yields.
Finally, we discuss and evaluate the implications of our model for the long-term equity
premium.
Empirical evidence Table 9 reports the mean and standard deviation of ex-ante real
yields on short-term (one year) Treasury Bills, intermediate-term government bonds (with

24

approximate maturity of five years), and long-term government bonds (with approximate
maturity of twenty years).20 The ex-ante yields on five (twenty) year bonds are computed
as the di§erence between the five (twenty) year nominal yield and the ex-ante five (twenty)
year inflation rate (yields are expressed on an annualized basis), which are taken from Luo
(2014).
A number of features are worth noting. First, consistent with Alvarez and Jermann
(2005), the term structure of real yields is upward sloping. Second, the real yield on longterm bonds is positive. This result is consistent with Campbell, Shiller and Viceira (2009)
who report that the real yield on long-term TIPS has always been positive and is usually
above two percent.
We use data on inflation-index U.K. gilts to shed further light on the slope of the real yield
curve. Table 10 reports the di§erence between the yield of a bond with 2.5 years maturity
and yields of bonds with 5, 10, 15, and 20 years of maturity. Our benchmark sample period
is 1985 to 2015. In every case, the longer duration bond has, on average, a higher yield than
the bond with duration 2.5 years.21 One might be concerned about the e§ect of the recent
financial crisis on these results. As Table 10 indicates, the qualitative results are una§ected
if we use a sample period from 1985 to 2006.22
Model implications Our model implies that long-term bonds command a positive risk
premium that increases with the maturity of the bond (see Appendix C for details on the
pricing of long-term bonds). The latter property reflects the fact that longer maturity assets
are more exposed to valuation risk. Table 9 shows that, taking sampling uncertainty into
account, the benchmark and extended models are consistent with the observed mean yields,
except that the former model generates slightly larger yields for long-term bonds than in the
data. The table also shows that the estimated models account for the volatility of the yields
on short-, intermediate-, and long-term bonds.
Piazzesi and Schneider (2007) and Beeler and Campbell (2012) argue that the bond term
20

The moments reported in this table are slightly di§erent from those reported in Table 5. The reason is
that the moments in the two tables were computed using di§erent samples. In Table 5, we compute a leaded
and a lagged correlation, so we lose one observation in the beginning of the sample and another in the end
of the sample.
21
The statistical significance of these average di§erences depend on whether we use zero or 12 lags in
computing Newey-West standard errors.
22
Evans (1998) and Piazzesi and Schneider (2006) finds that the U.K. real yield curve is downward sloping
for the periods January 1983-November 1995 and December 1995-March 2006. Our results indicate that
their findings depend on the sample period that they work with.

25

premium and the yield on long-term bonds are useful for discriminating between competing asset pricing models. For example, they stress that long-run risk models, of the type
pioneered by Bansal and Yaron (2004), imply negative long-term bond yields and a negative bond term premium. The intuition is as follows: in a long-run risk model agents are
concerned that consumption growth may be dramatically lower in some future state of the
world. Since bonds promise a certain payout in all states of the world, they o§er insurance
against this possibility. The longer the maturity of the bond, the more insurance it o§ers
and the higher is its price. So, the term premium is downward sloping. Indeed, the return
on long-term bonds may be negative. Beeler and Campbell (2012) show that the return on
a 20-year real bond in the Bansal, Kiku and Yaron (2012) model is −0.88.

Standard rare-disaster models also imply a downward sloping term structure for real

bonds and a negative real yield on long-term bonds. See, for example the benchmark model
in Nakamura et al. (2013). According to these authors, these implications can be reversed
by introducing the possibility of default on bonds and assuming that probability of partial
default is increasing in the maturity of the bond.23 So, we cannot rule out the possibility
that other asset-pricing models can account for bond term premia and the rate of return on
long-term bonds. Still, it seems clear that valuation risk is a natural explanation of these
features of the data.
Accounting for the slope of the yield curve and the persistence of bond yields
Backus and Zin (1994) investigate the properties of the log of the SDF that are consistent
with two key features of nominal yields: the yield curve is upward sloping and yields are very
persistent. They estimate various ARMA representations for the log of the SDF using data
on the mean and autocovariance of bond yields.24 Their best statistical fit is an ARMA(2,3).
These properties can be summarized as follows. First, the log of the SDF must have negative
serial correlation to account for the positive slope of the nominal yield curve. Second, the
log of the SDF must be close to i.i.d. but still have a small predictable component.25 The
log of the real SDF in both our benchmark and extended model satisfy these two properties.
For an ARMA(2,3), these properties are most easily seen in the impulse response function
23

Nakamura et al (2013) consider a version of their model in which the probability of partial default on
a perpetuity is 84 percent, while the probability of partial default on short-term bonds is 40 percent. This
model generates a positive term premium and a positive real return on long-term bonds.
24
Bansal and Viswanathan (1993) follow a similar approach but use a semi-nonparametric approximation
to the SDF.
25
See Ljungqvist and Sargent ( 2000) for a detailed exposition of these two properties.

26

of the extended model’s log SDF, which we display in Panel A of Figure 2.26
The first-order serial correlation of the extended model’s log of the real SDF is −0.07.

Interestingly, the first-order serial correlation of the log SDF in Bansal, Kiko and Yaron
(2012) is 0.002. These results are consistent with the fact that our model implies an upwardsloping yield curve, while Bansal, Kiko and Yaron (2012) implies a downward-sloping yield
curve.
To deduce the implications of our model for the nominal yield curve, we proceed as
follows. First, we generate 1000 synthetic time series for the log of the real SDF, each of
length equal to our sample size. We think of the first synthetic time-series observation as
corresponding to 1929. Second, for each synthetic time series, we obtain the nominal SDF
by dividing each realized value of the real SDF by the corresponding actual gross rate of
inflation. By working with ex-post inflation rates, we avoid taking a stand on the stochastic
process for inflation.27 For each of the 1000 synthetic time series, we estimate an ARMA(2,3)
for the log of the nominal SDF and compute the impulse response function to an innovation.
Panel B of Figure 2 displays the average impulse response functions of the log of the
nominal SDF along with a 95 percent confidence interval computed across the 1000 synthetic
time series. The impulse response function of the log of the real and the nominal SDFs are
very similar. The first-order serial correlation of the log of the nominal SDF is −0.073,

which is very similar to first-order serial correlation of the log of the real SDF. A 95 percent
confidence interval computed across the 1000 simulations spans the interval from −0.134

to −0.008. So we can exclude, at conventional significant levels, that the first-order serial
correlation of the log of the nominal SDF is positive.

In sum, the estimated SDF for our extended model has the two characteristics that
Backus and Zin (1994) argue to be required to explain an upward sloping nominal and real
yield curve and the persistence of bond yields.
Long-term equity premium According to Table 9, the benchmark and extended models
imply that the di§erence between stock returns and 20-year bond yield is roughly 1 percent.
In the data, the di§erence between stock returns and the 20-year bond yields is roughly 4.16
percent with a standard error of 2.39. So, taking sampling uncertainty into account, both
26

The dotted lines are the limits of the 95 percent confidence interval.
The results for mt are calculating using a very long simulation, so they are close to the plim of the
ARMA(2,3). In contrast, the results for Mt , we rely on realized inflation, correspond to the plim of the small
sample for the ARMA(2,3).
27

27

the benchmark and extended models are consistent with the data.
In our model, the positive premium that equity commands over long-term bonds reflects
the di§erence between an asset of infinite and twenty-year maturity. Consistent with this
perspective, Binsbergen, Hueskes, Koijen, and Vrugt (2011) estimate that 90 (80) percent
of the value of the S&P 500 index corresponds to dividends that accrue after the first five
(ten) years.
It is important to emphasize that the equity premium in our model is not solely driven
by the term premium. One way to see this property is to consider the results of regressing
the equity premium on two alternative measures of excess bond yields. The first measure is
the di§erence between yields on bonds of 20-year and 1-year maturities. The second measure
is the di§erence between yields on bonds of 5-year and 1-year maturities. Table 12 reports
our results. Not surprisingly, the benchmark model does poorly since the expected equity
premium and the term premia are constant. The extended model does better in the sense
that the model slopes are within one standard error of the slope point estimates. Also, both
models are consistent with the fact that the R2 in these regressions are quite low.
We conclude with an interesting observation made by Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen
(2012). Using data over the period 1996 to 2009, these authors decompose the S&P500 index
into portfolios of short-term and long-term dividend strips. The first portfolio entitles the
holder to the realized dividends of the index for a period of up to three years. The second
portfolio is a claim on the remaining dividends. Binsbergen et al (2012) find that the shortterm dividend portfolio has a higher risk premium than the long-term dividend portfolio, i.e.
there is a negative stock term premium. They argue that this observation is inconsistent with
habit-formation, long-run risk models and standard of rare-disaster models. Our model, too,
has di¢culty in accounting for the Binsbergen et al (2012) negative stock term premium.28
Of course, our sample is very di§erent from theirs and their negative stock term premium
result is heavily influenced by the recent financial crisis (see Binsbergen et al (2011)). Also,
Boguth, Carlson, Fisher, and Simutin (2012) argue that the Binsbergen et al (2012) results
may be significantly biased because of the impact of small pricing frictions.
28

Recently, Nakamura et al (2013) show that a time-vaying rare disaster model in which the component
of consumption growth due to a rare disaster follows an AR(1) process is consistent with the Binsbergen et
al (2012) results. Belo et al. (2013) show that the Binsbergen et al. (2012) result can be reconciled in a
variety of models if the dividend process is replaced with processes that generate stationary leverage ratios.

28

7. Conclusion
In this paper we argue that allowing for demand shocks substantially improves the performance of representative-agent, asset-pricing models. Specifically, it allows the model to
account for the equity premium, bond term premia, and the correlation puzzle with low
degrees of estimated risk aversion. According to our estimates, valuation risk is by far the
most important determinant of the equity premium and the bond term premia.
The recent literature has incorporated many interesting features into standard assetpricing models to improve their performance. Prominent examples, include habit formation,
long-run risk, time-varying endowment volatility, and model ambiguity. We abstract from
these features to isolate the empirical role of valuation risk. But they are, in principle,
complementary to valuation risk and could be incorporated into our analysis. We leave this
task for future research.

29

References
[1] Alvarez, Fernando, and Urban J. Jermann, “Using Asset Prices to Measure the Persistence of the Marginal Utility of Wealth,” Econometrica, 73 (6): 1977—2016, 2005.
[2] Backus, David K., and Stanley E. Zin. Reverse engineering the yield curve. No. w4676.
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1994.
[3] Backus, David, Bryan R. Routledge, and Stanley E. Zin, The Cyclical Component of
US Asset Returns, manuscript, New York University, April 2010.
[4] Bai, Yan, José Victor Ríos-Rull and Kjetil Storesletten “Demand Shocks as Productivity
Shocks,” manuscript, University of Minnesota, 2014.
[5] Bansal, Ravi and S. Viswanathan “No Arbitrage and Arbitrage Pricing: A New Approach,” The Journal of Finance, 48:4, 1231-1262, 1993.
[6] Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles,” The Journal of Finance, 59 (4): 1481-509, 2004.
[7] Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku and Amir Yaron, “An Empirical Evaluation of the Long-Run
Risks Model for Asset Prices,” Critical Finance Review, 1: 183—221, 2012.
[8] Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron. “Risks for the Long Run: Estimation with
Time Aggregation,” manuscript, Wharton School, 2013.
[9] Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. “A Model of Investor Sentiment,” Journal of Financial Economics 49 (3): 307-43, 1998.
[10] Barro, Robert J. “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121: 823—66, 2006.
[11] Barro, Robert J., and José F. Ursúa. “Rare Macroeconomic Disasters,” working paper
No. 17328, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
[12] Beeler, Jason, and John Y. Campbell. “The Long-Run Risks Model and Aggregate Asset
Prices: An Empirical Assessment,” Critical Finance Review, 1: 141—82, 2012.
[13] Belo, Frederico, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein. “Dividend Dynamics
and the Term Structure of Dividend Strips,” manuscript, University of Minnesota, 2013.
30

[14] Binsbergen, Jules H. van, Michael W. Brandt, and Ralph S.J. Koijen. “On the Timing
and Pricing of Dividends,” American Economic Review, 102 (4): 1596-618, 2012.
[15] Binsbergen, Jules H. van, Wouter Hueskes, Ralph Koijen, and Evert Vrugt. “Equity
Yields,” working paper N. 17416, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
[16] Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Jonas Fisher. “Habit Persistence, Asset
Returns, and the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 91: 149-66, 2001.
[17] Borovička, Jaroslav, and Lars Peter Hansen. “Examining Macroeconomic Models
through the Lens of Asset Pricing,” manuscript, University of Chicago, 2011.
[18] Borovička, Jaroslav, Lars Peter Hansen, Mark Hendricks, and José A. Scheinkman.
“Risk-Price Dynamics,” Journal of Financial Econometrics 9 (1): 3-65, 2011.
[19] Boguth, Oliver, Murray Carlson, Adlai Fisher, and Mikhal Simutin. “Leverage and the
Limits of Arbitrage Pricing: Implications for Dividend Strips and the Term Structure
of Equity Risk Premia,” manuscript, Arizona State University, 2012.
[20] Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, and Robert F. Whitelaw. “The Myth of LongHorizon Predictability,” Review of Financial Studies 24 (4): 1577-605, 2008.
[21] Campbell, John Y. “Bond and Stock Returns in a Simple Exchange Model,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (4): 785-803, 1986.
[22] Campbell, John Y. “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing,” in Handbook of the Economics
of Finance, Eds. G.M. Constantinides, M. Harris and R. Stulz, 801-85, 2003.
[23] Campbell, John Y., and John Ammer. “What Moves the Stock and Bond Markets? A
Variance Decomposition for Long-Term Asset Returns,” The Journal of Finance 48 (1):
3-37, 1993.
[24] Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107
(2): 205-51, 1999.
[25] Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. “The Dividend-price Ratio and Expectations
of Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies 1 (3): 195-228,
1988.
31

[26] Campbell, John, Robert Shiller, and Luis Viceira. “Understanding Inflation-Indexed
Bond Markets,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 79-120, 2009.
[27] Cochrane, John H. “Explaining the Variance of Price Dividend Ratios,” Review of Financial Studies 5: 243-80, 1992.
[28] Cochrane, John H. Asset Pricing, Princeton University Press, 2001.
[29] Cochrane, John H. “Presidential Address: Discount Rates,” The Journal of Finance,
66 (4): 1047-108, 2011.
[30] Cochrane, John H., and Lars Peter Hansen. “Asset Pricing Explorations for Macroeconomics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1992, Volume 7, pp. 115-82. MIT Press,
1992.
[31] Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. “Unconventional Fiscal Policy at the Zero Bound,” American Economic Review, 103 (4): 1172-211,
2013.
[32] Dew-Becker, Ian “A Model of Time-Varying Risk Premia with Habits and Production,”
manuscript, Northwestern University, 2014.
[33] Dumas, Bernard, Alexander Kurshev, and Raman Uppal. “Equilibrium Portfolio Strategies in the Presence of Sentiment Risk and Excess Volatility,” The Journal of Finance,
64 (2): 579-629, 2009.
[34] Du¢e, Darrell, and Larry G. Epstein. “Stochastic Di§erential Utility,” Econometrica,
60: 353-94, 1992.
[35] Eggertsson, Gauti. “Monetary and Fiscal Coordination in a Liquidity Trap,” Chapter
3 of Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in the Liquidity Trap, Ph.D. dissertation,
Princeton University, 2004.
[36] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford. “Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 139-233, 2003.
[37] Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica,
57 (4): 937-69, 1989.
32

[38] Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of
Political Economy, 99: 263-86, 1991.
[39] Epstein, Larry, Emmanuel Farhi, and Tomasz Strzalecki “How Much Would You Pay
to Resolve Long-Run Risk?,” American Economic Review, 104, (2014) 2680—2697
[40] Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, Pablo Guerron-Quintana, Keith Kuester, and Juan RubioRamírez. “Fiscal Volatility Shocks and Economic Activity,” manuscript, University of
Pennsylvania, 2013.
[41] Gabaix, Xavier, and Matteo Maggiori. “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate
Dynamics,” manuscript, New York University, 2013.
[42] Garber, Peter M., and Robert G. King. “Deep Structural Excavation? A Critique of
Euler Equation Methods,” working paper No. 31, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.
[43] Gârleanu, Nicolae, Leonid Kogan, and Stavros Panageas. “Displacement Risk and Asset
Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 105 (3): 491-510, 2012.
[44] Gourio, François. “Disaster Risk and Business Cycles,” American Economic Review,
102 (6): 2734-66, 2012.
[45] Grossman, Sanford J., Angelo Melino, and Robert J. Shiller. “Estimating the Continuous Time Consumption Based Asset Pricing Model”, Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics, 5: 315-28, 1987.
[46] Hall, Robert E. “High Discounts and High Unemployment,” working paper No. 19871,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.
[47] Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li. “Consumption Strikes Back? Measuring Long-Run Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (2): 260-302, 2008.
[48] Hansen, Lars Peter, and Ravi Jagannathan. “Implications of Security Market Data for
Models of Dynamic Economies,” Journal of Political Economy, 99 (2): 225-62, 1991.

33

[49] Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J. Singleton. “Generalized Instrumental Variables
Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica, 50, 1269-86,
1982.
[50] Huo, Zhen, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull. “Paradox of Thrift Recessions,” working paper
No. 19443, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.
[51] Kandel, Shmuel, and Robert F. Stambaugh. “Expectations and Volatility of Consumption and Asset Returns,” Review of Financial Studies 3 (2): 207-32, 1990.
[52] Kreps, David M., and Evan L. Porteus. “Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and Dynamic Choice Theory,” Econometrica, 46, 185-200, 1978.
[53] Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson. “Shocks and Crashes,” manuscript, New
York University, 2011.
[54] Lucas Jr, Robert E. “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 46, 1429-45,
1978.
[55] Luo, Victor. “Using Bond Yields to Discriminate Between Long-run and Valuation Risk
Models,” manuscript, Northwestern University, 2014.
[56] Lynch, Anthony W. “Decision frequency and synchronization across agents: Implications for aggregate consumption and equity return,” The Journal of Finance 51.4:
1479-1497, 1996.
[57] Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas Sargent Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, 2nd edition,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2000.
[58] Maurer, Thomas A. “Is Consumption Growth Merely a Sideshow in Asset Pricing?,”
manuscript, London School of Economics, 2012.
[59] Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott. “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 15 (2): 145-61, 1985.
[60] Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson, Robert Barro, and José Ursúa. “Crises and Recoveries in an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 5 (3), 35-74, 2013.
34

[61] Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West. “A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, 55
(3): 703-8, 1987.
[62] Normandin, Michel, and Pascal St-Amour. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, Taste Shocks
and Equity Premia,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 13 (3): 265-81, 1998.
[63] Parker, Jonathan A. “The Consumption Risk of the Stock Market,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 2: 279-348, 2001.
[64] Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon. “Asset Prices and Exchange Rates,” Review of
Financial Studies, 20 (4): 1139-81, 2007.
[65] Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider. “Equilibrium Yield Curves,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, 21: 389-472, 2007.
[66] Primiceri, Giorgio. “Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary
Policy,” The Review of Economic Studies, 72: 821-852, 2005.
[67] Rietz, Thomas A. “The Equity Risk Premium a Solution,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 22 (1): 117-31, 1988.
[68] Shiller, Robert. “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Dividends,” American Economic Review, 71: 421-36, 1981.
[69] Skiadas, Costis. “Asset Pricing Theory,” Princeton University Press, 2009.
[70] Stambaugh, Robert F. “Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 54,
375-421, 1999.
[71] Stockman, Alan C., and Linda L. Tesar. “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country
Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,” The American
Economic Review, 85 (1): 168-185, 1995.
[72] Wachter, Jessica A. “Solving models with external habit,” Finance Research Letters
2.4: 210-226, 2005.
[73] Wachter, Jessica A. “Can Time-varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock
Market Volatility?, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
35

[74] Weil, Philippe. “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-free Rate Puzzle,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 24 (3): 401-421, 1989.

36

Table61
Correlation6Between6Stock6Returns6and6Per6Capita
Growth6Rates6of6Fundamentals

Panel A, 1929-2011

Horizon
16year
56years
106years

Consumption
80.05
(0.12)
0.00
(0.14)
80.11
(0.20)

Output

Dividends

0.05
(0.10)
0.00
(0.12)
80.09
(0.14)

0.05
(0.11)
0.30
(0.13)
0.59
(0.14)

Earnings
0.10
(0.10)
0.20
(0.13)
0.30
(0.11)

Panel B, 1871-2006

Horizon
16year
56years
106years

Consumption
0.09
(0.09)
0.40
(0.18)
0.25
(0.18)

Output
0.14
(0.10)
0.25
(0.14)
0.00
(0.11)

Dividends
80.04
(0.10)
0.38
(0.15)
0.64
(0.17)

Earnings
0.13
(0.10)
0.44
(0.18)
0.41
(0.13)

Table"2
Correlation"Between"Stock"Returns"and"Per"Capita
Growth"Rates"of"Fundamentals

NIPA measures of consumption, 1929-2011
Horizon

Durables

Non-durables

Non-durables and services

1"year

'0.04
(0.13)

0.05
(0.14)

0.27
(0.14)

5"years

0.07
(0.11)

'0.08
(0.09)

0.18
(0.08)

10"years

0.21
(0.15)

'0.20
(0.13)

0.06
(0.14)

Table-3
Correlation-Between-Stock-Returns-and-Per-Capita
Growth-Rates-of-Fundamentals

Horizon

Consumption-

Output

Horizon

Consumption-

Output

OECD

G7
1-year

0.013
(0.061)

0.178
(0.079)

1-year

0.038
(0.033)

0.125
(0.045)

5-years

0.189
(0.105)

0.345
(0.091)

5-years

0.130
(0.067)

0.272
(0.067)

10-years

0.280
(0.130)

0.397
(0.117)

10-years

0.151
(0.103)

0.262
(0.104)

Table 4
Parameter Estimates and Standard Errors
Models estimated with ex-ante real bond yields

Parameter

Benchmark,model

Extended,model

Parameter

Benchmark,model

Extended,model

γ

1.516
(0.029616)

2.3961
(0.11244)

ρ

0.99132
(0.00056369)

0.99168
(0.00078787)

ψ

1.4567
(0.041753)

2.2107
,(0.17437)

σλ

0.00058631
,(2.8373e?05)

0.00038594
(1.8036e?05)

δ

0.99795
,(0.0017074)

0.99796
,(8.0205e?05)

Implied value of θ

?1.6459
,(0.19603)

?2.5492
(0.29743)

σc

0.0069004
,(0.00014956)

0.0046033
(0.00013664)

ν

0.00

0.99717
(0.00030196)

µ

0.0015644
,(4.4976e?05)

0.0010428
,(7.8579e?05)

σω

0.00

1.68E?06
(4.9166e?08)

πcλ

0.00

?0.0029185
(0.00023329)

αc

0.00

?95.3767
(4.1769)

σd

0.017103
,(0.00039626)

0.025274
(0.19243)

αd

0.00

?151.8814
(22.7162)

πdc

0.00049127
,(0.00044218)

?1.3205
(0.2236)

ρc

0.00

0.094708
(0.045391)

πdλ

0.00

?0.010907
(0.0015436)

ρd

0.00

0.33427
(0.11204)

ση

0.00

0.0077828
(0.00024356)

Table*5
Model*estimated*with*exMante*real*bond*yields
Benchmark*
model

Extended*model

2.2197
(0.22413)

1.87

1.38

1.4941
(0.30395)

0.12538
(0.65732)

1.87

1.38

Standard*deviation*of*the*growth
rate*of*consumption

2.1865
(0.34494)

2.1624
(0.31345)

2.38

2.65

Standard*deviation*of*the*growth
rate*of*dividends

6.914
(1.0409)

6.5181
(1.1219)

5.85

7.25

Contemporaneous*correlation
between*consumption*growth*and
dividend*growth

0.2215
(0.1006)

0.23722
(0.10649)

0.03

0.29

FirstMorder*serial*correlation
of*consumption

0.20014
(0.1475)

0.1584
(0.1240)

M0.01

0.30

Correlation*between*stock*returns
*and*oneMperiod*lagged*consumption*growth

M0.1555
(0.1070)

M0.26065
(0.0999)

0.00

M0.03

Correlation*between*stock*returns
*and*oneMperiod*lead*consumption*growth

0.49504
(0.0670)

0.50929
(0.0490)

0.01

0.17

Average*return*to*equities

7.8252
(1.7396)

6.3948
(1.8804)

5.94

4.00

Standard*deviation*of*return*to
equities

17.2537
(1.3783)

17.6831
(1.461)

17.37

19.23

Average*riskMfree*rate

0.12613
(0.8088)

0.12087
(0.8088)

0.13

0.13

Standard*deviation*of*the*riskMfree
rate

3.5615
(0.81818)

3.4989
(0.83447)

4.30

4.06

FirstMorder*serial*correlation*of*the
riskMfree*rate

0.51802
(0.068326)

0.52154
(0.070816)

0.90

0.51

7.6991

6.2739
(1.9485)

5.81

3.88

(1.8141)
Average*priceMdividend*ratio

3.3761
(0.14887)

3.3775
(0.14887)

3.22

3.32

Standard*deviaton*of*priceM
dividend*ratio

0.47324
(0.074827)

0.44502
(0.081116)

0.31

0.46

FirstMorder*serial*correlation*of
price*dividend*ratio

0.95041
(0.034499)

0.93257
(0.042679)

0.84

0.89

Contemporaneous*correlation
between*risk*free*rate*and
priceMdividend*ratio

*0.2736,
(0.11356)

0.30705
(0.11909)

M0.95

M0.20

Moments

Data*(constrained)

Data*(unconstrained)

1.4941
(0.30)

Average*growth*rate
of*dividends

Average*growth*rate*of*
of*consumption

Equity*premium

Table*6
Correlation*Between*Stock*Returns*and*Per*Capita
Growth*Rates*of*Consumption*and*Dividends
Model*estimated*with*ex9ante*real*bond*yields

Consumption*growth

Moments

Data*
Data*
(constrained) (unconstrained)

Benchmark*
Extended*model
model

19year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
consumption*growth

90.07
(0.11)

90.05
(0.12)

0.02

90.19

59year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
consumption*growth

90.01
*(0.16)

90.05
(0.13)

0.02

90.05

109year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
consumption*growth

90.08
*(0.30)

90.21
*(0.21)

0.03

0.11

Dividend*growth
19year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
dividend*growth

0.08
*(0.11)

0.05
*(0.11)

0.34

90.10

59year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
dividend*growth

0.22
*(0.14)

0.29
(0.14)

0.32

0.03

109year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
dividend*growth

0.51
*(0.22)

0.59
(0.15)

0.38

0.20

Table)7
Predictability)of)Excess)Returns)by)Price1dividend)Ratio)at)Various)Horizons
Model)estimated)with)ex1ante)real)bond)yields

Benchmark*model

Data

Model)
Model)
(median)
(plim)
Slope)coefficient

Data
R1square

Model)
Model)
(median)
(plim)
(%)of)values)larger)than
R1square)in)data)
0.01
0.0002
(0.03)

1)year

10.10
(0.03)

10.05

0.008

0.07

3)years

10.27
(0.06)

10.14

0.027

0.14

0.03
(0.08)

0.001

5)years

10.42
)(0.12)

10.21

0.034

0.26

0.04
(0.05)

0.001

Extended*model

1)year

10.10
(0.03)

10.07

10.04

0.07

0.03
()0.13)

0.01

3)years

10.27
(0.06)

10.19

10.10

0.14

0.08
(0.23)

0.04

5)years

10.42
)(0.12)

10.30

10.16

0.26

0.12
(0.15)

0.06

Table-8
Correlation-of-price)dividend-ratio-and-ex)ante-risk)free-rate

Sample

Full)sample

Pre-1983

Post-1983

Canada

1952)2014

0.0223
(0.139)

0.288
(0.136)

)0.213
(0.239)

France

1932)2014

)0.484
(0.152)

)0.576
(0.124)

0.132
(0.179)

Germany

1968)2014

)0.115
(0.105)

)0.382
(0.189)

)0.117
(0.277)

Italy

1940)2014

)0.588
(0.166)

)0.725
(0.0823)

0.344
(0.2)

Japan

1960)2014

0.342
(0.176)

)0.128
(0.16)

0.682
(0.109)

U.K.

1934)2014

0.246
(0.122)

0.147
(0.0819)

)0.253
(0.216)

US

1939)2011

0.30705
(0.11909)

0.39
(0.113)

)0.42
-(0.227)

Table*9
Term*Structure*of*Bond*Yields
Model*estimated*with*ex-ante*real*bond*yields
(sample*1929-2011)

Data*(ex-post*
real*yields)

Moments

Data*(ex-ante* Benchmark* Extended*
real*yields)
model
model

Average'yield
Long-term*bonds

1.32
(1.10)

2.90
(0.84)

4.92

3.00

Intermediate-term*bond

1.39
(0.91)

1.93
(0.99)

2.10

1.64

Short-term*bond

0.42
(0.80)

0.46
(0.78)

0.13

0.13

Return*to*equity*minus*long-term*bond*yield

4.16
(2.39)

2.54
(2.09)

1.02

1.00

Standard'deviation'of'yield
Long-term*bonds

3.02
(0.65)

2.59
(0.52)

1.84

1.40

Intermediate-term*bond

3.29
(0.53)

3.14
(0.57)

3.42

2.46

Short-term*bond

3.88
(0.77)

3.85
(0.77)

4.30

4.06

Return*to*equity*minus*long-term*bond*yield

20.2
(2.47)

20.09
(1.96)

16.96

19.10

Table,10
Difference,between,long<term,yields,and,2.5,year,yields
Inflation<indexed,U.K.,gilts
Newey<West,standard,errors
Sample

Mean

Zero,lags,in,
12,lags,in,
weighting,matrix weighting,matrix

5,year,minus,2.5,year

1985<2015,
1985<2006.Q3

0.19
0.09

0.03
0.03

0.10
0.11

10,year,minus,2.5,year

1985<2015,
1985<2006.Q3

0.38
0.22

0.05
0.05

0.17
0.17

15,year,minus,2.5,year

1985<2015
1985<2006.Q3

0.42
0.26

0.06
0.06

0.20
0.19

20,year,minus,2.5,year

1985<2015,
1985<2006.Q3

0.42
0.24

0.08
0.08

0.26
0.27

Table$11
Regressions$of$Excess$Stock$Returns$on$Long(term$Bond$Yields$in$Excess$of$Short$Rate
Model$estimated$with$ex(ante$real$bond$yields

Data$1929(2011

Benchmark$model

Extended$model

Long%term*government*bonds*(20*years)
R(square
Slope

0.03

0.13

0.03

0.91
(0.46)

3.48

0.98

Intermediate*term*government*bonds*(5*years)
R(square
Slope

0.02

0.07

0.02

0.72$
(0.51)

3.36

1.01

8. Appendix
8.1. Appendix A
In this appendix, we solve the model in Section 3 analytically for the case of CRRA utility.
Let Ca,t denote the consumption of the representative agent at time t. The representative
agent solves the following problem:
Ut = max Et

1
X
i=0

1−γ
Ca,t+i
,
δ λt+i
1−γ
i

subject to the flow budget constraints
Wa,i+1 = Rc,i+1 (Wa,i − Ca,i ) ,
for all i ≥ t. The variable Rc,i+1 denotes the gross return to a claim that pays the aggregate
consumption as in equation (3.8), financial wealth is Wa,i = (Pc,i + Ci ) Sa,i , and Sa,i is the

number of shares on the claim to aggregate consumption held by the representative agent.
The first-order condition for Sa,t+i+1 is:
"
#
−γ
−γ
= Et δ i+1 λt+i+1 Ca,t+i+1
Rc,i+1 .
δ i λt+i Ca,t+i

In equilibrium, Ca,t = Ct , Sa,t = 1. The equilibrium value of the intertemporal marginal
rate of substitution is:
Mt+1

&

λt+1
=δ
λt

Ct+1
Ct

The Euler equation for stock returns is the familiar,

'−γ

.

(8.1)

Et [Mt+1 Rc,t+1 ] = 1.
We now solve for Pc,t . It is useful to write Rc,t+1 as
Rc,t+1
In equilibrium:

*

(Pc,t+1 /Ct+1 + 1)
=
Pc,t /Ct

Et Mt+1

&

Pc,t+1
+1
Ct+1

'&

&

Ct+1
Ct

Ct+1
Ct

'+

=

'

.

Pc,t
.
Ct

Replacing the value of Mt+1 in equation (8.2):
"
&
'−γ &
'#
'&
Pc,t+1
Pc,t
Ct+1
λt+1 Ct+1
Et δ
=
+1
.
λt
Ct
Ct+1
Ct
Ct
37

(8.2)

Using the fact that λt+1 /λt is known as of time t we obtain:
*
&
'+
"
#1−γ Pct+1
λt+1
Pct
c
δ
Et exp µ + σ c "t+1
+1
=
.
λt
Ct+1
Ct

We guess and verify that Pct+1 /Ct+1 is independent of "ct+1 . This guess is based on the

fact that the model’s price-consumption ratio is constant absent time-preference shocks.
Therefore,

(
)
λt+1
exp (1 − γ) µ + (1 − γ)2 σ 2c /2 Et
δ
λt

&

Pc,t+1
+1
Ct+1

We now guess that there are constants k0 , k1 ,..., such that

'

=

Pc,t
.
Ct

2
Pc,t
= k0 + k1 (λt+1 /λt ) + k2 (λt+1 /λt )1+ρ + k3 (λt+1 /λt )1+ρ+ρ + ...
Ct

(8.3)

(8.4)

Using this guess,
&
'
Pc,t+1
+1
Et
Ct+1
/
.
"
##
"
##1+ρ
"
"
= Et k0 + k1 (λt+1 /λt )ρ exp σ λ "λt+1 + k2 (λt+1 /λt )ρ exp σ λ "λt+1
+ ... + 1
"
#
"
#
= k0 + k1 (λt+1 /λt )ρ exp σ 2λ /2 + k2 (λt+1 /λt )ρ(1+ρ) exp (1 + ρ)2 σ 2λ /2 + ... + 1. (8.5)

Substituting equations (8.4) and (8.5) into equation (8.3) and equating coe¢cients leads to
the following solution for the constants ki :
k0 = 0,
(
)
k1 = δ exp (1 − γ) µ + (1 − γ)2 σ 2c /2 ,

and for n ≥ 2
kn = k1n exp

nh

#2
#2 i 2 o
"
"
1 + (1 + ρ)2 + 1 + ρ + ρ2 + ... + 1 + ... + ρn−2
σ λ /2 .

We assume that the series {kn } converges, so that the equilibrium price-consumption ratio
is given by equation (8.4). Hence, the realized return on the consumption claim is
Rc,t+1 =

Ct+1 k1 (λt+2 /λt+1 ) + k2 (λt+2 /λt+1 )1+ρ + ... + 1
.
Ct
k1 (λt+1 /λt ) + k2 (λt+1 /λt )1+ρ + ...

The equation that prices the one-period risk-free asset is:
Et [Mt+1 Rf,t+1 ] = 1.

38

(8.6)

Taking logarithms of both sides of this equation and noting that Rf,t+1 is known at time t,
we obtain:
rf,t+1 = − log Et (Mt+1 ) .
Using equation (8.1),
"
"
##)
λt+1 (
Et exp −γ µ + σ c "ct+1
λt
"
#
λt+1
= δ
exp −γµ + γ 2 σ 2c /2 .
λt

Et (Mt+1 ) = δ

Therefore,

rf,t+1 = − log (δ) − log (λt+1 /λt ) + γµ − γ 2 σ 2c /2.
Using equation (3.4), we obtain
(

E (λt+1 /λt )

−1 )

= exp

&

σ 2λ /2
1 − ρ2

'

.

We can then write the unconditional risk-free rate as:
& 2 '
σ λ /2
E (Rf,t+1 ) = exp
δ −1 exp(γµ − γ 2 σ 2c /2).
1 − ρ2
Thus, the equity premium is given by:
& 2 '
#
)
(
"
σ λ /2
E [(Rc,t+1 ) − Rf,t+1 ] = exp
δ −1 exp(γµ − γ 2 σ 2c /2) exp γσ 2c − 1 ,
2
1−ρ
which can be written as:

8.2. Appendix B

#
)
(
"
E [(Rc,t+1 ) − Rf,t+1 ] = E (Rf,t+1 ) exp γσ 2c − 1 .

This appendix provides a detailed derivation of the equilibrium of the model economy where
the representative agent has Epstein-Zin preferences and faces time-preference shocks. The
agent solves the following problem:
U (Wt ) = max
Ct

h

1−1/
λt Ct

+δ

#1−1/
∗
Ut+1

"

i1/(1−1/

)

,

(8.7)

( "
#)1/(1−γ)
∗
where Ut+1
= Et U (Wt+1 )1−γ
. The optimization is subject to the following budget

constraint:

Wt+1 = Rc,t+1 (Wt − Ct ) .
39

The agent takes as given the stochastic processes for the return on the consumption claim
Rc,t+1 and the preference shock λt+1 . For simplicity, we omit the dependence of life-time
utility on the processes for λt+1 and Rc,t+1 .
The first-order condition with respect to consumption is,
#)1/(1−γ)−1 "
#
" ∗ #−1/ ( "
−1/
Et U (Wt+1 )1−γ
= δ Ut+1
Et U (Wt+1 )−γ U 0 (Wt+1 ) Rc,t+1 ,
λt Ct

and the envelope condition is:
#)1/(1−γ)−1 "
#
" ∗ #−1/ ( "
U 0 (Wt ) = U (Wt )1/ δ Ut+1
Et U (Wt+1 )1−γ
Et U (Wt+1 )−γ U 0 (Wt+1 ) Rc,t+1 .

Combining the first-order condition and the envelope condition we obtain:
−1/

U 0 (Wt ) = U (Wt )1/ λt Ct

.

(8.8)

This equation can be used to replace the value of U 0 (Wt+1 ) in the first order condition:
.
/
" ∗ #−1/ ( "
−1/
−1/
1−γ #)1/(1−γ)−1
1/ −γ
λt Ct
Et U (Wt+1 )
= δ Ut+1
Et U (Wt+1 )
λt+1 Ct+1 Rc,t+1 .

∗
Using the expression for Ut+1
, this last equation can be written after some algebra as,

1 = Et (Mt+1 Rc,t+1 ) .

(8.9)

Here, Mt+1 is the stochastic discount factor, or intertemporal marginal rate of substitution,
which is given by:
Mt+1 = δ

−1/

λt+1 U (Wt+1 )1/ −γ Ct+1
.
" ∗ #1/ −γ
−1/
λt
Ct
U
t+1

We guess and verify the policy function for consumption and the form of the utility
function. As in Weil (1989) and Epstein and Zin (1991), we guess that:
U (Wt ) = at Wt ,
Ct = bt Wt .
Replacing these guesses in equation (8.8) and simplifying yields:
1−1/

at

−1/

= λ t bt

.

(8.10)

Using the same guesses in the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation (8.7) and simplifying, we
obtain:

2

0"

6 1−1/
+ δ @ Et
at = 4λt bt

&

at+1

Wt+1
Wt
40

'1−γ !#1/(1−γ)

11−1/ 31/(1−1/ )
7
A
.
5

Finally, using the budget constraint to replace Wt+1 /Wt we obtain:
*
.( "
/1−1/ +1/(1−1/ )
1−1/
1−γ #)1/(1−γ)
at = λ t b t
+ δ Et (at+1 (1 − bt ) Rc,t+1 )
.

(8.11)

Equations (8.10) and (8.11) give a solution to at and bt .

Combining equations (8.10) and (8.11) we obtain:
.( "
#)1/(1−γ) /1−1/
−1/
(1 − bt ) = δ Et (at+1 (1 − bt ) Rc,t+1 )1−γ
,
λt b t

which we can replace in the expression for the stochastic discount factor together with (8.10)
to obtain:
'(1−γ)/(1−1/ ) &
&
'−((1/
bt+1
λt+1
(1 − bt )
Mt+1 = δ
λt
bt

−γ)/ )/(1−1/ )

&

Ct+1
Ct

'−1/

(Rc,t+1 )1/

−γ

.

Now note that θ = (1 − γ) / (1 − 1/ ), and that
Ct+1
Ct

Rc,t+1
to finally get,

=

bt+1 Rc,t+1 (Wt − Ct ) / (bt Wt )
bt+1 (1 − bt )
=
,
Rc,t+1
bt

'θ &
'− θ
λt+1
Ct+1
(Rc,t+1 )θ−1 .
Mt+1 = δ
λt
Ct
Taking logarithms of both sides and equating the consumption of the representative agent
&

to aggregate consumption yields equation (3.9).
The rest of the equilibrium derivation involves solving for rc,t+1 , rd,t+1 , and rf,t+1 . Until this point, we did not need to specify the process for the time-preference, consumption
growth, and dividend growth shocks. We solve the rest of the model assuming the general
processes of Subsection 3.4 given in equations (3.21) through (3.24). Recovering the equilibrium values for the benchmark model is easily done by setting π cΛ = π dΛ = σ η = 0 and
ν = σ w = αc = αd = ρc = ρd = 0.
To price the consumption claim, we must solve the pricing condition:
Et [exp (mt+1 + rc,t+1 )] = 1.
We guess that the logarithm of the price consumption ratio, zct ≡ log (Pc,t /Ct ), is
zct = Ac0 + Ac1 xt + Ac2 η t+1 + Ac3 σ 2t + Ac4 ∆ct ,
and approximate
rc,t+1 = κc0 + κc1 zct+1 − zct + ∆ct+1 .
41

(8.12)

Replacing the approximation and the guessed solution for zct on the pricing condition gives
Et [exp (θ log (δ) + θ log (λt+1 /λt ) + (1 − γ) ∆ct+1 + θκc0 + θκc1 zct+1 − θzct )] = 1.
Computing this expectation requires some algebra and yields the equation

0 = θ log (δ) + (1 − γ + θκc1 Ac4 ) µc − (1 − γ + θκc1 Ac4 ) αc σ 2 + ((1 − γ + θκc1 Ac4 ) αc + θκc1 Ac3 ) (1 − ν) σ
+ ((1 − γ + θκc1 Ac4 ) π cΛ + θκc1 Ac1 σ Λ )2 /2 + (θκc1 Ac2 )2 /2 + ((1 − γ + θκc1 Ac4 ) αc + θκc1 Ac3 )2 σ 2w /2

+θxt + θκc1 Ac1 ρxt − θAc1 xt + θσ η η t+1 − θAc2 η t+1 + (1 − γ + θκc1 Ac4 ) ρc ∆ct − θAc4 ∆ct − θAc0
+ ((1 − γ + θκc1 Ac4 ) αc + θκc1 Ac3 ) vσ 2t − θAc3 σ 2t + (1 − γ + θκc1 Ac4 )2 σ 2t /2 + θκc1 Ac0 + θκc0 .

In equilibrium, this equation must hold in all possible states resulting in the restrictions:
Ac1 =

1
,
1 − κc1 ρ

Ac2 = σ η ,
Ac3 =

αc v +

1 − κc1 v

Ac4 =
and
Ac0 =

(1−γ)/2
1−κc1 ρc

1 − 1/
,
1 − κc1 ρc

(1 − 1/ ) ρc
,
1 − κc1 ρc

log (δ) + (1 − 1/ + κc1 Ac4 ) (µc − αc σ 2 ) + κc0 + ((1 − 1/ + κc1 Ac4 ) αc + κc1 Ac3 ) (1 − ν) σ 2
1 − κc1
2
θ ((1 − 1/ + κc1 Ac4 ) π cΛ + κc1 Ac1 σ Λ ) /2 + θ (κc1 Ac2 )2 /2 + θ ((1 − 1/ + κc1 Ac4 ) αc + κc1 Ac3 )2
+
1 − κc1

To solve for the risk-free rate, we again use the stochastic discount factor to price the
risk-free asset. In logarithms, the Euler equation is:
rf,t+1 = − log (Et (exp (mt+1 )))
&
'''
& &
θ
.
= − log Et exp θ log (δ) + θ log (λt+1 /λt ) − ∆ct+1 + (θ − 1) rc,t+1
Using equation (8.12), we get:
rf,t+1 = − log (Et (exp (θ log (δ) + θ log (λt+1 /λt ) − γ∆ct+1 + (θ − 1) (κc0 + κc1 zct+1 − zct )))) .

42

Substituting in the consumption process and the solution for the price-consumption ratio,
and after much algebra, we obtain,
rf,t+1 = −θ log (δ) + γ 1 µc − γ 1 αc σ 2 − (θ − 1) κc0 − (θ − 1) κc1 Ac0 − ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ 1 αc ) (1 − ν) σ 2

+ (θ − 1) Ac0 − ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac1 σ Λ − γ 1 π cΛ )2 /2 − ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac2 )2 /2 − ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ 1 αc )2 σ

−xt − σ η η t+1 + (1/ ) ρc ∆ct − ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ 1 αc ) vσ 2t + (θ − 1) Ac3 σ 2t − γ 21 σ 2t /2,
where
γ 1 = γ − (θ − 1) κc1 Ac4 .
Setting π cΛ = π dΛ = σ η = 0 and ν = σ w = αc = αd = ρc = ρd = 0 = 0, we get the
benchmark-model value of the risk-free rate (3.18).
Finally, we price a claim to dividends. Again, we assume the price-dividend ratio is given
by
zdt = Ad0 + Ad1 xt + Ad2 η t+1 + Ad3 σ 2t + Ad4 ∆ct + Ad5 ∆dt ,
and approximate the log-linearized return to the claim to the dividend:
rd,t+1 = κd0 + κd1 zdt+1 − zdt + ∆dt+1 .

(8.13)

The pricing condition is
Et [exp (mt+1 + rd,t+1 )] = 1.
Using the expressions for mt+1 , rc,t+1 and rd,t+1 ,
*
θ
1 = Et exp θ log (δ) + θ log (λt+1 /λt ) − ∆ct+1 + (θ − 1) (κc0 + κc1 zct+1 − zct + ∆ct+1 )
+κd0 + κd1 zdt+1 − zdt + ∆dt+1 ] .

Replacing the consumption and dividend growth processes and of the price-consumption and
price-dividend ratios, and solving for the expectations, we obtain:
Ad1 =

1
,
1 − κd1 ρ

Ad2 = σ η ,
− (1/ ) ρc
,
1 − κd1 ρc
ρd
=
,
1 − κd1 ρd

Ad4 =
Ad5

43

Ad3 =
where

.
bα c v − α c v +
(1 + κd1 Ad5 ) αd v − γ

/

1−γ
/2
1−κc1 ρc

1/ −γ
1−κc1 ρc

+ (1 + κd1 Ad5 )2 σ 2d /2 + ((1 + κd1 Ad5 ) π dc − γ
b )2 /

1 − κd1 v

γ
b = γ − (θ − 1) κc1 Ac4 − κd1 Ad4 ,

and

bµc + (1 + κd1 Ad5 ) µd − ((1 + κd1 Ad5 ) αd − γ
bαc ) σ 2 + (θ − 1) κc0 + (θ − 1) κc1 A
Ad0 (1 − κd1 ) = θ log (δ) − γ

+ ((1 + κd1 Ad5 ) αd − γ
bαc + (θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 + κd1 Ad3 ) (1 − v) σ 2 + ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac2 + κd1 Ad
bπ cΛ + ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac1 + κd1 Ad1 ) σ Λ )2 /2
+ ((1 + κd1 Ad5 ) π dΛ − γ

bαc + (θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 + κd1 Ad3 )2 σ 2w /2 − (θ − 1) Ac0 .
+ ((1 + κd1 Ad5 ) αd − γ

Equality of the long run mean of consumption growth and of dividend growth requires that
µd
µc
=
.
1 − ρc
1 − ρd
Having solved for these constants, we can compute the expected return on the dividend
claim, Et (rd,t+1 ). Setting the relevant parameters to zero, we obtain the benchmark-model
value of Et (rd,t+1 ) given in equation (3.17). The expression for the conditional risk premium
in the benchmark model can be obtained by solving:
Et (rd,t+1 ) − rf,t+1 = Et (κd0 + κd1 zdt+1 − zdt + ∆dt+1 ) − rf,t+1 .
8.3. Appendix C
In this appendix we solve for the prices of zero-coupon bonds of di§erent maturities. Again,
we present the equilibrium prices for the model of Subsection 3.4. Recovering the equilibrium
values for the benchmark model is easily done by setting π cΛ = π dΛ = σ η = 0 and ν = σ w =
(n)

αc = αd = ρc = ρd = 0. Let Pt

be the time-t price of a bond that pays one unit of

consumption at t + n, with n ≥ 1. The Euler equation for the one-period risk-free bond price
(1)

Pt

= 1/Rf,t+1 is

(1)

Pt

= Et (Mt+1 ) .

The price for a risk-free bond maturing in n > 1 periods can be written recursively as:
(n)
Pt

= Et

.

(n−1)
Mt+1 Pt+1

44

/

.

In Appendix B we derive the value of the risk-free rate:
h
i
(1)
rf,t+1 = − ln Pt .
It is useful to write the risk-free rate as:
'
&
λt+1
rf,t+1 = − log
+ (1/ ) ρc ∆ct − p1 − q1 σ 2t ,
λt
where
p1 = θ log (δ) − γ 1 µc + γ 1 αc σ 2 + (θ − 1) κc0 + (θ − 1) κc1 Ac0 − (θ − 1) Ac0
+ ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ 1 αc ) (1 − ν) σ 2

+ ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac2 )2 /2 + ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac1 σ Λ − γ 1 π cΛ )2 /2

+ ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ 1 αc )2 σ 2w /2,
and

(n)

Let pt

q1 = γ 21 /2 + ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ 1 αc ) v − (θ − 1) Ac3 .
h
i
(n)
= ln Pt . Therefore,
(1)

pt

= −rf,t+1
= p1 + xt + σ η η t+1 − (1/ ) ρc ∆ct + q1 σ 2t .

We now compute the price of a risk-free bond that pays one unit of consumption in two
periods:
(2)
pt

h

.
/i
(1)
= ln Et exp mt+1 + pt+1 .

Using the expression for mt+1 and the solution for rc,t+1 and zct we obtain, after much algebra,
(2)

pt = p2 + (1 + ρ) xt + σ η η t+1 + q2 σ 2t − (γ 2 ρc + (θ − 1) Ac4 ) ∆ct ,
with
γ 2 = γ 1 + (1/ ) ρc ,
p2 = θ log (δ) − γ 2 µc + γ 2 αc σ 2 + (θ − 1) κc0 + (θ − 1) κc1 Ac0 − (θ − 1) Ac0
+ ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ 2 αc + q1 ) (1 − ν) σ 2

+ ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac2 + σ η )2 /2 + (((θ − 1) κc1 Ac1 + 1) σ Λ − γ 2 π cΛ )2 /2
+ (−γ 2 αc + (θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 + q1 )2 σ 2w /2 + p1 ,
45

q2 = γ 22 /2 + ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ 2 αc ) v − (θ − 1) Ac3 + vq1 .
Following the same procedure, we obtain the general formula for n ≥ 2:
(n)

pt
where:

"
#
= pn + 1 + ρ + ... + ρn−1 xt + σ η η t+1 + qn σ 2t − (γ n ρc + (θ − 1) Ac4 ) ∆ct ,
qn = γ 2n /2 + ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ n αc ) v − (θ − 1) Ac3 + νqn−1 ,

pn = θ log (δ) − γ n µc + γ n αc σ 2 + (θ − 1) κc0 + (θ − 1) κc1 Ac0 − (θ − 1) Ac0
+ ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ n αc + qn−1 ) (1 − ν) σ 2
##
#2
""
"
+ ((θ − 1) κc1 + 1)2 σ 2η /2 + (θ − 1) κc1 Ac1 + 1 + ρ + ... + ρn−2 σ Λ − γ n π cΛ /2
+ ((θ − 1) κc1 Ac3 − γ n αc + qn−1 )2 σ 2w /2 + pn−1 ,

with p1 and q1 given above, and the sequence of γ given by
"
#
#
"
+ (1/ ) ρn−1
(θ − 1) Ac4
+ 1 + ρc + ... + ρn−3
γ n = γ 1 1 + ρc + ... + ρn−2
c
c
c
...

γ 3 = γ 1 (1 + ρc ) + (1/ ) ρ2c + (θ − 1) Ac4
γ 2 = γ 1 + (1/ ) ρc
γ 1 = γ − (θ − 1) κc1 Ac4 .
(n)

Finally, we define the yield on an n-period zero-coupon bond as yt

(n)

= − n1 pt .

8.4. Appendix D
This Appendix contains a set of tables that provide versions of the results dicussed in the
main text that use ex-post, instead of ex-ante versions of the real interest rate.

46

Table 4 (appendix)
Parameter Estimates and Standard Errors
Models estimated with ex-post real bond yields

Parameter

Benchmark,model

Extended,model

Parameter

Benchmark,model

Extended,model

γ

1.7005
(0.017871)

2.2228
(0.22671)

ρ

0.99143
(0.00047649)

0.99108
(0.00059552)

ψ

1.4623
,(0.043679)

2.3876
(0.62451)

σλ

0.00054228
,(2.0143e?05)

0.00040323
(2.6299e?05)

δ

0.99784
,(0.0021963)

0.9978
,(0.00013075)

Implied value of θ

?2.2158
(0.099733)

?2.1041
,(0.50544)

σc

0.0068554
(0.00015674)

0.0046005
,(0.00046367)

ν

0.00

0.99673
,(0.00057417)

µ

0.0015234
,(5.2956e?05)

0.0009117
(5.7211e?05)

σω

0.00

1.70E?06
,(2.6272e?07)

πcλ

0.00

?0.0018895
(0.00029618)

αc

0.00

?119.3912
(28.7094)

σd

0.017153
(0.00041145)

0.025564
(0.52335)

αd

0.00

?145.5293
(68.6766)

πdc

0.0015658
(0.00041998)

?1.3161
(0.80412)

ρc

0.00

0.090348
(0.045439)

πdλ

0.00

?0.010369
(0.0054912)

ρd

0.00

0.33438
(0.39606)

ση

0.00

0.0082606
(0.00043981)

Table(5((appendix)
Models estimated with ex-post real bond yields

Moments(Matched(in(Estimation

Data((constrained,(
Data(
ex4post(bond( (unconstrained,(ex4
yields)
post(bond(yields)

Benchmark(
model

Extended(model

Average(growth(rate(of(
of(consumption

1.4941
(0.30395)

2.2197
(0.22413)

1.84

1.20

Average(growth(rate(of(dividends

1.4941
(0.30395)

0.12538
(0.65732)

1.84

1.20

Standard(deviation(of(the(growth
rate(of(consumption

2.1865
(0.34494)

2.1624
((0.31345)

2.36

2.72

Standard(deviation(of(the(growth
rate(of(dividends

6.914
((1.0409)

6.5181
((1.1219)

5.89

6.95

Contemporaneous(correlation
between(consumption(growth(and
dividend(growth

0.2215
((0.1006)

0.23722
(0.10649)

0.09

0.21

First4order(serial(correlation
of(consumption

0.2001
(0.1475)

0.1584
(0.1240)

40.01

0.43

Correlation(between(stock(returns
40.1555
(0.1070)
(and(one4period(lagged(consumption(growth

40.2607
(0.0999)

0.00

40.04

Correlation(between(stock(returns
0.4950
(and(one4period(lead(consumption(growth(0.0670)

0.5093
(0.0490)

0.01

0.22

Average(return(to(equities

7.8252
(1.74)

6.3948
(1.8804)

6.25

3.87

Standard(deviation(of(return(to
equities

17.2537
(1.3783)

17.6831
(1.461)

15.93

16.67

Average(risk4free(rate

0.19347
(0.84341)

0.10476
(0.84457)

0.19

0.19

Standard(deviation(of(the(risk4free
rate

3.4656
(0.82769)

3.5054
(0.83489)

3.99

4.23

First4order(serial(correlation(of(the
risk4free(rate

0.59242
(0.082348)

0.59736
(0.078284)

0.90

0.49

7.6318

6.29
(1.8812)

6.06

3.68

(1.758)
Average(price4dividend(ratio

3.3761
(0.14887)

3.3775
(0.14887)

3.12

3.30

Standard(deviaton(of(price4
dividend(ratio

0.47324
(0.074827)

0.44502
(0.081116)

0.28

0.40

First4order(serial(correlation(of
price(dividend(ratio

0.95041
(0.034499)

0.93257
(0.042679)

0.84

0.89

Contemporaneous(correlation
between(risk(free(rate(and
price(dividend(ratio

0.20139
(0.12648)(

0.21274
(0.12982)(

40.95

40.24

Equity(premium

Table*6*(appendix)
Correlation*Between*Stock*Returns*and*Per*Capita
Growth*Rates*of*Consumption*and*Dividends
Model*estimated*with*ex9post*bond*returns

Consumption'growth

Moments

Data*
Data*
(constrained) (unconstrained)

Benchmark*
Extended*model
model

19year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
consumption*growth

90.07
(0.11)

90.05
*(0.12)

0.04

90.14

59year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
consumption*growth

90.01
(0.16)

90.05
(0.13)

0.05

0.01

109year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
consumption*growth

90.08
*(0.30)

90.21
(0.21)

0.05

0.18

Dividend'growth
19year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
dividend*growth

0.08
*(0.11)

0.05
*(0.11)

0.37

90.11

59year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
dividend*growth

0.22
*(0.14)

0.29
*(0.14)

0.35

0.07

109year*correlation*between
equity*returns*and
dividend*growth

0.51
*(0.22)

0.59
(0.15)

0.41

0.26

Table)7)(apendix)
Predictability)of)Excess)Returns)by)Price1dividend)Ratio)at)Various)Horizons
Model)estimated)with)ex1post)real)bond)yields

Benchmark*model

Data

Model)
Model)
(median)
(plim)
Slope)coefficient

Data
R1square

Model)
Model)
(median)
(plim)
(%)of)values)larger)than
R1square)in)data)
0.01
0.0003
(0.02)

1)year

10.10
)(0.03)

10.05

0.008

0.08

3)years

10.27
(0.07)

10.14

0.027

0.14

0.03
(0.08)

0.001

5)years

10.41
)(0.12)

10.21

0.034

0.26

0.04
(0.04)

0.001

Extended*model

1)year

10.10
)(0.03)

10.06

10.03

0.08

0.02
(0.05)

0.01

3)years

10.27
(0.07)

10.18

10.08

0.14

0.06
(0.19)

0.02

5)years

10.41
)(0.12)

10.26

10.13

0.26

0.09
(0.12)

0.04

Table-8-(appendix)
Correlation-of-price)dividend-ratio-and-ex)post-risk)free-rate

Sample

Full)sample

Pre-1983

Post-1983

Canada

1952)2014

0.02
(0.14)

0.55
(0.06)

)0.31
(0.25)

France

1932)2014

)0.56
(0.17)

)0.67
(0.13)

0.07
(0.17)

Germany

1968)2014

)0.11
(0.08)

)0.10
(0.13)

)0.20
(0.20)

Italy

1940)2014

)0.54
(0.14)

)0.63
(0.08)

0.35
(0.21)

Japan

1960)2014

0.39
(0.16)

)0.01
(0.20)

0.66
(0.08)

U.K.

1934)2014

0.32
(0.11)

0.27
(0.06)

)0.25
(0.22)

US

1939)2011

0.21274
(0.12982)-

0.172
(0.148)

)0.44
-(0.21)

Table*9*(appendix)
Term*Structure*of*Bond*Yields
Model*estimated*with*ex-post*yields

Data*(ex-post*
real*yields)

Moments

Data*(ex-ante* Benchmark* Extended*
real*yields)
model
model

Average'yield
Long-term*bonds
(sample*1929-1992)

1.32
(1.10)

2.90
(0.84)

5.30

2.53

Intermediate-term*bond
(sample*1929-2007)

1.39
(0.91)

1.93
(0.99)

2.25

1.53

Short-term*bond
(sample*1929-2011)

0.42
(0.80)

0.46
(0.78)

0.19

0.19

Return*to*equity*minus*long-term*bond*yield
(sample*1929-1992)

4.16
(2.39)

2.54
(2.09)

0.95

1.34

Standard'deviation'of'yield
Long-term*bonds
(sample*1929-1992)

3.02
(0.65)

2.59
(0.52)

1.73

1.39

Intermediate-term*bond
(sample*1929-2007)

3.29
(0.53)

3.14
(0.57)

3.19

2.49

Short-term*bond
(sample*1929-2011)

3.88
(0.77)

3.85
(0.77)

3.99

4.23

Return*to*equity*minus*long-term*bond*yield
(sample*1929-1992)

20.2
(2.47)

20.09
(1.96)

15.59

16.53

Table$11$(appendix)
Regressions$of$Excess$Stock$Returns$on$Long(term$Bond$Yields$in$Excess$of$Short$Rate
Model$estimated$with$ex(post$real$yields

Data$1929(2011

Benchmark$model

Extended$model

Long%term*government*bonds*(20*years)
R(square
Slope

0.02

0.12

0.04

0.60
(0.96)

3.40

0.97

Intermediate*term*government*bonds*(5*years)
R(square

0.002

0.07

0.03

Slope

(0.30
(1.10)

3.30

0.97

Figure 1: Correlograms of stock returns and fundamentals
Panel A

United States - Correlogram of Returns (t) and Consumption Growth (t + τ )
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

τ

United States - Correlogram of Returns (t) and GDP Growth (t + τ )
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

τ

2

4

6

8

10

Figure 1: Correlograms of stock returns and fundamentals
Panel B

Canada:

corr(rt , ∆ct+τ )

Canada:

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-10

-5

0

5

10

-1

-10

-5

τ
France:

corr(rt , ∆ct+τ )

France:
1

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-10

-5

0

5

10

-1

-10

-5

τ
Italy:

corr(rt , ∆ct+τ )

Italy:
1

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-10

-5

0

τ

5

10

corr(rt , ∆yt+τ )

0

5

10

τ

1

-1

0

τ

1

-1

corr(rt , ∆yt+τ )

5

10

-1

-10

-5

corr(rt , ∆yt+τ )

0

τ

5

10

Figure 1: Correlograms of stock returns and fundamentals
Panel C

Germany:

corr(rt , ∆ct+τ )

Germany:

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-10

-5

0

5

10

-1

-10

-5

τ
Japan:

corr(rt , ∆ct+τ )

Japan:
1

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-10

-5

0

5

10

-1

-10

corr(rt , ∆ct+τ )

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-5

0

τ

0

United Kingdom:
1

-10

10

5

10

τ

1

-1

5

corr(rt , ∆yt+τ )

-5

τ
United Kingdom:

0

τ

1

-1

corr(rt , ∆yt+τ )

5

10

-1

-10

-5

corr(rt , ∆yt+τ )

0

τ

5

10

