                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHO IS EXPOSED TO GAS PRICES? HOW GASOLINE PRICES AFFECT AUTOMOBILE
                  MANUFACTURERS AND DEALERSHIPS

                                          Meghan R. Busse
                                        Christopher R. Knittel
                                         Florian Zettelmeyer

                                        Working Paper 18610
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18610


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




Christopher Knittel is currently funded by a Ford Motor Company MIT Alliance grant to run experiments
in a variety of Ford dealerships designed to assess whether more information about fuel consumption
and fuel costs changes consumer behavior. Meghan Busse and Florian Zettelmeyer gratefully acknowledge
the support of NSF grants SES-0550508 and SES-0550911. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Meghan R. Busse, Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who is Exposed to Gas Prices? How Gasoline Prices Affect Automobile Manufacturers and
Dealerships
Meghan R. Busse, Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer
NBER Working Paper No. 18610
December 2012
JEL No. L1,L2,L9,Q4

                                              ABSTRACT

Many consumers are keenly aware of gasoline prices, and consumer responses to gasoline prices have
been well studied. In this paper, by contrast, we investigate how gasoline prices affect the automobile
industry: manufacturers and dealerships. We estimate how changes in gasoline prices affect equilibrium
prices and sales of both new and used vehicles of different fuel economies. We investigate the implications
of these effects for individual auto manufacturers, taking into account differences in manufacturers'
vehicle portfolios. We also investigate effects on manufacturers' affiliated dealership networks, including
effects implied by the changes in used vehicle market outcomes.


Meghan R. Busse                                      Florian Zettelmeyer
Northwestern University                              Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management                         Kellogg School of Management
Management & Strategy, Sixth Floor                   Marketing Department, Fourth Floor
2001 Sheridan Road                                   2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208                                   Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                             and NBER
m-busse@kellogg.northwestern.edu                     f-zettelmeyer@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Christopher R. Knittel
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-513
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
knittel@mit.edu
You know what I’d rather have them do—this will make my Republican friends puke—as gas is
going to go down here now, we ought to just slap a 50-cent or a dollar tax on a gallon of gas
                                 Dan Akerson, CEO of General Motors, Detroit News, June 7, 2011


1        Introduction

On November 19, 2008, the CEOs of Chrysler, Ford, and General Motors appeared before the U.S.
Senate to ask for a financial bailout package to prevent their companies from going bankrupt. The
event was a dramatic and public admission that the U.S. auto industry was in a very precarious
financial position. Although there were presumably a large number of factors that led to these
events, two seem particularly likely to have had first order effects.
        One is the financial crisis in the U.S., a crisis that had been building throughout the mid-2000s
because of risky practices in the subprime mortgage market, but which burst into a full-blown crisis
of the financial system in mid-September 2008 with the collapse of Lehman Brothers investment
bank and the proposal of a $700 billion emergency bailout by Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson
and Fed Chariman Ben Bernanke. The threat of a looming recession depressed orders for durable
goods such as vehicles almost immediately.1
        A second factor, which had also been operating over several years, had put U.S. auto manufac-
turers into a strained position even before the financial crisis. This factor is rising gasoline prices.
The average price of gasoline in the U.S. hovered steadily between about $1 and $1.50 per gallon
throughout the late 1990s and early 2000s, as shown in Figure 1. Then, in early 2005, the national
average price of gasoline passed $2 per gallon, and began to be much more variable, repeatedly
increasing or decreasing by $0.50 to $1 within several months. Throughout this period, the over-
all trend was increasing, and the national average gasoline price finally reached $4 per gallon in
mid-2008.
        While the auto industry bailout might be the most public evidence that fluctuating gasoline
prices create risks for auto manufacturers, there is less well-known, but more directly related,
evidence that suggests this even more strongly. Recently, various automobile industry insiders
have begun to argue that a minimum gasoline price would benefit the industry by encouraging
consumers to buy high-MPG cars more consistently. One supporter is Michael Jackson, the CEO
of Autonation, the largest dealership group in the U.S., who called a gasoline price floor of $4 per
gallon “a good start.”2 Another is Keith Crain, the publisher and editorial director of Automotive

    1
     Jeff Bater and Brian Blackstone, “Data Indicate Faltering Demand,” Wall Street Journal, November 26, 2008;
Kelly Evans and Sudeep Reddy, “Capital Spending Continues to Fall,” Wall Street Journal, January 30, 2009; Richard
Truett, “September was awful, and 2009 looks ugly,” Automotive News, October 7, 2008.
   2
     “Tax My Products, Please,” Wall Street Journal, March 17, 2009


                                                        1
News, a leading trade journal, who argued in a 2009 editorial for a tax that would set a minimum
price of $3.50.3 Finally, Alan Mulally, the CEO of Ford, has supported such a tax obliquely,
suggesting that it would be more effective than CAFE standards,4 and arguing for an “integrated
energy policy” that would “involve the consumer.”5 These arguments all suggest that the problems
created for auto manufacturers by variability in gasoline prices—such as difficulties in long-run
vehicle planning—are large enough that manufacturers would actually prefer high gasoline prices
to variable gasoline prices.6
      The aim of this paper is to understand how changes in gasoline prices affect vehicle markets,
and in particular to understand the implications of these effect for automobile manufacturers and
dealers. We begin by estimating the effect of gasoline prices on the prices and sales of vehicles and
find (as did Li, Timmins, and von Haefen (2009) and Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (forthcom-
ing)) that the effect of gasoline prices varies for vehicles according to the vehicle’s fuel economy.
In this paper, we add to these previous results by showing how changing gasoline prices affect
individual vehicle buyer’s choices relative to their past vehicle choices. Second, we show that gaso-
line prices have very different effects on new vehicle prices and sales and on used vehicle prices
and sales. We argue that the most plausible reason for this difference is differences in the market
structure of the industry that supplies new vehicles (auto manufacturers) and the industry that
supplies used vehicles (individual owners and wholesale auctions). Third, we show that, because
manufacturers differ substantially in the mix of vehicles that they offer, manufacturers of different
nameplates—and their affiliated dealers—are likely to be affected very differently by changes in
gasoline prices.
      This paper proceeds as follows. We begin by describing in the next section the data we will
use for the analysis in this paper. In Section 3 we delineate the contribution of this paper relative
to related papers. In Section 4 we investigate the effect of gasoline price changes on individual
consumers’ choices of fuel economy relative to their past choices. In Sections 5 and 6 we estimate
the effect of gasoline prices on the equilibrium market shares, sales, and prices of new and used
vehicles, respectively. Section 7 investigates the implication of our estimated gasoline price effects
for the revenues of individual automobile manufacturers and for the net revenues of their associated
dealer networks. Section 8 investigates the robustness of our empirical results by allowing the effects
to vary by gasoline price levels and trends, and by classifying vehicles according to their segment
rather than by their fuel economy. Section 9 offers some concluding remarks.

  3
     Keith Crain, “After 34 years, CAFE still doesn’t work,” Automotive News, May 25, 2009
  4
     Richard Truett, “Mulally: Higher gas taxes would conserve fuel,” Automotive News, August 8, 2007
   5
     “Tax My Products, Please,” Wall Street Journal, March 17, 2009
   6
     The 2006-2008 run-up in gasoline prices coincided with the Ford F-150 pickup truck losing its decades-long
position as the best-selling vehicle in the U.S. to the Honda Civic, a very different vehicle.



                                                      2
2        Data

The analysis in the paper makes use of several different types of data. The primary data contain
information on automobile transactions occurring between January 1, 1998 and June 30, 2008 from
a sample of about 20% of all new car dealerships in the U.S. A major market research firm collected
the data, which include every new vehicle and used vehicle transaction at the dealers in the sample
during the sample period. For each transaction we observe the precise vehicle that is purchased, the
price the customer paid for the vehicle, (Census-based) demographic information on the customer,
and detailed information on the vehicle that was traded in, if any. We describe the variables used
in each specification in more detail later in the paper.
        We augment these transaction data with information about gasoline prices and about the fuel
economy of different vehicle models. We use data from the Energy Information Administration on
weekly regional gasoline prices. The EIA collects its data by telephoning about 900 retail gasoline
outlets every Monday. We use data on the price of regular gasoline, which is gasoline with an
octane rating of at least 85 but less than 88. The data are weighted by sales and delivery volume
to create average prices for different levels of geographic aggregation. The EIA uses a regional
classification that divides the U.S. into seven areas called PADDs (Petroleum Administration for
Defense Districts): New England, Central Atlantic, Lower Atlantic, Midwest, Gulf Coast, Rocky
Mountain, and West Coast.7 In all the specifications we estimate in this paper, gasoline price is
measured at either the PADD-week or PADD-month level.
        There is fairly substantial intertemporal variation in gasoline prices in our sample period. In
Figure 1, we graph the weekly national average gasoline price in our sample. The national average
is as low as $1 early in the sample, and rises to $4 in the later parts of the sample. There is also
variation by PADD. In Figure 2 we graph gasoline prices for West Coast (PADD 5, which typically
has the highest prices), Gulf Coast (PADD 3, which typically has the lowest prices), and Rocky
Mountain (PADD 4, which is an example of a medium-priced area). As can be seen from this
graph, the price difference between areas changes over time.
        We measure the fuel economy of each vehicle model with the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA)’s “Combined Fuel Economy” which is a weighted geometric average of the EPA Highway
(45%) and City (55%) Vehicle Mileage. In 2008, the EPA changed the formula that it uses to
calculate MPG in order to make the official rating better represent what a typical driver would
experience. Using conversion formulas available from the EPA, we are able to translate the MPG

    7
    Technically, the EIA divides the country into five Petroleum Administration for Defense Districts (PADDs).
Price data for the East Coast PADD is reported separately by three subdistricts (New England, Central Atlantic,
and Lower Atlantic). These three subdistricts plus the four remaining districts define the geographic granularity of
the gasoline price data we use.



                                                         3
                       01                 Average gasoline price, $/gal.                                                                                                             01               Average gasoline price, $/gal.
                          ja                                                                                                                                                           jan




                                      0
                                          .5
                                               1
                                                   1.5
                                                         2
                                                             2.5
                                                                   3
                                                                       3.5
                                                                             4
                                                                                 4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4.5


                            n1                                                                                                                                                            19
                               99
                       01         8                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                                                             98
                          jan1                                                                                                                                                         jan
                               99                                                                                                                                                         19
                       01         9                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                                                             99
                          jan2                                                                                                                                                         jan
                               00                                                                                                                                                         20
                       01         0                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                                                             00
                          jan2                                                                                                                                                         jan
                               00                                                                                                                                                         20
                       01         1                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                                                             01
                          jan2                                                                                                                                                         jan
                               00                                                                                                                                                         20
                       01         2                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                                                             02
                          jan2                                                                                                                                                         jan
                                                                                                                                                                                          20




4
                               00




    PADD 5
    PADD 3
                       01         3                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                                                             03
                          ja




                Date
                                                                                                                                                                              Date
                            n2                                                                                                                                                         jan
                               00                                                                                                                                                         20
                       01         4                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                                                             04
                          jan2                                                                                                                                                         jan
                               00                                                                                                                                                         20
                       01         5                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                                                             05
                          jan2                                                                                                                                                         jan
                               00                                                                                                                                                         20




       PADD 4
                                  6                                                                                                                                                          06




                                                                                       Average Gasoline Prices by Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   National Average Gasoline Prices




                       01                                                                                                                                                            01
                          jan2                                                                                                                                                         jan
                               00                                                                                                                                                         20
                       01         7                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                                                             07
                          jan2                                                                                                                                                         jan
                               00                                                                                                                                                         20
                                  8                                                                                                                                                          08




                                                                                                                         Figure 2: Weekly average gasoline prices (by area)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 1: Weekly average gasoline prices (national)
rating for pre-2008 model year cars to a rating in the 2008 system, and it is this version of the
ratings we use in this paper.
    In most results in the paper, we use a 25% random sample of all transactions as our final
estimation sample.8 Our estimation sample, which includes transaction, gasoline price, and MPG
information, contains 4,156,663 new vehicle transaction and 2,923,323 used vehicle transactions.
Table 16 presents summary statistics separately by new and used vehicle transactions.


3     Previous literature

Several recent papers have estimated how responsive vehicle buyers are to changes in gasoline prices.
These papers have used various approaches and data from different time periods and countries.
They all have found that consumers are responsive to some extent either in the prices they are
willing to pay or in the kinds of vehicles they choose to buy, or on both dimensions. Klier and
Linn (2010) and Li, Timmins, and von Haefen (2009) estimate the effect of gasoline prices on sales
of vehicles of differing fuel economies. Sallee, West, and Fan (2009), and Verboven (2002) find
that car buyers come close to fully adjusting their willingness-to-pay in response to gasoline prices.
Allcott and Wozny (2011) find that consumers are moderate in their adjustment to gasoline prices,
while Kahn (1986) finds the least adjustment, among recent papers on the topic, by consumers to
gasoline prices.
    The paper most closely related to this paper is Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (forthcoming),
although the focus in this paper is very different. Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer focuses on
consumer behavior; specifically how consumers trade off the upfront prices of vehicles against their
future gasoline costs. This paper, in contrast, focuses on firms; specifically on market structure
and on firm profitability in the face of changes in gasoline prices. While both this paper and
Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer estimate how new and used vehicle prices and quantities respond
to changes in gasoline prices, Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer use their estimates to estimate the
implied discount rates that consumers use when making vehicle purchase decisions. This paper, in
contrast, focuses on the effect that changes in gasoline prices have on revenues and firm profitability
and on how this effect varies across automobile manufacturers and across their affiliated dealer
networks.
    To estimate the impact on manufacturer and dealer profitability, we bring in both new data
and new empirical results. While Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer focuses only on retail price
effects, this paper focuses on gasoline price effects throughout the supply chain. Specifically, here

    8
      The 25% sample is necessary to allow for estimation of specifications with multiple sets of high-dimensional fixed
effects, including fixed effect interactions, that we use later in the paper.



                                                           5
we also estimate how wholesale prices and dealer margins change when gasoline prices change. In
addition, we investigate whether the effect of gasoline prices differs when gasoline price are high
or low, or when they have been rising or falling. Finally, we use a much larger estimation sample
(approximately 2.5 times larger).


4        Consumer response to gasoline prices

In this section, we will exploit one of the unique features of our data (among papers addressing this
topic) in order to estimate the effect of gasoline prices on consumer choices. In our data, we observe
transactions for individual vehicles, including what vehicle—if any—was traded in as part of the
transaction. This means that for the approximately 40% of new and used vehicle transactions that
involve a trade-in, we can see what a customer purchases compared to what that same customer
purchased at some point in the past. We can use this information to estimate whether consumers
buy higher MPG vehicles relative to their trade-in vehicles when gasoline prices are high than when
they are low.
        We do this by estimating the following regression.


 MPGirjlt = β0 +β1 GasolinePriceat +β2 Demogi +β3 PurchaseTimingjt +δl +τrT +µrt +ξijkt (1)


M P Girjlt is the MPG of vehicle j bought by customer i in region r at date t using trade-in
vehicle l. The key coefficient we wish to estimate is β1 , the effect of GasolineP rice in PADD
a at date t on the MPG of the vehicle purchased by customer i. We include as covariates the
demographic characteristics of customer i’s Census block group (Demogi ) from the 2000 Census.
Demogi contains information on the income, house value and ownership, household size, vehicles
per household, education, occupation, average travel time to work, English proficiency, and race
of buyers. We also include PurchaseTimingit , a vector of indicators for whether the transaction
occurred on a weekend (Saturday or Sunday); occurred during the last five days of the month; or
occurred during the last five days of the year. These are times in which dealers may have “stair
step incentive” targets that make them particularly eager to make sales. In addition, we allow
region-specific year (τrT ) and region-specific month-of-year (µrt ) fixed effects. There are 34 regions
in the U.S., defined by the firm that collects the transaction data according to its understanding of
regional automobile markets.9 Using region-specific time fixed effects allows for secular or seasonal

    9
    The 34 regions are: Baltimore/Washington, Charlotte, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Colorado, Columbus, Dakotas,
Detroit, Georgia, Gulf, Hawaii, Illinois/Indiana, Indianapolis, Kansas City, Miami, Minneapolis, Missouri, Nevada,
New England, New York, Norfolk/Virginia Beach, Northern California, Oklahoma, Orlando, Pennsylvania, Phoenix,
Pittsburgh, San Antonio, Seattle/Portland, South Texas, Southern California, Tampa, Tennessee, and Texas. Al-
though the regions are sometimes named after cities and sometimes after states, they represent a complete division


                                                        6
differences in preferences for high- vs. low-MPG vehicles, and allows these intertemporal differences
to differ by region of the country.
    The most important covariate in the specification is δl , which is a vector of “vehicle type” fixed
effects for the trade-in vehicle (l) used by customer i to purchase vehicle j. A “vehicle type” in
our data is the interaction of make, model, model year, trim level, doors, body type, displacement,
cylinders, and transmission. (For example, one “vehicle type” in our data is a 2005 Toyota Camry
LE 4-door sedan with a 6-cylinder, 3.0-liter engine and automatic transmission.) The inclusion of
the trade-in vehicle type fixed effects (δl ) makes this a difference-in-differences regression whose
identifying variation is differences among customers who trade in a specific vehicle in the MPGs of
the replacement vehicles they buy when gasoline prices are low vs. high. This allows us to perform
analysis that is in the spirit of a within customer analysis, in the sense that we are estimating
the effect of gasoline prices on MPG choice, conditioning on the prior purchase of a very specific
vehicle.10
    The results of estimating equation 1 are reported in Table 1. We estimate equation 1 separately
for transactions in which buyers buy a new vehicle (reported in column 1) and transactions in which
buyers buy a used vehicle (reported in column 2). In both columns, we find that higher gasoline
prices are associated with consumers choosing a higher level of fuel economy (MPG) for their new
vehicle relative to the fuel economy of their trade-in. The estimated coefficient implies that a $1
increase in the gasoline price leads customers to increase the fuel economy of their new vehicle by
0.83 miles per gallon relative to their trade-in.11 For used vehicles, we find that a $1 gasoline price
increase increases the fuel economy of the newly purchased used vehicle by 0.41 miles per gallon
relative to the trade-in.
    We infer from these results is that vehicle buyers do respond to gasoline prices by changing the
MPG of the vehicles they buy, as previous research has found, and that this effect is not an artifact
of selection or composition effects during high vs. low gasoline price times, but that during high
gasoline price periods, individual customers choose to buy higher MPG vehicles relative to their
own past purchases than they do when gasoline prices are low.
    In the next two sections, we estimate what effect this change in individual behavior has on
market outcomes: the equilibrium sales and transaction prices of vehicles of different fuel economies.

of the country. Regions vary in both geographic size and population, but are designed to correspond to regional
automobile markets.
  10
     We cannot generate a true within-customer estimate because we do not observe multiple new car purchases by
the same customer. We also do not know when a trade-in was purchased because a given model year is usually
available for well over a year (as long as 18 months is not uncommon). Furthermore, we cannot tell if the trade-in
was originally purchased as a new or a used vehicle.
  11
     Because of the included year fixed effects, this coefficient does not measure merely changes in market tastes for
high- vs. low-MPG vehicles over time. Year-to-year differences in these tastes will be absorbed by the region-specific
year fixed effects (τrT ).


                                                          7
                                 Table 1: New and Used Cars: Trade-in results†

                                                  New Cars                              Used Cars
                                                       MPG                                   MPG
              GasolinePrice                             .83**                                .41**
                                                        (.04)                               (.023)
              PctLessHighSchool                         -.46*                                 -.13
                                                        (.17)                                (.17)
              PctCollege                                .75**                                .58**
                                                         (.2)                                (.11)
              Income                               -6.6e-06**                              -7.7e-07
                                                    (1.7e-06)                             (9.4e-07)
              MedianHHSize                             -.12**                               -.067*
                                                       (.043)                               (.032)
              MedianHouseValue                       -1.8e-07                            -9.3e-07**
                                                    (6.4e-07)                             (2.6e-07)
              VehiclePerHH                              -.064                                 -.18
                                                        (.22)                                (.18)
              TravelTime                              .0063+                                .0047*
                                                      (.0035)                              (.0018)
              Weekend                                    .2**                                .12**
                                                       (.026)                                (.01)
              EndOfMonth                               -.13**                               -.0077
                                                      (.0084)                               (.007)
              EndOfYear                                 .059*                               .085**
                                                       (.022)                               (.016)
              Constant                                   17**                                19**
                                                        (.17)                                (.11)
              Observations                          4156663                               2923323
              R-squared                                 0.060                                0.018
              *
                significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors (robust and
                clustered at the region level) in parentheses.
                Not reported: Region × year, region × month-of-year, and trade-in vehicle type fixed effects.
                We also don’t report house ownership, occupation, English proficiency, and race of buyers.


5         New vehicle markets

In order to understand the effect of gasoline price changes on auto manufacturers and dealers, we
begin by estimating the effect of gasoline prices on the sales and price outcomes in the market
for new vehicles. We will focus on how the effects of gasoline price changes differ for high vs.
low fuel economy vehicles. In Section 7, we will investigate how these effects differentially affect
individual auto manufacturers. While most of the major auto manufacturers technically have a
full product line,12 there are substantial differences across manufacturers in the market segments
in which they have attractive, competitive products. As a consequence, the equilibrium effects
of gasoline prices on sales and vehicle prices that we estimate can have very different effects on
manufacturers, depending on their product mixes.

    12
         There are, of course, exceptions. BMW does not make a pickup truck, for example.




                                                             8
5.1     Empirical approach

In order to estimate how changes in gasoline prices affect the equilibrium market outcomes (prices
and sales) in new vehicle markets, we will estimate true reduced forms. In general terms, our
approach will be to regress market quantities (Q), measured as either market shares or unit sales,
and transaction prices (P ) on gasoline prices and other demand and supply covariates (X D and
X S , respectively).
                           Q = γ0 + γ1 GasolinePrice + γ2 X D + γ3 X S + ν                         (2)

                           P = λ0 + λ1 GasolinePrice + λ2 X D + λ3 X S +                          (3)

Note that γ2 and γ3 in equation 2 and λ2 and λ3 in equation 3 will estimate neither parameters of
the demand curve nor parameters of the supply curve, but instead will estimate the effect of each
covariate on the equilibrium value of either P or Q. The main coefficients of interest will be γ1
and λ1 . These coefficients will estimate the effect of changes in gasoline prices on the equilibrium
vehicle quantities and prices, respectively, conditional on the effect of the other included demand
and supply covariates.


5.2     New vehicle quantities

In this section we investigate the effect of gasoline prices on the equilibrium sales of new vehicles
of different fuel economies.


5.2.1    Quantity specifications

We will estimate two variants of the quantity specification given in its generic form by Equation 2.
In the first variant, described in more detail below, we will estimate the effect of gasoline prices on
the market shares of new vehicles in different MPG categories. The advantage of this approach is
that we can use individual transaction data, including controls for the demographic characteristics
of the buyer (at the Census block group level) and for the timing of the purchase, which will help
to mitigate the role of selection in our results.
   In the second variant, also described in more detail below, we will estimate the effect of gasoline
prices on the unit sales of new vehicles in different MPG categories. Because we have to aggregate
across transactions in order to create a unit sales number, in this approach we cannot use as large
a set of covariates as we can in the market share specification, but this approach will capture
the effect of gasoline price changes on the overall volume of vehicles sales, an effect that may be
obscured in the market share specification.




                                                    9
Market shares We estimate the effect of gasoline prices on market shares by using the following
linear probability model.

                       Iirt (j ∈ K) = γ0 + γ1 GasolinePriceat + γ2 Demogi
                                                                                                               (4)
                                          + γ3 PurchaseTimingit + τrT + µrt + ijt .

Iirt (j ∈ K) is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 if the transaction in which customer i buys
new vehicle j in region r at date t is for a vehicle in MPG Bin K. We split vehicles into 5 bins on
the basis of each vehicle’s EPA Combined Fuel Economy rating.13 The bins are defined in Table
2. Table 2 also reports the average market share (across all years in our sample) of each bin. (The
bins divide the sample into rough quintiles.)

                                          Table 2: MPG Bin Definitions
                                                  Vehicles in bin
                                                   have MPG of        Share in
                                    Bin      at least but less than    sample
                                      1         0            16        18.1%
                                      2        16            19        22.5%
                                      3        19            21        16.7%
                                      4        21            24        21.8%
                                      5        24            ∞         20.8%


       The main coefficient of interest in Equation 4 is γ1 , which measures the effect of the price of
gasoline in PADD a in week t on the probability that a transaction is for a vehicle in MPG Bin K,
an effect we will interpret as a market share effect. We will estimate Equation 4 five times, once
for each bin. The estimated coefficient γˆ1 from the specification in which the dependent variable
is equal to one if the transaction was for a vehicle in Bin 1 estimates the effect of gasoline price on
the market share of vehicles in Bin 1. The estimated coefficient γˆ1 from the specification in which
the dependent variable is equal to one if the transaction was for a vehicle in Bin 2 estimates the
effect of gasoline price on the market share of vehicles in Bin 2, and so on.
       We include as covariates the same demographic characteristics, purchase timing indicators, and
region-specific year (τrT ) and region-specific month-of-year (µrt ) fixed effects that were used as
covariates in Equation 1. These fixed effects allow for secular or seasonal differences in the market
shares of vehicles in different bins and allows these difference to vary by region of the country. The
inclusion of these fixed effects mean that the variation that identifies our gasoline price effects is
variation within a year and region that differs from the average pattern of seasonal variation within

  13
    Note that the correct units in which to measure the rate at which a vehicle consumes gasoline is gallons per
mile, which is the inverse of miles per gallon. Thus, small differences in MPG between vehicles with low MPG can
have bigger implications for the number of gallons of fuel consumed per mile of travel than much larger differences
in MPG among vehicles with high MPG.


                                                        10
that region.
       We do not include explicit supply covariates in Equation 4. Supply covariates that we might
control for—such as prices of raw materials, labor, and energy—are unlikely to vary to a significant
degree within the region-specific year and region-specific month-of-year fixed effects that are already
included in the specification.


Unit sales      In order to estimate the effect of gasoline prices on unit sales, we need to aggregate
from individual transactions to the number of new vehicles sold in a particular time period. The
transaction data that we used to estimate the market share specification in Equation 4 are drawn
from a representative sample of car dealerships, which is why they are suitable for the market share
estimation. However, we do not know exactly what fraction of dealerships the sample represents
in any given year, and the fraction changes year-to-year, according to our data source. As a
consequence, we cannot be confident that aggregating our transaction data will give us sales figures
that represent the total sales volume in the country.
       As a consequence, we take a different approach. We obtain information from Ward’s Automotive
on national monthly new vehicle sales by model. Using the EPA’s fuel economy rating for each
model, we collapse the national monthly sales data by model to national monthly sales by the
fuel economy bins defined in Table 2.14 Next, we calculate from our transaction data the share
of transactions for each month and each fuel economy bin that occur in each PADD. We then
allocate national monthly unit sales by fuel economy bins to each of the seven PADDs according to
these shares. We then regress this measure—monthly PADD-level unit sales in a given MPG bin
(Qakt )—on monthly PADD-level gasoline prices (GasolineP riceat ) and other covariates, as shown
below.
                              Qakt = γ0 + γ1 GasolinePriceat + τaT + µat + akt .                                    (5)

Because this specification does not use individual transactions, we cannot include the demographic
or purchase timing covariates that we used in Equation 4. We do include PADD-specific year
and PADD-specific month-of-year fixed effects in Equation 5. We estimate Equation 5 separately
for each bin, to allow the year (τaT ) and month-of-year (µat ) effects to vary by bin. This allows
high-MPG vehicles (such as mid-size sedans) and low-MPG vehicles (such as SUVs) to have both
different seasonal sales patterns and different sales trends over time.15

  14
      Vehicle options (such a 4- vs. 6-cylinder engine) can create variation within a model in the MPG of individual
vehicles. The Ward’s data do not report sales broken down by this more granular, sub-model categorization, so for
models that do have such intra-model variation in MPG, we use the share of of the different sub-models sold in our
transaction data to impute how many units of the model’s sales reported by Ward’s are for each sub-model. Note
that this imputation will be meaningful only for models whose sub-models have MPGs that fall into different bins.
   15
      It also makes the unit sales specification (Equation 5) and the market share specification (Equation 4) comparable,
since the linear probability model of Equation 4 has to be estimated in five separate equations, meaning that the


                                                           11
    The main coefficients of interest in Equation 5 are the γ1 ’s estimated for each bin. These
coefficients measure the effect of a $1 increase in gasoline prices on the monthly PADD-level unit
sales of vehicles of different fuel economies.


5.2.2    New vehicle quantity results

We report the full results from estimating Equations 4 and 5 in new vehicle markets in Tables A-1
and A-2 respectively. We summarize the key coefficients in Tables 3 and 4.
    In Table 3, we report the estimated effects of gasoline prices on market shares of new vehicles
in the five fuel economy bins. The results imply that when gasoline prices rise, the market shares
of low fuel economy vehicles fall and the market shares of high fuel economy vehicles rise. A $1
increase in gasoline prices is estimated to decrease market share by 4.2 percentage points for new
vehicles whose fuel economy is below 16 MPG (Bin 1) and by 2.9 percentage points for vehicles
with fuel economy of at least 16 but less than 19 MPG (Bin 2). Given the average market shares
in each of these bins, these are decreases of 22.8% and 13% respectively.
    At the other end of the spectrum, the results indicate that market shares of high fuel economy
vehicles rise when gasoline prices rise. For these vehicles, a $1 increase in the price of gasoline
would be predicted to increase the market share of vehicles whose fuel economy is at least 24 MPG
(Bin 5) by 5.9 percentage points, a 28.7% increase relative to the average market share in this bin.
The same gasoline price increase would be predicted to increase the market share of vehicles with
fuel economy of at least 21 MPG but less than 24 MPG (Bin 4) by 1.5 percentage points, a 6.9%
increase.
    Taken together, these results suggest that when gasoline prices rise, the equilibrium market
shares of new vehicles shift from low-MPG vehicles to high-MPG vehicles in the way that our
results on individual consumer responses reported in Section 4 suggested they would.
    Because the market share results use data on individual transactions, we can include covariates
that capture demographics and purchase timing. However, the market share effects may not
translate directly to unit sales effects if changes in gasoline prices change the total market size.
In particular, if it is the case that increased gasoline prices are associated with recessions and
decreased spending on consumer durables, then the market share results will overstate the extent
to which unit sales of high fuel economy vehicles increase and understate the extent to which unit
sales of low fuel economy vehicles decrease.16

fixed effect estimates are allowed to vary across bins.
   16
      Conversely, if increased gasoline prices were associated with expansions instead of recessions and therefore with
increased spending on consumer durables, then the market share results would understate the extent to which unit
sales of high fuel economy vehicles increase and overstate the extent to which unit sales of low fuel economy vehicles
decrease.


                                                          12
                  Table 3: Equilibrium market share response to gasoline prices

                  Variable                                                     Average
                                                                 Coefficient    Share      Effect
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1                          -.042**      18.4%      -22.8%
                  (fuel economy < 16 MPG)                           (.004)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                          -.029**      22.4%      -13.0%
                  (16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                 (.0028)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                          -.0037*      16.8%      -2.2%
                  (19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                 (.0016)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                          .015**       21.8%       6.9%
                  (21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                  (.003)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                          .059**       20.6%      28.7%
                  (fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                          (.0029)
                   *
                       significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard
                       errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at the region level.


   The unit sales estimates summarized in Table 4 suggest that this is indeed the case. In these
results, a $1 increase in gasoline prices is estimated to decrease sales in the lowest MPG bin by
10,084 vehicles per month in the average PADD, a 27.7% decrease relative to average monthly
sales of 36,442 vehicles in this bin. This is a somewhat larger percentage effect than the 22.8%
decrease estimated for market share. The comparison is similar for Bin 2, where an 8.5% decrease
in unit sales is predicted, in comparison to a 13% decrease in market share. At the other end of
the fuel economy distribution, a $1 increase in the price of gasoline is predicted to increase sales of
vehicles in Bin 5 by 4,974 vehicles per month in the average PADD, a 15.7% increase compared to
average PADD-level sales of 31,602 units in this bin. This is a smaller increase than the increase
in market share of 28.7% estimated for this bin in Table 3. The results in Table 4 indicate that
when gasoline prices increase, the total unit sales of vehicles fall, which means that the market
share effects estimated in Table 3 would be under-predictions of decreases and over-predictions of
increases if they were (mis)interpreted as unit sales effects.

                          Table 4: Equilibrium sales response to gasoline prices

                  Variable                                                     Average
                                                                 Coefficient    Sales      Effect
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1                        -10,084**      36,442     -27.7%
                  (fuel economy < 16 MPG)                          (1,076)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                         -7,422**      40,099     -18.5%
                  (16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                 (1,244)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                         -4,705**      31,590     -14.9%
                  (19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                 (1,228)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                         -2,155+       39,179     -5.5%
                  (21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                 (1,275)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                          4,974**      31,602     15.7%
                  (fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                          (1,108)
                   *
                       significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard
                       errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at the region level.



                                                          13
       The results so far suggest that when gasoline prices increase, there is a substantial shift in both
the equilibrium sales and market shares of new vehicles toward higher fuel economy cars, and that
this is a consequence, at least in part, of individual vehicle buyers buying cars with higher fuel
economy than they otherwise would have. In order to complete the picture of what effect this
has on the automotive industry—manufacturers and dealers—we need to consider the effect on
equilibrium prices of new vehicles.


5.3       New vehicle prices

In this section we investigate the effect of gasoline prices on the equilibrium prices of new vehicles
of different fuel economies.


5.3.1      Price specification

We estimate the effect of gasoline prices on new vehicle prices by estimating the following specifi-
cation:

                      Pirjt = λ0 + λ1 (GasolinePriceat · MPG Binj ) + λ2 Demogi +
                                                                                                                  (6)
                               λ3 PurchaseTimingit + δj + τrT + µrt + ijt .

Pirjt , the price that customer i pays for vehicle j purchased in region r at time t, is based on the new
vehicle transaction price that the dealer and customer agree on. This price includes all factory and
dealer-installed options, except for those that our data provider classifies as “not contributing to
the resale value of the vehicle,” for example, undercoating. We want our price variable to measure
the consumer’s wealth outlay for the car. As a result, we make two adjustments to the new vehicle
transaction price. First, we subtract any cash rebate that a manufacturer offers to pay on behalf
of the consumer to the dealer. Second, we subtract from the new vehicle transaction price any
profit the customer made on his or her trade-in (or add to the purchase price any loss made on the
trade-in).17 We can make this adjustment because we separately observe what the dealer pays for
the trade-in vehicle and the estimated wholesale value of the vehicle (as booked by the dealer).
       In Equation 6 the main coefficients of interest are λ1 . These coefficients measure the effect
of a $1 increase in gasoline prices (in PADD a in week t) on the transaction prices of vehicles of
different fuel economies. To allow for the possibility that gasoline prices affect high fuel economy

  17
     For example, suppose a consumer agrees on a price of $25,000 for a new car and her trade-in was worth $10,000.
If the dealer paid the consumer $10,000 for the trade-in, we would code the new vehicle price as $25,000. However,
if the dealer paid the consumer only $9,000 for her trade, we would add $1,000 to the new vehicle price, now coding
it as $26,000. This is because the $1,000 loss on the trade-in is an in-kind payment with the trade-in vehicle for the
new vehicle and should thus be reflected in the total wealth outlay for the new car. Similarly, if the dealer paid the
consumer for the trade-in in excess of the trade-in’s value, we would subtract the amount from the new vehicle price.


                                                         14
vehicles differently from low fuel economy vehicles, we interact GasolineP rice with indicators for
each of our five fuel economy bins. We will thus estimate a different gasoline price coefficient for
each bin.
   We account for a variety of demand covariates other than gasoline prices, specifically demo-
graphics, purchase timing, “vehicle type” fixed effects, and year, season, and regional controls.
Demogi and PurchaseTimingit are the same covariate vectors that were included in Equation 1.
“Vehicle type” fixed effects (δj ) are the same as the “vehicle type” fixed effects for the trade-in
used in Equation 1; namely, the interaction of make, model, model year, trim level, doors, body
type, displacement, cylinders, and transmission. In Equation 6, these fixed effects apply to the
vehicle type of the new vehicle being purchased.
   We also want to allow average price levels to differ seasonally and over the years in our sample.
Since we don’t want to assume that prices evolve equally across the United States, we interact
the geographic region (34 throughout the U.S.) in which the vehicle was sold with year (τrT ) and
month-of-year (µrt ) fixed effects. As a result, our results will be identified based on variation
within a year and region that differs from the average pattern of seasonal variation within that
region. While these fixed effects do not allow directly for changes in taste over time for different
types of vehicles (e.g. the increasing popularity of SUVs), the vehicle type fixed effects (δj ) already
capture changes in tastes implicitly since any particular vehicle type sells as a new car only for one
model-year and the model-year is part of the fixed effect. This will mitigate the extent to which
our estimated gasoline price effects are driven by secular changes in taste as opposed to gasoline
price fluctuations.


5.3.2   New vehicle price results

We report on the full results from estimating Equation 6 in Table A-3. We summarize the key
coefficients (λ1 ) in Table 5. The reported coefficients estimate by how much equilibrium prices for
vehicles with different fuel economies change for a $1 increase in gasoline prices.
   In the new vehicle market we find that, all else equal, a $1 increase in gasoline price is associated
with an average price decrease of $362 for the lowest fuel economy vehicles (those in Bin 1, whose
fuel economy is less than 16 MPG). For vehicles in Bin 2, a $1 increase in the price of gasoline is
associated with a $159 decrease in price. For high fuel economy cars, the effect is the opposite. A
$1 increase in gasoline prices is, on average, associated with a $295 vehicle price increase for the
highest fuel economy vehicles (Bin 5, whose fuel economy is greater or equal to 24 MPG) and a
$137 price increase for vehicles in Bin 4. These results imply that vehicles in Bin 5 increase in price
by $657 relative to those in Bin 1.



                                                  15
                        Table 5: New cars: Equilibrium price response to gasoline prices

                         Variable                                                      Coefficient (SE)
                         GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1†                                          -362**
                         (fuel economy < 16 MPG)                                             (89)
                         GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                                           -159**
                         (16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                                    (31)
                         GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                                              -20
                         (19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                                    (33)
                         GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                                            137**
                         (21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                                    (36)
                         GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                                            295**
                         (fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                                             (32)
                         Price difference between highest and lowest MPG Bin:               $ 657
                         *
                             significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard
                             errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at the region level.


Summary             Combining the results of this section and the previous section, we conclude that when
gasoline prices increase, the market share, unit sales, and equilibrium prices of low fuel economy
vehicles fall, and the market share, unit sales, and equilibrium prices of high fuel economy vehicles
rise. This is consistent with a decrease in demand for low fuel economy vehicles, and an increase in
demand for high fuel economy vehicles. The results also suggest that the market for new cars has
neither a vertical supply curve (which would predict that gasoline prices should affect primarily
the equilibrium prices of new vehicles with little effect on sales) nor a horizontal supply curve
(which would imply that gasoline prices should affect only sales and not prices). The automobile
industry is made up of oligopolistic manufacturers who produce differentiated (but substitutable
products) which are sold by dealerships that have varying degrees of local market power. Since
both manufacturers and dealers have some degree of market power, they have a choice when faced
with a change in demand: whether to respond primarily by changing prices, primarily by allowing
quantities to change, or having both change. Our results indicate that manufacturers and dealers
respond to the demand change by adjusting both prices and quantities, but with bigger percentage
changes in quantities than in prices.18


6         Used vehicle markets

In the previous section we estimated the effect of gasoline prices on new vehicle markets, which
are the markets on which automobile manufacturers depend. Fluctuations in the new vehicle
market could also have large effects on dealers, whose profits arise in part from sales of new
vehicles. Dealers also earn significant profits from buying and selling used vehicles. In this section,
we estimate the effect of gasoline prices on used vehicle markets. We do so by estimating the

    18
         The $657 relative price change between Bin 1 and Bin 5 is 2.6% of the average new vehicle price of $25,592.


                                                                16
price specification (Equation 6), the market share specification (Equation 4), and the unit sales
specification (Equation 5) using data on used vehicle transactions.


6.1    Used vehicle prices

In estimating the price specification for used cars, we want to account for the fact that used vehicles
depreciate as their mileage increases, independently of vehicle age. We do so by adding a linear
spline in odometer with knots at 10,000 mile increments to Equation 6 when we estimate it with
used vehicle data.19 We interact the odometer spline with indicators for the vehicle’s segment and
the PADD in which the transaction occurs in order to allow for different depreciation patterns
for different kinds of vehicles in different areas of the country.20 We also replace the year fixed
effects (τrT ) in Equation 6 with segment-specific year fixed effects. This is to allow for changing
tastes over time for different vehicles segments.21 To reduce the number of fixed effects we have
to estimate, the used car specification interacts the segment-specific year fixed effects with PADDs
instead of regions, as we did for new cars.22 The full results from estimating the price specification
are reported in Table A-4.
    In Table 6 we summarize the gasoline price coefficients from the price specification. The esti-
mated effect of gasoline prices on used vehicle prices is qualitatively similar to the effects on new
car prices, but larger in magnitude. Specifically, the estimated effect of a $1 increase in gasoline
prices is to decrease the average price of the lowest fuel economy vehicles, those with MPG less
than 16 (Bin 1), by $1,474. For vehicles with MPG of at least 16 but less than 19 (Bin 2), a $1
increase in the price of gasoline is estimated to decrease the average vehicle price by $356. For
high fuel economy vehicles, gasoline prices have the opposite effect. A $1 increase in the price of
gasoline is estimated to increase the price of the highest fuel economy vehicles, those with MPG
of at least 24 (Bin 5), by $922, and to increase by $745 the price of vehicles with MPG of at least
21 but less than 24 (Bin 4). We can summarize the comparison to the new vehicle price results by
noting that the estimates imply that when gasoline prices rise by $1 the average transaction prices
of the highest fuel economy used vehicles rise by $2,396 relative to the average transaction prices
of the lowest fuel economy used vehicles. This relative price effect is almost four times the $657
relative price effect estimated for new vehicles.
    In the next subsection, we report the quantity effect for used vehicle markets, and then we

  19
     We drop from the sample vehicles with odometer readings of 150,000 miles or more; such vehicles make up 1.14%
of our sample.
  20
     There are seven vehicle segments: Compact, Midsize, Luxury, Sporty, SUV, Pickup, and Van.
  21
     The new car price specification did not require segment-specific year fixed effects to control for changing tastes:
For new cars the car type fixed effects captured taste changes since each car type only sells during one model-year.
  22
     In unreported results we find that using PADDs instead of regions in this interaction does not materially change
the estimates.


                                                          17
                Table 6: Used cars: Equilibrium price response to gasoline prices

                  Variable                                                      Coefficient (SE)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1†                                         -1474**
                  (fuel economy < 16 MPG)                                             (40)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                                           -356**
                  (16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                                    (48)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                                            313**
                  (19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                                    (21)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                                            745**
                  (21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                                    (24)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                                            922**
                  (fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                                             (24)
                  Price difference between highest and lowest MPG Bin:              $ 2396
                  *
                      significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard
                      errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at the region level.


discuss explanations for the differences in the results between the two markets.


6.2   Used vehicle quantities

In this subsection, we present the effect of gasoline prices on shares and sales of used vehicles. We
make a careful distinction between market shares of new vehicles and transaction shares of used
vehicles. This is because changes in the proportions of new vehicles of different fuel economies that
are sold are changes in market shares, in the sense that these changes will show up as changes in
the fleet of vehicles on the road relative to what would be observed under a counter-factual gasoline
price. Changes in the “market shares” of used vehicles sold at new car dealerships will not actually
change the stock of vehicles on the road. As such, it is more appropriate to think of these changes
as changes in “transaction shares,” a measure of the change in the sales activity occurring at new
vehicle dealerships, rather than true changes in market share.
   In Table 7, we report the gasoline price coefficients obtained by estimating the market/transaction
share specification (Equation 4) on data from used vehicle transactions. (Full estimates are reported
in Table A-5.) The estimates indicate that when gasoline prices rise by $1, the share of used vehicle
transactions at new vehicle dealerships that is for used vehicles in the lowest MPG bin (MPG of
less than 16), falls by -0.96 percentage points, a 4.8% decrease relative to an average transaction
share of 20.2%. At the same time, the share of used vehicle transactions that is for vehicles in the
top MPG bin (MPG of 24 or more) rises by 2.5%. The effects are statistically significant, but only
a fraction of the size of the market share effects for new cars in the same two bins (-22.8% and
28.7% respectively).
   We also estimate the effect of gasoline prices on used vehicle unit sales at new vehicle dealerships.
For new vehicles, we used data from Ward’s Automotive to scale our unit sales measures up to a
national level. Ward’s does not record a national used vehicle sales analog to its new vehicle sales


                                                         18
                 Table 7: Used Cars: Transaction share response to gasoline
                 prices

                   Variable                                                     Average
                                                                 Coefficient     Share     Effect
                   GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1                         -.0096**      20.2%     -4.8%
                   (fuel economy < 16 MPG)                          (.0015)
                   GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                          .0023+       23.4%      1.0%
                   (16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                 (.0012)
                   GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                          -.00071      18.0%     -0.4%
                   (19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                 (.0015)
                   GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                          .0041**      23.5%      1.7%
                   (21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                 (.0011)
                   GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                          .0038**      15.0%      2.5%
                   (fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                         (.00092)
                   *
                       significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Stan-
                       dard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at the region level.


figures, so we can’t use Ward’s directly to scale our used vehicle transaction data up to total used
vehicle sales. Instead, we collapse our used vehicle transaction data to sales by MPG bin, PADD,
and month. In order to scale these numbers up to reflect sales at the full set of dealers in the
country—not just those in our sample—we multiply the sales in each “MPG bin-PADD-month”
by a scaling factor equal to the ratio of the national new vehicle sales recorded by Ward’s to the
total number of new vehicle sold in our transaction data. This approach implicitly assumes that
the share of all new vehicles sold in a month that are sold by dealers in our transaction sample is
the same as the share of all used vehicles sold at new vehicle dealerships in a month that are sold
by dealers in our transaction sample.
   We estimate the unit sales specification (Equation 5) using this measure of unit sales of used
vehicles as Qakt . The full results of this specification are reported in Table A-6; the gasoline price
coefficients are summarized in Table 8.
                 Table 8: Used Cars: Equilibrium sales response to gasoline prices

                  Variable                                                     Average
                                                                 Coefficient    Sales      Effect
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1                         -3,857**      26,520     -14.5%
                  (fuel economy < 16 MPG)                           (597)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                         -2,406**      28,898     -8.3%
                  (16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                  (627)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                            -790       23,055     -3.4%
                  (19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                  (605)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                             134       29,687      0.5%
                  (21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                  (743)
                  GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                             375       17,673      2.1%
                  (fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                           (598)
                   *
                       significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard
                       errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at the region level.




                                                          19
   The relationship between the transaction share and unit sales results for used vehicles is similar
to the relationship between the market share and unit sales results for new vehicles, in that the
unit sales effects are more negative than the market share effects, suggesting that total sales of
used vehicles falls when gasoline prices increase. For used vehicles, however, this effect is more
concentrated in the low fuel economy bins. In particular, the used vehicle transaction shares of the
lowest two fuel economy bins are estimated to fall by 4.8% in MPG Bin 1 and be close to unchanged
(a statistically weak estimate of a 1% increase) in MPG Bin 2 when gasoline price increases by $1.
However, unit sales are estimated to decrease by 14.5% and 8.3% respectively in these two bins. At
the other end of the fuel economy spectrum, the transaction shares of the two highest fuel economy
bins are estimated to increase by 2.5% (Bin 5) and 1.7% (Bin 4) when gasoline prices increase by
$1, while the point estimates imply unit sales effects that are not much smaller, 2.1% and 0.5%
respectively, although the point estimates are statistically indistinguishable from zero.
   As a last point of comparison, we note that the predicted unit sales effects for used vehicles
(measured in percentage terms in the last column of Table 8) are distinctly smaller in magnitude
than the analogous effects for new vehicles, reported in the last column of Table 4.


Inventories    We can see the differences between new and used markets in the effects of gasoline
prices on market/transaction shares and on unit sales echoed in the effect of gasoline prices on
dealership inventories of new and used vehicles of different fuel economies. In our data, we observe
an inventory-related measure, called “days to turn.” Days to turn counts the number of days that
a specific vehicle was on a dealer’s lot before it sold. Higher average days to turn for vehicles in a
particular MPG bin indicates that the dealer is carrying higher inventory levels of those vehicles.
In order to investigate inventory effects, we estimate the effect of gasoline prices on days to turn
by MPG bin. (The specification and results are reported in Table A-7.) We find much larger
changes in days to turn in response to gasoline price changes for new than for used vehicles. For
new vehicles, the estimated coefficients imply that a $1 increase in gasoline price is associated with
a 10-day increase in days to turn for cars in the lowest fuel economy bin, a 15.2% increase relative
to mean of 65.7 days to turn in this bin. Conversely, we find that the same gasoline price increase
reduces by 10 days the time that a car in the highest fuel economy bin remains on the lot, a 20.8%
decrease relative to an average of 48.1 days. In contrast, for used cars, a $1 higher gasoline price
is estimated to increase the days to turn for vehicles in Bin 1 by 7.0% (2.9 days relative to a mean
of 41.7 days), and reduced days to turn in Bin 5 by 4.2% (1.7 days compared to a mean of 40.5
days).




                                                 20
6.3      Comparing new vs. used vehicle markets

It is somewhat surprising that gasoline prices would have such different effects in new vs. used
vehicle markets. While new vehicles and used vehicles are distinctly different goods, the selection
of used vehicles that are sold at new car dealerships—which is what we observe in our transaction
data—are the used vehicles that are most similar to new vehicles. They are typically a few years
old and in very good condition (almost half of the used vehicles in our sample are three years old
or less; nearly 80% are five years old or less); the median mileage at the time of sale is 35,971. The
average transaction price of used vehicles in our data is $15,317, compared to a price of $25,592 for
new vehicles. Furthermore, used vehicles are sold at the same dealerships by the same salespeople
as new vehicles. Finally, the customers who buy new vehicles and used vehicles are similar. The
average new vehicle buyer in our data comes from a Census block group with average income of
$58,211 while the average used vehicle buyer comes from a Census block group with average income
of $51,018.23
       We argue that the differences in the estimated effects of gasoline prices on new and used
vehicle markets arise instead from differences in the supply side of each market, and specifically,
differences in what lies upstream of the dealership for new and used vehicles. For new vehicles,
what is upstream of the dealership are the auto manufacturers, an oligopolistic set of suppliers who
produce differentiated products. This, combined with the local market power that at least some
dealerships have due to franchise boundaries, means that there is market power in the pricing of new
vehicles. When demand for a particular vehicle increases, manufacturers and dealers must choose
how to use that increase in demand to increase profits the most: by increasing the price of the
vehicle; by keeping the price of the vehicle about the same, but letting unit sales increase instead; or
by a mix of increasing price and quantity. (Similarly, when demand decreases, manufacturers and
dealers must choose whether to absorb the decrease by lowering prices, by allowing unit sales to fall,
or by some of each.) Which choice is better for profits depends on the shape of the demand curve
and the marginal cost curve, and on the nature of competition. As described in Busse (2012),
an increase in demand will lead to larger increases in equilibrium prices relative to equilibrium
quantities the more inelastic demand is, the steeper the marginal cost curve is, and the greater
the market power of the suppliers in the market.24 The results reported in Section 5 suggest
that manufacturers and dealers generally respond to gasoline price induced changes in demand by
making relatively small adjustments to prices, and allowing unit sales to change instead.25 This

  23
     See Table 16 for comparisons of other demographic characteristics between new vehicle and used vehicle buyers.
  24
     Conversely, and in the extreme, an increase in demand will increase only equilibrium quantities, with no change
in the price, if demand increases in a perfectly competitive market with constant marginal costs.
  25
     In Section 8, we investigate whether gasoline price effects differ when gasoline prices are high or low, when
they are increasing or decreasing, etc. In general, we find that the estimated effects don’t vary much across these


                                                        21
result indicates some combination of demand being somewhat elastic, marginal costs not being too
steep, and automobile manufacturers not having too much market power.
    For used vehicle markets, what is upstream of the dealership are wholesale automobile auctions.
According to a 2010 report of the National Auto Auction Association, there are 316 auto auctions
in North America. According to the same report, in most years in our sample between 9 and 10
million vehicles a year are sold at auction, and new vehicle dealerships acquire about a third of their
used vehicles at auction.26 An auto auction site typically holds weekly auctions, with the average-
sized facility running eight simultaneous auction lanes. The sellers at auto auctions include not only
dealers who are selling trade-ins they don’t want to sell at their own dealerships, but also financial
institutions (such as banks or manufacturer-affiliated lessors) who need to sell off lease returns and
fleet companies (such as car rental agencies) that wish to cycle cars out of service after a year or
two on the road. Buyers are primarily dealerships, both franchised new vehicle dealerships and
stand-alone used vehicle dealerships. New vehicle dealerships would typically attend the auction
every week, often acting as both a buyer and a seller on the same day. Because of this, auctions
have tremendous potential to transmit market price information quickly throughout a local market.
An auction also provides a way for dealerships to convert vehicles to cash and vice versa within a
short time frame at fairly low transaction cost.
    A second difference between new and used markets is that in used vehicle markets, gasoline
prices are relevant to the reservation price that both a buyer and a seller have for a vehicle. The
cost of driving for the owner of a low-MPG vehicle is going to increase with gasoline prices by
approximately the same amount as a potential buyer’s cost of driving that vehicle, assuming the
two drive approximately the same distance each year. If it is the case that the reservation price
of the potential buyers for vehicles in a given MPG bin change by about the same amount as the
reservation prices of the potential sellers of vehicles in that MPG bin, then it is not surprising that
the equilibrium prices would change by that same amount. In a simple supply and demand model,
if the reservation prices of buyers and sellers all fell by the same amount, the supply curve and the
demand curve would both shift down by the same amount, and the new equilibrium price would
be lower by the same amount as the reservation prices had fallen, leaving equilibrium quantities
the same. While this is almost certainly too simple a model for the used car market, it is not
implausible that the marginal buyers and sellers of particular vehicles might have similar driving
habits, meaning that at the margin, reservation prices for buyers and sellers would change similarly,
leading to a potentially large effect on equilibrium prices.
    The fact that gasoline prices have very different effects in new and used markets is relevant

conditions.
  26
     The biggest source of used vehicles for dealerships is trade-ins, which supply 50-60% of used vehicles.


                                                         22
for understanding how manufacturers and especially dealers are affected by changes in gasoline
prices, as we will describe more fully in the next section. However, these results also illustrate
a more general point, which is that the effect on market outcomes of events such as a change
in the price of a complementary good depends on the structure of the market itself. One area
in which this is particularly relevant is environmental economics. In recent years, environmental
policy has increasingly relied on price-based instruments (such as tradable permits) to accomplish
environmental objectives by influencing market outcomes, rather than by using direct command-
and-control mechanisms to determine those outcomes. Several recent papers have shown that the
effect of such environmental instruments depends on the structure of the target markets (Mansur
(2007), Busse and Keohane (2007), Fowlie (2010)). This paper suggests that the effect of a gasoline
tax or carbon tax, which would operate in vehicle markets by affecting the price of gasoline, would
depend on the structure of vehicle markets.


7    Winners and losers

Manufacturers differ considerably in the composition of their product mix. For example, Subaru’s
product line focuses on all-wheel-drive wagons, sedans, and crossovers. BMW’s product line focuses
on sports sedans. Even for the large American and Asian manufacturers, who offer a full product
line of compact cars, mid-size cars, luxury cars, sports cars, SUVs, pickups, and vans, manufacturers
differ in the vehicle segments in which they offer market-leading products, and therefore in which
segments they are most dependent upon for revenues and profitability.
    As a result, manufacturers will differ in their exposure to gasoline prices. A manufacturer
(or dealer) that typically makes a large share of its sales in SUVs and pickups is likely to be
hurt by gasoline price increases. A manufacturer (and its associated dealers) that sell market
leading compact and mid-size cars may be helped by a gasoline price increase. In this section we
investigate the implications of our estimates for different car companies, assessing who will be the
biggest winners and losers when gasoline prices change.
    Table 9 shows the breakdown of 11 major manufacturers’ sales by fuel economy bins.27 Stark
differences are apparent. During our sample period, at least 25% of the sales of Chrysler, Ford,
and GM were Bin 1 vehicles (MPG less than 16). Meanwhile BMW, Honda, Hyundai, Mazda, and
VW had no more than a few percentage points of sales of vehicles in this MPG range. On the other
end of the spectrum, for Honda, Hyundai, Mazda, and Toyota at least 30% of their sales were of
Bin 5 vehicles (at least 24 MPG). But this category of vehicles represented no more than 15% of

 27
    For manufacturers with multiple nameplates, Table 9 aggregates the sales across nameplates. For example,
Honda contains sales of Honda and Acura vehicles; GM contains sales of Chevrolet, Buick, GMC, and Cadillac.



                                                    23
the sales of BMW, Chrysler, Ford, GM, and Mercedes during our sample period.
   The distributions are even more lopsided if one compares sales shares in the bottom two bins to
those in the top two bins of fuel economy. More than half the vehicles sold by four manufacturers
have MPG of less than 19: Chrysler (70%), Ford (61%), GM (52%) and Mercedes (51%). At the
same time, for five manufacturers at least half their sales are of vehicles with MPG of more than
21: Mazda (63%), Hyundai (65%), Toyota (64%), Honda (75%), and VW (80%).
   While these differences are inter-company differences, there are some striking similarities across
companies who are headquartered on the same continent. The second panel of Table 9 shows the
breakdown of sales across fuel economy bins after aggregating to region-of-origin for Asian (Honda,
Hyundai, Mazda, Nissan, Toyota), European (BMW, Mercedes, VW), and U.S. (Chrysler, Ford,
GM) manufacturers. Asian manufacturers as a whole sell mostly cars in the top two bins, U.S.
manufacturers in the bottom two bins, and European manufacturers in the middle three bins.

          Table 9: New Cars: Distribution of manufacturers’ sales across fuel economy
          bins

                      MPG Bin 1     MPG Bin 2     MPG Bin 3     MPG Bin 4      MPG Bin 5
                      [0,16) MPG   [16-19) MPG   [19-21) MPG   [21-24) MPG    [24-∞) MPG
           BMW           2.4%          21%            47%          15%            15%
           Chrysler       32%          38%            15%          8.4%          6.4%
           Ford           34%          27%            15%          11%            13%
           GM             26%          26%            16%          18%           14%
           Honda        .0047%         12%            13%          31%            44%
           Hyundai       1.6%          14%            19%          19%            46%
           Mazda         .36%          22%            15%          27%           36%
           Mercedes       13%          38%            30%          19%           .59%
           Nissan         12%          17%            22%          25%            25%
           Toyota        7.8%          14%            14%          21%            43%
           VW            1.6%          7.3%           11%          49%            31%
           Asia          5.3%          14%            16%          25%           40%
           Europe        4.5%          19%            26%          32%           19%
           U.S.          30%           29%            16%          13%           12%



   Using the information in Table 9 on the sales mix of different manufacturers’ vehicles, we can
construct back-of-the-envelope estimates of who wins and loses, and by how much, when gasoline
prices change. In particular, our transaction data record the negotiated retail prices that customers
pay dealers for individual vehicles and also the wholesale prices that dealers pay manufacturers for
those same vehicles. Meanwhile, the transaction data and the Ward’s data on total industry sales
allows us to construct measures of market shares and unit sales, as described in previous sections.
Putting these pieces of information together, we can construct measures of retail sales (retail price
× quantity), manufacturer revenue (wholesale price × quantity), and dealer net revenues ([retail
price – wholesale price] × quantity). (We cannot calculate manufacturer net revenues because we


                                                 24
do not have a marginal cost measure for manufacturing vehicles.)
   Our aim in this section will not be to re-create what happened to industry, manufacturer, and
dealer revenues over time; many of these figures could simply be looked up in industry statistical
sources or in manufacturer annual reports. Rather, our aim is to extrapolate, based on our esti-
mates, how much a $1 increase in the price of gasoline would be predicted to change, all else equal,
manufacturer revenues and dealer net revenues in this industry. This could be loosely interpreted
as an attempt to form a rough estimate of what portion of the changes in manufacturer and dealer
revenues during the recent period of gasoline price increases was attributable to changes in gasoline
prices.
   We will begin by constructing a “benchmark” measure of manufacturer revenue, based on
sample averages, using elements reported in Table 10. This benchmark measure begins with the
average (across all years in the sample) share of each manufacturer’s sales in each of the five fuel
economy bins. For example, Table 10 shows that, over all years in the sample, 2.4% of the new
BMW vehicles sold in the U.S. were in fuel economy Bin 1, 21% were in Bin 2, and so on. Next,
we multiply these bin-shares by the manufacturer’s average (across all years in the sample) total
unit sales to obtain the manufacturer’s benchmark sales volume in each bin. As Table 10 indicates,
over all years in the sample, there were an average of 252,576 new BMW vehicles sold per year
in the U.S.; the bin-shares imply that 6,050 (or 2.4%) of those vehicles were in Bin 1, 53,328
vehicles per year (21%) were in Bin 2, and so on. Next, we obtain a benchmark price, which is the
average retail price (across all years in the sample) of each manufacturer’s vehicles in each bin. As
Table 10 reports, the average price of new BMW vehicles in Bin 1, over all years in the sample, was
$73,452; the average price of new BMW vehicles in Bin 2 was $58,797, and so on. Multiplying the
benchmark retail price in each bin by the benchmark unit sales in each bin gives us the benchmark
retail revenue generated by the sales of each manufacturer’s vehicles in each bin. For example,
according to Table 10, the benchmark annual retail sales value of new BMW vehicles in Bin 1
was $444 million (6,050 × $73,452). Summing across bins yields a benchmark total annual retail
revenue generated by sales of each manufacturer’s vehicles. For BMW, this is $11.275 billion.
   In the bottom panel of Table 10, we aggregate to the region-of-origin level. For example, the
table indicates that on average across years in the sample, 5.3% of the new vehicles sold by Asian
manufacturers (Honda, Hyundai, Mazda, and Nissan) were vehicles in Bin 1. This corresponds
to a benchmark of 263,466 vehicles per year in this bin, given an average annual total sales by
these manufacturers across all bins of 4,954,461 vehicles per year. Vehicles in Bin 1 made by Asian
manufacturers have an average price of $33,149. Taken together, these elements yield a benchmark
annual retail sales of $8.734 billion dollars for vehicles in Bin 1 made by Asian manufacturers.
   We can construct a measure of benchmark manufacturer revenues (as opposed to retail revenues)


                                                 25
by using wholesale prices in place of retail prices. We can also construct a measure of benchmark
dealer net revenues by using dealer margins in place of retail prices. (Note that dealer net revenues
should be interpreted as net revenues accruing to dealers in aggregate from sales of a particular
manufacturer’s vehicles.) Table A-12 reports the average wholesale prices and dealer margins by
manufacturer and bin that are inputs to these two calculations.
       Our next step is to construct a back-of-the-envelope “counter-factual” measures of retail rev-
enues, manufacturer revenues, and dealer net revenues based on estimates of the changes in prices
and quantities in each fuel economy bin implied by a $1 increase in gasoline prices.28 In doing so,
we could use the coefficients we estimated in Section 5 in order to estimate the implied changes in
retail prices and sales in each bin for each manufacturer when gasoline prices rise by $1. However,
we note that Table 9 shows strong region-of-origin differences among manufacturers in the kinds of
vehicles they produce, and we wish to allow for there to be corresponding differences in the effect
of gasoline prices by manufacturer region-of-origin. We accommodate this by estimating Equa-
tions 5 and 6 separately by manufacturer region-of-origin (U.S., Asia, and Europe). In addition,
we estimate the effect of gasoline prices on wholesale prices and on dealer margins by estimating
Equation 6 first with wholesale prices, and then with with dealer margins, in place of retail prices.29
       The results of these regressions are reported in Tables A-8, A-9, A-10, and A-11. Summarizing
briefly, these results suggest that when gasoline prices increase, the unit sales of high fuel economy
Asian and European vehicles rise, while sales of their low fuel economy vehicles fall by roughly
equal proportions. For U.S. manufacturers, however, sales of low fuel economy vehicles fall, with
only a very small gain in sales of high fuel economy vehicles. This reflects a widely-held opinion
that U.S. manufacturers did not offer appealing small cars during our sample period.
       The results also suggest that gasoline prices have somewhat different effects on retail prices,
wholesale prices, and dealer margins for manufacturers of different regions-of-origin. The results in
Table A-9 indicate that when gasoline prices increase, the prices of high fuel economy vehicles (Bin
5) increase by about twice as much relative to those with low fuel economy (Bin 1) for European
manufacturers as they do for Asian and U.S. manufacturers. Table A-10 suggests that the wholesale
prices of high fuel economy vehicles relative to low fuel economy vehicles increase with gasoline
prices by the most for U.S. manufacturers, followed by European and then Asian manufacturers.

  28
      Note that this should not be interpreted as a full-blown counter-factual simulation such as one could obtain from
a structural estimate of primitive parameters and a fully specified equilibrium model.
   29
      We would like our measure of wholesale price to capture the incremental revenue the manufacturer received when
it sold the vehicle to the manufacturer. In order to accomplish this we define wholesale price as the invoice price
for the vehicle minus the “dealer holdback” (a profit margin that the manufacturer tries to guarantee the dealer by
leaving it out of the invoice price) minus any direct-to-dealer or direct-to-customer rebates the manufacturer pays
when the car is sold. The dealer margin is equal to the retail price minus the wholesale price, which in turn is equal
to the price the dealer negotiates with the customer minus the invoice price the dealer pays for the vehicle, plus the
dealer holdback and any direct-to-dealer rebates.


                                                          26
Table 10: New Cars: Benchmark shares, sales units, retail prices, and retail revenues by MPG bin†

              Variable          MPG Bin 1       MPG Bin 2     MPG Bin 3     MPG Bin 4     MPG Bin 5     Total/Average
    BMW       Bin Share                2.4%            21%           47%           15%           15%             100%
              Sales units              6,050         53,328       118,460        37,489        37,249          252,576
              Retail prices        $ 73,452        $ 58,797      $ 43,347      $ 42,032      $ 26,437         $ 44,641
              Retail revenues      $ 444 M       $ 3,136 M     $ 5,135 M     $ 1,576 M       $ 985 M       $ 11,275 M
Chrysler      Bin Share                 32%            38%           15%          8.4%          6.4%             100%
              Sales units           701,014         848,992       344,477       186,462       141,881        2,222,825
              Retail prices        $ 26,735        $ 25,323      $ 23,323      $ 19,321      $ 15,718         $ 24,342
              Retail revenues   $ 18,742 M      $ 21,499 M     $ 8,034 M     $ 3,603 M     $ 2,230 M       $ 54,107 M
    Ford      Bin Share                 34%            27%           15%           11%           13%             100%
              Sales units          1068268          852,668       484,253       356,481       408,328        3,169,998
              Retail prices        $ 28,925        $ 25,346      $ 23,259      $ 21,712      $ 16,521         $ 24,688
              Retail revenues   $ 30,899 M      $ 21,612 M    $ 11,263 M     $ 7,740 M     $ 6,746 M       $ 78,260 M
     GM       Bin Share                 26%            26%           16%           18%           14%             100%
              Sales units          1155911         1122793        719,061       788,493       608,757        4,395,015
              Retail prices        $ 32,946        $ 28,561      $ 29,113      $ 20,299      $ 16,198         $ 26,610
              Retail revenues   $ 38,083 M      $ 32,068 M    $ 20,934 M    $ 16,006 M     $ 9,861 M      $ 116,952 M
    Honda     Bin Share             .0047%             12%           13%           31%           44%             100%
              Sales units                 62        158,256       164,768       410,448       575,304        1,308,837
              Retail prices        $ 30,966        $ 32,912      $ 29,447      $ 23,927      $ 19,061         $ 23,570
              Retail revenues       $ 1.9 M      $ 5,208 M     $ 4,852 M     $ 9,821 M    $ 10,966 M       $ 30,849 M
Hyundai       Bin Share                1.6%            14%           19%           19%           46%             100%
              Sales units              9,277         81,023       111,405       106,385       265,908          573,998
              Retail prices        $ 23,176        $ 21,223      $ 20,843      $ 17,366      $ 15,141         $ 17,648
              Retail revenues      $ 215 M       $ 1,720 M     $ 2,322 M     $ 1,848 M     $ 4,026 M       $ 10,130 M
    Mazda     Bin Share                .36%            22%           15%           27%           36%             100%
              Sales units                950         58,336        38,918        70,373        93,017          261,593
              Retail prices        $ 21,113        $ 24,963      $ 22,553      $ 19,934      $ 17,603         $ 20,621
              Retail revenues        $ 20 M      $ 1,456 M       $ 878 M     $ 1,403 M     $ 1,637 M        $ 5,394 M
Mercedes      Bin Share                 13%            38%           30%           19%          .59%             100%
              Sales units             27,484         83,601        64,906        40,857         1,297          218,145
              Retail prices        $ 67,526        $ 60,833      $ 47,185      $ 39,914      $ 51,988         $ 53,645
              Retail revenues    $ 1,856 M       $ 5,086 M     $ 3,063 M     $ 1,631 M        $ 67 M       $ 11,702 M
    Nissan    Bin Share                 12%            17%           22%           25%           25%             100%
              Sales units           105,367         142,740       184,379       211,326       209,791          853,603
              Retail prices        $ 30,051        $ 27,829      $ 29,889      $ 23,045      $ 18,320         $ 25,027
              Retail revenues    $ 3,166 M       $ 3,972 M     $ 5,511 M     $ 4,870 M     $ 3,843 M       $ 21,363 M
    Toyota    Bin Share                7.8%            14%           14%           21%           43%             100%
              Sales units           153,391         276,794       275,712       413,964       836,568        1,956,429
              Retail prices        $ 36,389        $ 29,258      $ 31,845      $ 28,064      $ 19,808         $ 25,888
              Retail revenues    $ 5,582 M       $ 8,099 M     $ 8,780 M    $ 11,618 M    $ 16,571 M       $ 50,649 M
     VW       Bin Share                1.6%           7.3%           11%           49%           31%             100%
              Sales units              5,748         26,123        39,840       174,878       111,409          357,997
              Retail prices        $ 52,356        $ 43,228      $ 33,938      $ 24,266      $ 23,815         $ 27,036
              Retail revenues      $ 301 M       $ 1,129 M     $ 1,352 M     $ 4,244 M     $ 2,653 M        $ 9,679 M
     Asia     Bin Share                5.3%            14%           16%           25%           40%             100%
              Sales units           263,466         714,861       776,699     1,229,854     1,969,581        4,954,461
              Retail prices        $ 33,149        $ 28,649      $ 28,832      $ 24,274      $ 18,695         $ 23,874
              Retail revenues    $ 8,734 M      $ 20,480 M    $ 22,394 M    $ 29,853 M    $ 36,822 M      $ 118,282 M
Europe        Bin Share                4.5%            19%           26%           32%           19%             100%
              Sales units             37,247        155,126       213,267       264,801       158,277          828,718
              Retail prices        $ 65,840        $ 56,922      $ 42,489      $ 28,818      $ 24,598         $ 38,455
              Retail revenues    $ 2,452 M       $ 8,830 M     $ 9,061 M     $ 7,631 M     $ 3,893 M       $ 31,868 M
     U.S.     Bin Share                 30%            29%           16%           13%           12%             100%
              Sales units         2,929,684       2,859,802     1,546,850     1,313,154     1,138,347        9,787,837
              Retail prices        $ 29,865        $ 26,558      $ 25,905      $ 20,507      $ 16,241         $ 25,433
              Retail revenues   $ 87,494 M      $ 75,952 M    $ 40,072 M    $ 26,929 M    $ 18,488 M      $ 248,934 M
†
    All calculations based on sample averages



                                                        27
Finally, according to Table A-11, when gasoline prices increase, the dealer margins for high fuel
economy vehicles increase by more than $500 relative to the dealer margins for low fuel economy
vehicles for European manufacturers; by $136 for Asian manufacturers; and that dealer margins
for high fuel economy vehicles fall relative to the margins for low fuel economy vehicles for U.S.
manufacturers.
   In Table 11, we report the changes in retail revenues implied by our estimates in Tables A-8
and A-9 for a $1 increase in gasoline prices. The top line of each row reports the implied change
in retail revenue arising from sales of an individual manufacturer’s vehicles in that fuel economy
bin. For example, the first entry indicates that when gasoline prices go up by $1, the retail revenue
generated by sales of BMW vehicles in Bin 1 is implied to fall by $203 million. (This number is
the outcome of the benchmark retail price of $73,452 for Bin 1 BMW vehicles (Table 10, column
1, row 3) falling by $802 (Table A-9, column 2, row 1) and the average sales volume of 6,050
(Table 10, column 1, row 2) falling by 45% (Table A-8, panel 2, row 1).) A fall of $203 million is
a 46% decrease compared to a benchmark retail revenue of $444 million (Table 10, column 1, row
4) generated by BMW sales of vehicles in this bin.
   In the last column of Table 11, we add up the implied revenue changes for each bin to obtain
the total retail revenue change implied for the sales of an individual manufacturer’s vehicles when
gasoline prices rise by $1. The second entry for each manufacturer in this column calculates the
percentage change relative to the benchmark retail revenue reported in the last column of Table 10
(row 4 of each manufacturer’s entry). These implied revenue changes differ across manufacturers
for two reasons. First, manufacturers differ in the distribution of their sales across fuel economy
bin. Second, our estimates allow gasoline prices to have different effects by manufacturer region-
of-origin. Table 11 indicates that the retail sales of U.S. manufacturers (Chrysler, Ford, and GM)
decrease the most when gasoline prices increase by $1, both in absolute levels ($11-19 billion),
and in percentage terms (16-20%). Retail sales of Mercedes and Nissan vehicles also decrease
substantially (by 9.3 and 11% respectively), while the retail revenues generated by sales of most
other manufacturers’ vehicles fall by less than 5%. The one exception is VW; the retail revenue
generated by sales of VW vehicles actually rise when gasoline prices increase by $1, by about $1.3
billion, or 13%. (This arises because 80% of VW’s benchmark sales are vehicles in the two highest
fuel economy bins.)
   In the lower panel of Table 11, we calculate the implied retail revenue effects of a $1 gasoline
price increase if we aggregate to manufacturer region-of-origin. The retail revenues arising from
sales of U.S. manufacturers’ vehicles are implied to decrease by $44.5 billion (18%) when gasoline
prices increase by $1, while the retail revenues from the sale of Asian manufacturers’ vehicles are
implied to fall by $5.9 billion (5%). Retail revenues from the sale of European manufacturers’


                                                 28
              Table 11: New Cars: Retail revenue changes implied by $1 increase in gasoline prices†

                Implied               MPG Bin 1      MPG Bin 2     MPG Bin 3     MPG Bin 4    MPG Bin 5          Total
     BMW        ∆   Retail revenues      $ -203 M         $ 90 M     $ -662 M        $ 85 M      $ 493 M      $ -197 M
                %   change                    -46%          2.9%          -13%         5.4%          50%          -1.7%
 Chrysler       ∆   Retail revenues    $ -5,482 M     $ -5,072 M     $ -649 M       $ 227 M       $ 66 M   $ -10,910 M
                %   change                    -29%          -24%         -8.1%         6.3%           3%           -20%
     Ford       ∆   Retail revenues    $ -9,019 M     $ -5,098 M     $ -909 M       $ 475 M      $ 194 M   $ -14,357 M
                %   change                    -29%          -24%         -8.1%         6.1%         2.9%           -18%
      GM        ∆   Retail revenues   $ -11,079 M     $ -7,562 M   $ -1,717 M       $ 996 M      $ 288 M   $ -19,074 M
                %   change                    -29%          -24%         -8.2%         6.2%         2.9%           -16%
     Honda      ∆   Retail revenues       $ -.44 M      $ -669 M   $ -1,105 M    $ -1,566 M    $ 2,570 M      $ -770 M
                %   change                    -23%          -13%          -23%         -16%          23%          -2.5%
 Hyundai        ∆   Retail revenues        $ -51 M      $ -226 M     $ -530 M      $ -291 M      $ 962 M      $ -136 M
                %   change                    -24%          -13%          -23%         -16%          24%          -1.3%
     Mazda      ∆   Retail revenues       $ -4.8 M      $ -190 M     $ -200 M      $ -222 M      $ 386 M      $ -231 M
                %   change                    -24%          -13%          -23%         -16%          24%          -4.3%
 Mercedes       ∆   Retail revenues      $ -847 M        $ 149 M     $ -394 M        $ 88 M       $ 33 M      $ -972 M
                %   change                    -46%          2.9%          -13%         5.4%          49%          -8.3%
     Nissan     ∆   Retail revenues      $ -739 M       $ -515 M   $ -1,255 M      $ -776 M      $ 903 M    $ -2,380 M
                %   change                    -23%          -13%          -23%         -16%          24%           -11%
     Toyota     ∆   Retail revenues    $ -1,294 M     $ -1,046 M   $ -1,998 M    $ -1,862 M    $ 3,873 M    $ -2,327 M
                %   change                    -23%          -13%          -23%         -16%          23%          -4.6%
      VW        ∆   Retail revenues      $ -138 M         $ 27 M     $ -176 M       $ 238 M    $ 1,336 M     $ 1,287 M
                %   change                    -46%          2.4%          -13%         5.6%          50%            13%
      Asia      ∆   retail revenues    $ -2,031 M     $ -2,649 M   $ -5,100 M    $ -4,762 M    $ 8,642 M    $ -5,900 M
                %   change                   -23%           -13%          -23%         -16%          23%           -5%
  Europe        ∆   Retail revenues    $ -1,120 M        $ 250 M   $ -1,170 M       $ 422 M    $ 1,956 M       $ 339 M
                %   change                   -46%           2.8%          -13%         5.5%          50%          1.1%
      U.S.      ∆   Retail revenues   $ -25,515 M    $ -17,914 M   $ -3,261 M     $ 1,672 M      $ 538 M   $ -44,481 M
                %   change                   -29%           -24%         -8.1%         6.2%         2.9%          -18%
 †
     All calculations based on sample averages


vehicles are implied to rise by $339 million (1.1%), driven mostly by VW.
      In order to calculate the implied effect of gasoline price increases on manufacturer revenues
and on dealer net revenues from the sale of new cars, we can repeat the analysis we carried out in
Table 11, with two changes. To calculate the implied effect on manufacturer revenue, we replace
benchmark retail prices with benchmark wholesale prices (Table A-12, row 2 for each manufacturer),
and replace estimated effects of gasoline prices on retail prices with estimated effects of gasoline
prices on wholesale prices (Table A-10). (The unit sales benchmark and unit sales effects are the
same as we used to calculate the implied retail revenue effects.) To calculate the implied effect on
dealer net revenue, we redo the analysis with benchmark dealer margins (Table A-12, row 3 for
each manufacturer) and estimated effects of gasoline prices on dealer margins (Table A-11).
      These implied effects are reported in Table 12. The first panel of Table 12 repeats the implied
changes for retail revenues that were reported in the last column of Table 11; the next two panels
report the analogous results for the implied changes in manufacturer revenues and dealer net
revenues.


                                                          29
   The results show some interesting patterns across manufacturers. The first is that the changes
in manufacturer revenues are closely proportional to the changes in retail revenues. In every
case, the percentage change in manufacturer revenue is within 1 percentage point of the implied
change in retail revenue. This is not entirely surprising, given that the unit sales of new vehicles
change much more in response to changes in gasoline prices than prices do, and that changes in
unit sales are part of both retail and manufacturer revenues. However, the relationship between
manufacturer revenues and dealer net revenues is much less consistent across manufacturers. The
starkest contrast is between the Big Three U.S. manufacturers and all other manufacturers. For
each of the U.S. manufacturers, when gasoline prices increase, dealer net revenues are implied to
fall by less (as a percentage) than do manufacturer revenues. Since manufacturers and dealers are
equally exposed to changes in sales, this suggests that manufacturers are to some extent insulating
their dealers from the effect of gasoline price increases by some means such as increasing direct-
to-dealer rebates or dealer holdback. The results indicate that Chrysler’s revenues are implied to
decrease by 20% when gasoline prices increase, while the figure is 19% for Ford and 17% for GM.
The net revenues from sales of new vehicles for their respective dealership networks fall by 15%,
13% and 11% respectively.
   For Asian and European manufacturers, however, dealer net revenues fall by more relative to
their benchmark than do manufacturer revenues when gasoline prices increase. (For VW, whose
revenues rise when gasoline prices rise, the net revenues of dealers rise by less in percentage terms
than do VW’s revenues.) For most of the manufacturers, the difference is about 4 to 5 percentage
points. The biggest difference is for Mercedes. When gasoline prices rise by $1, the revenues of
Mercedes are implied to fall by 7.6% relative to benchmark revenues, but the net revenues accruing
to dealers from the sales of new Mercedes vehicles is implied to fall by 27% relative to benchmark
net revenues. This suggests that Asian and European manufacturers are doing much less than
their U.S. counterparts to adjust pricing instruments between themselves and their dealers so as
to insulate dealers from the effect of higher gasoline prices.
   In order to understand the effect of gasoline prices on dealers as well as manufacturers, we
need to understand the effect of gasoline prices on the used car market, and particularly the effect
of gasoline prices on dealer net revenues arising from the sale of used vehicles. We can redo the
analysis that underlies Table 12 using data on the unit sales, retail prices, wholesale prices, and
dealer margins of used vehicles. Table A-13 presents the benchmark values of unit sales, retail prices
and retail revenues for used vehicles by MPG bin. Table A-14 reports wholesale prices and dealer
margins by bin. (Note that for used vehicles, wholesale price is not revenue for auto manufacturers;
instead it is either the price at which the dealership acquired the vehicle at auction, or the dealer’s
estimate of the market value of the car made at the point that it was accepted as a trade-in.) In


                                                  30
             Table 12: New Cars: Revenue changes implied by a $1 gasoline price increase

                                 Implied                  Implied                     Implied
                                ∆ Retail        %       ∆ Manuf.          %         ∆ Dealer           %
                                Revenues    Change       Revenues     Change     Net Revenues      Change
               BMW              $ -197 M      -1.7%       $ -146 M      -1.4%          $ -52   M     -9.8%
               Chrysler      $ -10,910 M       -20%    $ -10,574 M       -20%         $ -334   M      -15%
               Ford          $ -14,357 M       -18%    $ -13,887 M       -19%         $ -469   M      -13%
               GM            $ -19,074 M       -16%    $ -18,440 M       -17%         $ -631   M      -11%
               Honda            $ -770 M      -2.5%       $ -665 M      -2.3%         $ -106   M     -7.1%
               Hyundai          $ -136 M      -1.3%       $ -116 M      -1.2%          $ -20   M     -5.9%
               Mazda            $ -231 M      -4.3%       $ -211 M      -4.1%          $ -19   M      -10%
               Mercedes         $ -972 M      -8.3%       $ -860 M      -7.6%         $ -112   M      -27%
               Nissan         $ -2,380 M       -11%     $ -2,217 M       -11%         $ -163   M      -18%
               Toyota         $ -2,327 M      -4.6%     $ -2,147 M      -4.4%         $ -180   M     -8.1%
               VW              $ 1,287 M        13%      $ 1,269 M        14%           $ 18   M      4.4%
               Asia           $ -5,900 M       -5%      $ -5,404 M      -4.8%         $ -495 M       -9.6%
               Europe            $ 339 M      1.1%         $ 470 M       1.5%         $ -131 M       -9.9%
               U.S.          $ -44,481 M      -18%     $ -43,040 M       -18%       $ -1,435 M        -12%
               †
                   All calculations based on sample averages


Table A-15 we show the implied effect by fuel economy bin of a $1 gasoline price increase on retail
revenues arising from the sale of used vehicles. Finally, in Table 13, we show the implied effect of
a $1 gasoline price increase on all three revenue measures: retail revenue, wholesale revenue, and
dealer net revenue.30
       The retail revenues from sales of used vehicles echo, to some extent, the patterns for new vehicle
sales. For new vehicles, the changes implied by a $1 increase in gasoline prices for retail revenues
were small to moderate decreases for Asian and European manufacturers, and large decreases
for U.S. manufacturers. For used vehicles, the implied effects are decreases of 6.3 to 8.5% for
vehicles made by U.S. manufacturers and smaller decreases (for BMW, Mercedes, and Nissan) or
increases of 1.4 to 6.1% for the other manufacturers, with Honda vehicles experiencing the biggest
implied retail revenue increases. These effects are mirrored fairly closely in the wholesale revenues,
indicating that auction prices (or dealers’ assessments of market values) track retail prices fairly
closely.
       The most interesting comparison is between the implied change in dealer net revenues arising
from sales of used vehicles (Panel 3 of Table 13) and the implied change in dealer net revenues
arising from sales of new vehicles (Panel 3 of Table 12). This comparison shows that dealer net
revenues from the sale of used vehicles made by U.S. manufacturers are implied to fall by almost as
much in percentage terms (and for Ford and GM vehicles, by more in dollar terms) when gasoline
prices increase as do dealer net revenues from sales of new vehicles by the same manufacturer.

  30
   The estimates of the effect of gasoline prices on used vehicle unit sales, retail prices, wholesale prices, and dealer
margin by manufacturer region-of-origin, which are inputs to the results in Table 13, are contained in Tables A-16,
A-17, A-18, and A-19.


                                                           31
The same is not true for used and new vehicles made by Asian and European manufacturers. The
difference is particularly stark for vehicles made by Honda, Hyundai, Mazda, and Toyota. While
the dealer net revenues from sales of new vehicles made by these manufacturers are implied to fall
by 5.9 to 10% relative to benchmark dealer net revenues when gasoline prices rise by $1, the dealer
net revenues from sales of used vehicles made by these manufacturers are implied to increase by 4.7
to 8.8% when gasoline prices rise. Because used vehicles can be sold by a dealer of any nameplate
(e.g. a Ford dealer could sell a used Honda), the change in dealer net revenues from the sale of
used Honda vehicles does not correspond directly to the change in dealer net revenues at Honda
dealerships. Still, a dealership sells a fairly high proportion of used vehicles that are the nameplate
of its dealership compared to other nameplates. So these results suggest, very loosely, that some
dealerships are able to compensate for reduced new vehicle net revenues with larger used vehicle
net revenues when gasoline prices increase.

          Table 13: Used Cars: Revenue changes implied by a $1 gasoline price increase

                           Implied                    Implied                   Implied
                          ∆ Retail         %      ∆ Wholesale         %       ∆ Dealer        %
                          Revenues     Change        Revenues     Change   Net Revenues   Change
           BMW             $ -162 M      -3.8%         $ -170 M    -4.3%        $ 7.5 M       2.3
           Chrysler      $ -2,200 M      -8.1%       $ -1,877 M    -7.9%       $ -323 M       -10
           Ford          $ -3,795 M      -8.5%       $ -3,260 M    -8.3%       $ -535 M       -10
           GM            $ -3,818 M      -6.3%       $ -3,123 M    -5.9%       $ -695 M      -9.9
           Honda            $ 490 M       6.1%          $ 422 M     5.8%         $ 69 M       8.8
           Hyundai          $ 147 M       5.5%          $ 123 M     5.4%         $ 23 M       6.3
           Mazda             $ 87 M       4.3%           $ 74 M     4.2%         $ 13 M       5.7
           Mercedes        $ -220 M      -5.4%         $ -222 M    -5.9%          $2M         .64
           Nissan          $ -132 M      -1.7%         $ -142 M      -2%        $ 9.6 M       1.2
           Toyota           $ 218 M       1.4%          $ 150 M     1.1%         $ 68 M       4.7
           VW               $ 169 M       5.5%          $ 132 M     4.8%         $ 37 M        12
           Asia             $ 852 M       2.4%          $ 665 M       2%        $ 186 M      5.2
           Europe          $ -177 M      -1.6%         $ -226 M    -2.2%         $ 49 M      5.3
           U.S.          $ -9,836 M      -7.5%       $ -8,283 M    -7.1%     $ -1,553 M      -10
           †
               All calculations based on sample averages


   The above calculations estimate the revenue effects taking the average distribution of sales
across bins—averaged over our entire sample. We push these results in two directions. First, we
calculate what these imply for changes in profitability, under a variety of assumptions regarding
own-price elasticities. Second, we calculate the implied changes in revenues and profits at different
points in time. We stress throughout that these represent back-of-the-envelope calculations and
therefore come with a number of caveats. A comprehensive estimation of the impact of changes of
gasoline prices on revenues and profitability would require a structural model of three primitives
of the industry: the demand for vehicles, the marginal costs of production, and costs associated
with changing the product mix of vehicles offered by a manufacturer. These are beyond the scope


                                                           32
of this paper, but our reduced form estimates allow us to approximate these relationships.
    Abstracting away from the multi-product nature of the firms, given assumptions on the own-
price elasticities of vehicles, we can calculate what the changes in manufacturer prices and sales
imply for changes in profitability. To implement this, we use assumptions on own-price elasticities,
consistent with the demand estimation literature, to “identify” vehicle marginal costs. Given the
new set of prices and quantities from our reduced form impacts, we can calculate the change in
profits.31 As with the revenue impacts we do this by firm and also across regions-of-origin.
    Figures 3, 4, and 5 illustrate that the distribution of sales across bins changed considerably
over our sample. We can see evidence in the raw data of a shift towards higher fuel economy cars
that started in 2006 and that for European and U.S. manufacturers seems to have accelerated after
the beginning of the economic crisis. During the first half of our sample—from 1998 to 2004—the
share of sales of Asian manufacturers’ vehicles that were in Bin 5 of the fuel economy distribution
averaged 29%. By 2010, Asian manufacturers increased the share of Bin 5 sales to over 57%,
while Bin 1 and 2 sales fell to levels below their 1998 levels. The sales mix of European and U.S.
manufacturers changed even more drastically. During the first half of the sample the percentage
of Bin 5 vehicles sold by European manufacturers average only 7.2%. By 2010, this increased to
38.6%. The bulk of this increase came from a reduction in the sales of Bin 4 vehicles (falling from
20.1% to 11.1%), but both Bin 2 and 3 vehicles sales also fell.
    The pattern of U.S. manufacturers is slightly different. The share of vehicles in Bins 5 and
4 increased dramatically, with the share in Bin 5 increasing from an average of 8.0% during the
first half of the sample to 19.5% in 2010. Unlike Asian and European sales, this increase came
predominantly from a reduction in Bin 1 sales; the average share of Bin 1 sales was 36.1% during
the first half of the sample, while it was only 10.7% in 2010.
    The observed changes in the distribution of sales is a result of changes in both consumer
preferences and shifts in the products offered by manufacturers as a response to these changes
in preferences. Figures A-1, A-2, and A-3, in the appendix, provide similar graphs based on the
cars offered by manufacturer, rather than the sales-weighted graphs above. These figures suggest
that manufacturers did indeed change the mix of vehicles that they offered over this time period.32
If we believe that the changes in distributions represent, at least in part, conscious decisions by
manufacturer to change the mix of vehicles they offer, then comparing the different affects of

  31
     We assume that marginal costs do not change over time. This may not be true in reality for two countervailing
reasons. On the one hand, technological progress is driving down the cost of offering more fuel-efficient vehicles.
On the other hand, firms may have increased the amount of costly technology embedded in vehicles over this time
period.
  32
     Given that we have fixed the cut-offs for each bin, technological progress will tend to push manufacturers to
higher bins independent of changes in gasoline prices, but the observed rate is much faster than that would be
predicted by the results in Knittel (2011).


                                                        33
            Figure 3: Annual share of new vehicles sold by bin, Asian manufacturers



                                                Asian Manufacturers
                                            Shares of vehicle sold by MPG bin

                     100
                     80
                 Percentage




                                                                                                 MPG Bin 5
                        60




                                                                                                 MPG Bin 4
                                                                                                 MPG Bin 3
                                                                                                 MPG Bin 2
                                                                                                 MPG Bin 1
                40   20
                     0




                              1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                                                           Year




          Figure 4: Annual share of new vehicles sold by bin, European manufacturers



                                             European Manufacturers
                                            Shares of vehicle sold by MPG bin
                     100
                     80
                 Percentage




                                                                                                 MPG Bin 5
                        60




                                                                                                 MPG Bin 4
                                                                                                 MPG Bin 3
                                                                                                 MPG Bin 2
                                                                                                 MPG Bin 1
                40   20
                     0




                              1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                                                           Year




gasoline prices at points in time gives some indication of the differences in the degree to which
manufacturers insulated themselves from additional increases in gasoline prices. Alternatively, if
we observe one manufacturer shifting its distribution considerably more than another, this may


                                                               34
              Figure 5: Annual share of new vehicles sold by bin, U.S. manufacturers



                                                  US Manufacturers
                                             Shares of vehicle sold by MPG bin

                      100
                      80
                  Percentage




                                                                                                  MPG Bin 5
                         60




                                                                                                  MPG Bin 4
                                                                                                  MPG Bin 3
                                                                                                  MPG Bin 2
                                                                                                  MPG Bin 1
                 40   20
                      0




                               1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                                                            Year




indicate that manufacturers vary in their ability to increase offerings of higher fuel economy vehicles.
   To understand the implications of these distributional shifts, we calculate the change in revenues
for the observed distribution of bin sales for 2002—the year just prior to gasoline prices beginning
their rise—and 2010—the last full year of data in our sample—by manufacturer and origin. We also
calculate the implied change in profits under a variety of assumptions on the own-price elasticity.
Given that the manufacturers are making product offering decisions, we focus on the effects on
manufacturers. To calculate the change in profits, we calculate the implied markup prior to a $1
increase in gasoline prices:
                                                        P − mc  1
                                                               = ,                                            (7)
                                                          P     η
where η is the assumed own-price elasticity. We then reduce this markup by our set estimated price
impact and combine this with our estimates on the sales effect to calculate the implied change in
profits. For example, if we estimate that the effect of a $1 change in gasoline prices on the price of
a given vehicle is to reduce its price by X, the new markup is estimated to be the mark up given
by equation (7) minus X. We report the estimated profit impacts for own-price elasticities of -4,
-5, and -6. These are consistent with those estimates, for example, in Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes
(1995).
   Table 14 reports manufacturer-specific changes in revenues using the distribution of sales in
2002, while Table 15 reports manufacturer-specific changes in revenues using the distribution of


                                                                35
sales in 2010.
Table 14: New Cars: Revenue and profit changes implied by a $1 gasoline price increase in 2002

                      Implied                     Implied                    Implied                    Implied
                     ∆ Manuf.         %        ∆ Manuf.            %      ∆ Manuf.             %     ∆ Manuf.             %
                     Revenues     Change           Profits Change             Profits Change             Profits Change
                                                 Elasticity of 4             Elasticity of 5             Elasticity of 6
 BMW                 $ -995 M      -8.9%        $ -207 M       -7.9%       $ -163 M        -7.7%      $ -133 M        -7.6%
 Chrysler         $ -11,178 M       -22%      $ -2,877 M        -23%     $ -2,348 M         -24%    $ -1,995 M         -24%
 Ford             $ -16,752 M       -21%      $ -4,219 M        -22%     $ -3,424 M         -23%    $ -2,895 M         -23%
 GM               $ -22,574 M       -18%      $ -5,616 M        -19%     $ -4,545 M         -19%    $ -3,831 M         -20%
 Honda             $ -1,743 M      -6.1%        $ -200 M         -3%       $ -115 M        -2.2%       $ -59 M        -1.3%
 Hyundai             $ -452 M      -4.7%         $ -34 M       -1.5%        $ -9.2 M       -.51%       $ 7.2 M         .48%
 Mazda               $ -269 M      -5.3%         $ -43 M       -3.5%         $ -29 M         -3%       $ -20 M        -2.4%
 Mercedes            $ -973 M        -9%        $ -224 M       -8.7%       $ -182 M        -8.8%      $ -155 M          -9%
 Nissan            $ -2,906 M       -17%        $ -624 M        -15%       $ -486 M         -15%      $ -394 M         -15%
 Toyota            $ -2,166 M      -5.1%        $ -374 M       -3.7%       $ -265 M        -3.3%      $ -193 M        -2.8%
 VW                   $ 752 M       7.1%         $ 261 M         10%        $ 227 M          11%       $ 205 M          12%
 Asia              $ -7,822 M      -7.6%      $ -1,320 M      -5.4%        $ -937 M       -4.8%       $ -681 M       -4.2%
 Europe            $ -1,113 M      -3.4%        $ -145 M      -1.9%         $ -98 M       -1.6%        $ -66 M       -1.3%
 U.S.             $ -50,524 M       -20%     $ -12,719 M       -21%     $ -10,323 M        -21%     $ -8,726 M        -22%
 †
     All calculations based on sales mix in 2002


 Table 15: New Cars: Revenue and profit changes implied by a $1 gasoline price increase in 2010

                       Implied                    Implied                   Implied                    Implied
                      ∆ Manuf.        %        ∆ Manuf.             %    ∆ Manuf.             %     ∆ Manuf.             %
                      Revenues    Change           Profits Change            Profits Change             Profits Change
                                                   Elasticity of 4           Elasticity of 5            Elasticity of 6
     BMW                $ 337 M      2.7%        $ 122 M           4%      $ 107 M         4.3%         $ 97 M        4.7%
     Chrysler        $ -4,656 M      -17%     $ -1,149 M         -17%     $ -919 M         -17%      $ -765 M         -17%
     Ford            $ -6,348 M      -12%     $ -1,508 M         -11%   $ -1,192 M         -11%      $ -982 M         -11%
     GM              $ -7,527 M      -11%     $ -1,737 M         -11%   $ -1,360 M         -10%    $ -1,108 M         -10%
     Honda              $ 592 M      1.9%        $ 309 M           4%      $ 289 M         4.7%       $ 276 M         5.4%
     Hyundai          $ 1,896 M       10%        $ 597 M          13%      $ 516 M          14%       $ 462 M          15%
     Mazda              $ 130 M      2.6%          $ 61 M        4.9%        $ 57 M        5.7%         $ 54 M        6.6%
     Mercedes          $ -757 M     -6.1%       $ -162 M        -5.3%     $ -129 M        -5.2%      $ -107 M        -5.2%
     Nissan            $ -360 M     -1.6%          $ 24 M        .43%        $ 48 M        1.1%         $ 64 M        1.7%
     Toyota            $ -566 M     -1.2%        $ 104 M         .88%      $ 142 M         1.5%       $ 167 M         2.1%
     VW               $ 3,024 M       28%        $ 842 M          31%      $ 702 M          33%       $ 609 M          34%
     Asia             $ 1,281 M        1%        $ 992 M       3.2%        $ 968 M       3.9%         $ 952 M       4.6%
     Europe           $ 3,154 M        9%        $ 946 M        11%        $ 799 M        12%         $ 701 M        12%
     U.S.           $ -18,467 M      -12%     $ -4,382 M       -12%     $ -3,463 M       -12%      $ -2,850 M       -12%
     †
         All calculations based on sales mix in 2011


         Across all manufacturers, the estimated impacts on revenues and profits are larger in 2002
compared to 2010. However, the degree to which this is true varies considerably. Focusing first on
origin, we see that using the distribution of sales in 2002, we estimate that Asian manufacturers’
revenues fell 7.6% for every $1 increase in gasoline prices. In contrast, they gain 1% in revenues
using the 2010 distribution of sales. The implied change in profits under the three different as-
sumptions on the own-price elasticity mirrors the changes in revenues, with the profits increases


                                                              36
being larger in 2010, compared to revenue increases. Comparing Asian manufacturers suggests that
Hyundai saw the largest shift in their sales mix over this time period.33 Honda and Mazda had
similar shifts. In 2002, the two manufacturers are estimated to have lost roughly 5% in revenues
and had an even smaller loss in profits. By the end of our sample, both Honda and Mazda benefit
from increases in gasoline prices, with profits increasing by between 4 and 6.6%.
    Nissan stands out among the Asian manufacturers. The sales mix for Nissan is similar to that
of the U.S. manufacturers in 2002; a $1 increase in gasoline prices reduced Nissan revenues by
17% and profits by 15% across all three assumptions on the own-price elasticity. Nissan’s sale mix
shifted drastically by 2010, and in 2010 a $1 increase in gasoline prices is predicted to lead to slight
decreases in revenues and increases in profits. Toyota did not shift its sales mix as drastically as
the other Asian manufacturers. Using the 2010 sales mix, Toyota is estimated to continue to be
harmed on the revenue side from increases in gasoline prices with profits effectively unchanged.
    This shift from losses in 2002 to gains in 2010 is even more stark for European manufacturers.
The large shift in the sales distribution from 2002 to 2010, implies that the effect of a $1 change in
gasoline prices goes from reducing revenues of European manufacturers by over 3% and profits by
roughly 1.5% in 2002 to increasing revenues by 9% and profits by over 10% in 2010. These gains
come predominantly from Volkswagen and BMW.
    In terms of absolute impacts, the change between 2002 and 2010 for U.S. manufacturers swamps
that of Asian and European manufacturers. In 2002, we estimate that a $1 increase gasoline prices
reduced U.S. revenues by over $50 billion; the drop in profits ranges from nearly $9 billion to nearly
$13 billion. By 2010, the revenue effects fell to $18.5 billion, while the impact on profits ranges
from $2.8 to $4.4 billion.
    There are also large differences in how the U.S. manufacturers responded to the increase in
gasoline prices over this time. While all three manufacturers had similar sales mixes in 2002,
leading to reductions in revenues and profits of roughly 18-22%, Ford and GM changed their sales
mix considerable over this time period. In contrast, Chrysler changed very little. Using the 2010
mix, the effect on revenues and profits fall by 50% compared to 2002 for Ford and GM. The impact
of increases in gasoline prices on Chrysler remained largely unchanged.
    To summarize, we find large differences across manufacturers in how their sales mixes changed
during our sample. We again stress that the shifts in the distribution of sales is a mixture of both
a supply and demand response. However, regardless of the cause for the shift, these calculations
illustrate how the estimated impact changes over our sample. If the observed shifts are due more
to demand response, then these calculations suggest which manufacturers are poised to gain from

  33
     This consistent with Hyundai’s recent ad campaign touting the fact that they are now the most fuel efficient
auto company in the U.S.


                                                       37
these shifts in demand. If they instead are due more to a supply response, then these calculations
suggest which manufacturers are more capable of changing their product mix in response to a run
up in gasoline prices.34 We would argue that both of these causes—and likely a mixture of the
two—help us better understand the automobile industry.


8         Heterogeneity in gasoline price response

The specifications reported so far in the paper estimate a single coefficient for the effect of Gaso-
linePrice on prices, market shares, or sales for each MPG bin. The implicit assumption is that the
effect of gasoline prices is the same whether gasoline prices are high or low and whether gasoline
prices have been rising or falling recently. One might wonder whether this is true. For example,
suppose drivers experience an adjustment cost to changing vehicle types. (For example, switching
away from a pickup means that a driver can’t carry material for home improvement projects or
pull a boat; switching away from a large SUV means a parent can’t drive a carpool of kids.) If this
is the case, then drivers might not respond to increases in gasoline prices until the price crosses a
threshold at which it becomes worthwhile to make the necessary lifestyle switch to drive a smaller,
higher fuel economy car.35
         Effect sizes might differ depending on whether gasoline prices have been recently rising or falling
if the direction of the recent trend affects customers’ expectations of future gasoline prices, and
therefore of what car they wish to own in the future. Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (2011) present
evidence that, on average, customers expect the real price of gasoline in the future to be the current
price of gasoline, which suggests that most consumers either believe that real gasoline prices are a
random walk, or that they are not forming sophisticated gasoline price expectations.36 Our results
below are one way to examine whether that is true.


8.1         Heterogeneity by gasoline price levels

In order to investigate whether customers respond differently to changes in gasoline prices when
gasoline prices are high vs. low, we re-estimate the effects of gasoline prices on the prices and

    34
     For example, comparing the U.S. firms, in 2010 35% and 30% of Ford and GM’s offered cars, respectively, were
in either Bins 1 or 2. Only 21% of Chrysler’s offerings were in Bins 1 or 2. At the other end of the spectrum, 26.8%
of Chrysler’s cars were in Bin 1 in 2010, compared to 15% for Ford and 15.3% for GM.
  35
     The automotive industry participants believe such effects exist. In an article in Automotive News on May 22,
2008 entitled “Ford: $3.50 gasoline was tipping point for sales shift” states: “The segment shifts [away from SUVs and
pickups] ‘really started to move’ when gasoline prices hit $3.50 a gallon, [Ford CEO Alan] Mulally said. ‘It seemed
to us that we reached a tipping point where customers began shifting away from these vehicles at an accelerated
rate,’....”
  36
     Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (forthcoming) discuss the implications of using current gasoline prices, rather
than an expectations measure such as future prices, in regressions such as those estimated in this paper.



                                                         38
market shares of new and used vehicles (Tables 3, 5, 6, and 7) using GasolinePrice interacted with
indicators for whether GasolinePrice is below $2, between $2 and $3, or above $3. The purpose is
to see whether there is an inflection point of gasoline prices at which the effects suddenly kick in,
or at which they grow much larger.
   Table A-20 reports the estimated effect of gasoline prices on the relative prices of cars of different
fuel economies, both new and used, separately by the three price regions. For new vehicles, a $1
increase in the price of gasoline has approximately the same effect on the relative price of a vehicle
in Bin 5 relative to a vehicle in Bin 1 when GasolinePrice is between $2 and $3, and when it is
above $3. The effect is a third smaller when gasoline prices are below $2. For used cars, the effect
of GasolinePrice is also similar whether GasolinePrice is between $2 and $3 or above $3, and about
17% smaller when price is less than $2.
   The estimated effects of gasoline prices on market share are reported separately by ranges of
gasoline price in Table A-21. The effects for both new and used cars are quite similar in any fuel
economy bin across the gasoline price ranges. The effects on market share are larger in magnitude at
higher gasoline prices for most of the bins in which the estimated effects are statistically significant
(new Bins 2 and 5, used Bins 1, 4, and 5) but this is not true for all such bins (new Bins 1 and 4).
Generally, the estimated effects sizes differ only by several tenths of a percentage point.
   Overall, we conclude that there is some evidence of larger effects of gasoline prices on vehicle
prices and market shares when the price of gasoline is higher, but the appropriate characterization
is that the effects are somewhat smaller at low prices (below $2), not that the effects suddenly kick
in strongly at high prices (above $3).


8.2   Heterogeneity by gasoline price trends

In order to investigate whether the effect of gasoline prices on vehicle prices and market shares
differs by whether gasoline prices have been trending up or down, we first need to identify periods
of upward- vs. downward-trending gasoline prices. As Figure 1 shows, gasoline prices do have
periods of generally upward or downward trends, but within these trends, movements are often
non-monotonic. We defined periods of upward vs. downward trend by first fitting a cubic spline
of weekly gasoline prices with knots at 4 month intervals, as shown in Figure 6. We then split
our sample period into spells in which the fitted spline is monotonically increasing or decreasing.
A monotonic spell in which the spline rises by at least 10 cents is defined as a period of upward
trending prices, denoted with dark grey shading in Figure 6. A monotonic spell in which the spline
falls by at least 10 cents is defined as a period of downward trending prices, the light grey regions
in Figure 6. A monotonic spell in which the price changes by less than 10 cents is defined as a
period in which prices “hold,” and is indicated by the white regions in Figure 6.


                                                  39
                                Figure 6: Gasoline price trend periods




                    4
                    3
                    2
                    1
                    0




                    01jan1998   01jan2000   01jan2002       01jan2004   01jan2006     01jan2008
                                                          Date

                                      Increasing Prices             Decreasing Prices
                                      Fitted values                 National Gas Prices




   We then estimate the effect of gasoline prices on vehicle prices and market shares interacting
GasolinePrice with an indicator variable for whether the observation occurred during a spell of
increasing, decreasing, or “holding” gasoline prices.
   In Table A-22, we report the effect of gasoline prices on vehicle prices, and in Table A-23 we
report the effect of gasoline prices on market shares. In Table A-22, we find that in both new
and used markets vehicle prices respond more to gasoline prices when prices have been recently
increasing or decreasing than when they have been “holding,” although the differences are not large.
The most noteworthy result in the table, however, is that there is little difference in the estimated
effects between periods of increasing and decreasing gasoline prices. We draw a similar conclusion
about the effect of gasoline prices on market shares. There are differences (usually tenths of a
percentage point) in the market share results across price trend regimes, but it is difficult to find
a coherent way to characterize the differences.


8.3   Heterogeneity by vehicle segment

In the results so far, we have categorized vehicles by fuel economy bins. While this categorization
sorts vehicles rigidly by fuel economy, it groups different kinds of vehicles within a single bin.
An alternative would be to sort vehicles by segment. This would group together vehicles that
are similar on a variety of characteristics, although with potentially greater heterogeneity among
vehicles in fuel economy.
   Our data source sorts vehicles into seven different segments (Compact, Midsize, Luxury, Sporty,



                                                          40
SUV, Pickup, and Van). Each segment is divided into two to four subsegments. For example,
Compact cars are divided into Entry Compact (such as the Hyundai Accent) and Premium Compact
(such as the Honda Civic); SUVs are divided into Entry SUV (Ford Escape), Midsize SUV (Toyota
4Runner), Fullsize SUV (GMC Yukon), and Luxury SUV (Cadillac Escalade). Table A-24 lists
each segment and subsegment, reporting average MPG within the segment or subsegment, and
representative vehicles in each subsegment.
    We repeat the base regressions that estimate the effect of gasoline prices on new vehicle prices,
used vehicle prices, new vehicle sales, and used vehicle sales, but interacting GasolinePrice with
indicators for vehicle segment or subsegment instead of with MPG Bin indicators. The results are
reported in Tables A-25, A-26, A-27, and A-28. The most interesting results are the results for
subsegments, reported in the second column of each table. In many cases, we see the same pattern
we saw across MPG bins repeated within a particular segment. For example, in Tables A-25 and
A-26, an increase in gasoline prices is associated with an increase in the price of Entry SUVs, but
with decreases in the price of Midsize SUVs, and even larger decreases for Fullsize and Luxury
SUVs. A similar effect occurs within the pickup segment: the price of Compact Pickups increases
or stays unchanged when gasoline prices increase, but the price of Fullsize Pickups decreases. The
sales estimates in Tables A-27 and A-28 show complementary effects: when gasoline prices increase,
sales of Fullsize SUVs decrease by more than sales of Midsize SUVs, which decrease more than
sales of Entry SUVs.
    While it would be far from correct to claim that the pattern of larger effects for lower fuel
economy vehicles holds within each segment, there are patterns that are consistent with substitution
within segments; for example, that buyers substitute from larger SUVs to smaller SUVs, or from
Fullsize Pickups to Compact Pickups.


9    Concluding remarks

In this paper we have investigated the effect of gasoline prices on market shares, unit sales, and
prices of vehicles of different fuel economies in both the used and new vehicle markets. We have
found statistically and economically significant effects in both markets. In new vehicle markets,
gasoline prices have a large effect on market shares, and more modest effects on prices. We estimate
the market share of vehicles with at least 24 MPG increases by 28.7% when gasoline prices increase
by $1, and the market share of the vehicles with less than 16 MPG falls by 22.8%. Transaction
prices for the highest fuel economy vehicles increase by $657 relative to the lowest fuel economy
vehicles.
    In used vehicle markets, the transactions prices of the lowest fuel economy vehicles are estimated


                                                 41
to fall by $1,474 when gasoline prices rise by $1, while the prices of the highest fuel economy used
vehicles are estimated to rise by $922, a difference of almost $2400, an effect that is almost four times
the effect estimated for new vehicles. We also estimate the effect of gasoline prices on the share
of transactions at new vehicle dealerships which are for used vehicles of different fuel economies.
We find changes of several percentage points, much smaller effects than the market share effects
estimated for new vehicles.
   We believe that there are several things we learn from these results. First, these results help us
understand at least part of what happened in the U.S. auto industry over the last decade to bring
it to the brink of bankruptcy in 2008. One might argue that the auto industry has experienced a
“perfect storm” that included a credit crunch and a major recession as well as historically large
increases in gasoline prices. While this paper cannot address all of these contributing factors, we
believe we have learned something about the role of gasoline prices. In particular, we have shown
that the big differences in sales mixes across manufacturers imply that gasoline price changes will
have very different effects on the revenues of different manufacturers and on the net revenues of
their affiliated dealer networks. In particular, increasing gasoline prices in the mid-2000’s would
have hit U.S. manufacturers (with their strong reliance on SUVs and pickups) particularly hard.
The dealer networks affiliated with U.S. manufacturers would also have seen their net revenues fall
because of increasing gasoline prices, despite evidence that manufacturers made some efforts to
insulate their dealerships from these effects. Asian manufacturers, with stronger portfolios of high
fuel economy cars than their U.S. competitors, still experience revenue decreases when gasoline
prices increase, but this is the result primarily of overall unit sales declines, partially mitigated by
shifts in market share that favor their high-fuel economy vehicles. Finally, we find that used vehicle
sales help to counteract for dealerships some of the negative effects of gasoline price increases, but
only if the dealerships sell high fuel economy used vehicles. The net revenues of a dealership whose
used vehicle sales were concentrated in sales of one of the U.S. manufacturers’ vehicles would
be predicted to see the net revenues from sales of those vehicles fall if gasoline prices increased,
compounding rather than mitigating the new vehicle effects.
   The second lesson to learn from these results is that gasoline prices have very different effects
in new and for used vehicle markets. We argue that the dramatic difference in how usage cost
affects new and used automobile markets can be explained by differences in the supply of new
and used cars. The auto manufacturers (and affiliated dealer networks) who supply new cars have
some choice in determining how to respond to a change in demand: by changing prices, allowing
quantities to change, or a mix of the two. The optimal response will depend on the shape of the
demand and marginal cost curves, and on the extent of market power the suppliers have. In used
vehicle markets, the ultimate buyers and sellers of used vehicles are drivers, whose valuations of the


                                                   42
car will both change (and may change similarly) when gasoline prices change. This characteristic
of the market—combined with an efficient wholesale market for used cars—appears to lead to
rapid price adjustment for used cars, while new car manufacturers choose not to change prices,
and experience market share changes instead. In this paper, we have investigated the implication
of these effects for the revenues of auto manufacturers and net revenues of dealerships. However,
these results have broader implications as well. One implication is for understanding the effect
of environmental policy instruments in markets with different market structures, as discussed in
Section 6.3. Another implication is for macroeconomists who are interested in the question of how
oil prices affect the economy broadly (Kilian (2008), Barsky and Kilian (2004)). These results
suggest that the effect of energy prices on markets for one of the major durable goods in the
economy depends on the market structure of the market.




                                               43
References
Allcott, H., and N. Wozny (2011): “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox,”
 Discussion paper, New York University.

Anderson, S. T., R. Kellogg, and J. M. Sallee (2011): “What Do Consumers Believe about
 Future Gasoline Prices?,” Discussion Paper 16974, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Barsky, R. B., and L. Kilian (2004): “Oil and the Macroeconomy since the 1970s,” Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 18(4), 115–134.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
  Econometrica, 63(4), 841–890.

Busse, M. R. (2012): “When Supply and Demand Just Won’t Do: Using the Equilibrium Locus
 to Think about Comparative Statics,” Discussion paper, Northwestern University.

Busse, M. R., and N. O. Keohane (2007): “Market Effects of Environmental Regulation: Coal,
 Railroads, and the 1990 Clean Air Act,” RAND Journal of Economics, 38(4), 1159–1179.

Busse, M. R., C. R. Knittel, and F. Zettelmeyer (forthcoming): “Are Consumers Myopic?
 Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases,” American Economic Review.

Fowlie, M. (2010): “Emissions Trading, Electricity Restructuring, and Investment in Pollution
  Abatement,” American Economic Review, 100, 837–869.

Kahn, J. (1986): “Gasoline Prices and the Used Automobile Market: A Rational Expectations
 Asset Price Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), 323–340.

Kilian, L. (2008): “The Economic Effects of Energy Price Shocks,” Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture, 46(4), 871–909.

Klier, T., and J. Linn (2010): “The Price of Gasoline and New Vehicle Fuel Economy: Evidence
 from Monthly Sales Data,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(3), 134–153.

Knittel, C. R. (2011): “Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-offs and Technolog-
 ical Progress in the Automobile Sector,” American Economic Review, 101(7), 3368–3399.

Li, S., C. Timmins, and R. von Haefen (2009): “How Do Gasoline Prices Affect Fleet Fuel
  Economy?,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(2), 113–137.

Mansur, E. T. (2007): “Do Oligopolists Pollute Less? Evidence from a Restructured Electricity
 Market,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 55(4), 661–689.

Sallee, J. M., S. E. West, and W. Fan (2009): “Consumer Valuation of Fuel Economy: A
  Microdata Approach,” Discussion paper, National Tax Association Conference Proceedings.

Verboven, F. (2002): “Quality-based Price Discrimination and Tax Incidence - The Market for
 Gasoline and Diesel Cars in Europe,” RAND Journal of Economics, 33(2), 275–297.



                                             44
                                            Table 16: Summary Statistics Retail Data
                                             New Cars                                              Used Cars
     Variable              N       Mean     Median  SD        Min     Max        N       Mean     Median   SD       Min     Max
     GasolinePrice       4156663        2     1.8       .73    .85     4.5     2923323       2       1.8      .75    .85      4.5
     MPG                 4156663       20      20       4.9     9       53     2923323      19        19      4.1     9        53
     Price               4156663   25592    23447     10674   1402   198864    2923323   15317     14175    8064      1    166500
     DaysToTurn          4018207       57      28        74     1      730     2814936      42        25       56     1       730
     ModelYear           4156663     2004    2004       2.7   1996    2008     2923323    2001     2001       3.6   1984     2008
     CarAge              4156663      .79       1       .46     0       3      2923323       4         4      2.5     0        25
     Odometer            4156663       54      21        81     1      500     2923323   42218    35971     27789     8    149999
     PctBlack            4156663     .081    .022       .16     0        1     2923323      .1      .026       .2     0        1
     PctAsian            4156663     .049    .019      .085     0        1     2923323    .037      .013     .069     0         1
     PctHispanic         4156663      .12    .049       .18     0       1      2923323     .12      .046      .18     0        1
     PctLessHighSchool   4156663      .15     .11       .13     0        1     2923323     .17       .14      .13     0        1
     PctCollege          4156663      .38     .36       .19     0        1     2923323     .33        .3      .18     0        1
     PctManagment        4156663      .16     .15      .082     0        1     2923323     .14       .13     .074     0         1
     PctProfessional     4156663      .22     .22      .097     0        1     2923323      .2       .19     .091     0        1
     PctHeath            4156663     .016    .012      .018     0        1     2923323    .019      .014      .02     0         1
     PctProtective       4156663      .02    .016      .021     0       1      2923323     .02      .016      .02     0        1
     PctFood             4156663     .041    .035      .031     0        1     2923323    .046       .04     .033     0        1




45
     PctMaintenance      4156663     .027    .021      .028     0       1      2923323    .032      .025      .03     0        1
     PctHousework        4156663     .027    .024      .021     0        1     2923323    .028      .025     .022     0        1
     PctSales            4156663      .12     .12      .046     0       1      2923323     .12       .11     .044     0        1
     PctAdmin            4156663      .15     .15      .054     0       1      2923323     .16       .16     .053     0        1
     PctConstruction     4156663     .049    .042      .038     0       1      2923323    .055      .049      .04     0        1
     PctRepair           4156663     .036    .033      .027     0       1      2923323     .04      .037     .027     0        1
     PctProduction       4156663     .065    .051      .054     0       1      2923323    .077      .063      .06     0        1
     PctTransportation   4156663     .051    .045      .038     0       1      2923323     .06      .054      .04     0        1
     Income              4156663    58211   53398    26112      0    200001    2923323   51018    47016    21946      0     200001
     MedianHHSize        4156663      2.7     2.7       .52     0      8.9     2923323     2.7       2.7      .51     0       8.9
     MedianHouseValue    4156663   178464   144900   131980     0    1000001   2923323   145831   122803   102004     0    1000001
     VehPerHousehold     4156663      1.8     1.9       .39     0        7     2923323     1.8       1.8      .39     0        7
     PctOwned            4156663      .72      .8       .23     0        1     2923323      .7       .77      .24     0        1
     PctVacant           4156663     .061    .041      .077     0       1      2923323    .066      .046     .076     0        1
     TravelTime          4156663       27      27       6.8     0      200     2923323      27        26      6.9     0      200
     PctUnemployed       4156663     .047    .037      .043     0        1     2923323    .052      .041     .047     0        1
     PctBadEnglish       4156663     .043    .015      .076     0        1     2923323    .043      .014     .077     0         1
     PctPoverty          4156663     .083    .056      .085     0       1      2923323    .099       .07     .094     0        1
     Weekend             4156663      .25       0       .43     0       1      2923323     .25        0       .43     0        1
     EndOfMonth          4156663      .25       0       .43     0        1     2923323     .21         0      .41     0        1
     EndOfYear           4156663     .022       0       .15     0        1     2923323    .016         0      .13     0        1
           Table A-1: New Cars: Market share results, fuel economy bins†

                        MPG Bin 1      MPG Bin 2     MPG Bin 3      MPG Bin 4     MPG Bin 5
FuelPrice                  -.042**        -.029**       -.0037*         .015**        .059**
                            (.004)        (.0028)       (.0016)          (.003)       (.0029)
PctLessHighSchool             .022         .029**         .0037          -.0075        -.047*
                            (.016)        (.0091)       (.0081)           (.01)        (.019)
PctCollege                 -.064**         -.0062        .027**         .037**          .0067
                            (.014)        (.0089)       (.0076)          (.012)        (.016)
Income                     9.4e-09       2.7e-07*     2.9e-07**        -1.2e-07    -4.4e-07**
                          (9.3e-08)     (1.0e-07)     (6.5e-08)       (8.5e-08)     (1.3e-07)
MedianHHSize                 .01**          .0019         -.004        -.0088*        .00045
                           (.0021)         (.002)       (.0031)         (.0033)       (.0052)
MedianHouseValue           2.5e-08      6.7e-08**     3.2e-08**      -6.4e-08**      -6.0e-08
                          (3.3e-08)     (2.3e-08)     (5.7e-09)       (1.5e-08)     (4.1e-08)
VehiclePerHH                -.0031           .021         -.013           -.014        .0094
                            (.021)         (.017)        (.014)          (.016)        (.018)
TravelTime                -.000038      -.00029+       -.00023*       -.000012       .00057*
                          (.00017)       (.00016)     (.000087)       (.00011)      (.00026)
Weekend                    -.018**      -.0045**        -.00023        .0063**        .017**
                           (.0014)        (.0015)      (.00093)         (.0016)        (.002)
EndOfMonth                 .0051**       .0034**        .0028**        -.00067       -.011**
                          (.00059)       (.00088)      (.00059)       (.00057)        (.0008)
EndOfYear                   -.004*        -.0045*       -.0029*        .0066**        .0047*
                           (.0016)        (.0017)       (.0011)         (.0017)        (.002)
Constant                     .32**          .29**         .21**           .18**        -.0012
                            (.021)         (.013)       (.0072)          (.007)       (.0098)
Observations              4156663        4156663       4156663        4156663       4156663
R-squared                    0.023          0.006         0.007           0.008        0.036
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors (robust
    and clustered at the region level) in parentheses.
    Not reported: Region × month-of-year and region × year fixed effects. We also don’t report
    house ownership, occupation, English proficiency, and race of buyers.




                                         Appendix-1
       Table A-2: New Cars: Equilibrium sales response to gasoline prices

Dep. Var: Sales      MPG Bin 1     MPG Bin 2     MPG Bin 3     MPG Bin 4      MPG Bin 5
FuelPrice             -10084**       -7422**       -4705**       -2155+         4974**
                        (1076)        (1244)        (1228)        (1275)        (1108)
Constant               25067**       19902**       17954**       26738**        4291**
                        (1385)        (1456)        (1821)        (2801)        (1499)
Observations              882           882           882           882           882
R-squared                0.953         0.961         0.962         0.963         0.973
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in
    parentheses are robust.
    Not reported: PADD × year fixed effects and PADD × month-of-year fixed effects.




                                       Appendix-2
Table A-3: New Cars: Equilibrium price
response to gasoline prices

 Variable                         Coefficient (SE)
 GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1               -362**
                                         (89)
 GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2               -159**
                                         (31)
 GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                  -20
                                         (33)
 GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                137**
                                         (36)
 GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                295**
                                         (32)
 PctLessHighSchool                      171*
                                         (79)
 PctCollege                                81
                                         (56)
 Income                               .0015**
                                      (.00032)
 MedianHHSize                           61**
                                         (15)
 MedianHouseValue                     .000083
                                     (.000091)
 VehiclePerHH                           220+
                                        (109)
 TravelTime                              .033
                                        (.84)
 Weekend                                  4.9
                                          (6)
 EndOfMonth                            -122**
                                        (2.8)
 EndOfYear                              -61**
                                        (7.4)
 Constant                             32853**
                                        (117)
 Observations                         4156663
 R-squared                              0.046
 *
     significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; +
     significant at 10% level. Standard errors in
     parentheses are robust and clustered at the re-
     gion level.
     Not reported: Region × month-of-year, region
     × year, and vehicle type fixed effects. We also
     don’t report house ownership, occupation, En-
     glish proficiency, and race of buyers.




                   Appendix-3
      Table A-4: Used Cars: Retail and wholesale prices†

                                                          Retail   Wholesale
FuelPrice*MPG Bin 1                                     -1474**     -1444**
                                                           (40)        (37)
FuelPrice*MPG Bin 2                                      -356**      -318**
                                                           (48)        (43)
FuelPrice*MPG Bin 3                                       313**       323**
                                                           (21)        (24)
FuelPrice*MPG Bin 4                                       745**       720**
                                                           (24)        (26)
FuelPrice*MPG Bin 5                                       922**       849**
                                                           (24)        (22)
PctLessHighSchool                                         239**       233**
                                                           (56)        (68)
PctCollege                                                  57         95*
                                                           (44)        (39)
Income                                                   .0011+      .0014*
                                                         (.0006)    (.00062)
MedianHHSize                                               41+         -4.6
                                                           (21)        (24)
MedianHouseValue                                         .00012      .00011
                                                        (.00017)    (.00013)
VehiclePerHH                                                 23         -78
                                                           (94)        (77)
TravelTime                                                  .74        -.18
                                                          (.66)       (.88)
Weekend                                                   105**       41**
                                                           (11)       (9.7)
EndOfMonth                                                -71**       -36**
                                                          (3.7)       (2.9)
EndOfYear                                                    20         8.2
                                                           (13)        (12)
Constant                                                26234**     24881**
                                                          (258)       (200)
Observations                                            2923323     2923323
R-squared                                                 0.728       0.739
Relative price difference b/w MPG bin 5 and 1:            $2396       $2293
*
  significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Stan-
  dard errors (robust and clustered at the region level) in parentheses.
  Not reported: Region × mont-of-year fixed effects, PADD × segment ×
  year fixed effects, vehicle type fixed effects, and odometer spline. We also
  don’t report house ownership, occupation, English proficiency, and race
  of buyers.




                              Appendix-4
             Table A-5: Used Cars: Market share results, fuel economy bins†

                          MPG Bin 1     MPG Bin 2      MPG Bin 3     MPG Bin 4      MPG Bin 5
FuelPrice                     -.01**        .0021+       -.00025        .0043**       .0039**
                             (.0015)        (.0012)      (.0015)        (.0011)       (.00089)
PctLessHighSchool              .0027         -.0067      -.00021          .0052        -.00096
                             (.0069)        (.0068)      (.0074)        (.0058)        (.0067)
PctCollege                    -.014*         -.05**        .0032         .043**        .017**
                             (.0062)        (.0052)      (.0049)        (.0066)        (.0047)
Income                      -1.1e-09      1.8e-07**      3.5e-08      -1.8e-07**      -3.3e-08
                           (4.6e-08)      (3.4e-08)     (3.8e-08)      (3.2e-08)     (2.8e-08)
MedianHHSize                 .0061**       -.0048**      -.0018+        -.00017        .00062
                             (.0011)       (.00085)      (.0009)        (.0012)       (.00075)
MedianHouseValue           2.6e-08+       1.2e-08+     -3.6e-08**       4.0e-09       -6.8e-09
                           (1.4e-08)      (7.4e-09)     (6.4e-09)      (6.7e-09)     (4.6e-09)
VehiclePerHH                   -.017         .00068         .021          -.009         .0047
                              (.018)         (.017)       (.016)         (.011)        (.0095)
TravelTime                 -.00013+        -.000043     -.000032        .00015*       .000056
                           (.000076)      (.000057)    (.000051)       (.00006)      (.000043)
Weekend                     -.0061**        -.00035       .0015*        .0026**       .0023**
                            (.00056)       (.00072)     (.00061)       (.00058)       (.00029)
EndOfMonth                    .00091        -.0017*       .00068        -.00065       .00075+
                            (.00056)       (.00063)     (.00064)       (.00067)       (.00042)
EndOfYear                   -.0056**          .0031       -.0014          .0024         .0015
                             (.0015)         (.002)      (.0015)        (.0018)        (.0012)
Constant                      .042**          .0074        -.015          .12**         .84**
                             (.0079)         (.012)       (.012)          (.03)         (.027)
Observations                2986570        2986570      2986570        2986570        2986570
R-squared                      0.384          0.217        0.146          0.343         0.595
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors (robust
    and clustered at the region level) in parentheses.
    Not reported: Region × mont-of-year, PADD × segment × year fixed effects, and odometer
    spline. We also don’t report house ownership, occupation, English proficiency, and race of
    buyers.




          Table A-6: Used Cars: Equilibrium sales response to gasoline prices

    Dep. Var: Sales      MPG Bin 1     MPG Bin 2      MPG Bin 3     MPG Bin 4      MPG Bin 5
    FuelPrice             -3857**        -2406**         -790           134           375
                           (597)          (627)         (605)          (743)         (598)
    Constant              11470**        12394**       9046**        14246**        7979**
                           (705)          (845)         (766)         (1396)         (922)
    Observations            882            882            882           882           882
    R-squared              0.978          0.979         0.976          0.950         0.927
    *
        significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in
        parentheses are robust.
        Not reported: PADD × year fixed effects and PADD × month-of-year fixed effects.




                                           Appendix-5
                                   Table A-7: New and Used Cars: Inventory results†

                                                            New Cars                                          Used Cars
                                             Coefficient   DTT sample           % Change     Coefficient     DTT sample          % Change
Variable                                       (SE)           mean               in DTT        (SE)             mean              in DTT
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1                         10**            65.7             15.2%         2.9**              41.7             7.0%
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)                         (1.5)                                           (.39)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                         6.5**             62             10.5%          1.6**             41.6             3.8%
(16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                (.74)                                           (.33)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                         -1.5*           54.7             -2.7%          .66+              43.6             1.5%
(19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                (.67)                                           (.38)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                        -2.7**           53.1             -5.1%         -1.2**             43.7            -2.7%
(21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                (.54)                                            (.4)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                         -10**           48.1             -20.8%        -1.7**             40.5            -4.2%
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                         (.59)                                           (.44)
Constant                                       -432**                                           63**
                                                (4.1)                                           (2.4)
Observations                                  4018207                                         2814936
R-squared                                       0.146                                           0.014
†
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. The full specification for both new and used cars is:

                            DT Tirdjt = ω0 + ω1 (GasolinePriceit · MPG Quartilej ) + τrt + µrt + δdj + νijt

    where DTT irdjt measures days to turn for transaction i in region r at dealer d on date t for car j. We use the same time
    and region controls we have used in the market share specification with one addition. To control for the fact that different
    dealerships may have different inventory policies we include car type × dealer fixed effects (δdj ).
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors (robust and clustered at the region level)
    in parentheses.




                  Table A-8: New Cars: Equilibrium sales response to gasoline prices by origin

                                               Asia                              Europe                              U.S.
Variable                            Coef      Av. Sales    Effect      Coef      Av. Sales   Effect        Coef     Av. Sales      Effect
GasPrice*MPG Bin 1                  -796**      3551       -22%        -231**       513       -45%      -9032**          31752     -28%
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)              (142)                               (35)                            (1061)
GasPrice*MPG Bin 2                 -1150**      9346       -12%           88       2075        4%       -6255**          26577     -24%
(16 MPG ≤ FE < 19 MPG)               (289)                               (80)                             (937)
GasPrice*MPG Bin 3                 -2259**      10003      -23%        -342**      2719       -13%       -1490*          17113      -9%
(19 MPG ≤ FE < 21 MPG)               (404)                              (120)                             (623)
GasPrice*MPG Bin 4                 -2620**      15858      -17%          176       3441        5%          783           16044      5%
(21 MPG ≤ FE < 24 MPG)               (520)                              (159)                             (619)
GasPrice*MPG Bin 5                  4211**      19422      22%         481**       1021       47%           98           10603      1%
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)              (524)                               (63)                             (516)
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered
    at the region level.
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the authors.




                                                     Appendix-6
             Table A-9: New cars: Equilibrium price response to gasoline prices by origin

                                                                     Asia              Europe                U.S.
Variable                                                       Coefficient (SE)    Coefficient (SE)    Coefficient (SE)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1†                                           -363**              -802**               -318*
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)                                              (71)               (264)               (124)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                                            -207**              -781**                 -30
(16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                                     (33)               (172)                (50)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                                              -65+                -149               162**
(19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                                     (32)               (149)                (40)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                                             159**                117                260**
(21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                                     (43)                (98)                (31)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                                             272**               527**               319**
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                                              (37)                (82)                (53)
Price difference between highest and lowest MPG Bin:                 $635              $1,329                $637
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and
    clustered at the region level.
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the authors.

      Table A-10: New cars: Equilibrium wholesaleprice response to gasoline prices by origin

                                                                     Asia              Europe                U.S.
Variable                                                       Coefficient (SE)    Coefficient (SE)    Coefficient (SE)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1†                                            -211*                 -170             -395**
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)                                              (80)                (207)               (81)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                                            -139**               -169+               -90**
(16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                                     (34)                 (97)               (28)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                                             188**                  83               113**
(19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                                     (28)               (111)                (28)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                                             269**               231**               164**
(21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                                     (37)                 (51)               (30)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                                             184**               364**               202**
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                                              (37)                 (51)               (48)
Price difference between highest and lowest MPG Bin:                 $395                $534                $597
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and
    clustered at the region level.
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the authors.

       Table A-11: New cars: Equilibrium dealer margin response to gasoline prices by origin

                                                                     Asia              Europe                U.S.
Variable                                                       Coefficient (SE)    Coefficient (SE)    Coefficient (SE)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1†                                           -152**              -632**                  78
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)                                              (33)                (123)               (51)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                                             -68**              -612**                 61*
(16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                                     (25)               (143)                (28)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                                            -252**              -232**                  49
(19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                                     (29)                 (78)               (32)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                                            -110**               -114+                97**
(21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                                     (20)                 (57)               (15)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                                              88**               163**               117**
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                                              (27)                 (48)               (17)
Price difference between highest and lowest MPG Bin:                 $240                $795                 $39
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and
    clustered at the region level.
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the authors.


                                                     Appendix-7
       Table A-12: New Cars: Retail prices, wholesale prices, and dealer margins by MPG bin†

              Variable            MPG Bin 1     MPG Bin 2    MPG Bin 3    MPG Bin 4    MPG Bin 5    Average
    BMW       Retail prices         $ 73,452      $ 58,797     $ 43,347     $ 42,032     $ 26,437   $ 44,641
              Wholesale prices      $ 68,677      $ 56,120     $ 41,482     $ 40,394     $ 24,404   $ 42,544
              Dealer margins         $ 4,774       $ 2,677      $ 1,865      $ 1,638      $ 2,033    $ 2,097
Chrysler      Retail prices         $ 26,735      $ 25,323     $ 23,323     $ 19,321     $ 15,718   $ 24,342
              Wholesale prices      $ 25,495      $ 24,352     $ 22,282     $ 18,570     $ 15,026   $ 23,312
              Dealer margins         $ 1,239         $ 971      $ 1,041        $ 751        $ 692    $ 1,030
    Ford      Retail prices         $ 28,925      $ 25,346     $ 23,259     $ 21,712     $ 16,521   $ 24,688
              Wholesale prices      $ 27,587      $ 24,131     $ 22,227     $ 20,801     $ 15,720   $ 23,547
              Dealer margins         $ 1,338       $ 1,216      $ 1,032        $ 911        $ 801    $ 1,141
     GM       Retail prices         $ 32,946      $ 28,561     $ 29,113     $ 20,299     $ 16,198   $ 26,610
              Wholesale prices      $ 31,323      $ 27,226     $ 27,638     $ 19,251     $ 15,417   $ 25,305
              Dealer margins         $ 1,622       $ 1,335      $ 1,475      $ 1,048        $ 782    $ 1,305
    Honda     Retail prices         $ 30,966      $ 32,912     $ 29,447     $ 23,927     $ 19,061   $ 23,570
              Wholesale prices      $ 29,786      $ 30,997     $ 27,645     $ 22,801     $ 18,320   $ 22,432
              Dealer margins         $ 1,180       $ 1,915      $ 1,802      $ 1,127        $ 742    $ 1,138
Hyundai       Retail prices         $ 23,176      $ 21,223     $ 20,843     $ 17,366     $ 15,141   $ 17,648
              Wholesale prices      $ 22,281      $ 20,479     $ 20,132     $ 16,688     $ 14,661   $ 17,043
              Dealer margins           $ 895         $ 744        $ 711        $ 678        $ 480      $ 605
    Mazda     Retail prices         $ 21,113      $ 24,963     $ 22,553     $ 19,934     $ 17,603   $ 20,621
              Wholesale prices      $ 20,174      $ 24,067     $ 21,717     $ 19,187     $ 17,065   $ 19,901
              Dealer margins           $ 939         $ 896        $ 836        $ 747        $ 538      $ 720
Mercedes      Retail prices         $ 67,526      $ 60,833     $ 47,185     $ 39,914     $ 51,988   $ 53,645
              Wholesale prices      $ 64,871      $ 58,439     $ 45,843     $ 38,571     $ 49,889   $ 51,730
              Dealer margins         $ 2,655       $ 2,394      $ 1,341      $ 1,343      $ 2,099    $ 1,915
    Nissan    Retail prices         $ 30,051      $ 27,829     $ 29,889     $ 23,045     $ 18,320   $ 25,027
              Wholesale prices      $ 28,710      $ 26,664     $ 28,642     $ 22,050     $ 17,663   $ 23,989
              Dealer margins         $ 1,341       $ 1,165      $ 1,247        $ 995        $ 657    $ 1,038
    Toyota    Retail prices         $ 36,389      $ 29,258     $ 31,845     $ 28,064     $ 19,808   $ 25,888
              Wholesale prices      $ 34,589      $ 27,870     $ 30,383     $ 26,856     $ 19,037   $ 24,759
              Dealer margins         $ 1,799       $ 1,389      $ 1,462      $ 1,208        $ 771    $ 1,129
     VW       Retail prices         $ 52,356      $ 43,228     $ 33,938     $ 24,266     $ 23,815   $ 27,036
              Wholesale prices      $ 49,493      $ 41,363     $ 32,444     $ 23,141     $ 23,020   $ 25,891
              Dealer margins         $ 2,863       $ 1,865      $ 1,494      $ 1,125        $ 795    $ 1,145
     Asia     Retail prices         $ 33,149      $ 28,649     $ 28,832     $ 24,274     $ 18,695   $ 23,874
              Wholesale prices      $ 31,581      $ 27,287     $ 27,477     $ 23,204     $ 17,995   $ 22,838
              Dealer margins         $ 1,567       $ 1,362      $ 1,354      $ 1,070        $ 701    $ 1,036
Europe        Retail prices         $ 65,840      $ 56,922     $ 42,489     $ 28,818     $ 24,598   $ 38,455
              Wholesale prices      $ 62,832      $ 54,536     $ 40,847     $ 27,595     $ 23,524   $ 36,855
              Dealer margins         $ 3,009       $ 2,386      $ 1,642      $ 1,223      $ 1,074    $ 1,600
     U.S.     Retail prices         $ 29,865      $ 26,558     $ 25,905     $ 20,507     $ 16,241   $ 25,433
              Wholesale prices      $ 28,445      $ 25,380     $ 24,672     $ 19,542     $ 15,465   $ 24,249
              Dealer margins         $ 1,420       $ 1,178      $ 1,233        $ 965        $ 776    $ 1,184
†
    All calculations based on sample averages




                                                  Appendix-8
        Table A-13: Used Cars: Shares, sales units, retail prices, and retail revenues by MPG bin†

              Variable          MPG Bin 1       MPG Bin 2     MPG Bin 3     MPG Bin 4     MPG Bin 5     Total/Average
    BMW       Bin Share               2.6%             23%           52%           16%          6.3%             100%
              Sales units             3,877          33,814        77,140        23,162         9,266          147,260
              Retail prices        $ 42,439        $ 34,500      $ 27,683      $ 26,030      $ 18,881         $ 28,823
              Retail revenues      $ 165 M       $ 1,167 M     $ 2,135 M       $ 603 M       $ 175 M        $ 4,244 M
Chrysler      Bin Share                32%             32%           17%           12%          7.7%             100%
              Sales units           593,595         602,292       312,818       230,299       144,701         1883704
              Retail prices        $ 16,135        $ 15,075      $ 13,514      $ 12,014       $ 9,918         $ 14,379
              Retail revenues    $ 9,577 M       $ 9,080 M     $ 4,227 M     $ 2,767 M     $ 1,435 M       $ 27,086 M
    Ford      Bin Share                33%             28%           20%           10%           10%             100%
              Sales units          1020030          868,511       616,499       313,246       318,207         3136492
              Retail prices        $ 17,315        $ 14,774      $ 12,442      $ 10,943       $ 9,012         $ 14,175
              Retail revenues   $ 17,662 M      $ 12,831 M     $ 7,671 M     $ 3,428 M     $ 2,868 M       $ 44,460 M
     GM       Bin Share                22%             25%           16%           25%           12%             100%
              Sales units           880,256         997,569       644,804      1014254        503,542         4040426
              Retail prices        $ 19,729        $ 16,780      $ 14,994      $ 11,279       $ 9,786         $ 14,885
              Retail revenues   $ 17,366 M      $ 16,739 M     $ 9,668 M    $ 11,440 M     $ 4,928 M       $ 60,142 M
    Honda     Bin Share               .44%             10%           13%           37%           40%             100%
              Sales units             2,315          53,658        65,915       194,174       209,275          525,337
              Retail prices        $ 13,061        $ 21,798      $ 18,525      $ 15,189      $ 12,829         $ 15,333
              Retail revenues       $ 30 M       $ 1,170 M     $ 1,221 M     $ 2,949 M     $ 2,685 M        $ 8,055 M
Hyundai       Bin Share                  2%            18%           20%           24%           36%             100%
              Sales units             4,800          41,545        47,216        55,881        84,920          234,361
              Retail prices        $ 14,577        $ 13,126      $ 13,469      $ 10,487       $ 9,911         $ 11,431
              Retail revenues       $ 70 M         $ 545 M       $ 636 M       $ 586 M       $ 842 M        $ 2,679 M
    Mazda     Bin Share                 .8%            20%           18%           35%           26%             100%
              Sales units             1,286          32,813        29,173        55,620        41,693          160,585
              Retail prices        $ 12,763        $ 15,210      $ 12,687      $ 12,011      $ 10,911         $ 12,508
              Retail revenues       $ 16 M         $ 499 M       $ 370 M       $ 668 M       $ 455 M        $ 2,009 M
Mercedes      Bin Share                12%             38%           31%           19%          .69%             100%
              Sales units            14,561          46,879        38,090        24,318           860          124,707
              Retail prices        $ 39,580        $ 37,572      $ 28,606      $ 25,444      $ 30,345         $ 32,653
              Retail revenues      $ 576 M       $ 1,761 M     $ 1,090 M       $ 619 M        $ 26 M        $ 4,072 M
    Nissan    Bin Share                15%             17%           22%           30%           17%             100%
              Sales units            72,805          83,836       109,703       151,364        83,738          501,447
              Retail prices        $ 18,565        $ 17,908      $ 17,943      $ 14,015      $ 11,881         $ 15,830
              Retail revenues    $ 1,352 M       $ 1,501 M     $ 1,968 M     $ 2,121 M       $ 995 M        $ 7,938 M
    Toyota    Bin Share               8.3%             18%           15%           24%           34%             100%
              Sales units            74,223         160,182       135,301       216,315       307,404          893,425
              Retail prices        $ 24,412        $ 20,024      $ 20,607      $ 16,725      $ 13,365         $ 17,387
              Retail revenues    $ 1,812 M       $ 3,208 M     $ 2,788 M     $ 3,618 M     $ 4,108 M       $ 15,534 M
     VW       Bin Share               1.8%            9.9%           13%           60%           15%             100%
              Sales units             3,263          18,170        24,295       109,206        28,345          183,279
              Retail prices        $ 31,282        $ 24,660      $ 19,235      $ 14,597      $ 16,369         $ 16,780
              Retail revenues      $ 102 M         $ 448 M       $ 467 M     $ 1,594 M       $ 464 M        $ 3,076 M
     Asia     Bin Share               6.5%             16%           17%           29%           32%             100%
              Sales units           151,331         365,635       385,425       682,325       730,439        2,315,155
              Retail prices        $ 20,943        $ 18,661      $ 18,017      $ 14,757      $ 12,492         $ 15,606
              Retail revenues    $ 3,169 M       $ 6,823 M     $ 6,944 M    $ 10,069 M     $ 9,125 M       $ 36,130 M
Europe        Bin Share               4.5%             21%           30%           36%          8.9%             100%
              Sales units            20,611          95,377       136,078       162,758        40,423          455,247
              Retail prices        $ 38,684        $ 33,855      $ 26,290      $ 17,661      $ 17,201         $ 24,544
              Retail revenues      $ 797 M       $ 3,229 M     $ 3,577 M     $ 2,874 M       $ 695 M       $ 11,173 M
     U.S.     Bin Share                28%             28%           17%           17%           10%             100%
              Sales units          2506090         2493822       1565284       1544556        950,870        9,060,622
              Retail prices        $ 17,778        $ 15,636      $ 13,721      $ 11,356       $ 9,579         $ 14,532
              Retail revenues   $ 44,554 M      $ 38,994 M    $ 21,477 M    $ 17,539 M     $ 9,108 M      $ 131,673 M
†
    All calculations based on sample averages



                                                   Appendix-9
      Table A-14: Used Cars: Retail prices, wholesale prices, and dealer margins by MPG bin†

              Variable            MPG Bin 1     MPG Bin 2    MPG Bin 3    MPG Bin 4    MPG Bin 5    Average
    BMW       Retail prices         $ 42,439      $ 34,500     $ 27,683     $ 26,030     $ 18,881   $ 28,823
              Wholesale prices      $ 39,566      $ 32,062     $ 25,551     $ 23,921     $ 17,181   $ 26,632
              Dealer margins         $ 2,873       $ 2,437      $ 2,132      $ 2,109      $ 1,700    $ 2,191
Chrysler      Retail prices         $ 16,135      $ 15,075     $ 13,514     $ 12,014      $ 9,918   $ 14,379
              Wholesale prices      $ 14,312      $ 13,366     $ 11,812     $ 10,399      $ 8,498   $ 12,669
              Dealer margins         $ 1,823       $ 1,709      $ 1,701      $ 1,615      $ 1,420    $ 1,710
    Ford      Retail prices         $ 17,315      $ 14,774     $ 12,442     $ 10,943      $ 9,012   $ 14,175
              Wholesale prices      $ 15,538      $ 13,055     $ 10,872      $ 9,469      $ 7,616   $ 12,523
              Dealer margins         $ 1,778       $ 1,719      $ 1,570      $ 1,474      $ 1,396    $ 1,652
     GM       Retail prices         $ 19,729      $ 16,780     $ 14,994     $ 11,279      $ 9,786   $ 14,885
              Wholesale prices      $ 17,869      $ 14,908     $ 13,208      $ 9,657      $ 8,322   $ 13,143
              Dealer margins         $ 1,860       $ 1,872      $ 1,786      $ 1,622      $ 1,465    $ 1,742
    Honda     Retail prices         $ 13,061      $ 21,798     $ 18,525     $ 15,189     $ 12,829   $ 15,333
              Wholesale prices      $ 11,394      $ 20,176     $ 16,886     $ 13,714     $ 11,426   $ 13,851
              Dealer margins         $ 1,667       $ 1,622      $ 1,640      $ 1,475      $ 1,403    $ 1,483
Hyundai       Retail prices         $ 14,577      $ 13,126     $ 13,469     $ 10,487      $ 9,911   $ 11,431
              Wholesale prices      $ 12,709      $ 11,346     $ 11,753      $ 8,894      $ 8,493    $ 9,837
              Dealer margins         $ 1,867       $ 1,780      $ 1,716      $ 1,593      $ 1,418    $ 1,593
    Mazda     Retail prices         $ 12,763      $ 15,210     $ 12,687     $ 12,011     $ 10,911   $ 12,508
              Wholesale prices      $ 11,010      $ 13,616     $ 11,156     $ 10,537      $ 9,581   $ 11,034
              Dealer margins         $ 1,753       $ 1,594      $ 1,532      $ 1,474      $ 1,330    $ 1,474
Mercedes      Retail prices         $ 39,580      $ 37,572     $ 28,606     $ 25,444     $ 30,345   $ 32,653
              Wholesale prices      $ 36,814      $ 34,876     $ 26,333     $ 23,267     $ 27,664   $ 30,179
              Dealer margins         $ 2,766       $ 2,696      $ 2,273      $ 2,177      $ 2,681    $ 2,474
    Nissan    Retail prices         $ 18,565      $ 17,908     $ 17,943     $ 14,015     $ 11,881   $ 15,830
              Wholesale prices      $ 16,802      $ 16,287     $ 16,387     $ 12,471     $ 10,542   $ 14,272
              Dealer margins         $ 1,763       $ 1,621      $ 1,556      $ 1,545      $ 1,339    $ 1,557
    Toyota    Retail prices         $ 24,412      $ 20,024     $ 20,607     $ 16,725     $ 13,365   $ 17,387
              Wholesale prices      $ 22,516      $ 18,230     $ 18,781     $ 15,120     $ 11,959   $ 15,759
              Dealer margins         $ 1,896       $ 1,794      $ 1,826      $ 1,604      $ 1,406    $ 1,628
     VW       Retail prices         $ 31,282      $ 24,660     $ 19,235     $ 14,597     $ 16,369   $ 16,780
              Wholesale prices      $ 29,151      $ 22,642     $ 17,452     $ 13,012     $ 14,844   $ 15,126
              Dealer margins         $ 2,131       $ 2,018      $ 1,783      $ 1,585      $ 1,525    $ 1,654
     Asia     Retail prices         $ 20,943      $ 18,661     $ 18,017     $ 14,757     $ 12,492   $ 15,606
              Wholesale prices      $ 19,118      $ 16,954     $ 16,339     $ 13,218     $ 11,097   $ 14,044
              Dealer margins         $ 1,825       $ 1,707      $ 1,677      $ 1,538      $ 1,395    $ 1,561
Europe        Retail prices         $ 38,684      $ 33,855     $ 26,290     $ 17,661     $ 17,201   $ 24,544
              Wholesale prices      $ 36,007      $ 31,388     $ 24,189     $ 15,923     $ 15,614   $ 22,515
              Dealer margins         $ 2,677       $ 2,467      $ 2,101      $ 1,738      $ 1,586    $ 2,028
     U.S.     Retail prices         $ 17,778      $ 15,636     $ 13,721     $ 11,356      $ 9,579   $ 14,532
              Wholesale prices      $ 15,960      $ 13,861     $ 12,033      $ 9,762      $ 8,144   $ 12,827
              Dealer margins         $ 1,819       $ 1,775      $ 1,689      $ 1,594      $ 1,435    $ 1,706
†
    All calculations based on sample averages




                                                 Appendix-10
          Table A-15: Used Cars: Retail revenue changes implied by $1 increase in gasoline prices†

              Implied               MPG Bin 1     MPG Bin 2     MPG Bin 3     MPG Bin 4   MPG Bin 5          Total
    BMW       ∆   Retail revenues       $ -20 M     $ -109 M      $ -146 M       $ 59 M       $ 54 M      $ -162 M
              %   change                   -12%         -9.3%         -6.8%        9.8%           31%         -3.8%
Chrysler      ∆   Retail revenues   $ -1,772 M      $ -384 M       $ -59 M       $ 61 M      $ -46 M    $ -2,200 M
              %   change                   -19%         -4.2%         -1.4%        2.2%         -3.2%         -8.1%
    Ford      ∆   Retail revenues   $ -3,205 M      $ -537 M       $ -82 M       $ 98 M      $ -69 M    $ -3,795 M
              %   change                   -18%         -4.2%         -1.1%        2.8%         -2.4%         -8.5%
     GM       ∆   Retail revenues   $ -3,048 M      $ -746 M      $ -174 M      $ 302 M     $ -151 M    $ -3,818 M
              %   change                   -18%         -4.5%         -1.8%        2.6%         -3.1%         -6.3%
    Honda     ∆   Retail revenues      $ -7.3 M      $ -65 M       $ -21 M      $ 136 M      $ 448 M       $ 490 M
              %   change                   -24%         -5.5%         -1.8%        4.6%           17%          6.1%
Hyundai       ∆   Retail revenues       $ -16 M      $ -31 M      $ -7.3 M       $ 42 M      $ 160 M       $ 147 M
              %   change                   -23%         -5.7%         -1.2%        7.2%           19%          5.5%
    Mazda     ∆   Retail revenues        $ -4 M      $ -28 M      $ -3.8 M       $ 41 M       $ 82 M        $ 87 M
              %   change                   -24%         -5.6%           -1%        6.1%           18%          4.3%
Mercedes      ∆   Retail revenues       $ -75 M     $ -140 M       $ -73 M       $ 60 M      $ 7.5 M      $ -220 M
              %   change                   -13%           -8%         -6.7%        9.8%           29%         -5.4%
    Nissan    ∆   Retail revenues     $ -295 M       $ -84 M       $ -34 M      $ 108 M      $ 172 M      $ -132 M
              %   change                   -22%         -5.6%         -1.7%        5.1%           17%         -1.7%
    Toyota    ∆   Retail revenues     $ -371 M      $ -178 M       $ -54 M      $ 148 M      $ 673 M       $ 218 M
              %   change                   -20%         -5.6%         -1.9%        4.1%           16%          1.4%
     VW       ∆   Retail revenues       $ -17 M      $ -72 M       $ -41 M      $ 153 M      $ 145 M       $ 169 M
              %   change                   -17%          -16%         -8.7%        9.6%           31%          5.5%
     Asia     ∆   retail revenues     $ -672 M      $ -381 M      $ -119 M      $ 481 M    $ 1,542 M       $ 852 M
              %   change                  -21%          -5.6%         -1.7%        4.8%           17%          2.4%
Europe        ∆   Retail revenues     $ -106 M      $ -312 M      $ -253 M      $ 278 M      $ 216 M      $ -177 M
              %   change                  -13%          -9.7%         -7.1%        9.7%           31%         -1.6%
     U.S.     ∆   Retail revenues   $ -8,029 M    $ -1,681 M      $ -315 M      $ 454 M     $ -264 M    $ -9,836 M
              %   change                  -18%          -4.3%         -1.5%        2.6%         -2.9%         -7.5%
†
    All calculations based on sample averages




                                                  Appendix-11
                Table A-16: Used Cars: Equilibrium sales response to gasoline prices by origin

                                              Asia                            Europe                            U.S.
Variable                            Coef     Av. Sales    Effect     Coef    Av. Sales    Effect       Coef    Av. Sales     Effect
GasPrice*MPG Bin 1                 -317**       1957       -16%        4.9      260        2%      -3192**       23952       -13%
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)              (71)                             (15)                           (485)
GasPrice*MPG Bin 2                   -223       4198       -5%         91       1224       7%      -1482**       23066        -6%
(16 MPG ≤ FE < 19 MPG)              (191)                            (160)                           (502)
GasPrice*MPG Bin 3                   -151       4463       -3%         -40      1537       -3%       -960*       17805        -5%
(19 MPG ≤ FE < 21 MPG)              (169)                             (55)                           (479)
GasPrice*MPG Bin 4                    -96       8714       -1%       196+       1949      10%         -880       20344        -4%
(21 MPG ≤ FE < 24 MPG)              (625)                            (115)                           (726)
GasPrice*MPG Bin 5                    706       7870        9%       77**       296       26%       -1183*       10994       -11%
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)             (731)                             (15)                           (528)
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered
    at the region level.
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the authors.


            Table A-17: Used cars: Equilibrium price response to gasoline prices by origin

                                                                       Asia             Europe                 U.S.
Variable                                                         Coefficient (SE)   Coefficient (SE)     Coefficient (SE)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1†                                            -1247**            -5770**               -968**
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)                                                (86)              (202)                 (41)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                                                 -56            -5396**                354**
(16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                                       (62)              (172)                 (43)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                                               309**            -1210**                569**
(19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                                       (57)               (76)                 (45)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                                               877**                -52                820**
(21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                                       (48)               (53)                 (47)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                                               909**              706**                848**
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                                                (35)               (66)                 (44)
Price difference between highest and lowest MPG Bin:                  $2156              $6476                $1816
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and
    clustered at the region level.
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the authors.




                                                       Appendix-12
      Table A-18: Used cars: Equilibrium wholesaleprice response to gasoline prices by origin

                                                                     Asia              Europe                U.S.
Variable                                                       Coefficient (SE)    Coefficient (SE)    Coefficient (SE)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1†                                          -1259**             -5421**              -974**
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)                                              (88)               (204)                (40)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                                               -92             -5229**               370**
(16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                                     (59)               (170)                (41)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                                             256**             -1223**               618**
(19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                                     (57)                 (72)               (44)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                                             782**                -92+               896**
(21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                                     (47)                 (52)               (46)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                                             773**               541**               915**
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                                              (37)                 (57)               (39)
Price difference between highest and lowest MPG Bin:                $2032               $5962               $1889
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and
    clustered at the region level.
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the authors.




      Table A-19: Used cars: Equilibrium dealer margin response to gasoline prices by origin

                                                                     Asia              Europe                U.S.
Variable                                                       Coefficient (SE)    Coefficient (SE)    Coefficient (SE)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1†                                              13               -350**                 5.9
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)                                              (23)                (56)                (11)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                                              36+               -167**                 -16
(16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                                     (19)                (22)                (10)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                                              53**                 13                -49**
(19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                                     (14)                (27)                (12)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                                              95**                40*                -76**
(21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                                     (12)                (15)                (13)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                                             136**               164**               -67**
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                                              (12)                (27)                (14)
Price difference between highest and lowest MPG Bin:                 $123                $514                -$73
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and
    clustered at the region level.
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the authors.




                                                     Appendix-13
                  Table A-20: Heterogeneity by gasoline price levels: Equilibrium prices

                                                                New Vehicles                   Used Vehicles
                                                             Gasoline Price Range           Gasoline Price Range
Variables                                                   <$2    $2 to $3    ≥$3         <$2    $2 to $3    ≥$3
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1                                   -109      -275**     -300**     -1204**   -1339**    -1347**
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)                                   (98)        (99)       (93)       (61)       (49)       (43)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                                  -181**     -189**     -169**      -298**    -285**     -321**
(16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                          (29)        (28)       (29)       (44)       (51)       (43)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                                    -24         -25        -23      311**      403**      330**
(19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                          (32)        (34)       (33)       (30)       (27)       (22)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                                   76+        116*       122**      484**      714**      677**
(21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                          (40)        (45)       (40)       (35)       (27)       (25)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                                  257**       303**      292**      649**      918**      856**
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                                   (37)        (32)       (30)       (38)       (26)       (24)
Relative price difference b/w MPG bin 5 and 1:            $366        $578       $592      $1,853    $2,257     $2,203
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust
    and clustered at the region level.
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the
    authors.




                  Table A-21: Heterogeneity by gasoline price levels: Equilibrium shares

                                                        New Vehicles                        Used Vehicles
                                                     Gasoline Price Range                 Gasoline Price Range
     Variables                                      <$2    $2 to $3    ≥$3              <$2     $2 to $3     ≥$3
     GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1                      -.046**     -.043**    -.042**    -.0082**    -.0081**   -.0091**
     (fuel economy < 16 MPG)                      (.0048)     (.0044)     (.0041)    (.0019)     (.0017)    (.0015)
     GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                      -.022**     -.024**    -.027**     -.00048       .0014     .0018
     (16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)             (.0032)     (.0033)      (.003)    (.0015)     (.0013)    (.0012)
     GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                      .00091       -.0024    -.0029+      .0027       .00056   -.000093
     (19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)              (.002)     (.0018)    (.0016)     (.0022)     (.0018)    (.0016)
     GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                      .013**       .017**     .015**     .0036*       .0034*   .0039**
     (21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)              (.003)     (.0027)    (.0028)     (.0016)     (.0014)    (.0012)
     GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                      .053**       .052**     .057**     .0024*      .0028**    .0034**
     (fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                      (.0031)     (.0029)     (.0028)    (.0012)    (.00094)   (.00092)
     *
         significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are
         robust and clustered at the region level.
         This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the
         authors.




                                                     Appendix-14
                   Table A-22: Heterogeneity by gasoline price trends: Equilibrium prices

                                                              New Vehicles                       Used Vehicles
                                                           Gasoline Price Trend               Gasoline Price Trend
Variables                                               Up 10¢   Hold     Down 10¢        Up 10¢     Hold     Down 10¢
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1                                 -360**    -244*      -350**       -1437**   -1287**    -1481**
(fuel economy < 16 MPG)                                  (89)      (90)        (90)         (39)       (34)       (42)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                                 -161**    -93**      -177**        -336**    -338**     -339**
(16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)                         (31)      (33)        (31)         (48)       (52)       (50)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                                   -17       50         -5.3        325**     243**       346**
(19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)                         (33)      (35)        (35)         (22)       (23)       (23)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                                 140**     192**       146**        754**      665**     822**
(21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)                         (36)      (43)        (37)         (24)       (22)       (26)
GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                                 302**     334**       320**        932**      860**    1040**
(fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                                  (33)      (33)        (36)         (25)       (29)       (26)
Relative price difference b/w MPG bin 3 and 1:           $662      $578       $670         $2,369    $2,147     $2,521
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and
    clustered at the region level.
    This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the authors.




                  Table A-23: Heterogeneity by gasoline price trends: Equilibrium shares

                                                        New Vehicles                         Used Vehicles
                                                     Gasoline Price Range                 Gasoline Price Range
    Variables                                    Up 10¢     Hold     Down 10¢         Up 10¢     Hold     Down 10¢
    GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 1                     -.042**    -.046**     -.043**     -.0092**    -.0082**    -.0082**
    (fuel economy < 16 MPG)                     (.0039)    (.0045)     (.0038)      (.0015)     (.0017)     (.0014)
    GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 2                     -.028**    -.027**     -.027**       .0019        .002       .0013
    (16 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 19 MPG)            (.0028)    (.0033)     (.0028)      (.0012)     (.0015)     (.0013)
    GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 3                     -.0031+      .0011      -.0025      -.00052      -.0019     -.00029
    (19 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 21 MPG)            (.0017)    (.0019)     (.0019)      (.0015)     (.0019)     (.0016)
    GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 4                      .015**     .013**     .016**      .0042**       .005**    .0038**
    (21 MPG ≤ fuel economy < 24 MPG)             (.003)     (.003)     (.0031)      (.0011)     (.0015)     (.0012)
    GasolinePrice*MPG Bin 5                      .059**     .058**     .056**      .0037**      .0031**     .0033**
    (fuel economy ≥ 24 MPG)                     (.0029)    (.0034)     (.0029)     (.00093)    (.00083)    (.00094)
    *
        significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level. Standard errors in parentheses are robust
        and clustered at the region level.
        This table only reports the coefficients on gasoline prices. Full results are available upon request from the
        authors.




                                                     Appendix-15
                 Table A-24: Examples of cars in segments and subsegments

Segment       Avg. MPG   Subsegment            Avg. MPG   Example
Compact Car      26.9    Entry Compact Car        27.7    Hyundai Accent, Toyota Yaris
                         Premium Compact Car      26.8    Honda Civic, Ford Focus
Midsize Car     22.3     Entry Midsize Car        22.4    Pontiac G6, VW Jetta
                         Premium Midsize Car      22.2    Honda Accord, Ford Fusion, Nissan Altima
Luxury Car      19.6     Entry Luxury Car         20.1    BMW 3-Series, Acura TSX
                         Mid Luxury Car           19.1    BMW 5-Series, Volvo V70
                         Premium Luxury Car       18.0    BMW 7 Series, Lexus LS Series
                         Luxury Sports Car        17.0    BMW 6 Series, Mercedes SL-Class
Sporty Car      20.4     Sporty Car               20.8    VW Golf GTI, Ford Mustang
                         Premium Sports Car       19.1    Chevrolet Corvette, Porsche 911
SUV             17.0     Entry SUV                19.4    Honda CRV, Ford Escape
                         Midsize SUV              16.4    Toyota 4Runner, Dodge Durango
                         Fullsize SUV             14.0    GMC Yukon, Toyota Sequoia
                         Luxury SUV               16.1    Acura MDX, Cadillac Escalade
Pickup          15.5     Compact Pickup           17.0    Ford Ranger, Dodge Dakota
                         Fullsize Pickup          14.7    Ford F150, Chevrolet Silverado 1500
Van             18.1     Compact Van              18.3    Honda Odyssey, Dodge Grand Caravan
                         Fullsize Van             14.0    Dodge Ram Van, Ford Club Waron E-150




                                       Appendix-16
              Table A-25: New Cars: Equilibrium price response to gasoline prices by segment

Segment                Coef. (SE)      Subsegment                 Coef. (SE)   Example
Compact Car              378**         Entry Compact Car             264**     Hyundai Accent, Toyota Yaris
(avg. MPG=26.9)           (34)         (avg. MPG=27.7)                (61)
                                       Premium Compact Car           390**     Honda Civic, Ford Focus
                                       (avg. MPG=26.8)                (33)
Midsize Car                90*         Entry Midsize Car             213**     Pontiac G6, VW Jetta
(avg. MPG=22.3)            (41)        (avg. MPG=22.4)                (47)
                                       Premium Midsize Car             60      Honda Accord, Ford Fusion, Nissan Altima
                                       (avg. MPG=22.2)                (43)
Luxury Car                -397**       Entry Luxury Car                -19     BMW 3-Series, Acura TSX
(avg. MPG=19.6)            (88)        (avg. MPG=20.1)                (64)
                                       Mid Luxury Car               -883**     BMW 5-Series, Volvo V70
                                       (avg. MPG=19.1)               (118)
                                       Premium Luxury Car          -1672**     BMW 7 Series, Lexus LS Series
                                       (avg. MPG=18.0)               (323)
                                       Luxury Sports Car           -2026**     BMW 6 Series, Mercedes SL-Class
                                       (avg. MPG=17.0)               (411)
Sporty Car                187**        Sporty Car                    319**     VW Golf GTI, Ford Mustang
(avg. MPG=20.4)            (56)        (avg. MPG=20.8)                (44)
                                       Premium Sports Car             -163     Chevrolet Corvette, Porsche 911
                                       (avg. MPG=19.1)               (160)
SUV                       -83**        Entry SUV                     295**     Honda CRV, Ford Escape
(avg. MPG=17.0)            (21)        (avg. MPG=19.4)                (19)
                                       Midsize SUV                  -184**     Toyota 4Runner, Dodge Durango
                                       (avg. MPG=16.4)                (43)
                                       Fullsize SUV                 -475**     GMC Yukon, Toyota Sequoia
                                       (avg. MPG=14.0)               (143)
                                       Luxury SUV                   -459**     Acura MDX, Cadillac Escalade
                                       (avg. MPG=16.1)                (91)
Pickup                     -127        Compact Pickup                  37      Ford Ranger, Dodge Dakota
(avg. MPG=15.5)            (77)        (avg. MPG=17.0)                (58)
                                       Fullsize Pickup               -215*     Ford F150, Chevrolet Silverado 1500
                                       (avg. MPG=14.7)                (97)
Van                       -87**        Compact Van                  -101**     Honda Odyssey, Dodge Grand Caravan
(avg. MPG=18.1)            (28)        (avg. MPG=18.3)                (29)
                                       Fullsize Van                   148      Dodge Ram Van, Ford Club Waron E-150
                                       (avg. MPG=14.0)               (127)
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level.
    Full results are available upon request from the authors.




                                                    Appendix-17
              Table A-26: Used Cars: Equilibrium price response to gasoline prices by segment

Segment                Coef. (SE)      Subsegment                 Coef. (SE)   Example
Compact Car              311**         Entry Compact Car             970**     Hyundai Accent, Toyota Yaris
(avg. MPG=26.9)           (15)         (avg. MPG=27.7)                (28)
                                       Premium Compact Car          270**      Honda Civic, Ford Focus
                                       (avg. MPG=26.8)                (17)
Midsize Car               233**        Entry Midsize Car             742**     Pontiac G6, VW Jetta
(avg. MPG=22.3)            (16)        (avg. MPG=22.4)                (28)
                                       Premium Midsize Car           73**      Honda Accord, Ford Fusion, Nissan Altima
                                       (avg. MPG=22.2)                (14)
Luxury Car                -261**       Entry Luxury Car             1087**     BMW 3-Series, Acura TSX
(avg. MPG=19.6)            (41)        (avg. MPG=20.1)                (44)
                                       Mid Luxury Car               -629**     BMW 5-Series, Volvo V70
                                       (avg. MPG=19.1)                (58)
                                       Premium Luxury Car          -6861**     BMW 7 Series, Lexus LS Series
                                       (avg. MPG=18.0)               (119)
                                       Luxury Sports Car           -4907**     BMW 6 Series, Mercedes SL-Class
                                       (avg. MPG=17.0)               (309)
Sporty Car                329**        Sporty Car                  1243**      VW Golf GTI, Ford Mustang
(avg. MPG=20.4)            (30)        (avg. MPG=20.8)                (50)
                                       Premium Sports Car          -2392**     Chevrolet Corvette, Porsche 911
                                       (avg. MPG=19.1)                (86)
SUV                       -281**       Entry SUV                    1748**     Honda CRV, Ford Escape
(avg. MPG=17.0)            (28)        (avg. MPG=19.4)                (52)
                                       Midsize SUV                    -119     Toyota 4Runner, Dodge Durango
                                       (avg. MPG=16.4)                (75)
                                       Fullsize SUV                -2101**     GMC Yukon, Toyota Sequoia
                                       (avg. MPG=14.0)               (120)
                                       Luxury SUV                  -3806**     Acura MDX, Cadillac Escalade
                                       (avg. MPG=16.1)               (105)
Pickup                    -81**        Compact Pickup                942**     Ford Ranger, Dodge Dakota
(avg. MPG=15.5)            (24)        (avg. MPG=17.0)                (26)
                                       Fullsize Pickup              -711**     Ford F150, Chevrolet Silverado 1500
                                       (avg. MPG=14.7)                (32)
Van                       150**        Compact Van                  110**      Honda Odyssey, Dodge Grand Caravan
(avg. MPG=18.1)            (29)        (avg. MPG=18.3)                (28)
                                       Fullsize Van                 1477**     Dodge Ram Van, Ford Club Waron E-150
                                       (avg. MPG=14.0)                (81)
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level.
    Full results are available upon request from the authors.




                                                    Appendix-18
                   Table A-27: New Cars: Sales response to gasoline prices by segment

Segment                % Sales     Subsegment                  % Sales     Example
                       Change                                  Change
Compact Car            10.2%       Entry Compact Car           49.1%**     Hyundai Accent, Toyota Yaris
(avg. MPG=26.9)                    (avg. MPG=27.7)
                                   Premium Compact Car          6.8%*      Honda Civic, Ford Focus
                                   (avg. MPG=26.8)
Midsize Car              -3.7%     Entry Midsize Car            8.3%+      Pontiac G6, VW Jetta
(avg. MPG=22.3)                    (avg. MPG=22.4)
                                   Premium Midsize Car          -7.1%*     Honda Accord, Ford Fusion, Nissan Altima
                                   (avg. MPG=22.2)
Luxury Car               -6.4%     Entry Luxury Car             -3.6%      BMW 3-Series, Acura TSX
(avg. MPG=19.6)                    (avg. MPG=20.1)
                                   Mid Luxury Car               -7.4%*     BMW 5-Series, Volvo V70
                                   (avg. MPG=19.1)
                                   Premium Luxury Car          -20.5%**    BMW 7 Series, Lexus LS Series
                                   (avg. MPG=18.0)
                                   Luxury Sports Car           -14.6%**    BMW 6 Series, Mercedes SL-Class
                                   (avg. MPG=17.0)
Sporty Car              -11.1%     Sporty Car                  -16.7%**    VW Golf GTI, Ford Mustang
(avg. MPG=20.4)                    (avg. MPG=20.8)
                                   Premium Sports Car           8.5%*      Chevrolet Corvette, Porsche 911
                                   (avg. MPG=19.1)
SUV                     -21.5%     Entry SUV                   -13.3%**    Honda CRV, Ford Escape
(avg. MPG=17.0)                    (avg. MPG=19.4)
                                   Midsize SUV                 -22.3%**    Toyota 4Runner, Dodge Durango
                                   (avg. MPG=16.4)
                                   Fullsize SUV                -39.4%**    GMC Yukon, Toyota Sequoia
                                   (avg. MPG=14.0)
                                   Luxury SUV                  -14.9%**    Acura MDX, Cadillac Escalade
                                   (avg. MPG=16.1)
Pickup                  -24.0%     Compact Pickup              -23.3%**    Ford Ranger, Dodge Dakota
(avg. MPG=15.5)                    (avg. MPG=17.0)
                                   Fullsize Pickup             -24.2%**    Ford F150, Chevrolet Silverado 1500
                                   (avg. MPG=14.7)
Van                     -17.5%     Compact Van                 -15.4%**    Honda Odyssey, Dodge Grand Caravan
(avg. MPG=18.1)                    (avg. MPG=18.3)
                                   Fullsize Van                -26.1%**    Dodge Ram Van, Ford Club Waron E-150
                                   (avg. MPG=14.0)
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level.
    Full results are available upon request from the authors.




                                                    Appendix-19
                    Table A-28: Used Cars: Sales response to gasoline prices by segment

Segment                 % Sales      Subsegment                  % Sales   Example
                        Change                                   Change
Compact Car              1.6%        Entry Compact Car           -10.0%    Hyundai Accent, Toyota Yaris
(avg. MPG=26.9)                      (avg. MPG=27.7)
                                     Premium Compact Car          2.2%     Honda Civic, Ford Focus
                                     (avg. MPG=26.8)
Midsize Car              -0.4%       Entry Midsize Car            -4.0%    Pontiac G6, VW Jetta
(avg. MPG=22.3)                      (avg. MPG=22.4)
                                     Premium Midsize Car          -0.7%    Honda Accord, Ford Fusion, Nissan Altima
                                     (avg. MPG=22.2)
Luxury Car              -6.7%**      Entry Luxury Car             -2.1%    BMW 3-Series, Acura TSX
(avg. MPG=19.6)                      (avg. MPG=20.1)
                                     Mid Luxury Car             -12.5%**   BMW 5-Series, Volvo V70
                                     (avg. MPG=19.1)
                                     Premium Luxury Car         -11.4%+    BMW 7 Series, Lexus LS Series
                                     (avg. MPG=18.0)
                                     Luxury Sports Car            5.0%     BMW 6 Series, Mercedes SL-Class
                                     (avg. MPG=17.0)
Sporty Car             -11.8%**      Sporty Car                 -14.4%**   VW Golf GTI, Ford Mustang
(avg. MPG=20.4)                      (avg. MPG=20.8)
                                     Premium Sports Car           7.7%     Chevrolet Corvette, Porsche 911
                                     (avg. MPG=19.1)
SUV                    -11.0%**      Entry SUV                    1.0%     Honda CRV, Ford Escape
(avg. MPG=17.0)                      (avg. MPG=19.4)
                                     Midsize SUV                -13.6%**   Toyota 4Runner, Dodge Durango
                                     (avg. MPG=16.4)
                                     Fullsize SUV               -20.4%**   GMC Yukon, Toyota Sequoia
                                     (avg. MPG=14.0)
                                     Luxury SUV                   0.0%     Acura MDX, Cadillac Escalade
                                     (avg. MPG=16.1)
Pickup                 -12.1%**      Compact Pickup              -9.7%**   Ford Ranger, Dodge Dakota
(avg. MPG=15.5)                      (avg. MPG=17.0)
                                     Fullsize Pickup            -13.7%**   Ford F150, Chevrolet Silverado 1500
                                     (avg. MPG=14.7)
Van                    -10.3%**      Compact Van                -10.2%**   Honda Odyssey, Dodge Grand Caravan
(avg. MPG=18.1)                      (avg. MPG=18.3)
                                     Fullsize Van                 5.6%     Dodge Ram Van, Ford Club Waron E-150
                                     (avg. MPG=14.0)
*
    significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; + significant at 10% level.
    Full results are available upon request from the authors.




                                                    Appendix-20
 Figure A-1: Annual share of new vehicles offered by bin, Asian manufacturers



                                        Asian Manufacturers
                              Shares of models offered for sale by MPG bin

             100
             80
         Percentage




                                                                                          MPG Bin 5
                60




                                                                                          MPG Bin 4

                                                                                          MPG Bin 3

                                                                                          MPG Bin 2

                                                                                          MPG Bin 1
        40   20
             0




                      1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                                                 Model Year




Figure A-2: Annual share of new vehicles offered by bin, European manufacturers



                                     European Manufacturers
                              Shares of models offered for sale by MPG bin
             100
             80
         Percentage




                                                                                         MPG Bin 5
                60




                                                                                         MPG Bin 4
                                                                                         MPG Bin 3
                                                                                         MPG Bin 2
                                                                                         MPG Bin 1
        40   20
             0




                      1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                                                Model Year




                                               Appendix-21
Figure A-3: Annual share of new vehicles offered by bin, U.S. manufacturers



                                      US Manufacturers
                           Shares of models offered for sale by MPG bin
          100
          80
      Percentage




                                                                                      MPG Bin 5
             60




                                                                                      MPG Bin 4
                                                                                      MPG Bin 3
                                                                                      MPG Bin 2
                                                                                      MPG Bin 1
     40   20
          0




                   1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                                             Model Year




                                            Appendix-22
