NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPLOYED AND UNEMPLOYED JOB SEARCH:
A COMPARISON OF CHOICES
AND OUTCOMES AMONG YOUTH

Harry J. Hoizer

Working Paper No. 1861

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1986

I would 1-ike to thank Dan Hamerrnesh and other seminar participants

at Michigan State University for their comments. Eric Krupka provided excellent research assistance. Funding was provided by NSF
Grant No. SES—840887E. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1861
March 1986

flrployed and Unemployed Jcb Searth:

A rparison of thois and Outcones Anong Youth

ABSTPACI'

This

paper presents evidence that young unemployed jobseekers choose

higher levels of search effort (as measured by numbers of methods used and
tine spent per method) and lower relative reservation wages than do comparable

employed seekers.

The unemployed also have higher probabilities of gaining

new employment, which reflect higher probabilities of receiving offers and

higher probabilities of accepting them; as well as slightly lower
These differences in outcomes between the two groups are at least

especially

wages.

partly explained by differences in their respective search choices.
evidence

The

thus suggests that unemployed jobseekers have higher costs of search

(from foregone earnings) than do the employed, causing the former to seek new
jobs more eagerly.

Holzer
Iparbtnt of Econattics

Harry J.

Michiqan State University
Fast Lansing, MI 48824

In recent years, job search models have been amended to allow for

search by both employed and unemployed individuals.

Among the issues

addressed by empirical work on this topic has been the relative effectiveness

of each type of search in producing employment outcomes.

This issue is

critical for determining whether or not job search is an important factor in

explaining unemployment, since there may be little need to experience
unemployment in searching for work.1

Unfortunately, the research to date on this issue has provided very
conflicting evidence. Early papers by Mattila (1969) and Black (1980) argued

that employed search produces higher wage offers than unemployed search.
However, Kahn and Low (1982) argued that unemployed search produces higher
wage offers, once the self—selection of individuals into each mode of search

was accounted for.

More recently, Gottschalk and Maloney (1985) presented

evidence that employment status per se has no significant effect on whether

individuals thought they were "better off" in their new jobs, although
involuntary job terminations prior to unemployment did result in more negative
outcomes.

In

this paper, I hope to clarify these issues by presenting new

evidence on search choices and outcomes for employed and unemployed
men.

In particular, the search choices analyzed will

young

include the reported

2

reservation wage, the number of search methods used, and the time spent per

method by each searcher.

The employment outcomes considered will be the

probabilities of gaining new employment by receiving and accepting job offers,

as well as the wages of offers received and accepted.

The analysis is

performed on data from the New Youth Cohort of the National Longitudinal
Survey (NLS).

This paper thus builds on previous efforts by sorting through a more
complete range of search outcomes, and by considering various search choices

as sources of differences in outcomes between employed and unemployed
searchers.

All of this is done within the context of a search model that

predicts differences in search choices and outcomes between the two types of
jobseekers, given differences in their costs of searching.

The first section of the paper summarizes the search model and its
predictions regarding search choices and outcomes. The second section reports
the empirical results, while the third provides a summary and conclusion.

The main findings are that unemployed young jobseekers choose lower
relative reservation wages and higher levels of search effort than do employed
seekers.

Both of these findings are consistent with the notion of lower

utility while searching for the unemployed.

Furthermore, those choices help

to explain our additional findings of higher job gaining probabilities for the

unemployed, which reflect higher probabilities of receiving offers and
especially higher probabilities of accepting them; as well as their slightly

lower accepted wages.

In short, the higher costs of search while being

unemployed cause these individuals to exert more effort and to be less
selective in pursuing new employment.

3

I.

Theoretical

A very

Predictions Regarding Employed and Unemployed Search

standard result of the job search literature is that the

probability of receiving a new job within a certain period is related to
reservation wages and search effort in the following manner:

'E = ir(SE)

1)

where

-

is the probability of gaining employment, w' is the reservation

wage, SE is search effort, ¶

is

the probability of receiving an offer and

f(w0) is the density function of wage offers facing an individual. Likewise,

the expected wage of an individual conditional on gaining employment is
related to his or her reservation wage:

s;wf(w)dw
E(wjw°. wr) =

2)

w

f(w)dw

Of course, the assumption that search effort affects offer probabilities but
not wage offers is arbitrary and is made for the

sake

of simplicity.

Differences in these search outcomes between employed and unemployed
searchers should therefore reflect differences in search choices SE and

well as

wr; as

possible differences in the offer and wage functions which the two

groups face.

There

are several reasons for expecting the search choices of the two

groups to differ. It is well known that, ceteris parabus, reservation wages
should be inversely related to search costs, which are defined

as direct costs

4

of search plus foregone earnings

(Lippman and McCall, 1976).

Thus the

employed may have higher reservation wages due to lower costs of search, which
in turn are made possible by the earnings which they continue to receive while

searching. Lower reservation wages for the unemployed may, in fact, be part
of an explicit strategy in which search continues at a higher reservation wage
after an unemployed worker accepts a low—wage job (Burdett, 1978).

Search effort is also likely to be lower for those having lower costs

due to earnings.2

This factor, as well as the

higher marginal

value of leisure for those who also spend time working, should lead them to
have lower levels of search effort than the unemployed as well.3 Of course,

the crucial assumption of lower search costs for the employed rests on the
notion that nonwage income sources (such as Unemployment Insurance) and value

of leisure time do not fully compensate the unemployed for their loss of
earnings. The model also abstracts from the effects of temporary layoffs with
high probability of recall on the search effort of the unemployed.

Given these assumptions, we would predict on the basis of Equations 1)

and 2) that employed searchers have lower probabilities of receiving offers,

lower probabilities of accepting offers, and higher wages when offers are
accepted than do unemployed searchers. However, these predictions ny change
when some of the simple model's assumptions are relaxed.

For instance, if

search effort affects wage offers as well as offer probabilities (Kahn and
Low, 1982), the higher wages of the employed will be reduced.

Furthermore,

the offer probability and wage offer functions might differ between the two

groups if the technology of search varies across employment states.

As an

example, information and personal contacts may be more accessible to employed

searchers.

Differences in individual characteristics between the two may work

in the same direction (if, for instance, the unemployed are a lower—skilled

5

group on average). These factors might reduce or reverse the higher predicted

probability of gaining employment for the unemployed, while raising the
likelihood of higher received wages for the employed.

Differences in the

dynamics of search choices as the spell of search proceeds might also
complicate the comparison.4

Finally, all of the above is relevant only when initial employment
status is exogenously determined. This is true for those whose jobs have been

involuntarily terminated (Gottschalk and Maloney, 1985) as well as for those
who

are new entrants or reentrants to the labor force.

In fact, the vast

majority of the unemployed belong to one of these groups.5 But for others,
employment status while searching is endogenous——one may choose to either quit

into

unemployment before a new job is found or remain employed. Theoretical

models of the quit decision for jobseekers have been developed by Barron and
McCafferty (1977) and Burdett (1978) and have been empirically tested by Black

(1981) and Kahn and Low (1982, 1984).

For our purposes, we need only point

out that the search choice differences predicted above should hold for job
losers and labor force entrants, though not necessarily for the small number
of unemployed who are job—leavers.

II. Data and !apirtcal Results

The data used in the empirical analysis below are part of the 1981
panel of the New Youth Cohort of the NLS. Despite its focus on youth, these

data are very well—suited for this analysis because they contain very
extensive information on search behavior and outcomes.

In particular,

individuals were asked whether or not they had searched for work in the
previous month.

If they had, they were then asked: which methods of search

6

they had used,6 the amount of time spent in the previous month on each
method,7 whether or not a job offer resulted, the wage of any offer made, and
whether or not the job was accepted. The number of search methods used and
the amount of time spent on each are used here to measure search effort. The

former can be thought of as a measure of extensive effort and the latter as
intensive

effort.8

An additional measure of search choice is provided by

responses to a question about the lowest wage an individual would accept on a

hypothetical job offer, i.e., the reservation wage.

The data en job offers,

acceptances, and wages are then used to measure the outcomes of search for
each individual.

The sample used in the analysis includes nonenlisted and nonenrolled
males between the ages of 16 and 23 who claimed to have searched for work in

the previous month.9 Defining employment status of searchers was a bit more
difficult.

Since unemployed searchers who had accepted job offers might be

listed as currently employed, current employment status could not be used

alone to define status while searching.

Instead, I define unemployed

searchers to be those who are currently unemployed or those who had searched
for and accepted jobs in the previous month and whose employment durations are
thirty days or less.

Unlike previous studies, the sample here includes labor

force entrants and reentrants as well as job losers and leavers among the
unemployed, as well as both successful and unsuccessful searchersJ0
Table 1 presents summary statistics on the search choice variables for

employed and unemployed job seekers.

All means are weighted to correct for

the oversampling of low—income individuals in the NLS. The results show that

the average unemployed jobseeker uses more search methods than does the
employed seeker,

and

the difference between the

statistically significant."

two appears

to be

Intensive use of specific search methods, as

TABLE 1

Search Choices of
Employed and Unemployed Jobseekers
Means and Standard Deviations
Employed
Number of
Methods Used

2.723
(1.238)

Unemployed
3.285
(1.261)

Time Spent by
Those Using:
Friends/Relatives

109.30
(478.37)

314.04
(548.29)

Direct Contact

133.09
(460.10)

380.47
(546.40)

159.43
(220.12)

218.89
(301.63)

233.50
(1834.78)

234.68
(308.26)

Other Methods

33.25
(34.09)

243.01
(375.28)

Reservation Wages

6.01
(3.13)

(2.09)

6.32
(3.01)

(2.91)

State Agency

Newspapers

Reservation Wages
of Those with Offers

4.61

5.10

NOTE: Data are from the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS) New Youth Cohort,
1981 Panel. All means are weighted. Sample sizes are 438 for employed
seekers and 609 for unemployed seekers.

7

measured by time spent on each, is also substantially higher for the
unemployed in all but one case.

(The exception is the use of newspapers,

where time spent is basically comparable between the two groups.) Finally,
the reservation wages are significantly lower as well, for all searchers and

for those with offers.

All of this confirms the predictions of the simple

theoretical model outlined above, in which higher costs of search for the
unemployed cause them to expend more effort while searching and to be more
willing to accept job offers when received.

Table 2 presents summary results on the outcome variables for employed

and unemployed jobseekers.

Again, all means are weighted to reflect

population—wide estimates. The results show that a higher percentage of the
unemployed have received offers in the previous month. Even more striking is
the substantially higher percentage of those receiving offers who accept them

among the unemployed.

In particular, we find that employed searchers have

rejected almost 60% of the offers which they have received in the past month,

while unemployed searchers have rejected only about 20%. Thus the likelihood
of gaining a new job for an unemployed jobseeker is significantly higher than

for an employed seeker on both counts. But as for wages, those offered are a

bit higher for the employed, and those accepted are basically comparable
between the two groups.

Taken together the results suggest a need to consider a broad range of

search outcomes when discussing the effectiveness of search for each group,
since data on wages imply fairly comparable outcomes between the two groups

while data on offers and acceptances imply better outcomes for the
unemployed.

The results also suggest the importance of considering the

choices of search effort and reservation wages when comparing search outcomes

for the employed and unemployed, since the summary results of Tables 1 and 2

TABLE 2

Search Outcomes for
Employed and Unemployed Jobseekers
Means and Standard Deviations

Employed

Unemployed

Percentage Gaining
New Employment

.123

.275

Percentage Receiving
Offers

.294

.340

Percentage Accepting
Received Offers

.417

.809

Wages of Received
Offers

4.79

4.68

(1.76)

(2.50)

Wages of Accepted
Offers

4.83
(1.90)

4.87
(2.67)

NOTE: Example sizes for percentages gaining new employment and receiving
offers are 438 for employed seekers and 609 for unemployed seekers. For
percentage accepting received offers they are 127 and 192; for offered wages
they are 94 and 160; and for accepted wages they are 53 and 123 respectively.

8

imply that these choices and outcomes may be linked.

In particular, the

higher search effort and lower reservation wages of the unemployed which we
observe in Table 1 are theoretically consistent with their higher job—finding
that we observe in Table 2.

rates

are

It is also noteworthy that wage offers

higher for the employed. This suggests that wage offer distributions for the

two groups of searchers may differ independently of search choices, a
possibility that was discussed above. But the separate data on wage offers
and received wages also enable us to see whether or not the lower reservation

wages of the unemployed are simply a product of their lower wage offers. A
comparison of these data in Tables 1 and 2 implies that this is not the case,

since the ratio of reservation wages to offered wages among those reporting
both is substantially higher among the employed than among the unemployed ——

1.32 for the former and .99 for the latter, respectively.

The data thus

strengthen the argument that higher reservation wages among the employed
reflect their lower search costs.

We can analyze these issues more carefully by estimating equations for

the various employment outcomes as functions of search choices, employment
status, and other variables. The equations are of the following form:

P(X NtJSE, TIME., wr, UNEMP, Q) +

4)

p =

=

(x,

RUSE, TIME1, UNEMP, Q) + e2

PA(w 1w, UNEMP, Q) ÷

where E'O' AND

are the probabilities of gaining employment, receiving a

9

job offer, and accepting an offer (conditional on receiving it) respectively;

MUSE is the number of search methods used and TIME is the time spent on each

of the five search methods j; UNEMP is a dummy variable which equals one if

the jobseelcer is unemployed; Q is a dummy variable (included in some
specifications) for job leavers; and X is a vector of variables affecting the

offer and wage offer functions.

More specifically, the X include:

age,

education, marital status, race, local unemployment rates, urban residence,
region (South vs. non—South), and family income.17
Equations for wage outcomes are closely related to these:

=

6)

w

7)

1.1° =

w(x, MUSE, TIME wr, UNEMP, Q) +

w°(x, NUSE, TIMEJ UNENP, Q) +

These specifications are based on the simple model of Equations 1) and
2) above with slight modifications.

Thus Equations 3) and 6) are for the

final employment and wage outcomes, which reflect all of the search choices
and the underlying offer or wage offer functions respectively.

They differ

from the model above only in that search effort effects on wages as well as on

offers are tested for here. Equations 4) and 7), for offers and wage offers,

are identical to Equations 3) and 6) except for the omission of the
reservation wage term.

Finally, Equation 5) for accepting offers is based

simply on the comparison of reservation and offered wages.

In all of these

cases, the variables for unemployment status are entered to measure residual
differences in search outcomes between the employed and unemployed once search
choices

and other factors have been controlled for.

10

A number of econometric issues must be briefly discussed here before

turning to the actual results.

For one thing, the search choice and

employment status variables are treated as exogenous !here.

While search

theories stress that reservations wages and search effort are determined by
expected outcomes, the dependent variables (and error terms) of the equations

reflect actual outcomes. Expected outcomes are reflected in the X variables
above, which are used to capture the determinants of the offer and wage offer
functions.

The extent to which search choices are truly exogenous with

respect to observed outcomes will therefore depend on the completeness of the
X variables in explaining these functions.13

As for the employment status variables, the above specification
abstracts from self—selection into this status.

The low fraction of the

unemployed accounted for by quits (liz in this sample) implies that the
assumption of exogenous employment state for most searchers is reasonable
here, and the inclusion of a dummy variable for those who did quit allows for
differences in the search behavior of that particular group.

Equations 3) — 5) and 6) — 7) are estimated independently here, thereby

abstracting from possible correlations of errors across wage and employment

equations.'4 Equations 3) —

5),

which have dichotomous dependent variables,

are estimated by probit rather than OLS. The wage variables in all equations
appear in log form.

Moving on to the results, Table 3 shows estimates of Equation 3) for
the probability of gaining new employment. Specifications are presented with
and without the job leaver variable, as well as with and without -search choice
S

variables.

The results show that unemployed- jobseekers are significantly more

likely to gain new jobs than are employed seekers, even after controlling for

personal characteristics and search choices. The sum of the coefficients for

TABLE 3

Equations for the Probability of
Gaining New Employment

I
Number of
Methods Used

2.

.142

—

Ln (Reservation

(.052)

.141

—

(.052)

.242
(.151)

.242
(.151)

Friends/Relatives

.004
(.007)

.004
(.007)

Direct Contact

.003
(.008)

(.008)

State Agency

—.020
(.020)

—.020
—(.020)

Newspapers

—.013
(.013)

—.013
(.013)

Wage)

Time Spent Using:

Other Methods

—
.416

Unemployed

(.098)

.061

(.022)

NOTE:

—500.00

.061

(.022)

.342

.440

.364

(.088)

(.111)

—.198

—.177

(.155)

(.191)

Leaver

Log L

—

(.109)

—
Job

.003

—468.68

—500.77

—468.61

Equations estimated using Probit.Control variables for each equation
include: age, education, marital status, race, region, urban residence,
family income, local unemployment rate. Dummy variables are also included for
missing values on time spent, which take on values of zero when missing.
Sample size is 1045. Time spent variables are measured in hours.

ii

unemployment and for job leavers implies smaller but still positive effects
for the latter.'5 Of the search choice variables, the number of methods used

and time spent in other methods of search (i.e., those besides friends and
relatives, direct contact, state agencies and newspapers) have positive and
significant effects on the probability of gaining new employment.'6 But the
addition of search choice variables to the equation leaves the unemployment
effect still significant here.

Table

4 presents estimates of Equations 4) and s) which decompose the

probability of gaining new employment into probabilities of receiving offers
and

accepting theni.

The results in this table show that the unemployed

(excluding job leavers) receive more offers than the employed jobseekers,
though the difference is only marginally significant.

Furthermore, most of

this differential disappears when the search effort variables are added to the

equation. In particular, the number of search methods used has an ever larger

effect on receiving offers than on gaining new employment and appears to
explain most of the differential attributed to unemployed jobseeking status.17

In the equations for acceptance of offers, unemployed jobseekers accept

substantially more offers than do employed jobseekers.

As in Table 3, job

leavers accept fewer offers than the other unemployed but still more than
employed seekers. The ratio of reservation to received wages has the expected

negative effect on job acceptance and is marginally significant, although it
explains only a small fraction of the coefficient on unemployed status.

Taken together, the results of Tables 3 and 4 confirm many of our
previous predictions.

In particular, the unemployed receive and accept more

offers than do employed seekers.

Virtually all of their higher rate of

receiving offers and at least part of their higher rate of accepting them are

due to their choices of more extensive search and lower reservation wages

TABLE 4

Equations for the Probability of
Receiving arid Accepting Job Offers

Receiving Offers

I

I

2.

Number of
Methods Used

.159
(.045)

Accepting Offers

2.

2.
—

.159

(.045)

Ln (Relative Res—
ervation Wage)

—.302
—

—.301
(.182)

(.182)

Time Spent Using:
.004

.004
(.006)

Friends/Relatives —

(.006)

Direct Contact

—

(.007)

State Agency

—

(.015)

.004
(.015)

—.011

—.011

Newspaper

—

(.011)

(.011)

.053
Other Methods

—

(.021)

.053
(.021)

.121.

—.030

.139

(.043)

(.088)

(.095)

—.138
(.171)

—.125

.005

.005
(.007)

.004

Unemployed

(.086)

Job Leaver

Log L

—632.60

—

—.015

(.175)

—

—

—

.807

.735

.845

(.149)

(.153)

(.153)

—

—

—.331
(.306)

.764
(.157)

—.219
(.314)

—633.47

—610.71

—610.45

—195.62 —195.05 —195.05 —185.58

NOTE: Equations estimated using Probit. Equations for receiving offers include all
control variables listed in Table 3; those for accepting offers include only those for
missing values. Sample sizes are 1045 for offer equations and for acceptance equations.
Time spent variables are measured in hours.

12

respectively.

Furthermore, it is quite likely that the true effect of

reservation wages on the differential acceptance rate is understated here, due

to the problems of measurement error in reservation wages and unobservable
skills.18 In fact, the acceptance or rejection of offers in virtually all job

search models is caused exclusively by comparisons of wage offers and
reservation wages, which would imply that all of the differential between the

unemployed and employed reflects relative differences in their true (as
opposed to observed) reservation and offered wages. Either way, the role of

search choices in explaining differences between employed and unemployed
jobseeking outcomes appears to be fairly important; and observed differences

in both choices and outcomes conform quite well to the predictions of the
theory outlined above.

In Table 5 we turn to estimates of Equations 6) and 7) for offered and
accepted wages. The results indicate that both offered and accepted wages are

just a bit higher for employed seekers when controlling for personal
characteristics, though the differences are not significant in either case.
The search effort measures seem to have few (or incorrect) effects on wages.

However, reported reservation wages have large and significant effects on
received wages. In fact, their inclusion reverses the direction of the effect

of unemployed job search from a negative to a positive one on received
wages.

This positive effect is largest for unemployed job leavers.

Of

course, the direction of the bias on coefficients for reservation wages in
these equations is less clear than in employment equations, since unobserved
skill now has a positive rather than negative effect on estimated results.'9

But even if the measured reservation wage captures heterogenity as well as

true search choices, it appears to be responsible for the higher (or
comparable) wages employed jobseekers receive in summary measures and in

TABLE 5

Equations for Offered and Accepted Wages

Offered Wages

1
Number of
Methods Used

—

—.035

Accepted Wages

.1

—

(.023)

.1

—.036

—

(.023)

.016

—

(.026)

—

Ln (Reservation

1 1
.579

—

.581
(.071)

(.071)

Wage)

.016
(.026)

Time Spent Using:
.001

Friends/Relatives

—

Direct Contact

—

State Agency

—

(.004)
—.002

(.005)

Newspapers

(.009)

—

(.005)

—.041 —.007
Unemployed

(.005)
(.007)
(.009)
(.005)

—.044 —.011

(.044) (.048) (.045) (.049)

Job Leaver

.033

(.005)

—

(.012)

NOTE: Control

.055

.043

(.009)

—

(.006)

(.005)

—

(.012)

.006

.010

—

(.009)

—

(.006)

.003

.003

—.036
.069
—.042
.060
(.056) (.054) (.057)(.055)
.079

.033

.052

—.005

.010

—

(.004)

—

.005

.095

(:112) (.095)

(.094) (.095)
.046

—.002
—

—.005

—.001
—

(.004)

—

—.001

—

—.001

Other Nethods

—

—.004
—

—.001

—

(.004)
—.002

—

—.005

(.007)

—.002

.001

—

.096

.364

.093

.364

variables in each equation are those listed in Table 3. Dependent
variables appear in natural logarithms. Sample sizes are 254 for offered wage equations
and 173 for accepted wage equations. Time spent variables are measured in hours.
Relative reservation wages are defined as the ratio of reservation to offered wages. An
extra dummy variable has been added for cases where offered wages are missing.

13

equations which do not control far search choice. Thus employed search per se

does not appear to cause higher wage offers, as was suggested in some of the
earlier studies.

Once again, differences in search choices between the

employed and unemployed jobseekers help to explain search outcomes which we
observe for the two groups.

III. Conclusion

In this paper I argue that the higher costs of search for unemployed as
opposed to employed jobseekers should lead the former to undertake high levels

of search effort and to have lower reservation wages relative to offered
These predictions are borne out by empirical evidence on young male

wages.

jobseekers which shows that the number of search methods used and the time
spent per method are higher for unemployed searchers, while their relative
reservation wages are lower. Furthermore, these differences in search choices

help to explain some of the differences in outcomes which we also observe
between the two groups.

In particular, the higher number of search methods

used explains most of the higher probability of receiving offers which we find

for the unemployed.

Also, the lower relative reservation wages of the

unemployed explain at least part of the substantially higher job acceptance
rate and mildly lower received wage rates which we find for that group. All
of

this is consistent with a picture of unemployed searchers being more eager

to find new work, given the higher costs of search

which they bear.

A few important caveats must be kept in mind when considering these
results.

For one thing, they do not appear to hold for those who select

unemployed jobseeking status by leaving their previous jobs.

However, such

14

voluntary terminations account for only a small fraction of unemployed
jobseekers.

Measurement problems and other econometric issues also create

biases here which leave the exact magnitudes of search choice effects on
outcome very uncertain. Finally, the focus on young jobseekers enables us to
downplay the importance of Unemployment Insurance and temporary layoffs,
though these factors are probably more critical for older cohorts.
Despite these difficulties, the evidence strongly suggests that the
search choices of employed and unemployed jobseekers differ and that these
choices have important effects on the differences in outcomes which we observe
between the two groups.

15

FOOTNOTES

1For instance, the claim has been made that

reservation

wages should

be irrelevant, and no one should ever tun down a job offer, if they can
continue to search as (or more) effectively while being employed.

See Clark

and Summers (1979) for such a claim, and Burdett (1978) for a model which
incorporates such a notion.

2Yoon (1981) distinguishes between fixed and unit search costs, where

the former reflect the costs of being unemployed and the latter reflect the
costs per unit of search effort. He shows that fixed costs should be directly

related and variable costs inversely related to search effort.

In this

context, the receipt of earnings would lower fixed costs and therefore search

effort for the employed.

Barron and Mellow (1979) also argue that search

effort should be inversely related to the cost of being unemployed, where the
latter term is reduced by nonwage income.

3Barron and ricCafferty (1977) present a model in which labor supply,

leisure, and search effort are simultaneously determined, and in which an

individual can choose unemployed search (i.e., zero labor supply) by
quitting. In that model, labor supply and search effort respond in opposite

fashions to changes in exogenous factors such as real wages and vacancy
rates. Kahn and Low (1984) explicitly link unemployed status while searching
to a low level of search effort by claiming that the decision to quit a job is

based on a desire to raise search effort above some critical level, above
which employment is no longer possible.

16

4Por a variety of well—known reasons, we expect reservation wages to

decline as the spell continues for the unemployed; whether this is true for
the employed jobseeker is less clear. Thus the implications of these dynamic

factors for the comparison of employed and unemployed search choices are
uncertain.

5According to data in the Handbook of Labor Statistics (1983), the

fractions of the unemployed accounted for by job leaven, job losers, and
labor force entrants in 1982 are .069, .233, and .698 respectively.

For a

non—recession year such as 1978, the fraction accounted for by job leavers
rises only to .104.

6The search methods listed include friends and relatives, direct
contact without referral, state employment agencies, newspapers, and several

more formal but less frequently used channels for seeking employment.

Throughout the analysis in this paper, five search methods will be
considered: the four listed above and a fifth category which includes all of
the remaining ones.

7'rhe amount of time spent on each method has

been

adjusted to obtain

a correct measure of intensity for those who accepted jobs and therefore
stopped searching during the month. The adjustment factor is (30—D)/30, where
D is duration of employment on the current job. This factor thus reflects the
percentage of days in the previous month during which search was still taking
place.

17

8The distinction used here between extensive and intensive search is

closely related to the definition developed by Rees (1966).

It was not

possible to combine these measures into a single measure of total time spent
searching because of missing values which appear in different search methods
for different people, thereby making aggregation very difficult.

9The restriction of the analysis to males is done because of the huge

differences in search behavior and labor market outcomes between males and
females.

A similar rationale applies to the elimination of enlisted people

and students from the sample.

10Kahn and Low (1982) included only job leavers, since they were
focusing on the choice of employment status while searching as well as on
outcomes. Gottschalk and Maloney (1985) included job losers and leavers but
not entrants, since their outcome variable involves a comparison between old
and new jobs.

Since outcomes in both papers deal with characteristics of new

jobs, only successful job changers are included (though Gottschalk and Maloney

account for selection into this category). But since successful completion of

search is an explicit outcome in my work, and since previous jobs are not

needed for any of these outcomes, I have included all of the unemployed
here.

As noted, only the distinction between job leavers and others is

crucial here, and this distinction is made in econometric work discussed
below.

11Coniputed standard errors on weighted means are generally not

correct, since population rather than sample sizes are used during the
computation.

But standard errors for unweighted means give a fairly good

18

indication of the relevant ones. Unweighted standard errors for the employed

and unemployed on number of search methods used are .060 and .051
respectively, while for reservation wages of those with offers they are .276

and .159 respectively.

Since the standard error of the difference in

parameters between independent samples is the square root of the sum of
squared individual standard errors, the differences appear to be significant
in the above cases. Differences between employed and unemployed search times
are similarly significant in most cases.

'2Additional dummy variables have been included in these equations to

account for missing values in the TIMEj variables and in w0.

En cases of

missing values, these latter variables take on the value of zero while the

dummy variables take on the value of one.

The TIMEj variables also have

values of zero when any search method has not been used by a jobseeker.

13Treating search choices as exogenous in outcome equations enables
us to avoid specifying equations for the determinants of these choices. Since

the effects of Unemployment Insurance presumably work through these search
choices, we omit UI from the outcome equations. While temporary layoffs with

high chance of recall should affect search outcomes directly as well as
through the choice variables, the small number of young workers who are on
such layoffs and the incompleteness of this variable in the NLS (caused by
missing values and changes in employment status of individuals over the month)
have led us to omit this variable from these equations as well.

estimation of independent equations for wage and employment

outcomes of search follows Ehrenberg and Oaxaca (1976).

More structural

19

models of the search process have recently been developed by Kiefer and
Neumann (1979), among others.

15The coefficient on the quit variable must be added to that of the

unemployment variable, since both have a value of one for job leavers. The
variable in the ilLS which was used to create the dummy variable for quits was

the one which establishes reason for unemployment——job leaving, job loss,
etc.

Since this question was also asked only of the currently unemployed,

there were no responses for many of the unemployed who had accepted jobs and
begun working.

In particular, 14% of those counted as unemployed in this

sample failed to answer this question, though these individuals account for
33% of those receiving offers and 397. of those accepting offers. This higher
omission rate among successful searchers thus suggests that estimated effects
of the quit variable on employment outcomes may be biased downwards.

16The finding that the number of search methods used has a
significant positive effect on employment probabilities stands in sharp

contrast to the recent results of Keeley and Robbins (1985), who found
negative effects. Possible reasons for the discrepancy include differences in

samples and in specifications. In particular, they use intermediate outcomes

(e.g., number of firms contacted) as independent variables in addition to
choice variables, and the former may be picking up the latters' effects.

17Equations in which NUSE is the only search choice variable produce

virtually the same decline in the effects of unemployed search as in the
equations presented.

20

18Unobserved skills produce a downward bias due to their presumed
positive correlation with reservation wages and their negative correlation

with probabilities of receiving and accepting offers.

Measurement error,

which also produces a downward bias on estimated effects, results from the
subjective and hypothetical nature of the self—reported reservation wage.

A

further measurement problem involves the current nature of the reservation

wage question in the NLS Survey.

Given that many searchers have already

accepted new offers and begun working, the reported reservation wages may not
reflect

the true ones during their period of search.

191n this case unobserved skills are positively correlated with both

reservation wages and offered or accepted wages, thus producing a positive
bias.

21

REFERENcES

Barron, John and Stephen MeCafferty. "Job Search, Labor Supply and the Quit
Decision."

American Economic Review, September 1977.

and Wesley Mellow.

"Search Effort in the Labor Market."

Journal of Human Resources, Summer 1979.

Black, Matthew.

"Pecuniary Implications of On—The—Job Search and Quit

Activity." Review of Economics and Statistics, May 1930.

__________________

"An Empirical Test of the Theory of On—The—Job Search."

Journal of Human Resources, Winter 1981.

Burdett, Kenneth. "A Theory of Employee Job Search and Quit Rates." American
Economic Review, March 1978.

Clark, Kim and Lawrence Summers.

"The Dynamics of Unemployment:

A

Reconsideration." Brookings Papers on Economic ActivIty, 1979: 1.

Ehrenberg, Ronald and Ronald Oaxaca. "Unemployment Insurance, The Duration of

Unemployment and Subsequent Wage Growth" American Economic Review,
December 1976.

Gottschalk, Peter and Tim Maloney. "Involuntary Terminations, Unemployment and
Job Matching," Journal of Labor Economics, April 1985.

22

Kahn, Lawrence and Stuart Low.

"The Relative Effects of Employed and

Unemployed Job Search."

Review of Economics and Statistics, May

1982.

__________________ and _______________•

'An Empirical Model of Employed Search,

Unemployed Search, and Nonsearch." Journal of Human Resources, Winter
1984.

Keeley, Michael and Philip Robbing.

"Government Programs, Job Search

Requirements, and the Duration of Unemployment." Journal of Labor
Economics, July 1985.

Kiefer, Nicholas and George Neumann.

"An Empirical Job—Search Model with a

Test of the Constant Reservation Wage Hypothesis," Journal of
Political Economy. February 1979.

Lippman, Stephen and Joim Mccall.

"The Economics of Job Search: A Survey.

Economic Inquiry, June 1976.

Mattila,

J. Peter.
Association

Rees, Albert.

Quit

Behavior in the Labor Market." American Statistical

Proceedings, 1969.

'Inforaat1 Networks in labor Markets." American Economic

Review, flay 1*6.
Yoon, Bong Joon.

"A lindel of th.a..doyment Duration with Variable Search

Intensity." Review of Economics and Statistics, November 1981.

