                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            IMPORTERS, EXPORTERS, AND EXCHANGE RATE DISCONNECT

                                             Mary Amiti
                                            Oleg Itskhoki
                                            Jozef Konings

                                        Working Paper 18615
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18615


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




We gratefully acknowledge the National Bank of Belgium for the use of its research facilities and
data, and in particular Valere Bogaerts for help with the data collection, and Emmanuel Dhyne and
Catherine Fuss for comments and data clarifications. We thank George Alessandria, Ariel Burstein,
Elhanan Helpman, Doireann Fitzgerald, Linda Goldberg, Logan Lewis, Nick Li, Ben Mandel, Ulrich
Müller, Steve Redding, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, DavidWeinstein, Hylke Vandenbussche and seminar
participants at multiple venues for insightful comments. We also thank Sydnee Caldwell, Stefaan Decramer,
Cecile Gaubert, Diego Gilsanz, and Mark Razhev for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York or the National Bank of Belgium, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Mary Amiti, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate Disconnect
Mary Amiti, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings
NBER Working Paper No. 18615
December 2012, Revised October 2013
JEL No. F14,F31,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

Large exporters are simultaneously large importers. In this paper, we show that this pattern is key
to understanding low aggregate exchange rate pass-through as well as the variation in pass-through
across exporters. First, we develop a theoretical framework that combines variable markups due to
strategic complementarities and endogenous choice to import intermediate inputs. The model predicts
that firms with high import shares and high market shares have low exchange rate pass-through. Second,
we test and quantify the theoretical mechanisms using Belgian firm-product-level data with information
on exports by destination and imports by source country. We confirm that import intensity and market
share are the prime determinants of pass-through in the cross-section of firms. A small exporter with
no imported inputs has a nearly complete pass-through, while a firm at the 95th percentile of both
import intensity and market share distributions has a pass-through of just above 50%, with the marginal
cost and markup channels playing roughly equal roles. The largest exporters are simultaneously high-
market-share and high-import-intensity firms, which helps explain the low aggregate pass-through
and exchange rate disconnect observed in the data.


Mary Amiti                                         Jozef Konings
International Research                             Department of Economics
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                   University of Leuven
33 Liberty St                                      Naamsestraat 69
New York, NY 10045-0001                            3000 Leuven
Mary.Amiti@ny.frb.org                              Belgium
                                                   and National Bank of Belgium
Oleg Itskhoki                                      Joep.Konings@econ.kuleuven.be
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall 306
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
itskhoki@princeton.edu
1         Introduction
One of the central puzzles in international macroeconomics is why large movements in ex-
change rates have small effects on the prices of internationally traded goods. This exchange
rate disconnect has generated a vast literature, yet no empirical pass-through study has
taken into account one of the most salient features of international trade, that is that the
largest exporters are simultaneously the largest importers. In this paper, we show that this
pattern is key to understanding the low aggregate pass-through, as well as the variation in
pass-through across firms.
        Using detailed Belgian micro data, we find that more import-intensive exporters have sig-
nificantly lower exchange rate pass-through into their export prices, as they face offsetting
exchange rate effects on their marginal costs. These data reveal that the distribution of im-
port intensity among exporters is highly skewed, with the import-intensive firms being among
the largest exporters, accounting for a major share of international trade. Consequently, the
import-intensive firms also have high export market shares and hence set high markups and
actively move them in response to changes in marginal cost, providing a second channel that
limits the effect of exchange rate shocks on export prices. These two mechanisms reinforce
each other and act to introduce a buffer between local costs and international prices of the
major exporters, thus playing a central role in limiting the transmission of exchange rate
shocks across countries. The availability of firm-level data with imports by source country
and exports by destination, combined with domestic cost data, enables us to estimate the
magnitude of these two channels.
        To guide our empirical strategy, we develop a theoretical framework to study the forces
that jointly determine a firm’s decisions to source its intermediate inputs internationally and
to set markups in each destination of its exports. The two building blocks of our theoretical
framework are an oligopolistic competition model of variable markups following Atkeson and
Burstein (2008) and a model of the firm’s choice to import intermediate inputs at a fixed
cost following Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2011). These two ingredients allow us to capture
the key patterns in the data that we focus on, and their interaction generates new insights
on the determinants of exchange rate pass-through.1 In equilibrium, the more productive
firms end up having greater market shares and choose to source a larger share of their inputs
internationally, which in turn further amplifies the productivity advantage of these firms.
The theory further predicts that a firm’s import intensity and export market share form
    1
    The combination of these two mechanisms is central to our results, while the choice of a particular model
of variable markups or of selection into importing is less important.



                                                     1
a sufficient statistic for its exchange rate pass-through within industry-destination, with
import intensity proxying for marginal cost sensitivity to the exchange rate and market
shares proxying for markup elasticity.
       We test the predictions of the theory with a rich data set of Belgian exporters for the
period 2000 to 2008. A distinctive feature of these data is that they comprise firm-level
imports by source country and exports by destination at the CN 8-digit product codes (close
to 10,000 distinct product codes), which we match with firm-level characteristics, such as
wages and expenditure on inputs. This allows us to construct an import intensity measure
for each firm as the share of imports in total variable costs and a measure of firm’s market
share for each export destination, which are the two key firm characteristics in our analysis.
Further, with the information on imports by source country, we can separate inputs from
Euro and non-Euro countries, which is an important distinction since imported inputs from
within the Euro area are in the Belgian firms’ currency.
       We start our empirical analysis by documenting some new stylized facts related to the
distribution of import intensity across firms, lending support to the assumptions and predic-
tions of our theoretical framework. We show that in the already very select group of exporters
relative to the overall population of manufacturing firms, there still exists a substantial het-
erogeneity in the share of imported inputs sourced internationally, in particular from the
more distant source countries outside the Euro Zone. The import intensity is strongly cor-
related with firm size and other firm characteristics and is heavily skewed toward the largest
exporters.
       Our main empirical specification, as suggested by the theory, relates exchange rate
pass-through with the firm’s import intensity capturing the marginal cost channel and the
destination-specific market shares capturing the markup channel. We estimate the cross-
sectional relationship between pass-through and its determinants within industries and des-
tinations, holding constant the general equilibrium forces common to all firms.2 Our method-
ological contribution is to show that such a relationship holds independently of the general
equilibrium environment, thus we do not need to make any assumptions about the sources
of variation in the exchange rate. The exchange-rate pass-through coefficients in this rela-
tionship can be directly estimated without imposing any partial equilibrium or exogeneity
assumptions. Theory further provides closed-form expressions for these coefficients, which
allows us to directly test for the structural mechanism emphasized in the model.3
   2
     Such common forces include the correlations of sector-destination-specific price index, sector-specific
productivity and cost index with the exchange rate.
   3
     In particular, we show in the data that import-intensive exporters have lower pass-through due to
greater sensitivity of their marginal costs to exchange rates. Furthermore, the effect of import intensity


                                                     2
   The results provide strong support for the theory. First, we show that import intensity
is an important correlate of a firm’s exchange rate pass-through, with each additional 10
percentage points of imports in total costs reducing pass-through by over 6 percentage points.
Second, we show that this effect is due to both the marginal cost channel, which import
intensity affects directly, and the markup channel through the selection effect. Finally,
when we include market share, which proxies for the markup channel, together with import
intensity, we find these two variables jointly to be robust predictors of exchange rate pass-
through across different sub-samples and specifications, even after controlling for other firm
characteristics such as productivity and employment size.
   Quantitatively, these results are large. A firm at the 5th percentile of both import
intensity and market share (both approximately equal to zero) has a nearly complete pass-
through (94% and statistically indistinguishable from 100%). In contrast, a firm at the
95th percentile of both import intensity and market share distributions has a pass-through
slightly above 50%, with import intensity and market share contributing nearly equally
to this variation across firms. In other words, while small exporters barely adjust their
producer prices and fully pass on the exchange rate movements to foreign consumers, the
largest exporters offset almost half of the exchange rate movement by adjusting their prices
already at the factory gates. Active markup adjustment by the large firms explains this only
in part, and an equally important role is played by the marginal cost channel by means of
imported inputs. These results have important implications for aggregate pass through since
the low pass-through firms account for a disproportionately large share of exports.


Related literature Our paper is related to three strands of recent literature. First, it
relates to the recent and growing literature on the interaction of importing and exporting
decisions of firms. Earlier work, for example, Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2009), has
documented a large overlap in the import and export activity of firms.4 Indeed, major
exporters are almost always major importers, and this is also true in our dataset. We focus
exclusively on the already select group of exporters, most of whom are also importers from
multiple source countries. We instead emphasize the strong selection that still operates
within the group of exporters, in particular the heterogeneity in the intensity with which
firms import their intermediate inputs and its consequences for export-price pass-through.
   Second, our paper is related to the recent empirical and structural work on the relation-
on pass-through is larger when the import and export exchange rates are closely correlated and when the
pass-through into the import prices is high, confirming the theoretical predictions.
   4
     Other related papers include Kugler and Verhoogen (2009), Manova and Zhang (2009), Feng, Li, and
Swenson (2012), and Damijan, Konings, and Polanec (2012).


                                                  3
ship between firm import intensity and firm productivity. Although we base our model on
Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2011), who estimate the effects of import use on total factor
productivity for Hungarian firms, similar models were developed in Amiti and Davis (2012)
to study the effects of import tariffs on firm wages and in Gopinath and Neiman (2012) to
study the effects of the Argentine trade collapse following the currency devaluation of 2001
on the economy-wide productivity.5 In our study, we focus instead on how the interplay
between import intensity and markup variability contributes to incomplete exchange rate
pass-through.
       Third, our paper contributes to the vast literature on the exchange rate disconnect (see
Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2001; Engel, 2001) and in particular on the incomplete pass-through
of exchange rate shocks into international prices. In the past decade, substantial progress
has been made in the study of this phenomenon, both theoretically and empirically.6 This
literature has explored three channels leading to incomplete pass-through. The first channel,
as surveyed in Engel (2003), is short-run nominal rigidities with prices sticky in the local
currency of the destination market, labeled in the literature as local currency pricing (LCP).
Under LCP, the firms that do not adjust prices have zero short-run pass-through. Gopinath
and Rigobon (2008) provide direct evidence on the extent of LCP in US import and export
prices. The second channel—pricing-to-market (PTM)—arises in models of variable markups
in which firms optimally choose different prices for different destinations depending on local
market conditions. Atkeson and Burstein (2008) provide an example of a recent quantitative
investigation of the PTM channel and its implication for international aggregate prices.7
Finally, the third channel of incomplete pass-through into consumer prices often considered
in the literature is local distribution costs, as for example in Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo
(2003) and Goldberg and Campa (2010). Our imported inputs channel is similar in spirit to
the local distribution costs in that they make the costs of the firm more stable in the local
currency of export destination. The difference with the distribution cost channel is that the
   5
      Blaum, Lelarge, and Peters (2013) document stylized facts about import behavior of French firms and
provide another related model. Amiti and Konings (2007) provide an empirical analysis of the micro-level
effects of imports on firm productivity.
    6
      For a survey of earlier work, see Goldberg and Knetter (1997), who in particular emphasize that “[l]ess
is known about the relationship between costs and exchange rates. . . ” (see p. 1244). The handbook chapter
by Burstein and Gopinath (2012) provides a summary of recent developments in this area.
    7
      Gopinath and Itskhoki (2011) show the importance of PTM in matching patterns in the international
aggregate and micro price data. Fitzgerald and Haller (2012) provide the most direct evidence on PTM
by comparing the exchange rate response of prices of the same item sold to both the domestic and the
international market. Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010) and Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) show
that the PTM and LCP channels of incomplete pass-through interact and reinforce each other, with highly
variable-markup firms endogenously choosing to price in local currency as well as adopting longer price
durations.



                                                     4
use of imported inputs results in incomplete pass-through not only into consumer prices, but
also into producer factory gate prices.
       A related line of literature, surveyed in Goldberg and Hellerstein (2008), has identified
the PTM channel by structurally estimating industry demand to back out model-implied
markups of the firms. Goldberg and Verboven (2001) apply this methodology in the context
of the European car market, while Nakamura and Zerom (2010) and Goldberg and Hellerstein
(2011) study the coffee and the beer markets, respectively, incorporating sticky prices into
the analysis. Based on the finding that markups do not vary enough to capture the variation
in exporter prices arising from exchange rate volatility, these studies conclude there must be
a residual role for the marginal cost channel, due to either the local distribution margin or
imported inputs. Our paper is the first to directly estimate the importance of the marginal
cost channel for incomplete pass-through into exporter prices arising from the use of imported
intermediate inputs.
       Our work is closely related to Berman, Martin, and Mayer (2012) in that we also study
the variation in pass-through across heterogeneous firms. While they focus on the role of
firm productivity and size, we emphasize the role of imported inputs and destination-specific
market shares.8 Our approach also enables us to provide a quantitative decomposition of
the contribution of the marginal cost and variable markup channels to incomplete exchange
rate pass-through.
       The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 lays out the theoretical frame-
work and provides the theoretical results that motivate the empirical analysis that follows.
Section 3 introduces the dataset and describes the stylized patterns of cross-sectional varia-
tion in the data. Section 4 describes our main empirical findings. Section 5 concludes. The
technical derivations and additional results are provided in the appendix.
   8
    A number of earlier papers have linked pass-through with market share of exporters. Feenstra, Gagnon,
and Knetter (1996), Alessandria (2004), and Garetto (2012) emphasize the U-shape relationship between
market share and pass-through. The Atkeson and Burstein (2008) model can in general produce such a
non-monotonic relationship, however when the price index is held constant, consistent with our empirical
strategy, pass-through monotonically decreases in market share. Empirically, we also find no evidence of
a U-shape relationship between market share and pass-through (see Section 4.3). A recent paper by Auer
and Schoenle (2012) shows that greater sector-level market share of exporters from a particular country
contributes to higher pass-through. We instead focus on the firm-level interaction between market share
and pass-through, and find a negative relationship. These seemingly contradictory findings are consistent
with each other in a model of strategic complementarities due to counteracting general equilibrium effects
operating at the sectoral level and held constant in our analysis (see also Burstein and Gopinath, 2012).




                                                    5
2    Theoretical Framework
In this section, we develop a theoretical framework linking a firm’s exchange rate pass-
through to its import intensity and export market shares, all of which are endogenously
determined. We use this framework to formulate testable implications and to derive an
equilibrium relationship, which we later estimate in the data. We start by laying out the
two main ingredients of our framework—the Atkeson and Burstein (2008) model of strategic
complementarities and variable markups and the Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2011) model
of the firm’s choice to import intermediate inputs. We then show how the interaction of
these two mechanisms generates new theoretical insights on the determinants of exchange
rate pass-through. The key predictions of this theory are that a firm’s import intensity and
market shares are positively correlated in the cross-section and together constitute a sufficient
statistic for the exchange rate pass-through of the firm within sector-export market, with
import intensity capturing the marginal cost sensitivity to the exchange rate and market
share capturing the markup elasticity.
    We characterize the equilibrium relationship between market share, import intensity and
pass-through, which holds parametrically independently of the particular general equilibrium
environment. The parameter values in this relationship depend on the specifics of the general
equilibrium, in particular the equilibrium co-movement between aggregate variables such as
exchange rates, price levels and cost indexes. Nonetheless, we need not take a stand on
the specific general equilibrium assumptions as we directly estimate these parameters using
cross-sectional variation between firms within industries and export destinations, without
relying on any partial equilibrium or exchange rate exogeneity assumptions.
    To focus our analysis on the relationship between import intensity and pass-through of
the firms, we make a number of simplifying assumptions. First, we condition our analysis
on the subset of exporting firms, and hence we do not model entry, exit, or selection into
exporting (as, for example, in Melitz, 2003), but rather focus on the import decisions of the
firms. Similarly, we do not model the decision to export to multiple destinations, but simply
take this information as exogenously given. Furthermore, we assume all firms are single-
product. In the empirical section we discuss the implications of relaxing these assumptions.
    Second, we assume flexible price setting as in Atkeson and Burstein (2008) and hence do
not need to characterize the currency choice (i.e., local versus producer currency pricing).
This modeling choice is motivated by the nature of our dataset in which we use unit values
as proxies for prices. Empirically, incomplete pass-through is at least in part due to price
stickiness in local currency, and in light of this we provide a careful interpretation of our

                                               6
results in the concluding Section 5.9
       Last, while the marginal cost channel emphasized in the paper is inherently a mechanism
of real hedging, in modeling firms’ import decisions we abstract from choosing or switching
import source countries to better hedge their export exchange rate risk. Empirically, we
find that the positive correlation between a firm’s destination-specific exchange rate and its
import-weighted exchange rate does not vary with the main firm variables that are the focus
of our analysis (see Section 4.4).10


2.1       Demand and markups

Consider a firm producing a differentiated good i in sector s and supplying it to destination
market k in period t. Consumers in each market have a nested CES demand over the
varieties of goods, as in Atkeson and Burstein (2008). The elasticity of substitution across
the varieties within sectors is ρ, while the elasticity of substitution across sectoral aggregates
is η, and we assume ρ > η ≥ 1.
       Under these circumstances, a firm i faces the following demand for its product:

                                                      −ρ ρ−η
                                         Qk,i = ξk,i Pk,i Pk D k ,                                         (1)

where Qk,i is quantity demanded, ξk,i is a relative preference (quality) parameter of the firm,
Pk,i is the firm’s price, Pk is the sectoral price index, and Dk is the sectoral demand shifter,
which the firm takes as given. Index k emphasizes that all these variables are destination
specific. For brevity, we drop the additional subscripts s and t for sector and time, since all
of our analysis focuses on variation within a given sector.
                                                            1−ρ 1/(1−ρ)
                                                P              
    The sectoral price index is given by Pk ≡       i ξk,i Pk,i         , where the summation is
                                                                                      P
across all firms in sector s serving market k in time period t, and we normalize i ξk,i = 1.
As a convention, we quote all prices in the local currency of the destination market.
   9
      It is useful to keep in mind that, as shown in Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010), the flexible-price
pass-through forces shape the currency choice of the firms, i.e. firms with a low pass-through conditional on
a price change choose to price in local currency, which further reduces the short-run pass-through of these
firms. In this paper, we focus on the endogenous determinants of flexible-price (or long-run) pass-through
in the cross-section of firms, which in the sticky price environment would also contribute to the prevalence
of local currency pricing, yet the two forces work in the same direction.
   10
      Note that under the assumption of risk neutrality of the firm and in the absence of liquidity constraints
(for example, of the type modeled in Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein, 1993), financial hedging constitutes only a
side bet to the firm and does not affect its import and pricing decisions. Fauceglia, Shingal, and Wermelinger
(2012) provide evidence on the role of imported inputs in “natural” hedging of export exchange rate risk
by Swiss firms and Martin and Méjean (2012) provide survey evidence on the role of currency hedging in
international transactions of firms in the Euro Zone.



                                                      7
       An important characteristic of the firm’s competitive position in a market is its market
share given by:                                                       1−ρ
                                     Pk,i Qk,i                  Pk,i
                           Sk,i   ≡P               = ξk,i                     ∈ [0, 1],               (2)
                                    i0 Pk,i0 Qk,i0              Pk
where market share is sector-destination-time specific. The effective demand elasticity for
the firm is then
                                         d log Qk,i
                              σk,i ≡ −              = ρ(1 − Sk,i ) + ηSk,i ,                          (3)
                                         d log Pk,i
since ∂ log Pk /∂ log Pk,i = Sk,i . In words, the firm faces a demand elasticity that is a weighted
average of the within-sector and the across-sector elasticities of substitution with the weight
on the latter equal to the market share of the firm. High-market-share firms exert a stronger
impact on the sectoral price index, making their demand less sensitive to their own price.
       When firms compete in prices, they set a multiplicative markup Mk,i ≡ σk,i /(σk,i − 1)
over their costs. Firms face a demand with elasticity decreasing in the market share, and
hence high-market-share firms charge high markups. We now define a measure of the markup
elasticity with respect to the price of the firm, holding constant the sector price index:11

                                  ∂ log Mk,i                   Sk,i
                      Γk,i ≡ −                =                                   > 0.            (4)
                                   ∂ log Pk,i       ρ
                                                         − Sk,i 1 −       ρ−η
                                                                              S
                                                   ρ−η                    ρ−1 k,i


A lower price set by the firm leads to an increase in the firm’s market share, making optimal
a larger markup. Furthermore, the markup elasticity is also increasing in the market share
of the firm: firms with larger markups choose to adjust them by more in response to shocks
and to keep their prices and quantities more stable. We summarize this discussion in:

Proposition 1 Market share of the firm Sk,i is a sufficient statistic for its markup; both
markup Mk,i and markup elasticity Γk,i are increasing in the market share of the firm.

       The monotonicity of markup and markup elasticity in market share is a sharp prediction
of this framework. Although this prediction is not universal for other demand structures,
it emerges in a wide class of models, as surveyed in Burstein and Gopinath (2012). In
Section 4.3, we directly test this prediction and find no evidence of non-monotonicity in the
data.
  11
    We focus on this partial measure of markup elasticity because it emerges as the relevant object in our
cross-sectional comparisons across firms that all face the same sector-destination price index. Note that
the monotonicity result in Proposition 1 does not in general apply to other measures of markup elasticity
without further parameter restrictions.




                                                     8
2.2    Production and imported inputs

We build on Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2011) to model the cost structure of the firm
and its choice to import intermediate inputs. Consider a firm i, which uses labor Li and
intermediate inputs Xi to produce its output Yi according to the production function:

                                         Yi = Ωi Xiφ L1−φ
                                                      i   ,                                     (5)

where Ωi is firm productivity. Parameter φ ∈ [0, 1] measures the share of intermediate inputs
in firm expenditure and is sector specific but common to all firms in the sector.
   Intermediate inputs consist of a bundle of intermediate goods indexed by j ∈ [0, 1] and
aggregated according to a Cobb-Douglas technology:
                                            ˆ        1                    
                                 Xi = exp                 γj log Xi,j dj .                      (6)
                                                  0


The types of intermediate inputs vary in their importance in the production process as
                              ´1
measured by γj , which satisfy 0 γj dj = 1. Each type j of intermediate good comes in two
varieties—domestic and foreign—which are imperfect substitutes:

                                            ζ              1       ζ
                                                                          1+ζ
                                                                            ζ
                                            1+ζ            1+ζ     1+ζ
                                 Xi,j = Zi,j + aj                Mi,j            ,              (7)


where Zi,j and Mi,j are, respectively, the quantities of domestic and imported varieties of
the intermediate good j used in production. The elasticity of substitution between the
domestic and the foreign varieties is (1 + ζ) > 1, and aj measures the productivity advantage
(when aj > 1, and disadvantage otherwise) of the foreign variety. Note that since home and
foreign varieties are imperfect substitutes, production is possible without the use of imported
inputs. At the same time, imported inputs are useful due both to their potential productivity
advantage aj and to the love-of-variety feature of the production technology (7).
   A firm needs to pay a firm-specific sunk cost fi in terms of labor in order to import each
type of the intermediate good. The cost of labor is given by the wage rate W ∗ , and the
prices of domestic intermediates are {Vj∗ }, both denominated in units of producer currency
(hence starred). The prices of foreign intermediates are {Em Uj }, where Uj is the price
in foreign currency and Em is the nominal exchange rate measured as a unit of producer
currency for one unit of foreign currency.12 The total cost of the firm is therefore given by
  12
     We denote by m a generic source of imported intermediates, and hence Em can be thought of as an
import-weighted exchange rate faced by the firms. The generalization of the model to multiple import


                                                      9
           ´1                   ´
W ∗ Li +        Vj∗ Zi,j dj +              Em Uj Mi,j + W ∗ fi dj, where J0,i denotes the set of intermediates
                                                              
           0                        J0,i
imported by the firm.
    With this production structure, we can derive the cost function of the firm. In particular,
given output Yi and the set of imported intermediates J0,i , the firm chooses inputs to minimize
its total costs subject to the production technology in equations (5)–(7). This results in the
following total variable cost function net of the fixed costs of importing:

                                                                            C∗
                                                T V Ci∗ (Yi |J0,i ) =              Yi ,                    (8)
                                                                          Biφ Ωi

where C ∗ is the cost index for a non-importing firm.13 The use of imported inputs leads to a
                                         n´                o                                  1/ζ
cost-reduction factor Bi ≡ B(J0,i ) = exp J0,i γj log bj dj , where bj ≡ 1+aj (Em Uj /Vj∗ )−ζ
                                                                        

is the productivity-enhancing effect from importing type-j intermediate good, adjusted for
the relative cost of the import variety.
    We now describe the optimal choice of the set of imported intermediate goods, J0,i , in
the absence of uncertainty. First, we sort all intermediate goods j by γj log bj , from highest
to lowest. Then, the optimal set of imported intermediate inputs is an interval J0,i = [0, j0,i ],
with j0,i ∈ [0, 1] denoting the cutoff intermediate good. The optimal choice of j0,i trades off
the fixed cost of importing W ∗ fi for the reduction in total variable costs from the access to
an additional imported input, which is proportional to the total material cost of the firm.14
This reflects the standard trade-off that the fixed cost activity is undertaken provided that
the scale of operation (here total spending on intermediate inputs) is sufficiently large.
    With this cost structure, the fraction of total variable cost spent on imported intermediate
inputs equals:                                           ˆ    j0,i
                                                                     γj 1 − b−ζ
                                                                                
                                                ϕi = φ                       j    dj,                      (9)
                                                          0

where φ is the share of material cost in total variable cost and γj (1 − b−ζ
                                                                          j ) is the share of

material cost spent on imports of type-j intermediate good for j ∈ J0,i . We refer to ϕi as
the import intensity of the firm, and it is one of the characteristics of the firm we measure
directly in the data.
    Finally, holding the set of imported varieties J0,i constant, this cost structure results in
source countries is straightforward; in the data, we measure Em as an import-weighted exchange rate at the
firm-level, as well as split imports by source country (see Section 4.4).
                                              φ               1−φ                ´1
      This cost index is given by C ∗ = V ∗ /φ W ∗ /(1 − φ)         with V ∗ = exp 0 γj log Vj∗ /γj dj .
   13
                                                                                                     
   14
      The marginal imported input satisfies γj0,i log bj0,i · T M Ci = W ∗ fi , where the left-hand side is the
incremental benefit proportional to the total material cost of the firm T M Ci ≡ φC ∗ Yi / Biφ Ωi and the
                                                                                                    

cost-saving impact of additional imports γj0,i log bj0,i .



                                                                     10
the following marginal cost:
                                                M Ci∗ = C ∗ / Biφ Ωi .
                                                                   
                                                                                                       (10)

The partial elasticity of this marginal cost with respect to the exchange rate Em equals the
expenditure share of the firm on imported intermediate inputs, ϕi = ∂ log M Ci∗ /∂ log Em ,
which emphasizes the role of import intensity in the analysis that follows.
       We summarize these results in:

Proposition 2 (i) Within sectors, firms with larger total material cost or smaller fixed cost
of importing have a larger import intensity, ϕi . (ii) The partial elasticity of the marginal
cost of the firm with respect to the (import-weighted) exchange rate equals ϕi .


2.3       Equilibrium relationships

We now combine the ingredients introduced above to derive the optimal price setting of the
firm, as well as the equilibrium determinants of the market share and import intensity of the
firm. Consider firm i supplying an exogenously given set Ki of destination markets k. The
firm sets destination-specific prices by solving
                                                    (                                         )
                                                        X                        C∗
                                    max                        Ek Pk,i Qk,i −            Yi       ,
                               Yi ,{Pk,i ,Qk,i }k
                                                        k∈Ki
                                                                                Biφ Ωi
                    P
subject to Yi =        k∈Ki   Qk,i and demand equation (1) in each destination k. We quote the
destination-k price Pk,i in the units of destination-k local currency and use the bilateral
nominal exchange rate Ek to convert the price to the producer currency, denoting with
 ∗
Pk,i ≡ Ek Pk,i the producer-currency price of the firm for destination k. An increase in Ek
corresponds to the depreciation of the producer currency. The total cost of the firm is quoted
in units of producer currency and hence is starred.15 Note that we treat the choice of the set
of imported goods J0,i and the associated fixed costs as sunk by the price setting stage when
the uncertainty about exchange rates is realized. The problem of choosing J0,i under this
circumstance is defined and characterized in the appendix and Section 3.2 provides empirical
evidence supporting this assumption.
       Taking the first-order conditions with respect to Pk,i , we obtain the optimal price setting
conditions:
                            ∗           σk,i                C∗
                           Pk,i =              M Ci∗ = Mk,i φ ,                          k ∈ Ki ,      (11)
                                      σk,i − 1             Bi Ωi
  15
    We do not explicitly model variable trade costs, but if they take an iceberg form, they are without loss
of generality absorbed into the ξk,i Dk term in the firm-i demand (1) in destination k.

                                                                11
where M Ci∗ is the marginal cost as defined in (10) and Mk,i = σk,i /(σk,i −1) is the multiplica-
tive markup with the effective demand elasticity σk,i defined in (3). This set of first-order
conditions together with the constraints fully characterizes the allocation of the firm, given
industry-level variables. In the appendix, we exploit these equilibrium conditions to derive
how relative market shares and import intensities are determined in equilibrium across firms,
and since these results are very intuitive, here we provide only a brief summary.
   We show that other things equal and under mild regularity conditions, a firm with higher
productivity Ωi , higher quality/demand ξk,i , lower fixed cost of importing fi , and serving a
larger set of destinations Ki has a larger market share Sk,i and a higher import intensity ϕi .
Intuitively, a more productive or high-demand firm has a larger market share and hence
operates on a larger scale which justifies paying the fixed cost for a larger set of imported
intermediate inputs, J0,i . This makes the firm more import intensive, which through the
cost-reduction effect of imports (larger Bi in (8)) enhances the productivity of the firm and,
in turn, results in higher market shares. This implies that, independently of the specifics of
the general equilibrium environment, we should expect market shares and import intensities
to be positively correlated in the cross-section of firms, a pattern that we document in the
data in Section 3.


2.4    Imported inputs, market share, and pass-through

We are now in a position to relate the firm’s exchange rate pass-through into its export
prices with its market share and import intensity. The starting point for this analysis is the
optimal price setting equation (11), which we rewrite as a full log differential:

                                    ∗
                             d log Pk,i = d log Mk,i + d log M Ci∗ .                        (12)

Consider first the markup term. Using (2)–(4), we have:

                                                              Γk,i
                 d log Mk,i = −Γk,i d log Pk,i − d log Ps,k +       d log ξk,i ,            (13)
                                                              ρ−1
                                                                               ∗
where converting the export price to local currency yields d log Pk,i = d log Pk,i − d log Ek ,
and we now make explicit the subscript s indicating that Ps,k is the industry-destination-
specific price index. The markup declines in the relative price of the firm and increases in
the firm’s demand shock. From Proposition 1, Γk,i is increasing in the firm’s market share,
and hence price increases for larger market-share firms are associated with larger declines in
the markup.

                                               12
       Next, the change in the marginal cost in equation (10) can be decomposed as follows:

                                                              Em Ūs         Cs∗
                             d log M Ci∗ = ϕi d log                  + d log     + M
                                                                                    i
                                                                                      C
                                                                                        .                      (14)
                                                               V̄s∗          Ω̄s

This expression generalizes the result of Proposition 2 on the role of import intensity ϕi by
providing the full decomposition of the change in the log marginal cost. Here Ūs and V̄s∗ are
the price indexes for the imported intermediates (in foreign currency) and domestic interme-
diates (in producer currency), respectively. The subscript s emphasizes that these indexes
can be specific to sector s in which firm i operates. Finally, d log C̄s∗ /Ω̄s is the log change
in the industry-average marginal cost for a firm that does not import any intermediates,
and M
     i
       C
         is a firm-idiosyncratic residual term defined explicitly in the appendix and assumed
orthogonal with the exchange rate.16
       Combining and manipulating equations (12)–(14), we prove our key theoretical result:

Proposition 3 In any general equilibrium, the first-order approximation to the exchange
rate pass-through elasticity into producer-currency export prices of the firm is given by
                                                    ∗
                                             d log Pk,i
                                                         
                            Ψ∗k,i   ≡E                        = αs,k + βs,k ϕi + γs,k Sk,i ,                   (15)
                                             d log Ek

where (αs,k , βs,k , γs,k ) are sector-destination specific and depend only on average moments of
equilibrium co-movement between aggregate variables common to all firms.

       The pass-through elasticity Ψ∗k,i measures the equilibrium log change of the destination-k
producer-currency price of firm i relative to the log change in the bilateral exchange rate,
averaged across all possible states of the world and shocks that hit the economy.17 Under
this definition, the pass-through elasticity is a measure of equilibrium co-movement between
the price of the firm and the exchange rate, and not a partial equilibrium response to an
exogenous movement in the exchange rate. Thus, we do not need to assume that movements
in exchange rates are exogenous, nor do we rely on any source of exogenous variation in our
estimation. In fact, we allow for arbitrary equilibrium co-movement between exchange rates
  16
      This orthogonality assumption is necessary for Proposition 3, and it holds provided that firm idiosyn-
cratic shocks are not systematically correlated with exchange rate movements. More precisely, we allow
firm demand, productivity and import prices to move with exchange rates in arbitrary ways, but we require
that the relative demand, productivity and import prices of any two firms within sector-destination do not
systematically change with exchange rate movements.
   17
      Formally, the expectation in (15) is over all possible exogenous shocks that affect the exchange rate in
general equilibrium, as well as over all state variables (e.g., the distribution of firm productivities). Further,
the expectation in (15) is conditional on the persistent characteristics of a given firm (Ωi , ξk,i , fi ), which, as
Proposition 3 emphasizes, affect the firm’s pass-through only through the sufficient statistic (ϕi , Sk,i ).


                                                              13
and other aggregate variables, including price and cost indexes.
       Proposition 3 shows that we can relate firm-level pass-through to market share and import
intensity of the firm, which form a sufficient statistic for cross-section variation in pass-
through within sector-destination, independently of the specifics of the general equilibrium
environment and, in particular, independently of what shocks hit the economy and shape the
dynamics of the exchange rate. This relationship is the focus of our empirical investigation in
the next section. The values of the coefficients in this relationship (αs,k , βs,k , γs,k ) are sector-
destination specific, and, although they depend on the general equilibrium environment in
which firms operate, we show in Section 4.1 that we can directly estimate them in the data
without imposing any general equilibrium assumptions.18
       Furthermore, the theory provides closed form expressions for the coefficients in (15). The
coefficients αs,k and γs,k depend on the unconditional moments of equilibrium co-movement
between the exchange rate and aggregate variables such as the price index in the destina-
tion market and the domestic cost index (see appendix). For example, pass-through into
destination prices is lower (i.e., αs,k is higher) in an equilibrium environment where the do-
mestic cost index offsets some of the effects of the exchange rate on marginal costs. And
pass-through is relatively lower (i.e., γs,k is higher) for large market-share firms when the des-
tination price index responds weakly to the exchange rate, because of the stronger strategic
complementarities in their price setting.
       The closed form expression for βs,k highlights the structural determinants of the relation-
ship between pass-through and import intensity as captured by:

                                                     d log Em d log(Em Ūs /V̄s∗ )
                                                                                    
                                      1
                          βs,k   =           E                ·                          ,                 (16)
                                   1 + Γ̄s,k         d log Ek     d log Em

where Γ̄s,k is the markup elasticity evaluated at some average measure of market share S̄s,k .
Intuitively, βs,k depends on the co-movement between export and import exchange rates and
the pass-through of import exchange rate into the relative price of imported intermediates, as
reflected by the two terms inside the expectation in (16). Indeed, import intensity proxies for
the marginal cost correlation with the export exchange rate only to the extent that import
and export exchange rates are correlated and movements in the import exchange rate are
associated with the changes in the import prices of the intermediate inputs. Importantly,
  18
    We estimate the coefficients by exploiting the cross-sectional variation in the panel data within industries
and destinations in the responses to shocks across firms. These estimates, however, are not suitable for
undertaking counterfactuals across general equilibrium environments, as when the source of variation in
exchange rate changes, so do the coefficients. Such counterfactuals need to be carried out in the context of
a specific calibrated general equilibrium model.



                                                         14
we do not restrict the exchange rate pass-through into import prices to be complete. In
our empirical work, we directly examine our theoretical mechanism by using the variation
in exchange rate correlation and import price pass-through across import source countries.
         Proposition 3 predicts that pass-through into destination-currency prices, equal to (1 − Ψ∗k,i ),
is lower for more import-intensive firms and for firms with higher destination market share,
provided βs,k and γs,k are positive.19 Although theoretically these coefficients can have ei-
ther sign (or equal to zero), we expect them to be positive, and this is what we find in
the data. Intuitively, a more import-intensive firm is effectively hedged from a domestic
currency appreciation via decreasing import prices and hence keeps its destination-currency
price more stable. Further, a high-market-share firm has a lower pass-through as it chooses
to accommodate the marginal cost shocks with a larger markup adjustment as opposed to a
larger movement in its destination-currency price.



3          Data and Stylized Facts
In this section we describe the dataset that we use for our empirical analysis and the basic
stylized facts on exporters and importers.

3.1         Data description and construction of variables
Our main data source is the National Bank of Belgium, which provided a comprehensive
panel of Belgian trade flows by firm, product (CN 8-digit level), exports by destination, and
imports by source country. We merge these data, using a unique firm identifier, with firm-
level characteristics from the Belgian Business Registry, comprising information on firms’
inputs, which we use to construct total cost measures and total factor productivity estimates.
Our sample includes annual data for the period 2000 to 2008, beginning the year after the
euro was introduced. We focus on manufacturing exports to the OECD countries outside the
Euro Zone: Australia, Canada, Iceland, Israel, Japan, the Republic of Korea, New Zealand,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States, accounting for
58 percent of total non-Euro exports.20 We also include a robustness test with the full set of
    19
      Note that Proposition 3 provides a linear approximation (15) to the generally nonlinear equilibrium
relationship. In the data, we test directly for the nonlinearity in this relationship and find no statistically
significant evidence. Our interpretation is that this is not because nonlinearities are unimportant in general,
but because these finer features of the equilibrium relationship are less robust across broad industries that
we consider in our analysis. This is why we choose to focus on the first-order qualitative prediction of the
theory captured by the approximation in (15).
   20
      The Euro Zone was formed on January 1, 1999, in Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland,
Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. Greece joined on January 1, 2001, Slovenia joined
in 2007, Cyprus and Malta joined in 2008. We also exclude Denmark from the set of export destinations


                                                      15
non-Euro destinations. We provide a detailed description of all the data sources in the data
appendix.
    The dependent variable in our analysis is the log change in a firm f ’s export price of
good i to destination country k at time t, proxied by the change in a firm’s export unit
value, defined as the ratio of export values to export quantities:
                                                                                 
                                                          Export valuef,i,k,t
                              ∆p∗f,i,k,t   ≡ ∆ log                                    ,                   (17)
                                                         Export quantityf,i,k,t

where quantities are measured as weights or units. We use the change in the ratio of value to
weights, where available, and the change in the ratio of value to units otherwise. We note that
unit values are an imprecise proxy for prices because there may be more than one distinct
product within a CN 8-digit code despite the high degree of disaggregation constituting
close to 10,000 distinct manufacturing product categories over the sample period. Some
price changes may be due to compositional changes within a product code or due to errors in
measuring quantities.21 To try to minimize this problem, we drop all year-to-year unit value
changes of plus 200 percent or minus 67 percent (around seven percent of the observations.)
    A distinctive feature of these data that is critical for our analysis is that they contain
firm-level import values and quantities for each CN 8-digit product code by source country.
We include all 234 source countries and all 13,000 product codes in the sample. Studies
that draw on price data have not been able to match import and export prices at the firm
level. In general, many firms engaged in exporting also import their intermediate inputs.
In Belgium, around 80 percent of manufacturing exporters import some of their inputs. We
use these import data to construct three key variables—the import intensity from outside
the Euro Zone ϕf,t , the log change in the marginal cost ∆mc∗f,t and the firm’s market share
Sf,s,k,t . Specifically,
                                           Total non-euro import valuef,t
                                ϕf,t ≡                                    ,                               (18)
                                               Total variable costsf,t
where total variable costs comprise a firm’s total wage bill and total material cost. We often
average this measure over time to obtain a firm-level average import intensity denoted by ϕf .
because its exchange rate hardly moves relative to the Euro.
  21
     This is the typical drawback of customs data (as, for exmaple, is also the case with the French dataset
used in Berman, Martin, and Mayer, 2012), where despite the richness of firm-level variables, we do not
observe trade prices of individual items. As a result, there are two potential concerns: one, aggregation
across heterogeneous goods even at the very fine level of disaggregation (firm-destination-CN 8-digit product
code level); and, two, aggregation over time of sticky prices. This means we cannot condition our analysis on
a price change of a good, as was done in Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010) using BLS IPP item-level
data. The BLS data, however, is limited in the available firm characteristics and hence is not suitable for our
analysis. We address these two caveats by conducting a number of robustness tests and providing a cautious
interpretation of our findings in Section 5.


                                                          16
    The change in marginal cost is defined as the log change in unit values of firm imports
from all source countries weighted by respective expenditure shares:

                                           X X
                              ∆mc∗f,t ≡                                   ∗
                                                          ωf,j,m,t ∆ log Uf,j,m,t ,                      (19)
                                          j∈Jf,t m∈Mf,t


       ∗
where Uf,j,m,t is the euro price (unit value) of firm f ’s imports of intermediate good j from
country m at time t, the weights ωf,j,m,t are the average of period t and t − 1 shares of
respective import values in the firm’s total costs, and Jf,t and Mf,t denote the set of all
imported goods and import source countries (including inside the Euro Zone) for the firm
at a given time. Note that this measure of the marginal cost is still a proxy since it does
not reflect the costs of domestic inputs and firm productivity. We control separately for
estimated firm productivity and average firm wage rate, however, detailed data on the prices
and values of domestic inputs are not available. Nonetheless, controlling for our measure of
the firm-level marginal cost is a substantial improvement over previous pass-through studies
that typically control only for the aggregate manufacturing wage rate or producer price level.
Furthermore, our measure of marginal cost arguably captures the component of the marginal
cost most sensitive to exchange rate movements.
    Ideally, we would like to construct ϕf,t and ∆mc∗f,t for each of the products i a firm
produces; however, this measure is available only at the firm-f level, which may not be the
same for all of the products produced by multiproduct firms. To address this multiproduct
issue, we keep only the firm’s main export products, which we identify using Belgium’s
input-output table for the year 2005, comprising 56 IO manufacturing codes. For each firm,
we identify an IO code that accounts for its largest export value over the whole sample
period and keep only the CN 8-digit products within this major-IO code. The objective is to
keep only the set of products for each firm that have similar production technologies. This
leaves us with 60 percent of the observations but 90 percent of the value of exports. We also
present results with the full set of export products and experiment with defining the major
product using more disaggregated product lines, such as HS 4-digit.22 Further, it is possible
that some of the firm’s imports might be final goods rather than intermediate inputs. We
attempt to identify imported intermediate inputs using a number of different approaches.
First, we omit any import from the construction of ϕf,t that is defined as a final product
   22
      By only keeping the firm’s major products, we also deal with the potential problem of including products
that firms export but do not produce—a phenomenon referred to as carry-along trade (Bernard, Blanchard,
Van Beveren, and Vandenbussche, 2012). As a further robustness check, in Section 4.5 we use IO tables to
isolate the inputs that are used in the production of firms’ major products, and only use these inputs to
construct the firm’s import intensity variable. See De Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2012)
for an alternative structural treatment of multiproduct firms.


                                                     17
using Broad Economic Codes (BEC). Second, we construct ϕf using only the intermediate
inputs for a given industry according to the IO tables.
       The last key variable in our analysis is a firm’s market share, which we construct as
follows:
                                                    Export valuef,s,k,t
                                Sf,s,k,t ≡ P                                      ,                        (20)
                                               f 0 ∈Fs,k,t Export valuef 0 ,s,k,t

where s is the sector in which firm f sells product i and Fs,k,t is the set of Belgian exporters
to destination k, in sector s at time t. Therefore, Sf,s,k,t measures a Belgium firm’s market
share in sector s, export destination k at time t relative to all other Belgium exporters. Note
that, following the theory, this measure is destination specific. The theory also suggests
that the relevant measure is the firm’s market share relative to all firms supplying the
destination market in a given sector, including exporters from other countries as well as
domestic competitors in market k. But, since our analysis is across Belgian exporters within
sector-destinations, the competitive stance in a particular sector-destination is common for
all Belgian exporters, and hence our measure of Sf,s,k,t captures all relevant variation for
our analysis (see Section 4.1).23 We define sectors at the HS 4-digit level, at which we
both obtain a nontrivial distribution of market shares and avoid having too many sector-
destinations served by a single firm.24


3.2       Stylized facts about exporters and importers

A salient pattern in our dataset is that most exporters are also importers, a pattern also
present in many earlier studies cited in the introduction. As reported in Table 1, in the
full sample of Belgian manufacturing firms, the fraction of firms that are either exporters or
importers is 33%. Out of these firms, 57% both import and export, 28% only import and 16%
only export. That is, 22% of manufacturing firms in Belgium export and 78% of exporters
also import.25 This high correlation between exporting and importing suggests that the
  23
      In an extension of the theory, a multiproduct firm facing a nested-CES demand (1) sets the same markup
for all its varieties within a sector, as in (11), where its markup depends on the cumulative market share of
all these varieties (). Therefore, Sf,s,k,t is indeed the appropriate measure of market power for all varieties i
exported by firm f to destination k in sector s at time t. See Chatterjee, Dix-Carneiro, and Vichyanond
(2012) for a study of pass-through of multiproduct firms under an alternative demand structure.
   24
      The median of Sf,s,k,t is 7.8%, yet the 75th percentile is over 40% and the export-value-weighted median
is 55%. 24% of Sf,s,k,t observations are less than 1%, yet these observations account for only 1.4% of export
sales. 3% of Sf,s,k,t observations are unity, yet they account for less than 2.5%. Our results are robust (and,
in fact, become marginally stronger) to the exclusion of observations with very small and very large market
shares. We depict the cumulative distribution function of Sf,s,k,t in Figure A1 in the appendix.
   25
      These statistics are averaged over the sample length, but they are very stable year-to-year. In the
subsample of exporters we use for our regression analysis in Section 4.2, the fraction of importing firms is
somewhat higher at 85.5%, reflecting the fact that data availability is slightly biased toward larger firms.


                                                       18
                             Table 1: Exporter and importer incidence
                                                          Exporters              All
                                                       and/or importers       exporters
                   Fraction of all firms                    32.6%               23.7%
                    of them:
                    — exporters and importers                 57.0%             78.4%
                    — only exporters                          15.8%             21.6%
                    — only importers                          27.2%               —
Note: The data includes all manufacturing firms. The frequencies are averaged over the years 2000–2008.


selection into both activities is driven by the same firm characteristics, such as productivity,
which determines the scale of operations. We show how this overlap in importing and
exporting activities turns out to be important for understanding the incomplete exchange
rate pass-through.
       Interestingly, the data reveal a lot of heterogeneity within exporting firms, which are
an already very select subsample of firms. The large differences between exporters and
nonexporters are already well-known and are also prevalent in our data. The new stylized
facts we highlight here are the large differences within exporters between high and low
import-intensity exporting firms. We show in Table 2 that these two groups of exporting
firms differ in fundamental ways. We report various firm-level characteristics for high and
low import-intensity exporters, splitting exporters into two groups based on the median
import intensity outside the Euro Zone (ϕf ) equal to 4.2%.26 For comparison, we also report
the available analogous statistics for non-exporting firms with at least 5 employees.
       From Table 2, we see that import-intensive exporters operate on a larger scale and are
more productive. The share of imported inputs in total costs for import-intensive exporters
is 37% compared to 17% for nonimport-intensive exporters, and similarly for imports sourced
outside the Euro Zone it is 17% compared to 1.2%. And of course, these numbers are much
lower for non-exporters at 1.6% for imports outside Belgium and 0.3% for imports outside the
Euro Zone. Import-intensive exporters are 2.5 times larger in employment than non-import-
intensive exporters and 13 times larger than non-exporters; they pay a 15 percent wage
premium relative to non-import-intensive firms and a 40 percent wage premium relative to
non-exporters. Similarly, import-intensive exporters have much larger total material costs,
total factor productivity, and market share. These firms also export and import on a much
larger scale, and are more likely to trade with more distant countries outside the Euro Zone.
  26
   The unit of observation here is a firm-year. If we split our sample based on firm-product-destination-year
(which is the unit of observation in our regression analysis), the median import intensity is higher at 8.2%,
however, this has no material consequences for the patterns we document in Table 2.


                                                     19
                      Table 2: High- versus low-import-intensity exporters
                                                                Exporters
                                                          Import Not import              Non-exporters
                                                         intensive   intensive
 Share of total imports in total cost                       0.37          0.17                 0.02
 Share of non-Euro imports in total cost (ϕf )              0.17          0.01                 0.00
 Employment (# full-time equiv. workers)                   270.6          112.2                20.7
 Average wage bill (thousands of Euros)                     48.8          42.3                 34.9
 Material cost                                             103.3          28.2                 3.0
 Total Factor Productivity (log)                            0.33           0.07                 —
 Total exports (manufacturing goods)                        66.5          14.1
 — to non-Euro OECD countries                               14.4          2.4
 Total imports (all products)                               49.3          6.8
 — outside Euro Zone                                        20.8          0.5
 # of import source countries                               14.4          6.6
 # of HS 8-digit products imported                          79.3          38.2
Note: The exporter sub-sample is split at the median of non-Euro import intensity (share of non-Euro
imports in total costs) equal to 4.2%. The non-exporter subsample is all non-exporting manufacturing firms
with 5 or more employees. Material cost, import and export values are in millions of Euros. 28% of low
import intensity firms do not import at all, and 33% of them do not import from outside the Euro Zone.
The construction of the measured TFP is described in the data appendix.


These firms import more in terms of total value, in terms of number of imported goods,
and from a larger set of import source countries. These results highlight that both types of
exporting firms are active in importing from a range of countries both within and outside the
Euro Zone but that the two types of firms differ substantially in import intensity, consistent
with the predictions of our theoretical framework.
       We now provide more details on the distribution of import intensity outside the Euro
Zone (ϕf ) among the exporting firms and its relationship with other firm-level variables. We
see that the distribution of import intensity among exporters in Table 3, although somewhat
skewed toward zero, has a wide support and substantial variation, which we exploit in our
regression analysis in Section 4. Over 24% of exporters do not import from outside the Euro
Zone, yet they account for only 1% of Belgian manufacturing exports. For the majority
of firms, the share of imported inputs in total costs ranges between 0 and 10%, while the
export-value-weighted median of import intensity is 13%. At the same time, nearly 28%
of export sales are generated by the firms with import intensity in excess of 30%.27 We
  27
    While the unweighted distribution (firm count) has a single peak, the export-value-weighted distribution
has two peaks. This is due to the fact that one exporter with ϕf = 0.33 accounts for almost 14% of export
sales. Our results are not sensitive to the exclusion of this largest exporter, which accounts for only 134
observations out of a total of over 90,000 firm-destination-product-year observations in our sample.


                                                    20
                      Table 3: Distribution of import intensity among exporters
                                                           fraction   fraction of
                                              # firms      of firms export value
                                 ϕf   =0          717        24.9%       1.4%
                             0 < ϕf   ≤ 0.1     1,478        51.3%      38.2%
                           0.1 < ϕf   ≤ 0.2       348        12.1%      23.8%
                           0.2 < ϕf   ≤ 0.3       155         5.4%       8.8%
                           0.3 < ϕf   ≤ 0.4        94         3.3%      23.0%
                                 ϕf   > 0.4        89         3.1%       4.9%
Note: Import intensity, ϕf , is the share of imported intermediate inputs from outside the Euro Zone in the
total variable cost of the firm, averaged over the sample period.


further depict the cumulative distribution function of import intensity ϕf in Figure A1 in
the appendix, which also provides a cumulative distribution function for our market share
variable Sf,s,k,t .
       Table 4 displays the correlations of import intensity with other firm-level variables in the
cross-section of firms. Confirming the predictions of Section 2.3, import intensity is positively
correlated with market share, as well as with firm TFP, employment, and revenues. The
strongest correlate of import intensity is the total material cost of the firm, consistent with
the predictions of Proposition 2. Overall, the correlations in Table 4 broadly support the
various predictions of our theoretical framework. At the same time, although import intensity
and market share are positively correlated with productivity and other firm performance
measures, there is sufficient independent variation to enable us to distinguish between the
determinants of incomplete pass-through in the following subsections.
       We close this section with a brief discussion of the patterns of time-series variation in
import intensity for a given firm. Import intensity appears to be a relatively stable char-
acteristic of the firm, moving little over time and in response to exchange rate fluctuations.
Specifically, the simple regression of ϕf,t on firm fixed effects has an R2 of over 85%, imply-
ing that the cross-sectional variation in time-averaged firm import intensity ϕf is nearly 6
times larger than the average time-series variation in ϕf,t for a given firm. When we regress
the change in ϕf,t on firm fixed effects and the lags of the log change in firm-level import-
weighted exchange rates, the contemporaneous effect is significant with the semi-elasticity
of only 0.057, and with offsetting, albeit marginally significant, lag effects. That is, a 10%
depreciation of the euro temporarily increases import intensity by 0.57 of a percentage point.
Furthermore, we find that the firm hardly adjusts its imports on the extensive margin in
response to changes in its import-weighted exchange rate.28 All of this evidence provides
  28
       We measure the extensive margin as the change in firm imports due to adding a new variety or dropping


                                                      21
                         Table 4: Correlation structure of import intensity
                                    Import                                       Material
                                   intensity       TFP     Revenues   Empl’t      cost
                 Market share        0.16          0.20      0.28      0.25       0.27
                 Material cost       0.23          0.70      0.99      0.83
                 Employment          0.10          0.60      0.86
                 Revenues            0.21          0.72
                 TFP                 0.15
Note: Cross-sectional correlations of firm-level variables averaged over time. Material costs, employment,
revenues and TFP are in logs. Import intensity is the share of imported intermediate inputs from outside the
Euro Zone in the total cost of the firm. Market share corresponds to our measure Sf,s,k,t , defined in (20),
aggregated to the firm-level by averaging across sector-destination-time.


support for our assumption in Section 2 that the set of imported goods is a sunk decision
at the horizons we consider, and hence the extensive margin plays a very limited role in the
response of a firm’s marginal cost to exchange rate movements, justifying the use of ϕf as a
time-invariant firm characteristic in the empirical regressions that follow.
    To summarize, we find substantial variation in import intensity among exporters, and this
heterogeneity follows patterns consistent with the predictions of our theoretical framework.
Next, guided by the theoretical predictions, we explore the implications of this heterogeneity
for the exchange rate pass-through patterns across Belgian firms.



4     Empirical Evidence
This section presents our main empirical results. We start by introducing and estimating
our main empirical specification. We then provide nonparametric evidence and explore the
forces behind our empirical results, confirming the specific mechanisms identified by the
theory. We conclude with a battery of robustness tests.


4.1     Empirical specification

We now turn to the empirical estimation of the relationship between import intensity, market
share and pass-through in the cross-section of exporters (Proposition 3). The theoretical
pass-through regression equation (15) cannot be directly estimated since pass-through Ψ∗k,i is
not a variable that can be observed in the data. Therefore, we step back to the decomposition
of the log price change in equations (12)–(14), which we again linearize in import intensity
an existing variety at CN 8-digit-country level.



                                                      22
and market share. After replacing differentials with changes over time ∆, we arrive at our
main empirical specification, where we regress the annual change in log export price on the
change in the log exchange rate, interacted with import intensity and market share:

   ∆p∗f,i,k,t = αs,k + βϕf,t−1 + γ̃Sf,s,k,t−1 ∆ek,t + δs,k + bϕf,t−1 + cSf,s,k,t−1 + ũf,i,k,t ,
                                                                               
                                                                                                    (21)

where p∗f,i,k,t is the log euro producer price to destination k (as opposed to local-currency
price), and an increase in the log nominal exchange rate ek,t corresponds to the bilateral
depreciation of the euro relative to the destination-k currency.29 In our analysis we estimate
parameters β and γ̃ with values averaged across sector-destinations-time. In order to keep the
pool of averaged coefficients (βs,k , γs,k ) relatively homogenous, we focus on manufacturing
exports to high-income OECD countries in our benchmark specifications. The regression
equation (21) is a structural relationship that emerges from the theoretical model of Section 2,
and Sf,s,k,t−1 corresponds to our measure of market share defined in equation (20). Under a
mild assumption that ∆ek,t is uncorrelated with (ϕf,t−1 , Sf,s,k,t−1 ), we prove in the appendix:

Proposition 4 The OLS estimates of β and γ̃ in (21) identify the weighted averages across
sector-destination-years of βs,k and γs,k · Ss,k,t−1 respectively, where Ss,k,t−1 is the sector-
destination-time-specific cumulative market share of all Belgian exporters and (βs,k , γs,k ) are
the theoretical coefficient in the pass-through relationship (15).

       This result shows that, despite the fact that we cannot directly estimate the theoretical
regression (15), we can nonetheless identify the theoretical coefficients in the relationship
between pass-through, import intensity and market share. Furthermore, it formally confirms
the validity of our measure of the market share relative to other Belgian exporters.
       Equation (21) is our benchmark empirical specification. Note that it is very demanding
in that it requires including sector-destination dummies and their interactions with exchange
rate changes at a very disaggregated level. Therefore, we start by estimating equation (21)
with a common coefficient α, and later replace sector-destination fixed effects δs,k with sector-
destination-year fixed effects δs,k,t which absorb αs,k ∆ek,t . We also estimate (21) for exports
to a single destination (United States) only. In our main regressions we replace ϕf,t−1 with
a time-invariant ϕf to reduce the measurement error, and also to maximize the size of the
sample since some of the lagged ϕf,t−1 were unavailable. This has little effect on the results
since, as we show, ϕf,t is very persistent over time. In the main specifications we also replace
  29
    The nominal exchange rates are average annual rates from the IMF. These are provided for each country
relative to the US dollar, which we convert to be relative to the euro.


                                                   23
Sf,s,k,t−1 with the contemporaneous Sf,s,k,t , as both give the same results.30 In the robustness
section we report the estimates from the specification with the lagged ϕf,t−1 and Sf,s,k,t−1 .


4.2       Main empirical findings

To explore the underlying mechanisms behind the equilibrium relationship between pass-
through, import intensity, and market shares, we begin with a more simple specification
and build up to the specification in equation (21). Table 5 reports the results. We include
industry-destination specific effects (where industry is defined at the HS 4-digit level) to be
consistent with the theory, and year effects to control for common marginal cost variation.
First, in column 1, we report that at the annual horizon the unweighted average exchange
rate pass-through elasticity into producer prices in our sample is 0.2, or, equivalently, 0.8
(= 1 − 0.2) into destination prices. We refer to it as 80% pass-through.
      In column 2, we include an interaction between exchange rates and a firm’s import inten-
sity. We see that the simple average coefficient reported in column 1 masks a considerable
amount of heterogeneity, as firms with different import intensities have very different pass-
through rates. Firms with a high share of imported inputs relative to total variable costs
exhibit lower pass-through into destination-currency export prices—a 10 percentage point
higher import intensity is associated with a 6 percentage point lower pass-through. A typical
firm with zero import intensity has a pass-through of 87% (= 1 − 0.13), while a firm with a
38% import intensity (in the 95th percentile of the distribution) has a pass-through of only
64% (= 1 − 0.13 − 0.60 · 0.38).
      Next, we explore whether import intensity operates through the marginal-cost channel
or through selection and the markup channel. In columns 3 and 4, we add controls for
the marginal cost of the firm to see whether the effect of import intensity on pass-through
persists beyond the marginal cost channel. In column 3, we control for the change in marginal
cost ∆mc∗f,t , measured as the import-weighted change in the firm’s import prices of material
inputs (see equation (19)), which is likely to be sensitive to exchange rate changes if the
firm relies heavily on imported intermediate inputs. Comparing columns 2 and 3, we see
that the coefficient on the import intensity interaction nearly halves in size once we control
for marginal cost, dropping from 0.6 to 0.37, but still remains strongly significant with a
t-stat of 3.2. We confirm this finding with an alternative control for marginal cost changes,
by including firm-product-year fixed effects (δf,i,t ) in column 4. In this specification, the
only variation that remains is across destinations for a given firm and hence, among other
 30
      We do not use the time-averaged market share as firms move in and out of sector-destinations over time.


                                                      24
                     Table 5: Import intensity, market share, and pass-through
  Dep. var.: ∆p∗f,i,k,t      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)        (7)
                                   ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗
  ∆ek,t                     0.203         0.127         0.157         0.149         0.098         0.057       —
                           (0.026)       (0.027)       (0.028)       (0.037)       (0.030)       (0.031)
  ∆ek,t · ϕf                              0.604∗∗∗ 0.370∗∗∗ 0.341∗                  0.263∗∗ 0.473∗∗∗ 0.470∗∗
                                         (0.112) (0.117) (0.201)                   (0.115) (0.104) (0.236)
  ∆ek,t · Sf,s,k,t                                                                  0.238∗∗∗ 0.284∗∗∗ 0.299∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.060) (0.063) (0.100)
  ∆mc∗f,t                                               0.512∗∗∗                    0.506∗∗∗
                                                       (0.030)                     (0.031)
  Fixed effects:
    δs,k + δt                yes           yes           yes           no            yes           yes         no
    δs,k,t                   no            no            no            no            no            no          yes
    δf,i,t + δk              no            no            no            yes           no            no          no
  # obs.                   93,395        93,395        93,395        93,395        93,395        93,395      93,395
  R2                        0.057         0.057         0.062         0.487         0.062         0.057       0.344
Note: Observations are at the firm-destination-product-year level. ∆ corresponds to annual changes.
Columns(2)–(3) and (5)–(7) include a control for the level of ϕf , and columns (5)–(7) also include a control
for the level of the market share, Sf,s,k,t . Fixed effects: δs,k + δt is the combination of sector-destination and
year fixed effects; δs,k,t are sector-destination-year fixed effects; δf,i,t + δk is the combination of firm-product-
year and country fixed effects (the sector is defined at HS-4 and the product at HS-8-digit level). The results
without the year fixed effects are almost identical. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ correspond to 10%, 5% and 1% significance
levels respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the country-year level, reported in brackets. Alternative
clustering at the firm level and at the country-HS4-digit level yield the same conclusions.


things, controls for all components of the marginal cost of the firms.31 The coefficient on
the import intensity interaction in column 4 is almost the same as that in column 3, but
much less precisely estimated with a t-stat of 1.7. This result is impressive, given that this
specification is saturated with fixed effects, and the similarity of the results in columns 3
and 4 provides confidence in our measure of marginal cost.
       The results in columns 3 and 4 suggest that, although the marginal cost is an important
channel through which import intensity affects pass-through (see Proposition 2), there is still
a considerable residual effect operating through the markup channel after conditioning on the
marginal cost. This finding is consistent with the theoretical predictions, since import inten-
sity correlates with market share in the cross-section of firms and market share determines
the markup elasticity, causing omitted variable bias. To see this, in column 5 we augment
  31
    Although firm-product-year fixed effects (δf,i,t ) arguably provide the best possible control for marginal
cost, the disadvantage of this specification is that it only exploits the variation across destinations and thus
excludes all variation within industry-destinations that is the main focus of our analysis. Consequently, we
cannot use our measure of market share in a specifications with δf,i,t since our market share measure only
makes sense within industry-destinations, as we discuss in Section 3.1.


                                                          25
the specification of column 3 (controlling for ∆mc∗f,t ) with a market share interaction with
the log change in exchange rate to proxy for markup elasticity, as suggested by Proposition 3.
Given that we now control for both marginal cost and markup, we expect import intensity
to stop having predictive power. Although the effect of import intensity does not disappear
completely, the coefficient does fall in size (from 0.37 to 0.26) and becomes less significant.32
       Finally, column 6 implements our main specification in equation (21) by including the
import intensity and market share interactions, without controlling for marginal cost. Propo-
sition 3 suggests that import intensity and market share are two prime predictors of exchange
rate pass-through, and indeed we find that the two interaction terms in column 6 are strongly
statistically significant. Interpreting our results quantitatively, we find that a firm with a
zero import intensity and a nearly zero market share (corresponding respectively to the 5th
percentiles of both distributions) has a pass-through of 94% (= 1 − 0.06). Complete (100%)
pass-through for such firms cannot be rejected at the 95% confidence level. A hypotheti-
cal non-importing firm with a 75% market share relative to other Belgian exporters within
sector-destination (corresponding to the 95th percentile of the firm-level distribution of mar-
ket shares) has a pass-through of 73%, that is 21 percentage points (= 0.28 · 0.75) lower.
Holding this market share constant and increasing the import intensity of the firm from zero
to 38% (corresponding again to the 95th percentile of the respective distribution) reduces the
pass-through by another 18 percentage points (= 0.47 · 0.38), to 55%. Therefore, variation in
import intensity and market share explains a vast range of variation in pass-through across
firms. The marginal cost channel (proxied by import intensity) and the markup channel
(proxied by market share) contribute roughly equally to this variation in pass-through.
       Column 7 concludes this analysis by estimating our main specification (as in column 6)
controlling for the industry-destination-year fixed effects (δs,k,t ). Therefore, the only variation
used in this estimation is within industry-destination-year, as suggested by our theory in
Section 2.4. In this regression, the coefficient on the exchange rate is effectively allowed
to vary at the industry-destination level (i.e., αs,k ) but is absorbed in the fixed effects.
Comparing columns 6 and 7, we see that the point estimates on the import intensity and
market share barely change, and the estimates remain strongly statistically significant in
column 7 despite thousands of fixed effects.
  32
    The coefficient on ∆mc∗f,t in both specifications of columns 3 and 5 is remarkably stable at 0.51. The
theory suggests that this coefficient should be 1/(1 + Γ̄), that is the average pass-through elasticity of
idiosyncratic shocks into prices, corresponding to an average markup elasticity of Γ̄ ≈ 1, close to the estimates
provided in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2011) using very different data and methods.




                                                       26
4.3    Nonparametric Results

Our main empirical findings in Table 5 provide strong support for the theoretical predictions
developed in Section 2. However, we want to ensure that these results are smooth (e.g., not
driven by outliers) and are not artifacts of the linearized specification. We re-estimate the
specifications in Table 5 nonparametrically, by splitting the distribution of import intensity
ϕf into quartiles. Specifically, we estimate a separate pass-through coefficient for each quar-
tile of the import intensity distribution and plot these coefficients in Figure 1. All estimated
coefficients, standard errors, and p-values are reported in Table A1 in the appendix. The
graph shows that the coefficient is estimated to be monotonically higher (thus lower pass-
through) as we move from low to higher import intensity bins when we do not include both
marginal cost and market share controls. The steepest line corresponds to the unconditional
regression (a counterpart to column 2 of Table 5), and is somewhat flatter with controls for
marginal cost (column 3), and it is much flatter after controlling jointly for the change in
the marginal cost and the market share interaction (column 5). The dashed line corresponds
to our main specification (column 6), which controls for both market share and import in-
tensity, but not marginal cost, and it also exhibits a considerable slope across the import
intensity bins. Furthermore, in all of these cases the difference between the pass-through
coefficient in the first and fourth quartiles is significant with a p-value of 1%, with the ex-
ception of when we control for both marginal cost and markup (market share interaction).
In this case, consistent with the theory, the profile of pass-through coefficients across the
bins of the import intensity distribution becomes nearly flat with the differences between
the pass-through values in different bins statistically insignificant.
   An alternative nonparametric specification is to divide the observations by both import
intensity and market share. In Table 6, we split all firms into low and high import intensity
bins at the median import intensity, and all observations into low and high market share bins
depending on whether the firm-sector-destination market share is below or above the 75th
percentile of the market share distribution within sector-destination. With this split roughly
50% of firm-product-destination-year observations fall within each market share bin. For
each of the four bins, we estimate a simple pass-through regression of the change in producer
export prices on the change in the exchange rate. Consistent with the results in column
6 of Table 5, we find that pass-through into destination-currency export prices decreases
significantly either as we move toward the bin with a higher market share or toward the
bin with a higher import intensity. The lowest pass-through of 66% (= 1 − 0.34) is found
for the bin with high market share and above-median import intensity, compared with the


                                               27
                                                  0.4
                                                          Unconditional




                Producer price pass-through, Ψ∗
                                                          Cond’l on ∆mc∗f,t only

                                                  0.3     Condl’l on ∆mc∗f,t and Sf,s,k,t

                                                          Cond’l on Sf,s,k,t only


                                                  0.2




                                                  0.1



                                                         Bin 1            Bin 2             Bin 3          Bin 4
                                                   0
                                                    0            0.03               0.08            0.18           0.82
                                                                     Import intensity bins, ϕf

                                                   Figure 1: Pass-through by quartile of import intensity
Note: Equal-sized bins in terms of firm-product-destination-year observations, sorted by ϕf . The means of ϕf
in the four bins are 1.3%, 5.5%, 13.1% and 30.1%, respectively. The figure reports pass-through coefficients
of ∆p∗f,i,k,t on ∆ek,t within each ϕf -quartile, where the regressions include additional controls in levels and
interacted with ∆ek,t , as indicated in the legend of the figure, to parallel columns (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) of
Table 5. The pass-through coefficient in Bin 4 is significantly different from that in Bin 1 at the 1% level for
all specifications except the third one (controlling for both ∆mc∗f,t and Sf,s,k,t ) for which it is not significant
at the 5%. Additional information is reported in Table A1 in the appendix.


pass-through of 87% (= 1 − 0.13) for firms with below-median import intensity and low
market share, quantitatively consistent with the results in Table 5.
    From Table 6, we see that there are more observations along the main diagonal (around
30% in each bin) relative to the inverse diagonal (around 20% in each bin), which is due to the
positive correlation between the market share and the import intensity in the cross-section
of firms. This notwithstanding, the share of export value in the first bin with both low
market share and low import intensity is only 8%. The fourth bin with both above-median
import intensity and high market share accounts for the majority of exports, over 61%. This
suggests that the pass-through coefficient into destination prices from a regression weighted
by their respective export values should be substantially lower than from a regression in
which observations are unweighted. Indeed, when weighting by export values, we find a pass-
through coefficient of 62% , much lower than the 80% result in the unweighted specification
(column 1 of Table 5). Our evidence further shows that part of this difference is due to greater
markup variability among the large exporters, but of a quantitatively similar importance is
the higher import intensity of these firms.
    Finally, we explore the possibility of nonmonotonic and nonlinear effects of market share


                                                                                    28
                Table 6: Pass-through by import-intensity and market-share bins
                                              Low import intensity          High import intensity
            Low market share                        0.131∗∗∗                       0.194∗∗∗
             Fraction of observations                   30.0%                         21.0%
             Share in export value                      8.1%                           9.6%
            High market share                           0.214∗∗∗                      0.339∗∗∗
             Fraction of observations                   20.0%                         29.2%
             Share in export value                      21.3%                         61.1%
Note: Coefficients from regression of ∆p∗f,i,k,t on ∆ek,t within respective bins without fixed effects; bin-specific
intercepts included (all estimated to be close to zero). Firms are sorted by import intensity ϕf into below
and above median equal to 8.1%; and by market share Sf,s,k,t averaged across the years the firm served a
given sector-destination into below and above the 75th percentile within each sector(HS4)-destination, which
ensures a roughly even number of firm-product-destination-year observations in each high and low category.
The coefficient in the high-high bin is significantly different from the other coefficients at least at a 2% level.


and import intensity on pass-through by augmenting the main specification in column 6
of Table 5 with second-order terms. We find that the coefficient on the squared market
share term interacted with exchange rate is negative, but insignificant and small. Even
using the point estimate, the estimated relationship between pass-through and market share
remains monotonically increasing over the whole range [0, 1] of the market share variable,
which confirms the theoretical prediction in Proposition 1. Further, although the coefficient
on the interaction of import intensity with market share is positive, it is also small and
insignificant. These results justify our focus on the linear specification of Table 5 (see
discussion in footnote 19).


4.4     Deciphering the mechanism

Now that we have established that high-import-intensive firms have lower pass-through into
export prices, we delve into the underlying mechanisms. According to the theory, higher
import intensity is associated with higher marginal cost sensitivity to exchange rates (Propo-
sition 2). We test this directly by regressing the change in the marginal cost ∆mc∗f,t on the
change in the destination-specific exchange rate ∆ek,t and separately on the change in the
firm-level import-weighted exchange rate ∆eM
                                           f,t , within each quartile of the import-intensity

distribution.33 Figure 2, which plots these coefficients, illustrates a very tight monotonically
increasing pattern of marginal cost sensitivity to the destination-specific exchange rates
across the bins with increasing import intensity (and columns 5 and 6 in Table A1 in the
  33
    The import-weighted exchange rate ∆eM f,t is a weighted average of bilateral exchange rates with weights
equal to the import expenditure shares from outside the Euro Zone at the firm level.

                                                        29
                                            0.25

                                                      ∆mc∗f,t on ∆ek,t

                                             0.2      ∆mc∗f,t on ∆eM




                Marginal cost sensitivity
                                                                   f,t




                                             0.1




                                                    Bin 1          Bin 2          Bin 3          Bin 4
                                              0
                                               0            0.03           0.08           0.18           0.82
                                                              Import intensity bins, ϕf

                                               Figure 2: Marginal cost sensitivity to exchange rates
Note: The figure plots the pass-through coefficients from regressions of the log change in our measure of the
marginal cost of the firm ∆mc∗f,t on both bilateral export exchange rates ∆ek,t and firm-level import-weighted
exchange rate ∆eM f,t , by quartiles of the ϕf -distribution (as in Figure 1). Additional information is reported
in Table A1 in the appendix.


appendix report additional details). Quantitatively, an increase in import intensity from 1%
on average in the first quartile to 30% on average in the fourth quartile leads to an increase
in marginal cost sensitivity to the exchange rate from 0.02 to 0.17. This variation is quanti-
tatively consistent with the effects of import intensity on pass-through we studied earlier (see
Figure 1). The response of the marginal cost to the import-weighted exchange rate is also
monotonically increasing in ϕf and lies strictly above the response to the destination-specific
exchange rate, ranging from 0.05 to 0.21.
    The theory predicts the patterns depicted in Figure 2 hold when both the correlation
between export and import-weighted exchange rates and the pass-through into import prices
are positive (see equations (14) and (16)). We now provide evidence for each of these two key
structural determinants of the relationship between import intensity and pass-through. Col-
umn 8 of Table A1 shows there is a positive correlation between import and export exchange
rates by reporting the projection coefficients of firm-level import-weighted exchange rates
∆eM
  f,t on destination-specific exchange rates ∆ek,t across the quartiles of import-intensity

distribution. We find these projection coefficients to be stable at around 0.45, with no
statistically-detectable variation across bins of import intensity. Therefore, we find no sys-
tematic relationship between import intensity and the extent to which firms align their
import sources and export destinations to hedge their exchange rate risks (i.e., real hedging).


                                                                           30
       We next show the importance of this positive correlation between import and export
exchange rates for exchange rate pass-through into export prices. Intuitively, we would
expect the effects of import intensity to be stronger when inputs are imported from the
same country to which the firm sells its products. To capture this idea systematically, we
split all source-destination pairs of countries into a high and a low correlation bin depending
on whether the correlation between (the annual log changes in) the two respective exchange
rates is above or below 0.7. For each firm-destination we create two measures of import
intensity—ϕHigh
           f,k  and ϕLow
                     f,k —from high- and low-correlation source countries respectively.
                                                                                        34

The average correlation between exchange rates in the two bins is 0.92 and 0.25 respectively,
and according to the theory (see equation (16)) this difference should directly translate into
the differential effect of the two import intensities on the exchange rate pass-through of the
firm. This is exactly what we find in column 1 of Table 7, which estimates the augmented
specification (21) splitting the firm import intensity into the two components just introduced.
The estimated coefficients on the high- and low-correlation import intensity interactions are
0.86 and 0.38 respectively.
       We further show that the effect of import intensity on export price pass-through is
stronger the higher the exchange rate pass-through into import prices. We construct the
different import intensity measures by splitting the 210 non-Euro import source countries in
our sample into three groups: high pass-through, low pass-through, and other. The group
of other countries contains source countries for which there are either insufficient observa-
tions or not enough variation in the exchange rate to estimate pass-through accurately. The
remaining countries are assigned to the high bin if pass-through exceeds 0.5. With this
procedure we have 19 countries in the high pass-through bin with average pass-through into
Belgian import prices of 63% and accounting for 38% of Belgian firm imports. The low
pass-through bin contains 32 countries with average pass-through of 25% and accounting for
44% of Belgian firm imports. The list of countries, their pass-through and import shares
are reported in Table A3 in the appendix. We use the three corresponding import intensity
variables to estimate an augmented specification (21) in column 2 of Table 7. As predicted
by the theory, we find a higher coefficient, equal to 0.76, for import intensity from high-
pass-through countries, while the coefficient for the low-pass-through imports is 0.35 and
  34
    Note that our overall measure of import intensity equals ϕf ≡ ϕHigh        Low
                                                                      f,k + ϕf,k for all destinations k served
by firm f . Table A2 reports information on the pairs of high and low correlation countries. Our results are
robust to the specific correlation threshold, however raising it too high (e.g., setting it at 1, which amounts
to placing in the high bin only the imports from the destination country itself in most cases), leaves the
high-correlation bin too thin for reliable statistical inference. With the threshold of 0.7, imports from the
high-correlation source countries account on average for 22% of the overall import intensity across firms.




                                                      31
                                    Table 7: Which imports matter?
                                             Exchange rate          Import          OECD and
                                              correlation        pass-through       Euro Area
               Dep. var.: ∆p∗f,i,k,t                (1)                (2)               (3)
               ∆ek,t                              0.053∗              0.052             0.044
                                                 (0.031)             (0.032)           (0.040)
               ∆ek,t · ϕHigh
                        f,k                       0.864∗∗∗            0.763∗∗∗          0.472∗∗∗
                                                 (0.277)             (0.239)           (0.154)
               ∆ek,t · ϕLow
                        f,k                       0.376∗∗∗            0.348             0.505∗∗
                                                 (0.131)             (0.241)           (0.210)
               ∆ek,t · ϕOther
                        f                           —                 0.058             0.057
                                                                     (0.314)           (0.126)
               ∆ek,t · Sf,s,k,t                   0.284∗∗∗            0.285∗∗∗          0.282∗∗∗
                                                 (0.063)             (0.063)           (0.064)
               FE: δs,k + δt                       yes                 yes               yes
               # obs.                            93,395              93,395            93,395
               R2                                 0.058               0.058             0.058
Note: Results from the augmented specification
        ∆p∗f,i,k,t = α + β High ϕHigh + β Low ϕLow     Other Other
                                                                           
                                 f,k           f,k + β      ϕf,k + γSf,s,k,t ∆ek,t + . . . + f,i,k,t .
Column 1: splits imports into high and low correlation bins for each firm-destination depending on whether
the correlation (based on annual log changes) between import and export exchange rate is above 0.7; de-
composition of import intensity: ϕf ≡ ϕHighf,k  + ϕLow
                                                   f,k for every destination k. Column 2: splits imports
by pass-through into import prices into three bins—high (above 0.5), low (below 0.5) and other (imprecisely
estimated), as explained in the text (ϕf ≡ ϕHigh
                                             f   + ϕLow
                                                    f   + ϕOther
                                                            f    ). Column 3: splits non-Euro imports into
imports from high-income OECD and low-income non-OECD countries (ϕf ≡ ϕHigh        f    + ϕLow
                                                                                            f  ) and addition-
ally includes import intensity from within the Euro Area (ϕOther
                                                              f     ). All regressions additionally control for
the levels of all interaction terms and include country-destination and time fixed effects. Other details as in
Table 5.


insignificant.35
       The results in columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 provide direct evidence of the theoretical mecha-
nisms linking import intensity and exchange rate pass-through. Lastly, we ask whether there
may be additional forces correlated with the firm’s import intensity that could potentially
confound its relationship with the exchange rate pass-through. For example, low import-
intensity firms tend to import relatively more imports from within the Euro Area (see Ta-
ble 2). Another noticeable difference across firms is in their share of imports that comes from
non-OECD countries, which tends to be substantially higher for the high-import-intensive
firms. The import share from non-OECD countries in total non-Euro imports increases
  35
     While the share of high-correlation imports is stable at around 22% across firms with different import
intensity, the share of high-pass-through imports increases from 34% to 44% across import intensity quartiles,
slightly reinforcing the role of import intensity in our main specification.


                                                      32
monotonically from 25% to 45% across the quartiles of import intensity.36
       Column 3 of Table 7 explores the effects of this heterogeneity by splitting the overall
measure of the firm’s import intensity ϕf into the import intensities from the high-income
OECD and low-income non-OECD countries, both outside the Euro Area, as well as addi-
tionally controlling for the import intensity from within the Euro Area (denoted with ϕOther
                                                                                       f     ).
First, as expected, we find that import intensity from within the Euro Area has no effect
on pass-through, since the prices of these imports, just like those of the Belgium inputs, are
insensitive to the Euro exchange rate. This regression can be viewed as a placebo test con-
firming that our import intensity measure ϕf indeed picks up the marginal cost sensitivity
to exchange rates rather than proxying for other dimensions of heterogeneity across firms
related to import intensity.
       Second, surprisingly, we find no difference in the effects of import intensity from OECD
and non-OECD countries, with both coefficients estimated to be around 0.5. As expected,
OECD countries tend to have higher pass-through into import prices of Belgian firms: 44%
on average versus 15% on average from non-OECD countries, though there is significant
variation within these groups as reflected in Table A3. However, the effects of these import
pass-through differences are counterbalanced by the correlation pattern between import and
export exchange rates. Indeed, almost all source countries in the high-correlation pairs
with destination countries are non-OECD, which is to a large extent driven by the full or
partial exchange rate pegs adopted by many non-OECD countries. Overall, we find that the
composition of imports from OECD versus non-OECD countries has no detectable effect on
the export pass-through of Belgian firms.37
       To summarize, the data strongly supports the specific mechanisms identified by the the-
ory, and we find no evidence that our import intensity measure proxies for other mechanisms
or variables that may affect pass-through.
  36
      Both patterns are consistent with the presence of a fixed cost of importing which increases with the
geographic and economic distance to the source country, making it worthwhile only for the largest importers
to source inputs from the distant origin countries.
   37
      The other two possibilities we explored were whether pass-through into import prices of Belgian firms
varies by the type of the product imported (manufactured or not) and/or by the type (size) of the importing
firm. Although the share of manufactured products in imports decreases from 95% to 86% across the
quartiles of import intensity, we find no systematic difference in pass-through for manufacturing and non-
manufacturing imports, once we control for the source country of imports. Similarly, controlling for the
source country, we find no systematic difference in import pass-through between small and large firms.
Section 4.5 presents further robustness tests controlling for the size of the firm and types of imported inputs.




                                                      33
4.5       Robustness
In this section, we consider three sets of robustness tests: including additional controls,
considering alternative definitions of import intensity, and using alternative samples in terms
of included destinations, firms and products. We conclude the section by a discussion of the
possible selection and measurement issues.

Additional controls Our theory provides a sharp prediction that firm import intensity
and market share form a sufficient statistic for pass-through. We test this prediction by aug-
menting our main empirical specification (from column 6 of Table 5) with alternative proxies
for markup and marginal cost variability such as firm employment size and measured TFP.38
The results reported in columns 1 and 2 of Table 8 show that our empirical findings are ro-
bust to the inclusion of these additional interaction terms. Controlling for employment and
TFP interactions reduces slightly the estimated coefficients on import intensity and market
share interactions, but they remain large and strongly statistically significant. The coeffi-
cients on employment and TFP interactions, although significant, are in turn quantitatively
moderate. Column 3 of Table 8 augments the specification in column 2 by controlling for
the local component of the marginal cost—proxied by the log changes in the measure of the
firm-level wage rate and the firm TFP—to isolate the effect of import intensity through the
foreign-sourced component of the marginal cost of the firm. These controls have essentially
no effect on the estimated coefficients of interest.

Alternative definitions of import intensity To ensure that the results are not sensitive
to our definition of ϕf , we experimented extensively with alternative definitions. We report
these robustness checks in Table A4 in the appendix, where we estimate our main empirical
specification using different definitions of import intensity. First, in column 1, we verify that
our results are unchanged when as in specification (21) we use lagged time-varying ϕf,t−1 and
Sf,s,k,t−1 , as suggested by Proposition 4, instead of ϕf and Sf,s,k,t respectively. Remarkably,
the estimated coefficients are virtually the same as in Table 5.
       Next, in column 2 of Table A4 we include only manufacturing products in the construction
  38
    In theories where productivity is the only source of heterogeneity, market share, employment, and
productivity itself are all perfectly correlated. However, when there is more than one source of heterogeneity,
these variables are correlated positively but imperfectly (as we document in Table 4), which allows us to
jointly include these variables in one specification. Berman, Martin, and Mayer (2012) emphasized firm
productivity as the sufficient statistic for markup variability, and specifications in Table 8 are counterparts
to some of their regressions with the exception that we include both the import intensity and market share
interactions. Overall, our empirical results are consistent with their findings in that more productive firms
have lower pass-through, but we split this effect into the markup and marginal cost channels by controlling
separately for market share and import intensity, and show that these two controls are at least as strong as
employment and productivity, consistent with our theoretical model.


                                                      34
                           Table 8: Robustness with additional controls

                    Dep. var.: ∆p∗f,i,k,t       (1)            (2)            (3)
                    ∆ek,t · ϕf                 0.413∗∗∗       0.433∗∗∗       0.418∗∗∗
                                              (0.106)        (0.109)        (0.119)
                    ∆ek,t · Sf,s,k,t           0.219∗∗∗       0.249∗∗∗       0.245∗∗∗
                                              (0.065)        (0.064)        (0.065)
                    ∆ek,t · log Lf,t           0.044∗∗∗
                                              (0.012)
                    ∆ek,t · log T F Pf,t                      0.070∗∗∗       0.080∗∗∗
                                                             (0.023)        (0.024)
                           ∗
                    ∆ log Wf,t                                               0.004∗
                                                                            (0.002)
                    ∆ log T F Pf,t                                           0.035∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.007)
                    FE: δs,k + δt              yes             yes            yes
                    # obs.                    92,576         92,106         87,608
                    R2                        0.058           0.058          0.061
Note: The same specification as in column 6 of Table 5, augmented with additional controls. Lf,t is firm
             ∗
employment, Wf,t is firm average wage rate, and T F Pf,t is the estimate of firm total factor productivity.


of the import intensity variable. In columns 3 and 4, we respectively restrict the definition
of imports to exclude consumer goods and capital goods. In the subsequent columns, we
use IO tables to identify a firm’s intermediate inputs. In column 5, we include only imports
identified as intermediate inputs in the IO tables for all of the firm’s exports, and in column 6
we only include IO inputs for a firm’s IO major exports. Finally, in column 7, we exclude any
import at the CN-8-digit industrial code if the firm simultaneously exports in this category.
In all cases, the results are essentially unchanged, except that in the last case the coefficient
on the import intensity substantially increases, but it should be noted that the average
import intensities here are much lower as we drop a large share of imports from the import
intensity calculation.

Alternative samples We further check the robustness of our results within alternative
subsamples of the dataset, both in the coverage of export destinations and in the types
of products and firms. Table A5 in the appendix reports the results in eight alternative
subsamples. By and large, it reveals the same qualitative and quantitative patterns we find
in our benchmark sample.
    Columns 1–3 of Table A5 report the results for three alternative sets of export destinations—
all non-Euro countries, non-Euro OECD countries excluding the US, and the US only. It is

                                                    35
noteworthy that for the US subsample we estimate both a lower baseline pass-through (for
firms with zero import intensity and market share) and a stronger effect of import intensity
on pass-through, than for other countries.39 Our analysis in Section 4.4 suggests that the
larger effect of import intensity on pass-through into export price to the US is at least in part
due to the stronger correlation between the euro-dollar exchange rate and a typical Belgian
firm’s import-weighted exchange rate (see Table A2).
       The remaining columns in Table A5 consider different sets of products and firms. So far,
all of the specifications have been restricted to the subsample of only manufacturing firms
because our ϕf measure is likely to be a better proxy of import intensity in manufacturing
than for wholesalers, who may purchase final goods within Belgium to export them or al-
ternatively import final goods for distribution within Belgium. In column 4, which adds in
all wholesale firms to our baseline sample, we see that although the import intensity and
market share interactions are still positive and significant, their magnitudes and t-stats are
smaller. The wholesalers represent around 40 percent of the combined sample. Next, in
column 5, we drop all intra-firm transactions from our baseline sample (around 15 percent
of observations), and this has little effect on the estimated coefficients.40
       Finally, our sample has included only the firm’s major export products, based on its
largest IO code, in order to address the issue of multiproduct firms. In columns 6–8, we
show that the results are not sensitive to this choice of “main products”. In column 6, we
include all of the firm’s manufacturing exports rather than restricting it only to IO major
products. In column 7, we adopt an alternative way to identify a firm’s major products,
using the HS 4-digit category, which is much more disaggregated than the IO categories.
And in column 8, we only include a firm if its HS 4-digit major category accounts for at
least 50 percent of its total exports. In all three cases, we find the magnitudes on the import
intensity and market share interactions are very close to our main specification.

Measurement and selection We conclude the empirical section with a brief discussion
of measurement error and selection bias. One concern is that some firms, particularly small
ones, may import their intermediate inputs through other Belgian firms (e.g., specialized
importers), which we cannot observe in our data, and hence cannot adjust accordingly our
  39
     Specifically, small non-importing firms exporting to the US market pass-through on average only 82% of
the euro-dollar exchange rate changes, while the firms with high import-intensity and high market share (at
the 95th percentile) pass-through only 33%. This low pass-through is consistent with previous work using
US data.
  40
     Using data from the Belgium National Bank, we classify intra-firm trade as any export transaction from
a Belgium firm to country k in which there is either inward or outward foreign direct investment to or from
that country.



                                                    36
measure of import intensity. Note, however, that this would work against our findings
since some of the fundamentally import-intensive firms would be wrongly classified into low
import-intensity. This measurement error should cause an upward bias in the estimate of
our baseline pass-through (coefficient α in (21)) and a downward bias in our estimate of the
import-intensity effect on pass-through (coefficient β), which we find to be large nonetheless.
Similarly, we expect the measurement error in import intensity for multiproduct firms to
work against our findings. The measurement error for the market share variable is likely to
have classical properties, and hence we expect to have a downward bias in the estimates of
coefficient γ as well.
    Further, in the appendix we provide a formal theoretical argument that sample selection
is also likely to lead to an upward bias in the estimates of α and a downward bias in the esti-
mates of β and γ, as well as provide corroborating empirical evidence. Intuitively, the firms
that drop out from the sample in response to an exchange rate appreciation (∆ek,t < 0) are
more likely to be the ones simultaneously hit by an adverse marginal cost shock (e.g., neg-
ative productivity shock), and hence desiring to raise prices more than firms staying in the
sample. Censoring of these firms from the sample leads to an upward bias in α. Since the
probability of exit decreases with import intensity and market share (proxying for firm’s
profitability), we expect this upward bias to be less severe for firms with high import in-
tensity and high market shares, in other words a more shallow relationship between these
variables and pass-through. To summarize, this analysis suggests that both measurement
and selection issues are likely to lead us to estimate lower bounds on both β and γ, and hence
our quantitative account of the variation in pass-through should be viewed as conservative.



5    Conclusion
In this paper, we show that taking into account that the largest exporting firms are also
the largest importers is key to understanding the low aggregate exchange rate pass-through
and the variation in pass-through across firms. We find that import intensity affects pass-
through both directly, by inducing an offsetting change in the marginal cost when exchange
rates change, and indirectly, through selection into importing of the largest exporters with
the most variable markups. We use firms’ import intensities and export market shares as
proxies for the marginal cost and markup channels, respectively, and show that variation in
these variables across firms explains a substantial range of variation in pass-through. A small
firm using no imported intermediate inputs has a nearly complete pass-through, while a firm
at the 95th percentile of both market share and import intensity distributions has a pass-


                                              37
through of just over 50%. Around half of this incomplete pass-through is due to the marginal
cost channel, as captured by our import intensity measure. Since import intensity is heavily
skewed toward the largest exporters, our findings help explain the observed low aggregate
pass-through elasticities, which play a central role in the study of exchange rate disconnect.
Finally, we show that the patterns we document emerge naturally in a theoretical framework,
which combines standard ingredients of oligopolistic competition and variable markups with
endogenous selection into importing at the firm level.
   Our findings suggest that the marginal cost channel contributes substantially—reinforcing
and amplifying the markup channel—to low aggregate pass-through and pass-through vari-
ation across firms. The decomposition of incomplete pass-through into its marginal cost and
markup components is necessary for the analysis of the welfare consequences of exchange
rate volatility (as emphasized by Burstein and Jaimovich, 2008) and the desirability to fix
exchange rates, for example, by means of integration into a currency union. Furthermore,
price sensitivity to exchange rates is central to the expenditure switching mechanism at the
core of international adjustment and rebalancing. A sign of inefficiency is when exchange
rate movements affect mostly the distribution of markups across exporters from different
countries, leading to little expenditure switching. However, if the lack of pass-through is
largely due to the complex international web of intermediate input sourcing, incomplete
pass through of exchange rates into prices may well be an efficient response. A complete
analysis of the welfare consequences requires a general equilibrium model disciplined with the
evidence on the importance of marginal cost and markup channels of the type we provide,
and we leave this important question for future research.
   Even after controlling for the marginal cost channel, our evidence still assigns an impor-
tant role for the markup channel of incomplete pass-through. In particular, we find that
large high-market-share firms adjust their markups by more in response to cost shocks. This
is consistent with a model in which larger firms also choose higher levels of markups, a
pattern that can rationalize the evidence on misallocation of resources across firms, as, for
example, documented in Hsieh and Klenow (2009). The markup interpretation of this evi-
dence on misallocation differs from the cost-side frictions interpretation conventional in the
literature (an exception is Peters, 2011). Our evidence, therefore, is useful for calibration
and quantitative assessment of the models of misallocation at the firm-level.
   Finally, we briefly comment on the interpretation of our results in an environment with
sticky prices, where exporters choose to fix their prices temporarily either in local or in
producer currency. Since we cannot condition our empirical analysis on a price change or split
the sample by currency of pricing, our results confound together the change in the desired

                                             38
markup with the mechanical changes in markup induced by the exchange rate movements
when prices are sticky in a given currency. Therefore, one should keep in mind that our
results suggest that import intensity and market share contribute either to flexible-price
pass-through incompleteness or to the probability of local currency pricing, which in turn
leads to low pass-through before prices adjust. In reality, our results are likely to be driven
partly by both these sources of incomplete pass-through.41 Indeed, Gopinath, Itskhoki,
and Rigobon (2010) show that the two share the same primitive determinants and provide
evidence that the choice to price in local currency is closely correlated in the cross-section of
firms with the pass-through incompleteness conditional on price adjustment. Nonetheless,
we favor the flexible-price interpretation of our results, as we focus on a relatively long
horizon using annual data.




  41
    Our data do not allow us to do a decomposition into these two sources, but one can make such inference
by taking a stand on a particular structural model of incomplete pass-through with sticky prices, and using
outside information to calibrate its parameters related to price stickiness and currency of pricing. We do not
attempt this exercise in the current paper.


                                                     39
References
(2006): “Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and the Sensitivity of the CPI to Exchange
  Rates,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Ackerberg, D., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2006): “Structural identification of produc-
 tion functions,” http://www.econ.ucla.edu/ackerber/.
Alessandria, G. (2004): “International Deviations From The Law Of One Price: The Role
 Of Search Frictions And Market Share,” International Economic Review, 45(4), 1263–1291.
Amiti, M., and D. R. Davis (2012): “Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence,”
 Review of Economic Studies, 79(1), 1–36.
Amiti, M., and J. Konings (2007): “Trade liberalization, intermediate inputs, and pro-
 ductivity: Evidence from Indonesia,” American Economic Review, 97(5), 1611–1638.
Atkeson, A., and A. Burstein (2008): “Trade Costs, Pricing-to-Market, and Interna-
 tional Relative Prices,” American Economic Review, 98(5), 1998–2031.
Auer, R. A., and R. S. Schoenle (2012): “Market Structure and Exchange Rate Pass-
 Through,” http://people.brandeis.edu/~schoenle/research.htm.
Berman, N., P. Martin, and T. Mayer (2012): “How do different exporters react to
 exchange rate changes?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 437–492.
Bernard, A. B., E. J. Blanchard, I. Van Beveren, and H. Y. Vandenbussche
 (2012): “Carry-Along Trade,” NBER Working Papers No. 18246.
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, and P. K. Schott (2009): “Importers, Exporters and
 Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods,” in Producer Dynamics:
 New Evidence from Micro Data, pp. 513–552. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Blaum, J., C. Lelarge, and M. Peters (2013): “Non-Homothetic Import Demand: Firm
 Productivity and Quality Bias,” http://www.econ.brown.edu/fac/joaquin_blaum/.
Burstein, A., and G. Gopinath (2012): “International Prices and Exchange Rates,” in
 Handbook of International Economics, ed. by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff,
 vol. IV. forthcoming.
Burstein, A., and N. Jaimovich (2008): “Understanding Movements in Aggre-
 gate and Product-level Real Exchange rates,” http://econ.as.nyu.edu/docs/IO/8836/
 productRER.pdf.
Burstein, A. T., J. C. Neves, and S. Rebelo (2003): “Distribution costs and real
 exchange rate dynamics during exchange-rate-based stabilizations,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 50(6), 1189–1214.
Chatterjee, A., R. Dix-Carneiro, and J. Vichyanond (2012): “Multi-Product Firms
 and Exchange Rate Fluctuations,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forth-
 coming.
Damijan, J. P., J. Konings, and S. Polanec (2012): “Import Churning and Export
 Performance of Multi-Product Firms,” LICOS Discussion Paper 307.
De Loecker, J., P. K. Goldberg, A. K. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik (2012):


                                           40
  “Prices, Markups and Trade Reform,” NBER Working Paper No. 17925.
Engel, C. (2001): “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: Is There a
 Common Cause?: Comment,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, vol. 15, pp. 403–
 411.
        (2003): “Expenditure Switching and Exchange Rate Policy,” in NBER Macroeco-
  nomics Annual 2002, vol. 17, pp. 231–272.
Fauceglia, D., A. Shingal, and M. Wermelinger (2012): “ ‘Natural hedging’ of ex-
  change rate risk: The role of imported input prices,” http://www.alexandria.unisg.
  ch/publications/citation/Martin_Wermelinger/.
Feenstra, R. C., J. E. Gagnon, and M. M. Knetter (1996): “Market share and ex-
  change rate pass-through in world automobile trade,” Journal of International Economics,
  40(1–2), 187–207.
Feng, L., Z. Li, and D. L. Swenson (2012): “The Connection between Imported In-
  termediate Inputs and Exports: Evidence from Chinese Firms,” NBER Working Paper
  No. 18260.
Fitzgerald, D., and S. Haller (2012): “Pricing-to-Market: Evidence From Plant-Level
  Prices,” Working Paper, Stanford University.
Froot, K. A., D. S. Scharfstein, and J. C. Stein (1993): “Risk Management: Coordi-
 nating Corporate Investment and Financing Policies,” Journal of Finance, 48(5), 1629–58.
Garetto, S. (2012): “Firms’ Heterogeneity and Incomplete Pass-Through,” http://
 people.bu.edu/garettos/research.html.
Goldberg, L., and J. Campa (2010): “The Sensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates:
 Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and Trade Exposure,” Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 92(2), 392–407.
Goldberg, P., and M. Knetter (1997): “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have
 We Learned?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 35(3), 1243–1272.
Goldberg, P. K., and R. Hellerstein (2008): “A Structural Approach to Explaining
 Incomplete Exchange-Rate Pass-Through and Pricing-to-Market,” American Economic
 Review, 98(2), 423–29.
         (2011): “A Structural Approach to Identifying the Sources of Local-Currency Price
  Stability,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Goldberg, P. K., and F. Verboven (2001): “The Evolution of Price Dispersion in the
 European Car Market,” Review of Economic Studies, 68(4), 811–48.
Gopinath, G., and O. Itskhoki (2010): “Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-
 through,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 675–727.
          (2011): “In Search of Real Rigdities,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010,
  vol. 25, pp. 261–310.
Gopinath, G., O. Itskhoki, and R. Rigobon (2010): “Currency Choice and Exchange
 Rate Pass-through,” American Economic Review, 100(1), 306–336.
Gopinath, G., and B. Neiman (2012): “Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large

                                           41
  Crises,” http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/brent.neiman/research/.
Gopinath, G., and R. Rigobon (2008): “Sticky Borders,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 123(2), 531–575.
Halpern, L., M. Koren, and A. Szeidl (2011): “Imported Inputs and Productivity,”
 http://miklos.koren.hu/view/kmwprs/32/.
Hsieh, C.-T., and P. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
 and India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403–1448.
Kugler, M., and E. Verhoogen (2009): “Plants and Imported Inputs: New Facts and
 an Interpretation,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 99(2), 501–507.
Levinsohn, J., and A. Petrin (2003): “Estimating production functions using inputs to
  control for unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 70(2), 317–342.
Manova, K., and Z. Zhang (2009): “China’s Exporters and Importers: Firms, Products
 and Trade Partners,” NBER Working Paper No. 15249.
Martin, J., and I. Méjean (2012): “Invoicing Currency, Firm Size, and Hedging,” http:
 //www.isabellemejean.com/publications.html.
Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
 Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.
Nakamura, E., and D. Zerom (2010): “Accounting for Incomplete Pass-through,” Review
 of Economic Studies, 77(3), 1192–1230.
Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (2001): “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroe-
 conomics: Is There a Common Cause?,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, vol. 15,
 pp. 339–390.
Olley, G. S., and A. Pakes (1996): “The dynamics of productivity in the telecommuni-
 cations equipment industry,” Econometrica, 64, 1263–1297.
Peters, M. (2011): “Heterogeneous Mark-Ups and Endogenous Misallocation,” http://
 economics.mit.edu/grad/mipeters/papers.
Pierce, J. R., and P. K. Schott (2012): “On estimating firm-level production func-
  tions using proxy variables to control for unobservables,” Journal of Economic and Social
  Measurement, forthcoming.
Wooldridge, J. (2009): “On estimating firm-level production functions using proxy vari-
 ables to control for unobservables,” Economics Letters, 104, 112–114.




                                            42
A       Online Appendix
A.1     Theoretical Appendix
A.1.1   Cost function and import intensity

For brevity, we drop the firm identifier i in this derivation. Given output Y and the set of
imported intermediate goods J0 , the objective of the firm is
                                             ˆ 1            ˆ                    
          ∗                             ∗           ∗                        ∗
                                                                               
      T C (Y |J0 ) ≡     min         W L+         Vj Zj dj +     Em Uj Mj + W f dj ,
                    L,X,{Xj ,Zj },{Mj }                0                    J0


Denote by λ, ψ and χ the Lagrange multiplier on constraints (5), (6) and (7) respectively.
The first order conditions of cost minimization are respectively:

                              W ∗ = λ(1 − φ)Y /L,
                                  ψ = λφY /X,
                                  χ = ψγj X/Xj ,                        j ∈ [0, 1],
                               Vj∗   = χ(Xj /Zj )    1/(1+ζ)
                                                               ,       j ∈ [0, 1],
                                                           1/(1+ζ)
                            Em Uj = χ(aj Xj /Mj )                    , j ∈ J0 ,

with Mj = 0 and Xj = Zj for j ∈ J˜0 ≡ [0, 1]\J0 . Expressing out ψ and χ, taking the ratio
of the last two conditions and rearranging, we can rewrite:

                             W ∗ L = λ(1 − φ)Y,
                           Vj∗ Xj = λφγj Y (Xj /Zj )1/(1+ζ) , j ∈ [0, 1],
                                               −ζ
                        Em Uj Mj         Em U j
                                  = aj              ,     j ∈ J0 .
                         Vj∗ Zj           Vj∗

                                                                                    1+ζ
Substituting the last expression into (7), we obtain Xj = Zj 1 + aj (Em Uj /Vj∗ )−ζ ζ for
                                                                 

j ∈ J0 , which together with the expression for Vj∗ Xj above yields:
                                               
                                                   λφγj Y bj , j ∈ J0 ,
                                  Vj∗ Xj   =
                                                   λφγj Y,     j ∈ J˜0 ,

where
                                                               1/ζ
                                   bj ≡ 1 + aj (Em Uj /Vj∗ )−ζ
                                       
                                                                    .                  (A1)
Based on this, we express L and Xj for all j ∈ [0, 1] as functions of λY and parameters.
Substituting these expressions into (5)–(6), we solve for
                                 n´
                                    V ∗  o φ
                                     1j
                   1       exp
                            γ
                           0 j
                               log   γj
                                          dj    
                                                   W ∗
                                                       1−φ
                                                              C∗
                λ=         n´               o              = φ ,                      (A2)
                   Ω  φ exp J0 γj log bj dj       1−φ        B Ω



                                                      43
where                                        ˆ                            
                                   B = exp                 γj log bj dj                      (A3)
                                                      J0

and C ∗ is defined in footnote 13. Finally, we substitute the expression for W ∗ L, Vj∗ Zj =
Vj∗ Xj · (Zj /Xj ) and Em Uj Mj = Vj∗ Zj · (Em Uj Mj /(Vj∗ Zj )) into the cost function to obtain
                                                               ´
                                T C ∗ (Y ; J0 ) = λY +             J0
                                                                        W ∗ f dj.            (A4)


Choice of J0 without uncertainty           solves minJ0 T C ∗ (Y |J0 ), given output Y . Consider
adding an additional variety j0 ∈  / J0 to the set J0 . The net change in the total cost from this
is given by
                         ∂λ
                       Y    Bγj0 log bj0 + W ∗ f = −φλY · γj0 log bj0 + W ∗ f,
                         ∂B
since γj0 log bj0 is the increase in log B from adding j0 to the set of imports J0 . Note that
        ´1              ´
φλY = 0 Vj∗ Zj dj + J0 Em Uj Mj dj is the total material cost of the firm.
   Therefore, the optimal choice of J0 must satisfy the following fixed point:
                                                                            
                                          ∗
                                       C /Ω                                 
             J0 = j ∈ [0, 1] : φ     n ´              o Y · γj log bj ≥ W ∗ f .
                                exp φ     γ log b d`
                                             J0       `        `
                                                                             

This immediately implies that once j’s are sorted such that γj log bj is decreasing in j, the set
of imported inputs is an interval J0 = [0, j0 ] for some j0 ∈ [0, 1]. Furthermore, the condition
for j0 can be written as:
                                                                                 
                                                  ∗
                                              C /Ω                               
            j0 = max j ∈ [0, 1] : φ     n ´                o Y · γj log bj ≥ W ∗ f ,        (A5)
                                                j
                                   exp φ γ log b d`
                                                  0        `       `
                                                                                  

and such j0 is unique since the LHS of the inequality is decreasing in j. Figure A2 provides
an illustration.


Proof of Proposition 2      The fraction of variable cost spent on imports is given by
                                 ´                 ˆ
                                    E U Mj dj
                                  J0 m j
                            ϕ=                   =     γj (1 − bζj )dj,
                                       λY           J0

where we used the first order conditions from the cost minimization above to substitute in
for Em Uj Mj . Note that ϕ increases in J0 , and in particular when J0 = [0, j0 ], ϕ increases
in j0 . Therefore, from (A5) it follows that ϕ increases in total material cost T M C = φλY =
φ[C ∗ Y ]/[B φ Ω] and decreases in fixed cost W ∗ f .
   From the definition of total cost (A4), holding J0 constant, the marginal cost equals




                                                      44
M C ∗ (J0 ) = λ defined in (A2). We have:
                                                                              ˆ
               ∂ log M C ∗ (J0 )   ∂ log λ ∂ log B                                        ∂ log bj
                                 =                  = −φ ·                           γj            dj = ϕ,
                   ∂ log Em        ∂ log B ∂ log Em                             J0        ∂ log Em

since from (A1) ∂ log bj /∂ log Em = −(1 − bζj ).                        


A.1.2   Price setting and ex ante choice of J0

Under the assumption that J0 is a sunk decision chosen before uncertainty is realized, we
can write the full problem of the firm (bringing back the firm identifier i) as:
                          (           (                                      ))
                                         X
                   max E       max           Ek Pk,i Qk,i − T Ci∗ (Yi |J0,i )   ,
                    J0,i         Yi ,(Pk,i ,Qk,i )
                                                        k∈Ki

                P
subject to Yi = k∈Ki Qk,i , with (Pk,i , Qk,i ) satisfying demand (1) in each market k ∈ Ki ,
and total cost given in (A4). We assume that J0,i is chosen just prior to the realization
of uncertainty about aggregate variables, and for simplicity we omit a stochastic discount
factor which can be added without any conceptual complications.
   Substituting the constraints into the maximization problem and taking the first order
condition (with respect to Pk,i ), we obtain:

                                                 ∂Qk,i ∂T Ci∗ (Y |J0,i ) ∂Qk,i
                           Ek Qk,i + Ek Pk,i           −                       = 0,
                                                 ∂Pk,i      ∂Y           ∂Pk,i

which we rewrite as
                                                                              λi
                                   Ek Qk,i (1 − σk,i ) + σk,i Qk,i                = 0,
                                                                             Pk,i
where σk,i is defined in (3) and λi = M Ci∗ (J0,i ) is defined in (A2). Rearranging and using
 ∗
Pk,i = Ek Pk,i , results in the price setting equation (11).
   Now consider the choice of J0,i . By the Envelope Theorem, it is equivalent to

                                             min E {T Ci∗ (Yi |J0,i )} ,
                                              J0,i


where Yi is the equilibrium output of the firm in each state of nature. Therefore, this problem
is nearly identical to that of choosing J0,i without uncertainty, with the exception that now we
have the expectation and Yi varies across states of the world along with exogenous variables
affecting T Ci∗ . As a result, we can write the fixed point equation for J0,i in this case as:
                                                                                 
                                            ∗
                                       C /Ωi                        
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                    
     J0,i = j ∈ [0, 1] : E φ                          o Yi · γj log bj ≥ E {W fi } .
                             exp φ ´ γ log b d`
                                    n                                                        (A6)
                                                                                  
                                                     J0,i   `        `


Therefore, J0,i still has the structure [0, j0,i ], but now we need to sort goods j in decreasing


                                                                45
order by the value of the LHS in the inequality in (A6) (in expected terms).


A.1.3    Equilibrium Relationships

To illustrate the implications of the model for the equilibrium determinants of market share
and import intensity, we study the following simple case. Consider two firms, i and i0 , in
a given industry and both serving a single destination market k. The firms face the same
industry-destination specific market conditions reflected in Ek , Pk , Dk , C ∗ and φ. We allow
the firms to be heterogeneous in terms of productivity Ωi , demand/quality shifter ξk,i and
the fixed cost of importing fi . For a single-destination firm we have Yi = Qk,i , and we drop
index k in what follows for brevity.
    We want to characterize the relative market shares and import intensities of these two
firms. In order to do so, we take the ratios of the equilibrium conditions (demand (1), market
share (2) and price (11)) for these two firms:42
                                    −ρ                               1−ρ
                                                                                         Mi Biφ0 Ωi0
                                                           
              Yi    ξi        Pi               Si     ξi        Pi                 Pi
                  =                       ,         =                        and       =             ,
              Yi0   ξi0       Pi0              S i0   ξi0       Pi0                Pi0   Mi0 Biφ Ωi

where Mi = σi /(σi − 1) and σi = ρ(1 − Si ) + ηSi . Log-linearizing relative markup, we have:

                                                    Mi      Γ̄    Si
                                              log        =     log ,
                                                    Mi 0   ρ−1    Si0

where Γ̄ is markup elasticity given in (4) evaluated at some average S̄. Using this, we
linearize the equilibrium system to solve for:
                                                                          
                         Si      1        ξi   ρ−1         Ωi          Bi
                     log     =        log    +         log     + φ log             (A7)
                         Si0   1 + Γ̄     ξi0 1 + Γ̄       Ωi0         Bi0

and the interim variable (total material cost), which determines the import choice:
                                                                  
                  T M Ci         Yi        Ωi          Bi         Γ̄      Si
              log          = log     − log     − φ log      = 1−       log .                              (A8)
                  T M C i0       Yi0       Ωi0         Bi0       ρ−1      Si0

Assumption A1 Γ̄ < (ρ − 1).

   This assumption implies that the (level of) markup does not vary too much with the
productivity of the firm, so that high-market-share firms are simultaneously high-material-
cost firms (as we document is the case in the data, see Table 4).43 Consequently, under A1,
high-market-share firms choose to be more import intensive, as we discuss next.
  42
      Note that taking these ratios takes out the aggregate variables such as the price index. Intuitively, we
characterize the relative standing of two firms in a given general equilibrium environment, and aggregate
equilibrium variables such as the price index, which affect outputs and market shares of firms proportionately,
drop out.
   43
      This assumption is not very restrictive for the parameters of the model, as for a moderate value of ρ = 4,
it only requires S̄ < 0.8 (given the definition of Γ in (4) and η ≥ 1).

                                                            46
    Denote χ(j) ≡ γj E log bj , where the expectation is over aggregate equilibrium variables
(i.e., aggregate states of the world), and sort j so that χ0 (·) < 0 on [0, 1]. Assuming the
choice of the import set is internal for both firms, we can rewrite (A6) as a condition for a
cutoff j0 (i):                 (                        )
                                                     ∗
                                                  φC Yi
                             E γj0 (i) log bj0 (i) φ      = E{W ∗ fi },
                                                  Bi Ωi
and log-linearize it to yield:

           −χ0 j̄0
                                                                         
                                     0
                                               Yi         Ωi          Bi         fi
                    · j0 (i) − j0 (i ) = E log      − log     − φ log       − log ,
             χ j̄0                              Y i0       Ωi0         Bi0        fi 0

where j̄0 is some average cutoff variety. Finally, using definition (A3), we have

                                         Bi
                                             = χ j̄0 · j0 (i) − j0 (i0 ) .
                                                                       
                                 E log                                                                (A9)
                                         Bi0

   Combining the above two equations with (A8), we have:

                 −χ0 j̄0
                                              
                                  Bi         Γ̄          Si      fi
                        2 φE log     = 1−        E log     − log .
                 φχ j̄0           Bi0      ρ−1          Si0      f i0

Combining with (A7), we solve for:
                                     "         Γ̄
                                                                                         #
                                         1−
                                                                          
         Bi            1                      ρ−1  ξi                  Ωi           fi
  φE log      =                            log        + (ρ − 1) log        − log         ,          (A10)
         Bi 0           ρ
                κ̄0 − 1+Γ̄ − 1      1 + Γ̄         ξi 0               Ωi 0          f i0
                                                                                             
         Si            1            κ̄0        ξi                   Ωi       ρ−1           fi
   E log      =                          log      + (ρ − 1) log          −        log           ,   (A11)
         S i0   κ̄0 − 1+ρ Γ̄ − 1 1 + Γ̄        ξi0                  Ωi0      1 + Γ̄        f i0

                            2
where κ̄0 ≡ −χ0 j̄0 /[φχ j̄0 ] > 0.
                   


                    −χ0 j̄0
                            
                                  ρ
Assumption A2 κ̄0 ≡        2 >        − 1.
                    φχ j̄0      1 + Γ̄

   The parameter restriction in A2 is a local stability condition: the function χ(j) =
Eγj log bj must be decreasing in j fast enough, otherwise small changes in exogenous firm
characteristics can have discontinuously large changes in the extensive margin of imports.
We view it as a technical condition, and assume equilibrium is locally stable.
   Finally, we relate import intensity of the firm ϕi to Bi . From definition (9) it follows that
                                                                    
                                                             ν j̄ 0        B
                    E ϕi − ϕi0 = ν j̄0 j0 (i) − j0 (i0 ) =           E log i ,
                                                      
                                                                                           (A12)
                                                             χ j̄0         Bi0

where ν(j) = γj E{1 − bζj } and the second equality substitutes in (A9).

                                                     47
    Equations (A10)–(A12) provide the log-linear characterization of (expected) relative mar-
ket share and relative import intensities of the two firms as a function of their relative exoge-
nous characteristics. These approximations are nearly exact when the exogenous differences
between firms are small. In other words, one can think of those relationships as describing
elasticities of market share and semi-elasticities of import-intensity with respect to exoge-
nous characteristics of the firm (productivity, demand/quality and fixed cost of importing),
holding the general equilibrium environment constant. Therefore, we have:

Proposition A1 Under Assumptions A1 and A2, the (expected) market share and import
intensity of the firm are both increasing in its productivity and quality/demand shifter, and
are both decreasing in the firm’s fixed cost of importing, in a given general equilibrium envi-
ronment (that is, holding the composition of firms constant).

A similar result can be proved for firms serving multiple and different numbers of destina-
tions.


A.1.4   Pass-through relationship and proof of Proposition 3

Markup     Given (2) and (3), we have the following full differentials:

                                    σk,i      (ρ − η)Sk,i                      d log Sk,i
            d log Mk,i ≡ d log             =                 d log Sk,i = Γk,i            ,
                                  σk,i − 1   σk,i (σk,i − 1)                     ρ−1
                                                                                         
                                  d log Sk,i = d log ξk,i − (ρ − 1) d log Pk,i − d log Pk ,

where Γk,i is as defined in (4). Combining these two expressions results in (13).


Marginal cost    Taking the full differential of (10), we have:

                                                        C∗
                                  d log M Ci∗   = d log    − φd log Bi .
                                                        Ωi

Using definitions (A1) and (A3), and under the assumption that J0 is a sunk decision (that
is, the set of imported goods is held constant), we have:

                                        Em Uj
            d log bj = −(1 − bζj )d log       ,
                                         Vj∗
                         ˆ
                                         
           φd log Bi = φ    γj d log bj dj
                           J0,i
                                                 ˆ
                                                                                                Vj∗
                                                                                                   
                                Em Ū                                                 Uj
                     = −ϕi d log ∗ − φ                    γj (1 −   bζj )       d log    − d log ∗ dj,
                                 V̄                J0,i                               Ū        V̄
                                             ´1
where ϕi is defined in (9), and d log V̄ ∗ = 0 γj d log Vj∗ djdj and similarly d log Ū =
                                                           
´1           
   γ d log Uj djdj. Substituting this expression into the full differential of the marginal
 0 j



                                                      48
cost above results in (14), where the residual is given by:
                        ˆ
                                                            Vj∗
                                                               
                  MC                    −ζ        Uj                     Ωi
                 i =          γj (1 − bj ) d log    − d log ∗ dj − d log ,
                          J0,i                    Ū        V̄           Ω̄

where d log Ω̄ is the sectoral average change in firm-level productivity.

   Combining (13) and (14) with (12), we have:

               ∗
                                                         C∗           Em Ū
        d log Pk,i = −Γk,i d log Pk,i − d log P̃k + d log    + ϕi d log ∗ + k,i ,                   (A13)
                                                          Ω̄            V̄
where
                                               Γk,i M                   ξk,i
                              k,i ≡ M
                                      i
                                        C
                                          +          ,     M
                                                             k,i ≡ d log ¯ ,
                                              ρ − 1 k,i                  ξk
d log ξ¯k is the sector-destination average change in demand/quality across firms, and we
                          1
denote with P̃k ≡ ξkρ−1 Pk the sector-destination price index adjusted for the average de-
mand/quality shifter for Belgian firms. We make the following:
                  C M
                         
Assumption A3 M
               k,i , k,i , and hence k,i , are mean zero and independent from d log Em
and d log Ek .

Note that k,i reflects the firm idiosyncratic differences in the change in input prices, produc-
tivity and demand/quality shifter, and therefore Assumption A3 is a natural one to make.
Essentially, we assume that there is no systematic relationship between exchange rate move-
ment and firm’s idiosyncratic productivity or demand change relative to an average firm
from the same country (Belgium) serving the same sector-destination. This nonetheless al-
lows the exchange rates to be correlated with sector-destination average indexes for costs
and productivity (that is, Ω̄, Ū , V̄ ∗ , as well as P̃k ).
                                    ∗
   Substituting d log Pk,i = d log Pk,i − d log Ek into (A13) and rearranging, we arrive at:

                                                                                     Cs ∗

         ∗         Γk,i                 ϕi          Em Ūs Γk,i d log P̃s,k + d log Ω̃s,k + k,i
  d log Pk,i   =          d log Ek +          d log       +                                      , (A14)
                 1 + Γk,i            1 + Γk,i        V̄s∗                 1 + Γk,i

where we have now made the sector identifier s an explicit subscript (each i uniquely deter-
mines s, hence we do not carry s when i is present). Note that Γk,i is increasing in Sk,i . We
now linearize (A14) in ϕi and Sk,i :

Lemma A1 Log price change expression (A14) linearized in ϕi and Sk,i is

       ∗        Γ̄s,k                ḡs,k                       1                Em Ūs
d log Pk,i ≈           d log Ek +            S̃k,i d log Ek +           ϕi d log                    (A15)
             1 + Γ̄s,k             1 + Γ̄s,k                  1 + Γ̄s,k            V̄s∗
                                                                                                
                              Cs∗                                                        Cs∗
                                                                                                        
                                     0                                     Em Ūs             00
   Γ̄s,k d log P̃s,k + d log Ω̃ + ¯k,i ḡs,k d log P̃s,k − ϕ̄s d log V̄ ∗ − d log Ω̃ + ¯k,i
                               s,k                                            s           s,k
+                                        +                                                        S̃k,i  ,
                  1 + Γ̄s,k                                          1 + Γ̄s,k


                                                    49
where Γ̄s,k = Γk,i        S̄s,k
                                  , ḡs,k ≡ ∂ log(1 + Γk,i )/∂Sk,i   S̄s,k
                                                                           , S̄s,k is some average statistic                of the
                                                                         Γ̄s,k M               Γ̄s,k M
Sk,i distribution, S̃k,i = Sk,i − S̄k,i , and ¯0k,i ≡          M
                                                                 i
                                                                   C
                                                                     + ρ−1    k,i , ¯00k,i ≡ ρ−1  k,i − M
                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                                .

Proof: Given the definitions of Γ̄s,k and ḡs,k in the lemma, we have the following first-order
approximations:

     1       1 − ḡs,k S̃k,i                  Γk,i     Γ̄s,k + ḡs,k S̃k,i                      ϕi      ϕi − ϕ̄s ḡs,k S̃k,i
           ≈                 ,                       ≈                                and             ≈                      .
  1 + Γk,i     1 + Γ̄s,k                    1 + Γk,i       1 + Γ̄s,k                         1 + Γk,i      1 + Γ̄s,k

Substitute these approximations into (A14) and rearrange to obtain (A15). 


Proof of Proposition 3     Divide (A15) through by d log Ek and take expectations to char-
acterize the pass-through elasticity:
                                        ∗ 
                                d log Pk,i
                              
                       ∗
                     Ψk,i ≡ E               ≈ αs,k + βs,k · ϕi + γs,k · Sk,i ,
                                 d log Ek

where
                                              Γ̄s,k (1 + ΨPs,k ) + ΨCs,k
                                        αs,k =                           − γs,k S̄s,k ,
                                                       1 + Γ̄s,k
                                                                                                    
                            ΨM
                             s,k                              ḡs,k (1 − ϕ̄s ΨM          P      C
                                                                               s,k ) + (Ψs,k − Ψs,k )
                 βs,k =                     and       γs,k =                                           ,
                          1 + Γ̄s,k                                           1 + Γ̄s,k
and with
             (                 )                     (                        )
                                                         d log(Cs∗ /Ω̃s,k )                                 d log(Em Ūs /V̄s∗ )
                                                                                                                                  
                 d log P̃s,k
ΨPk,i   ≡E                         ,     ΨC
                                          s,k   ≡E                                ,         ΨM
                                                                                             s,k   ≡E                                  .
                  d log Ek                                   d log Ek                                            d log Ek
                                                                            
Note that the terms in k,i drop out since, due to Assumption A3, E k,i /d log Ek = 0.
Finally, note that Ψ·s,k ≈ cov(·, d log Ek )/var(d log Ek ), that is Ψ-terms are approximately
projection coefficients. The expectations and the definitions of Ψ-terms are unconditional,
and hence average across all possible initial states and paths of the economy. 


A.1.5    Empirical specification and proof of Proposition 4

We start from the linearized decomposition (A15) by replacing differential d with a time
change operator ∆, making the time index t explicit, and rearranging:

            Γ̄s,k ∆p̃s,k,t + ∆cs,t + ¯0k,i,t ḡs,k ∆p̃s,k,t − ∆cs,t + ¯00k,i,t
                                                                                 
    ∗
  ∆pi,k,t ≈                                  +                                     S̃k,i,t−1             (A16)
                        1 + Γ̄s,k                         1 + Γ̄s,k
                                                                                                          
            Γ̄s,k ∆ek,t      ϕi,t−1          Em,t Ūs,t ḡs,k S̃k,i,t−1                         Em,t Ūs,t
          +              +            ∆ log       ∗
                                                       +                  ∆ek,t − ϕ̄s,t−1 ∆ log      ∗
                                                                                                             ,
             1 + Γ̄s,k      1 + Γ̄s,k          V̄s,t      1 + Γ̄s,k                               V̄s,t

where ∆p∗i,k,t ≡ log Pk,i,t
                         ∗            ∗
                            − log Pk,i,t−1  , ∆ek,t ≡ log Ek,t − log Ek,t−1 , ∆cs,t ≡ log(Cs,t ∗
                                                                                                 /Ω̄s,t ) −
     ∗
log(Cs,t−1 /Ω̄s,t−1 ), and ∆p̃s,k,t ≡ log P̃s,k,t − log P̃s,k,t−1 . Note that we chose t − 1 as the point

                                                               50
of approximation for S̃k,i,t−1 and ϕi,t−1 . We also chose the approximation coefficients Γ̄s,k
and ḡs,k not to depend on time by evaluating the respective functions (see Lemma A1) at a
time-invariant average S̄s,k .
    Next consider our main empirical specification (21) which we reproduce as:
                                           
        ∗                          Sk,i,t−1                              Sk,i,t−1
     ∆pi,k,t = αs,k + βϕi,t−1 + γ̃            ∆ek,t + δs,k + bϕi,t−1 + c          + ũk,i,t ,                  (A17)
                                   Ss,k,t−1                              Ss,k,t−1

where Ss,k,t is the cumulative market share of all Belgian exporters. Our goal is to estab-
lish the properties of the OLS estimator of β and γ̃ in this regression, given approximate
structural relationship (A16). To this end, we introduce two assumptions:

Assumption A4 For every k, ∆ log ek,t is mean zero, constant variance and independent
from (ϕi,t−1 , Sk,i,t−1 , Ss,k,t−1 ).

Assumption A5 The variance and covariance of (ϕi,t−1 , Sk,i,t−1 /Ss,k,t−1 ) within (s, k, t−1)
are independent from (βs,k , γs,k Ss,k,t−1 ), where βs,k and γs,k are defined in the proof of Propo-
sition 3 above.

Assumption A4 is a plausible martingale assumption for the exchange rate, which we require
in the proof of Proposition 4. One interpretation of this assumption is that the cross-
section distribution of firm-level characteristics is not useful in predicting future exchange
rate changes. Assumption A5, in turn, is only made for convenience of interpretation, and
qualitatively the results of Proposition 4 do not require it. Essentially, we assume that the
cross-section distribution of firm-characteristics within sector-destination does not depend
on the aggregate comovement properties of sectoral variables which affect the values of βs,k
and γs,k .
    Before proving Proposition 4, we introduce the following three projections:
                                                                                                     
                                                                                   Em,t Ūs,t
                                                                       cov ∆ log       ∗
                                                                                     V̄s,t
                                                                                              ,∆ek,t
           ∆ log Em,t  Ūs,t
         
                             ≡ ρM            M
                                s,k ∆ek,t + vs,k,t ,         ρM
                                                              s,k =                                        ,
         
                      ∗
                   V̄                                                          var(∆ek,t )
         
         
                     s,t
         
                                                                       cov(∆p̃s,k,t ,∆ek,t )
                    ∆p̃s,k,t ≡ ρPs,k ∆ek,t + vs,k,t
                                              P
                                                    ,        ρPs,k =                           ,               (A18)
         
                                                                          var(∆ek,t )
         
                                                                       cov(∆cs,k,t ,∆ek,t )
         
         
                      ∆c∗s,t ≡ ρC            C
                                s,k ∆ek,t + vs,k,t ,         ρC
                                                              s,k =
         
         
                                                                           var(∆ek,t )

                M        P        C
and therefore (vs,k,t , vs,k,t , vs,k,t ) are orthogonal with ∆ek,t . Note that (ρM          P      C
                                                                                      s,k , ρs,k , ρs,k ) are the
empirical counterparts to (ΨM               P      C
                                     s,k , Ψs,k , Ψs,k ) defined in the proof of Proposition 3.




                                                        51
Proof of Proposition 4                           Substitute projections (A18) into (A16) and rearrange:
                                                                                                                     
            Γ̄s,k (1 + ρP ) + ρC       ρM                [(1 − ϕ̄s ρM         P       C
                                                                     s,k ) + (ρs,k − ρs,k )]ḡs,k Ss,k,t−1 Sk,i,t−1 
                                                                                                                      
                         s,k    s,k      s,k
∆p∗i,k,t ≈                         +           ·ϕi,t−1 +                                                  ·           ∆ek,t
           
                    1 + Γ̄s,k        1 + Γ̄s,k                              1 + Γ̄s,k                       Ss,k,t−1 
            |           {z        } | {z }                |                      {z                      }
                             ≡αs,k                        ≡βs,k                                            ≡γ̃s,k,t

                  M              P        C                M
                                                                 
                 vs,k,t         vs,k,t − vs,k,t − ϕ̄s,t−1 vs,k,t  ḡs,k Ss,k,t−1 Sk,i,t−1
        +           ·ϕi,t−1 +                               2
                                                                                 ·          + uk,i,t ,
          1 + Γ̄s,k                             (1 + Γ̄s,k )                       Ss,k,t−1
          | {z }              |                      {z                        }
                 ≡bs,k                                                 ≡cs,k,t
                    P
             Γ̄s,k vs,k,t    +    C
                                 vs,k,t   +   ¯0i,t           ḡs,k Sk,i,t−1 00
  uk,i,t =                                             ++                    ¯ .
                           1 + Γ̄s,k                           (1 + Γ̄s,k )2 k,i,t


Comparing this equation with the empirical specification (A17), the residual in the empirical
specification is given by:
                  h                                           i
                                                     Sk,i,t−1                                           Sk,i,t−1
ũk,i,t = uk,i,t + (βs,k − β)ϕi,t−1 + (γ̃s,k,t − γ̃) Ss,k,t−1   ∆ek,t + (bs,k − b)ϕi,t−1 + (cs,k,t − c) Ss,k,t−1 .


     Define xk,i,t = (10s,k , ϕi,t−1 , S̃k,i,t−1 )0 , so that we can write our regressors as zk,i,t
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                      =
   0       0
(xk,i,t , xk,i,t ∆ek,t ). From Assumptions A3 and A4 and properties of the projection (A18),
it follows that x0k,i,t ∆ek,t is orthogonal with x0k,i,t , and x0k,i,t ∆ek,t is uncorrelated with uk,i,t .
Therefore, the properties of the estimates of (αs,k , β, γ̃) are independent from those of
(δs,k , b, c). OLS identifies (αs,k , β, γ̃) from the following moment conditions:

                            0 = Ek,i,t {xk,i,t ∆ek,t ũk,i,t } = Ek,i,t {xk,i,t ∆ek,t (ũk,i,t − uk,i,t )} ,

where the second equality follows from Ek,i,t {∆ek,t xk,i,t uk,i,t } = 0 (due to Assumption A3
and projection (A18)). We now rewrite this moment condition in the form of summation
(across the population of firms, sector-destinations, and time periods/states):
           X                                      X                                                     0
       0=      xk,i,t ∆ek,t (ũk,i,t − uk,i,t ) =   ∆e2k,t xk,i,t x0k,i,t 00s,k , βs,k − β, γ̃s,k,t − γ̃ ,
                   k,i,t                                                   k,i,t


where the second equality substitutes in the expression for ũk,i,t − uk,i,t and uses the fact that
∆ek,t is orthogonal with xk,i,t (Assumption A4). Using the same assumption further, we can
rewrite the last expression as:
                                                                                                      
                                                       X                                 βs,k − β
                                                               σk2 ns,k,t Σs,k,t                           = 0,       (A19)
                                                       s,k,t
                                                                                        γ̃s,k,t − γ̃

where σk2 is the variance of ∆ek,t , Σs,k,t is the covariance matrix for (ϕi,t−1 , Sk,i,t−1 /Ss,k,t−1 )
within (s, k, t − 1), and ns,k,t is the respective number of observations.
    Equation (A19) already establishes the result of the proposition that β and γ̃ identify gen-
eralized weighted averages of the respective coefficients. Under additional Assumption A5,



                                                                                   52
we have a particularly simple expressions for these weighted averages:
                           X                           X
                                 0                          00
                       β=      ωs,k,t βs,k  and γ̃ =       ωs,k,t γ̃s,k,t ,
                                   s,k,t                                 s,k,t

 0                                            00
ωs,k,t ∝ σk2 ns,k,t vars,k,t−1 (ϕi,t−1 ) and ωs,k,t ∝ σk2 ns,k,t vars,k,t−1 (Sk,i,t−1 /Ss,k,t−1 ) with vars,k,t−1 (·)
denoting the variance for observations within (s, k, t − 1).
   Finally, βs,k and γ̃s,k,t = γs,k Ss,k,t−1 are defined above, and (βs,k , γs,k ) provide first-order
approximations to their analogs in Proposition 3 since (ρM           P      C         M      P      C
                                                              s,k , ρs,k , ρs,k ) ≈ (Ψs,k , Ψs,k , Ψs,k ). 


A.1.6     Selection bias
In this appendix we provide a brief exposition of the theoretical arguments for the direction
of the potential bias of the coefficient estimates in equation (21) due to sample selection.
We also provide corroborating empirical evidence.
    For simplicity, imagine an environment with no sunk cost and only fixed cost Fk,i of sup-
plying each market k for firm i, and denote with Πk,i the operating profit of firm i from serving
                                                                                        
market k. Then the selection equation is Πk,i ≥ Fk,i , or equivalently log Πk,i /Fk,i ≥ 0. A
general approximation to the profit function, which can also be derived from the structure of
the profit maximization problem introduced in Section 2.3, results in the following selection
condition:
                          Πk,i,t
                      log        ≈ δs,k + δt + ∆k,i,t−1 + θ∆ek,t + vk,i,t ≥ 0,             (A20)
                          Fk,i,t
where δs,k and δt are sector-destination and year dummies, ∆k,i,t−1 is a combination of firm-
destination characteristics (such as productivity Ωi and demand shifter ξk,i ) and vk,i,t is
an idiosyncratic firm-destination shock in period t. In words, approximation (A20) implies
that firms are more likely to stay in the sample under favorable industry-destination-year
conditions (high δs,k + δt ), when the domestic exchange rate depreciates (high ∆ek,t ), when
firms have strong fundamentals (large ∆k,i,t−1 ), and when firms face a favorable idiosyncratic
shock (large vk,i,t ). For our purposes we project ∆k,i,t−1 = aϕi,t−1 + bSk,i,t−1 + ξk,i,t−1 .
    Next consider our empirical specification:

                                           ∆p∗k,i,t = δq + αq ∆ek,t + uk,i,t ,                                 (A21)

estimated within bins q of import intensity and market share (analogous to Table 6). We
assume that uk,i,t is negatively correlated with vk,i,t . Intuitively, this implies that an adverse
marginal cost shock (e.g., negative productivity shock) both reduces vk,i,t and increases uk,i,t .
This assumption can be formally derived from the structure of our model: we can decompose
vk,i,t = zk,i,t − ρuk,i,t , where ρ > 0 and uk,i,t and zk,i,t are uncorrelated. Then the selection
equation (A20) can be rewritten as:

                 θ                                            1
uk,i,t ≤ γk,i,t + ∆ek,t ,         where            γk,i,t ≡     [δs,k + δt + aϕi,t−1 + bSk,i,t−1 + ξk,i,t + zk,i,t ] .
                 ρ                                            ρ

We directly verify in the data that a, b, θ > 0 (see the table below).

                                                              53
  Given this econometric model, we can directly evaluate the magnitude of the bias of an
OLS estimate of αq . First, for each bin q we calculate:

                            E ∆p∗k,i,t |∆ek,t = δq + αq ∆ek,t + fq (∆ek,t ),
                             


where                                                                          
                                                                          θ
                        fq (∆ek,t ) = E uk,i,t ∆ek,t , uk,i,t   ≤ γk,i,t + ∆ek,t .
                                                                          ρ
With uk,i,t unconditionally mean zero, we have the following properties (provided θ ≥ 0):

             fq (·) ≤ 0,    fq (∞) = 0,      fq0 (·) ≥ 0,    fq0 (·) ≥ fq (·),    fq0 0 (·) ≤ fq0 (·).

The last two properties come from the fact that in bin q 0 with higher ϕi,t−1 and/or Sk,i,t−1
the distribution of γk,i,t is shifted to the right (first order stochastically dominates), relative
to that for bin q. In the special case of θ = 0, we have fq (·) ≡ fq , a q-specific constant.
   Given this calculation, we can evaluate the bias in the OLS estimate of αq as the standard
omitted variable bias:

                                 cov ∆p∗k,i,t , ∆ek,t
                                                                                      
                                                                cov fq (∆ek,t ), ∆ek,t
     bias(α̂q ) = p lim α̂q − αq =                      − αq =                         ≥ 0,
                                       var ∆ek,t                     var ∆ek,t

since fq0 (·) ≥ 0 whenever θ > 0. For θ = 0, the bias equals zero. Furthermore, the bias is
(weakly) smaller (closer to zero) for bin q 0 than for bin q, if ϕi,t−1 and/or Sk,i,t−1 are higher
in bin q 0 than in bin q.
   To summarize, whenever a, b, θ > 0, the OLS estimates have an upward bias in α (down-
ward bias in the level of pass-through), which diminishes with import intensity and market
share. This in turn implies a downward bias in β and γ.
     The table below estimates a Probit regression for the probability of staying in the sample
(ιf,t = 1):

           P{ιf,t = 1|ιf,t−1 = 1}          (1)              (2)           (3)                (4)
           ϕf                             0.066∗∗∗         0.084∗∗∗      0.025              0.284∗∗∗
                                         (0.025)          (0.025)       (0.026)            (0.027)
           Sf,s,k,t−1                     0.564∗∗∗         0.558∗∗∗      0.710∗∗∗           0.777∗∗∗
                                         (0.011)          (0.011)       (0.011)            (0.013)
           ∆ek,t                          0.745∗∗∗         0.354∗∗∗      0.090              0.094
                                         (0.048)          (0.065)       (0.067)            (0.068)
           Fixed Effects                  —                δt           δt + δ k       δ t + δk + δ s
           # obs.                       172,988         172,988         172,988            172,988
          Note: δt , δk , δs are year, country and industry (HS 2-digit) fixed effects respectively.
          The dependent variable equals 1 in 67.6% of the observations.

This confirms that firms with high import intensity and market share are less likely to drop
out of the sample (a, b > 0). Further, this table provides evidence that exit is more likely in
response to exchange rate appreciation (∆ek,t < 0), that is θ > 0.

                                                     54
A.2     Data Appendix
Trade Data     The import and export data are from the National Bank of Belgium, with the
extra-EU transactions reported by Customs and the intra-EU trade by the Intrastat Inquiry.
These data are reported at the firm level for each product classified at the 8-digit combined
nomenclature (CN) in values and weights or units. Note that the CN code is a Europe-based
classification with the first 6-digits corresponding to the World Hamonized System (HS).
We include all transactions that are considered as trade involving change of ownership with
compensation (codes 1 and 11). These data are very comprehensive, covering all firms with
a total extra-EU trade whose value is greater than 1,000 euros or whose weight is more than
1,000 kilograms. Since 2006, even smaller transactions are reported. However, for intra-EU
trade, the thresholds are higher, with total intra-EU imports or exports above 250,000 euros
in a year, and in 2006 this threshold was raised to 1,000,000 euros for exports and 400,000 for
imports. Note that these thresholds result in changing cutoffs for countries that joined the
EU during our sample period as their transactions move from being recorded by Customs
to the Intrastat Inquiry.


Firm-level data      The firm-level data are from the Belgian Business Registry, covering all
incorporated firms. These annual accounts report information from balance sheets, income
statements, and annexes to the annual accounts. Only large firms are required to provide
full annual accounts whereas small firms have to only provide short annual accounts so that
some variables such as sales, turnover, and material costs may not be provided for small
firms. A large firm is defined as a company with an average annual workforce of at least 100
workers or when at least two of the followhing three thresholds are met: (i) annual average
workforce of 50 workers, (ii) turnover (excluding VAT) amounts to at least 7,300,000 euros,
or (iii) total assets exceeding 3,650,000 euros. Note that the last two thresholds are altered
every four years to take account of inflation. Although less than 10 percent of the companies
in Belgium report full annual accounts, for firms in the manufacturing sector these account
for most of value added (89 percent) and employment (83 percent).
   Each firm reports a 5-digit NACE code based on its main economic activity. The key
variable of interest is the construction of ϕ defined as the ratio of total non-Euro imports to
total costs (equal to wages plus total material costs). These total cost variables are reported
by 58 percent of exporters in the manufacturing sector. Combining this information with
the import data, we can set ϕ equal to zero when total non-Euro imports are zero even if
total costs are not reported, giving us a ϕ for 77 percent of manufacturing exporters, which
account for 98 percent of all manufacturing exports. Note that in less than half a percent of
the observations, total imports were greater than material costs in which case we treated ϕ
as missing.


Product Concordances      We use SITC one-digit product codes (5 to 8) to identify a man-
uacturing export as it is not possible to do so directly from the CN 8-digit classifica-
tions nor from its corresponding HS 6-digit code. We construct a concordance between


                                              55
CN 8-digit codes and SITC Revision 3 by building on a concordance between HS 10-digit
and SITC 5-digit from Peter Schott’s website, which takes into account revisions to HS
codes up to 2006 (see Pierce and Schott, 2012). We update this to take account of HS
6-digit revisions in 2007 using the concordance from the U.S. Foreign Census (see http:
//www.census.gov/foreign-trade/reference/products/layouts/imhdb.html). We be-
gin by taking the first 6-digits of the 8-digit CN code, which is effectively an HS 6-digit
code, and we include only the corresponding SITC code when it is a unique mapping. Some
HS 6-digit codes map to multiple SITC codes, so that in those cases we do not include a
corresponding SITC code. This happens mainly when we get to the more disaggregated
SITC codes and rarely at the one-digit SITC code.
   Second, we need to match the CN codes to input-output (IO) codes. We use a 2005
Belgium IO matrix with 74 IO codes of which 56 are within the manufacturing sector. The
IO codes are based on the Statistical Classifications of Product by Activity, abbreviated as
CPA, which in turn are linked to the CN 8-digit codes using the Eurostat correspondence
tables.The matching of the IO codes to the CN 8-digit was not straightforward as we had
to deal with the many-to-many concordance issues. We included an IO code only when the
match from the CN code was clear.


Sample     Our sample is for the years 2000 to 2008, beginning with the first year after the euro
was formed. We keep all firms that report their main economic activity in manufacturing
defined according to 2-digit NACE codes 15 to 36, thus excluding wholesalers, mining, and
services. We restrict exports to those that are defined within the manufacturing sector (SITC
one-digit codes 5 to 8). To address the multiproduct firm issue, we keep only the set of CN
8-digit codes that falls within a firm’s major IO export, which we identify as follows. We
select an IO code for each firm that reflects the firm’s largest export share over the sample
period and then keep all CN codes that fall within that IO code. For most of the analysis,
we focus on exports to noneuro OECD countries that are defined as advanced by the IMF
and high-income by the World Bank.
   We keep all import product codes and all import source countries. For some robustness
checks, we limit the set of imports to intermediate inputs defined either using the Belgium
2005 IO table or according to Broad Economic Codes (BEC). See http://unstats.un.org/
unsd/cr/registry/regcst.asp?Cl=10, where we define intermediate inputs as including
codes 111, 121, 2, 42, 53, 41, and 521.


Total Factor Productivity Measures        We measure total factor productivity (TFP) for
each firm by first estimating production functions for each 2-digit NACE sector separately.
We note that a key problem in the estimation of production functions is the correlation
between inputs and unobservable productivity shocks. To address this endogeneity problem
we estimate TFP using two different methodologies. The first approach is based on Levinsohn
and Petrin (2003) (LP), who propose a modification of the Olley and Pakes (1996) (OP)
estimator. OP uses investment as a proxy for unobservable productivity shocks. However,
LP finds evidence suggesting that investment is lumpy and hence that investment may not

                                               56
respond smoothly to a productivity shock. As an alternative, LP uses intermediate inputs,
such as materials, as a proxy for unobserved productivity. In particular, we assume a Cobb
Douglas production function,

                              νf,t = β0 + βl lf,t + βk kf,t + ωf,t + ηf,t ,                    (A22)

where νf,t represents the log of value added, lf,t is the log of the freely available input,
labor, and kf,t is the log of the state variable, capital. The error term consists of a com-
ponent that reflects (unobserved) productivity shocks, ωf,t , and a white noise component,
ηf,t , uncorrelated with the input factors. The former is a state variable, not observed by the
econometrician but which can affect the choices of the input factors. This simultaneity prob-
lem can be solved by assuming that the demand for the intermediate inputs, xf,t , depends
on the state variables kf,t and ωf,t , and


                                        xf,t = xf,t (kf,t , ωf,t ).                            (A23)
LP shows that this demand function is monotonically increasing in ωf,t and hence the in-
termediate demand function can be inverted such that the unobserved productivity shocks,
ωf,t , can be written as a function of the observed inputs, xf,t and kf,t , or ωf,t = ω(kf,t , xf,t ).
A two-step estimation method is followed where in the first step semi-parametric methods
are used to estimate the coefficient on the variable input, labor. In the second step, the co-
efficient on capital is estimated by using the assumption, as in OP, that productivity follows
a first-order Markov process.
    However, as pointed out by Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2006), a potential problem
with LP is related to the timing assumption of the freely available input, labor. If labor is
chosen optimally by the firm, it is also a function of the unobserved productivity shock and
capital. Then the coefficient on the variable input cannot be identified. Wooldridge (2009)
shows how the two-step semi-parametric approach can be implemented using a unified one-
step Generalized Methods of Moments (GMM) framework. This is the second methodology
that we adopt for estimating TFP. In particular ωf,t = ω(kf,t , xf,t ) is proxied by a lagged
polynomial in capital and materials, which controls for expected productivity in t. We use a
third-order polynomial in capital and material in our estimation. To deal with the potential
endogeneity of labor, we use its first lag as an instrument. A benefit of this method is that
GMM uses the moment conditions implied by the LP assumptions more efficiently. The log
of TFP measures are normalized relative to their 2-digit NACE sector mean to make them
comparable across industries. The correlation between both measures is very high at 99
percent.




                                                    57
A.3      Additional Figures and Tables

     1                                                                         1
  0.95                                                                      0.95
   0.9                                                                       0.9
          Count of
          firms
  0.75                                                                      0.75
                                                                                                 Count of
                       Export-value-                                                             observations
                       weighted
   0.5                                                                       0.5

                                                                                                      Export-value-
                                                                                                      weighted
  0.25                                                                      0.25


   0.1                                                                       0.1
  0.05                                                                      0.05
     0      0.1      0.2         0.3       0.4         0.5       0.6           0     0.2              0.4           0.6   0.8   1
                     Import intensity, ϕf                                                        Market share, Sf,s,k,t


  Figure A1: Cumulative distribution functions of import intensity ϕf and market share Sf,s,k,t
Note: Estimated cumulative distribution functions. In the left panel, the upper cdf corresponds to the un-
weighted firm count, while the lower cdf weights firm observations by their export values. The unweighted
distribution of ϕf has a mass point of 24% at ϕf = 0, while this mass point largely disappears in the value-
weighted distribution, which in turn has a step ϕf = 0.33 corresponding to the largest exporter in our sample
with an export share of 14%. In the right panel, the upper cdf corresponds to the count of firm-sector-
destination-year observations, and it has small mass points at both Sf,s,k,t = 0 and Sf,s,k,t = 1, which largely
correspond to small sectors in remote destinations. The lower cdf weights the observations by their export
value, and this weighted distribution has no mass points, although the distribution becomes very steep at the
very large market shares.


                             2

                                                                   B(j )

                           1.5         B(j0 )


                                                                                 FC
                             1
                                                                               T M C(j)




                           0.5
                                     Area = log B(j0 )                 γj log bj


                             0
                                 0               0.2         j 0 0.4           0.6         0.8                  1


                       Figure A2: Import cutoff j0 and cost-reduction factor B(j0 )
Note: F C = W ∗ fi is the fixed cost of importing an additional type of intermediate input. T M C(j) =
C ∗ Yi /[B(j)φ Ωi ] is the total material cost of the firm, decreasing in j holding output fixed due to cost-saving
effect of importing. The intersection between γj log bj and F C/T M C(j) defines the import cutoff j0 , and
the exponent of the area under γj log bj curve determines the cost-reduction factor from importing.



                                                                       58
 Table A1: Pass-through into producer prices and marginal cost by quartiles of import intensity

  Dep. variable:                           ∆p∗f,i,k,t                             ∆mc∗f,t              ∆eMf,t
                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)       (6)             (7)
  ∆e`,t · δ1,f            0.128∗∗∗ 0.115∗∗∗ 0.071∗∗ 0.077∗∗                 0.023∗∗∗ 0.054∗∗∗          0.399∗∗∗
                         (0.034) (0.034) (0.035) (0.035)                   (0.007) (0.006)            (0.065)
  ∆e`,t · δ2,f            0.203∗∗∗ 0.176∗∗∗ 0.130∗∗∗ 0.149∗∗∗               0.047∗∗∗ 0.092∗∗∗          0.434∗∗∗
                         (0.036) (0.034) (0.033) (0.035)                   (0.017) (0.011)            (0.068)
  ∆e`,t · δ3,f            0.239∗∗∗ 0.185∗∗∗ 0.113∗∗ 0.154∗∗∗                0.095∗∗∗ 0.145∗∗∗          0.466∗∗∗
                         (0.053) (0.049) (0.048) (0.052)                   (0.022) (0.010)            (0.070)
  ∆e`,t · δ4,f            0.321∗∗∗ 0.227∗∗∗ 0.152∗∗∗ 0.232∗∗∗               0.165∗∗∗ 0.213∗∗∗          0.421∗∗∗
                         (0.039) (0.040) (0.041) (0.035)                   (0.037) (0.018)            (0.084)
  ∆ek,t · Sf,s,k,t                                0.205∗∗∗ 0.238∗∗∗
                                                 (0.053) (0.059)
  ∆mc∗f,t                             0.569∗∗∗ 0.565∗∗∗
                                     (0.031) (0.031)
  p-value Bin 1 vs 4 0.000∗∗∗ 0.014∗∗             0.081∗        0.000∗∗∗     0.000∗∗∗ 0.000∗∗∗          0.479
  # obs.             93,395   93,395             93,395        93,395       93,395    89,504           89,504
  R2                 0.003    0.010               0.010         0.003        0.025    0.045             0.214

Note: Nonparametric regressions: firm-product-destination-year observations split into four equal-sized bins
by value of import intensity ϕf , with δq,f denoting a dummy for respective bins (quartiles q = 1, 2, 3, 4).
No fixed effects included in nonparametric specifications. Specifications (3) and (4) additionally control
for the level of the market share Sf,s,k,t . In columns 1–5 and 7, ∆e`,t ≡ ∆ek,t is the destination-specific
bilateral exchange rate; in column 6, ∆e`,t ≡ ∆eM f,t is the firm-level import-weighted exchange rate (excluding
imports from the Euro Zone). In column 7, firm-level import-weighted exchange rate ∆eM          f,t is regressed on
the destination-specific bilateral exchange rate ∆ek,t . p-value for the F -test of equality of the coefficients for
quartiles 1 and 4. Standard errors clustered at the destination-year level.




                                                          59
                  Table A2: High exchange rate correlation source-destination pairs
                                        # of source countries Share of imports from
                  Destination           pegs     corr ≥ 0.7   destination corr ≥ 0.7
                  Australia               1           6          0.5%       5.2%
                  Canada                 0           79          2.5%      58.7%
                  Iceland                0            6          0.1%       2.3%
                  Israel                  0          77          0.5%      41.2%
                  Japan                  0           22          5.1%      16.0%
                  Korea                  0           24          1.6%      33.9%
                  New Zealand             0           3          0.3%       0.6%
                  Norway                 0            1          1.2%       1.3%
                  Sweden                 0            4          5.0%       6.8%
                  Switzerland             0           1          6.3%       6.7%
                  United Kingdom         0           12         23.0%      30.3%
                  United States          20          79         17.6%      38.0%
Note: Total number of non-Euro source countries: 210. Number of countries in the first two columns excludes
destination itself, while the share of imports in the last column includes imports from the destination country.


                    Table A3: High and low pass-through import source countries
           High pass-through (≥ 0.50)                          Low pass-through (< 0.50)
                         Pass-    Import                                      Pass-    Import
       Country          through    share                Country             through     share
       Peru               1.20∗∗∗  0.5%                 Israel†               0.45∗∗∗   0.2%
       Bangladesh         0.93∗∗∗  0.2%                 India                 0.42∗∗∗   1.0%
       Chile              0.75∗∗∗  0.2%                 Brazil                0.41∗∗∗   3.1%
       Taiwan             0.74∗∗∗  0.5%                 Thailand              0.41∗∗∗   1.0%
       Canada†            0.71∗∗∗  1.8%                 Sri Lanka             0.40∗∗    0.2%
                 †            ∗∗                                                   ∗∗∗
       Australia          0.69     1.5%                 Malaysia              0.40      0.3%
       Saudi Arabia       0.67∗∗   1.3%                 Egypt                 0.39∗∗∗   0.4%
       China              0.67∗∗∗  3.8%                 Philippines           0.39∗     0.5%
                     †        ∗∗∗                                                  ∗∗
       United States      0.63    16.6%                 Venezuela             0.36      0.4%
       Russia             0.62∗∗∗  3.8%                 Singapore             0.31      0.2%
       Hong Kong          0.61∗∗∗  0.2%                 Sweden†               0.31∗∗∗ 14.3%
             †                ∗∗∗
       Japan              0.55     5.4%                 South Korea†          0.24∗∗∗   0.9%
       Colombia           0.55∗∗∗  0.3%                 United Kingdom   †
                                                                              0.19∗∗∗ 15.7%
       Switzerland†       0.53∗∗∗  1.5%                 Indonesia             0.18∗∗    0.6%
       Mexico             0.50∗∗∗  0.4%                 Ukraine               0.15      0.2%
                                                        Argentina             0.08∗∗    0.3%
                                                        Turkey                0.02      1.5%
                                                        Pakistan             −0.02      0.2%
                                                        Vietnam              −0.03      0.3%
                                                        South Africa         −0.09      1.0%
Note: Non-OECD import source countries with a share in Belgian imports above 0.2% and precisely es-
timated pass-through into import prices of Belgian firms, split into high and low pass-through bins with
a threshold pass-through of 0.5. † marks high-income OECD countries. High-pass-through countries also
include Guatemala, Macao, Uganda and United Arab Emirates; Low-pass-through countries also include
Belarus, Congo, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Ghana, Honduras, Madagascar, New Zealand† , Paraguay,
Uruguay, Zambia, Zimbabwe. For the remaining of the 210 countries in our sample, most of which are very
small sources of imports for Belgian firms, pass-through is imprecisely estimated.

                                                      60
                                                      Table A4: Robustness to the definition of import intensity
                                                            Lagged         Only   Drop  Drop             Only     Only      Drop
                                                        time-varying manuf. consumer capital           IO-table IO-table inputs in
                                                         (ϕf,t−1 ,S·,t−1) imports goods goods           inputs   inputs* export CN8
                              Dep. var.: ∆p∗f,i,k,t            (1)          (2)    (3)   (4)              (5)      (6)       (7)
                              ∆ek,t                        0.054∗      0.062∗∗    0.068∗∗    0.065∗∗    0.057∗      0.056∗     0.077∗∗
                                                          (0.032)     (0.030)    (0.030)    (0.032)    (0.031)     (0.031)    (0.033)
                              ∆ek,t · ϕf,·                 0.452∗∗∗    0.459∗∗∗ 0.429∗∗∗ 0.450∗∗∗ 0.471∗∗∗ 0.486∗∗∗ 1.062∗∗∗
                                                          (0.154)     (0.114) (0.135) (0.153) (0.106) (0.106)       (0.376)




61
                              ∆ek,t · Sf,s,k,·             0.278∗∗∗    0.294∗∗∗ 0.292∗∗∗ 0.286∗∗∗ 0.287∗∗∗ 0.286∗∗∗ 0.288∗∗∗
                                                          (0.058)     (0.064) (0.063) (0.062) (0.063) (0.063)       (0.060)
                              FE: δs,k + δt                 yes        yes         yes        yes        yes        yes         yes
                              # obs.                       87,799     93,395     93,395     93,395      93,395     93,395      93,395
                              R2                           0.059      0.058       0.057      0.057      0.057      0.057       0.057
     Note: Column 1 estimates (21) with lagged import intensity and market share variables. Specifications in columns 2–7 are the same as in column 6 of Table 5,
     but with alternative measures of import intensity ϕf , dropping respective categories of imports from the definition of ϕf : Column 2 keeps only manufacturing
     products; Columns 3 and 4 exclude consumer and capital goods categories respectively according to the BEC classification; Columns 5 and 6 keep only imports
     that correspond to intermediate input categories for the exports of the firm according to the input-output tables, where column 6 additionally focuses on the
     major export category of the firm; Column 7 drops all imports in the same CN-8 industrial codes as exports of the firm. Other details appear in the text and
     as in Table 5.
                                                             Table A5: Robustness with different samples
                                                          Destinations               All firms Dropping            Products
                                                     all     w/out         only      including intra-firm    all       HS 4-digit
                                                  countries    US           US      wholesalers trade     products  major   major*
                          Dep. var.: ∆p∗f,i,k,t      (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)     (7)      (8)
                          ∆ek,t                   −0.011        0.034     0.184∗∗      0.094∗∗∗ 0.070∗∗        0.062∗∗    0.102∗∗ 0.090∗∗
                                                   (0.016)     (0.035)   (0.062)      (0.028)   (0.033)       (0.027)    (0.042) (0.045)
                          ∆ek,t · ϕf                0.263∗∗∗ 0.438∗∗∗ 0.652∗           0.335∗∗∗ 0.479∗∗∗ 0.587∗∗∗ 0.400∗∗ 0.505∗∗∗
                                                   (0.064) (0.122) (0.385)            (0.079)   (0.120)  (0.107)  (0.175) (0.165)
                          ∆ek,t · Sf,s,k,t          0.097∗∗∗ 0.292∗∗∗ 0.312∗∗∗ 0.162∗∗∗ 0.211∗∗∗ 0.224∗∗∗ 0.195∗∗∗ 0.198∗∗
                                                   (0.029) (0.062) (0.110)     (0.057)  (0.071)  (0.051)  (0.070) (0.087)




62
                          Fixed Effects:
                            δs,k + δt                yes         yes        no         yes         yes         yes         yes        yes
                            δs                       no          no        yes         no           no         no           no         no
                          # countries                55          11         1          12           12         12           12         12
                          # obs.                   218,879     82,438     10,957     158,804      79,461     143,912      62,679     53,037
                          R2                        0.077       0.058     0.055       0.041       0.062       0.043       0.057      0.060

     Note: Main specification from column 6 of Table 5 estimated with alternative subsamples of the data. In column 3, δs are sector fixed effects at HS-4 digit
     level. All other details are as in Table 5. Column 5 excludes all firm-destination observations if the Belgian firm has either inward or outward FDI with that
     destination. Column 6 keeps all of the firms’s manufacturing exports (i.e., not only its major products). Column 7 uses an alternative definition of the firm’s
     major product and keeps only the major good reported by the firm at the HS 4-digit level, and column 8 keeps only these HS 4-digit major goods if its market
     share in the firm’s exports is above 50%.
