NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SECURITIZATION
Gary Gorton
Andrew Metrick
Working Paper 18611
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18611
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

Thanks to Thomas Bonczek, Henry Hansmann, George Pennacchi, Robert Sitkoff, Rene Stulz, and
Nancy Wallace for comments and suggestions. Also, thanks to Richard Cantor, William Black, Erkan
Erturk, Ildiko Szilank, and Julia Tung for help with data. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Securitization
Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick
NBER Working Paper No. 18611
December 2012
JEL No. E0,G0,G2
ABSTRACT
We survey the literature on securitization and lay out a research program for its open questions. Securitization
is the process by which loans, previously held to maturity on the balance sheets of financial intermediaries,
are sold in capital markets. Securitization has grown from a small amount in 1990 to a pre-crisis issuance
amount that makes it one of the largest capital markets. In 2005 the amount of non-mortgage asset-backed
securities issued in U.S. capital markets exceeded the amount of U.S. corporate debt issued, and these
securitized bonds – even those unrelated to subprime mortgages -- were at center of the recent financial
crisis. Nevertheless, despite the transformative effect of securitization on financial intermediation,
the literature is still relatively small and many fundamental questions remain open.
Gary Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
Andrew Metrick
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
metrick@yale.edu

1

1. Introduction
Prior to the financial crisis of 2007-2008, securitization was a very large part of U.S. capital
markets. It played a central role in the recent financial crisis. Yet it is largely unregulated and it
is not well understood. There is little research on this topic. In this paper, we survey the
literature on securitization and summarize the outstanding questions.
Traditionally, financial intermediaries originated loans that they then held on their balance sheets
until maturity. This is no longer the case. Starting around 1990 pools of loans began to be sold
in capital markets, by selling securities linked to pools of loans held by legal entities called
“special purpose vehicles” (SPVs). These securities, known as asset-backed securities (ABS) (or
mortgage-backed securities (MBS), in the case where the loans are mortgages) are claims to the
cash flows from the pool of loans held by the SPV. Such securities can be issued with different
seniorities, known as tranches. Securitization has fundamentally altered capital markets, the
functioning of financial intermediation, and challenges many theories of the role of financial
intermediaries.
Securitization has an important role in the U.S. economy. As of April 2011, there was $11
trillion of outstanding securitized assets, including residential mortgage-backed securities
(RMBS), other ABS and asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP). This is substantially more than
the size of all outstanding marketable U.S. Treasury securities—bonds, bills, notes, and TIPS
combined.1 A large fraction of consumer credit in the U.S. is financed via securitization. It is
estimated that securitization has funded between 30 percent and 75 percent of lending in various
consumer lending markets and about 64 percent of outstanding home mortgages.2 In total,
securitization has provided over 25% of outstanding U.S. consumer credit.3
Figure 1 shows the U.S. issuance amounts of private securitization and corporate bonds. In 2002
the amounts of securitized bonds issued ($662.4 billion) exceeded corporate bond issuance
($636.7 billion) for the first time, and continued to be larger until the financial crisis. Figure 1
1

U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Monthly Statement of the Public Debt of the United States: January 31, 2011,”
(January 2011). < http://www.treasurydirect.gov/govt/reports/pd/mspd/2011/opds012011.pdf>.
2
See Statement of Tom Deutsch, before the House Financial Services Committee, Subcommittee on Capital
Markets and Government Sponsored Enterprises, April 14, 2011.
3
Federal Reserve Board of Governors, “G19: Consumer Credit,” (Sept. 2009).
<http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/current/g19.htm>.

2

includes non-agency, i.e., private, mortgage securitizations. But, even when this very large
category is removed, securitization is very significant, as shown in Figure 2.

The main

categories of loans securitized, aside from mortgages, are credit card receivables, automobile
loans, and student loans. U.S. non-mortgage securitization issuance exceeded U.S. corporate
bond issuance in 2005, and then plummets during the financial crisis. Figure 3 shows U.S.
mortgage-related securitization, including agency bonds, residential-mortgage-backed securities
(RMBS), and commercial-mortgage-backed securitization (CMBS).

Securitization has also

grown significantly in other countries, as well. The total European securitization issuance grew
from $302 million in 1992 to a peak of $1.1 billion in 2008, falling to $512 million after the
crisis. Figure 4 shows the amounts of European issuance of some of the major categories of nonmortgage securitization.
Securitization is not only important because it is quantitatively significant. It also challenges
theoretical notions of the role of financial intermediation. Financial intermediaries make loans to
customers, loans that traditionally were held on their balance sheets until maturity. They did this
to ensure themselves an incentive, so the theory goes, to screen borrowers and to monitor them
during the course of the loan. The logic of the argument is that were banks not to hold the loans,
then they would not screen or monitor. Providing the banks with these incentives explained the
nonmarketability of bank loans. Many firms, however, issue bonds, which do not involve banks
and the associated screening and monitoring, so somehow it is possible for banks to be
successfully avoided. Securitization blurs the line between bonds and loans, suggesting that the
traditional arguments about screening and monitoring were not correct or that the world has
changed in some important way.
Despite the quantitative and theoretical importance of securitization, there is relatively little
research on the subject. In addition, the recent financial crisis centered on securitization, so the
imperative to understand it is paramount. The central motivations for securitization are often
driven by institutional details in law, accounting, and regulation, so it is necessary to start with
some of these details. Section II provides an overview of the legal structure of securitization and
a brief example of a specific securitization. Section III gives summary statistics on the growth
and performance of various types of securitized vehicles, illustrating the rapid transformation of
financial intermediation in the last 25 years.

3

To go from the old world of finance to the new world of securitization, a bank must decide to
move some loans off its balance sheet into a legal entity generically known as a special purpose
vehicle (SPV). This decision is driven by the relative cost of capital in the two places, and this
cost of capital is itself determined by a wide variety of factors. In Section IV, we survey the
literature on these factors and present a simple model of the private decision to securitize, driven
by such factors as bankruptcy costs, taxes, and the convenience yield (if any) for bank deposits
and securitized bonds. Section V explores several hypotheses for the rise of securitization over
the last three decades, focusing on the changes in the banking sector and on how those changes
may have affected the parameters of the Section IV model.
The Section IV model considers a full-information ideal and abstracts from the asymmetric
information costs if investors perceive that securitized loans are improperly screened or suffer
from a lemons problem. The market deals with these costs using a variety of security designs
and contractual features, the source of the largest current literature on securitization. Section VI
summarizes the theory papers in this literature, and Section VII summarizers the empirical
papers. Section VIII takes up the social costs and benefits of securitization, surveying a small
literature on the role of securitization on monetary policy, financial stability, and financial
regulation. Section IX concludes with a summary of what we know and lays out a set of
important open questions.
2. Securitization: Some Institutional Details
In this section we begin with an overview of the legal structure of securitization. Then we
provide a brief discussion of an example, the Chase Issuance Trust, for securitizing credit card
receivables. Finally, we consider some other related forms of securitization.
2.1. Legal Structure
“Securitization” means selling securities whose principal and interest payments are exclusively
linked to a pool of legally segregated, specified, cash flows (promised loan payments) owned by
a special purpose vehicle (SPV). The cash flows were originated (“underwritten”) by a financial
intermediary, which sold the rights to the cash flows to the special purpose vehicle. The
securities, called “asset-backed securities” (ABS), are rated and sold in the capital markets.

4

Historically, the financial intermediary would have held the loans on-balance sheet until
maturity. But, with securitization the loans can be financed off-balance sheet.
Figure 5 shows a simplified overview of the securitization process. The originating firm is at the
top of the figure. This firm, a financial intermediary, employs lending officers and actively
engages in the process of finding lending opportunities. Whether a potential borrower represents
a good lending opportunity or not is the primary decision that this intermediary must make. It
determines underwriting criteria or lending standards, and proceeds to make loans. These loans
must be funded, and they can be funded by the intermediary borrowing, or by selling the loans to
a “special purpose vehicle” (SPV), which is a legally separate legal entity. In the figure this
entity is labeled “Master Owner Trust.” This SPV is not an operating entity. Indeed, no one
works there and it has no physical location. Instead, it is an artificial firm that functions
according to pre-specified rules, and it contractually outsources the servicing of the loans.
The SPV purchases the loan cash flows by selling securities based on seniority, called
“tranches,” to investors in the capital markets, shown at the bottom of the figure.

These

securities are claims that are linked to the cash flows of the portfolio of loans that the SPV then
purchases from the operating firm (the intermediary). The cash flows are passive in the sense
that the underwriting decision has already been made, so there is nothing further to do except
wait to see if the cash flows are repaid as promised.
2.3 Securitization Example: Credit Card Securitization via the Chase Issuance
Trust
To illustrate some of the important features of securitization that we will subsequently focus on,
it is useful to very briefly examine an actual example. For this purpose we will look at the Chase
Issuance Trust, which is the JP Morgan Chase master trust for the securitization of credit card
receivables underwritten by First USA and Chase USA. Chase merged with First USA in 2005,
so credit card receivables can come from Chase or from the old First USA bank. The entity,
Chase Issuance Trust, is a special purpose vehicle that periodically receives/buys credit card
receivables and issues securities in the capital markets. We will highlight the important features
of the structure, which are basically common to all securitizations.

5

The structure of the securitization is shown in Figure 6. The box labeled “Master Owner Trust”
is what the deal documents refer to as “Chase Issuance Trust.” The figure shows the various
special purpose vehicles and participants in the securitization. Along the right-hand side of the
figure are the governing legal documents corresponding to each part of the structure. At the very
top of the figure are the consumers who have borrowed money on their credit cards, as customers
of Chase Bank. Chase transfers/sells the receivables, depending on whether they were originated
in the First USA or Chase bank to one of two master trusts, either First USA Master Trust or
Chase Master Trust.
There is a two-tiered structure. Each of First USA Master Trust and Chase Master Trust is a
special purpose vehicle, a trust. A business trust is a separate legal entity, created under a state's
business trust law.

(See Schwarcz (2003).)

Each of these trusts is able to purchase the

receivables by selling collateral certificates representing interests in the cash flows that credit
card holders are obligated to pay to the Master Owner Trust –Chase Issuance Trust. Chase
Issuance Trust issues securities in the capital markets called CHASEseries Notes that are
differentiated by seniority, with Class A notes being the most senior (AAA/Aaa) and Class C
notes the most junior of the publicly issued notes. In the figure, these notes are linked to one
specific vintage of credit card receivables, called “Asset Pool One.” Periodically, different pools
of receivables are sold by Chase USA to the trusts, with different series of securities periodically
issued that are contractually linked to the various pools. Securities issues by Chase Issuance
Trust to capital market participants are generically known as asset-backed securities.
The structure involves multiple special purpose vehicles, which are legal entities, but not really
operating companies, as there are no decisions to be made. In this example, Chase Issuance
Trust is a Delaware statutory trust, a separate legal entity that is an unincorporated association
governed by a trust agreement under which management is delegated to a trustee. The master
trusts activities are limited to (according to the Prospectus Supplement dated May 12, 2005):
•

Acquiring and holding collateral certificates, credit card receivables and the other
assets of the master trust and the proceeds from those assets;

•

Issuing notes;

•

Making payments on the notes;

6

•

Engaging in other activities that are necessary or incidental to accomplish these
limited purposes, which activities cannot be contrary to the status of the master
owner trust as a “qualifying special purpose entity” under existing accounting
literature.4

The trust makes no managerial decisions, but simply executes rules that are written down in the
contracts.
As indicated in Figure 6, the mechanics of collecting payments from the credit card holders,
monitoring them, distributing payments to note holders, and so on, is outsourced via “pooling
and servicing” contracts and trustees. Servicers perform the necessary tasks needed to enforce
and implement the debt contracts with respect to cash flows, while trustees monitor adherence to
indentures.
There are three important features to the securitization structure. First, the SPV is tax neutral;
second, the SPV is liquidation-efficient in that it avoids bankruptcy; and third, that it is
bankruptcy remote from the sponsor—Chase in this example. The SPVs used in securitization,
whether they are trusts, limited liability corporations, or limited partnerships can be structured so
that they qualify for “pass through” tax treatment with regard to state and federal income tax
purposes. This avoids income tax at the entity level. The debt issued by the SPV is then not tax
advantaged, as is on-balance sheet debt issued by the sponsor. This means that the sponsor’s
decision about on- versus off-balance sheet financing has an important tax dimension.
Bankruptcy by an SPV is an event that effectively cannot occur; we call this liquidation-efficient.
Under U.S. law private contracts cannot simply agree to avoid government bankruptcy rules, but
private contracts can be written so as to minimize this possibility. While we discuss more of the
details later, here we note the most important, namely, what happens if the underlying pool of
securitized loans does not payoff enough to contractually honor the coupon payments to the note
holders.

Normally, under a debt contract, if note holders are not paid what has been

contractually promised them, then they can force the borrowers into Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
Importantly, that does not happen with asset-backed securities.

4

A “qualifying special purpose entity” is an SPV that has satisfied certain true sale rules under old FASB rules. This
is no longer relevant.

7

According to the prospectus, events of default include:
• The master owner trust’s failure, for a period of 35 days, to pay interest on any
series, class or tranche of notes when that interest becomes due and payable;
• The master owner trust’s failure to pay the stated principal amount of any series,
class or tranche of notes on the applicable legal maturity date for that series,
class or tranche;
• The master owner trust’s default in the performance, or breach, of any other of
its covenants or warranties in the indenture for a period of 90 days after either
the indenture trustee or the holders of at least 25% of the aggregate
outstanding dollar principal amount of the outstanding notes of the affected
series, class or tranche has provided written notice requesting the remedy of
that breach, if, as a result of that default, the interests of those noteholders are
materially and adversely affected and continue to be materially and adversely
affected during that 90-day period;
• The occurrence of certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency of the master
owner trust; and
• With respect to any series, class or tranche of notes, any additional events of
default specified in the accompanying prospectus supplement.
An event of default, however, does not trigger bankruptcy.

If the SPV cannot pay the

contractually obligated coupons, it declares an “early amortization event.”

The contract states

that:
It is not an event of default if the issuing entity fails to redeem a series, class or
tranche of notes prior to the legal maturity date for those notes because it does not
have sufficient funds available or if payment of principal of a class or tranche of
subordinated notes is delayed because that class or tranche is necessary to provide
required subordination for senior notes.

8

After an event of default and acceleration of a tranche of notes, funds on deposit
in the applicable issuing entity bank accounts for the affected notes will be
applied to pay principal of and interest on those notes. Then, in each following
month, available principal collections and available finance charge collections
allocated to those notes will be deposited into the applicable issuing entity bank
account and applied to make monthly principal and interest payments on those
notes until the earlier of the date those notes are paid in full or the legal maturity
date of those notes. However, subordinated notes will receive payment of
principal prior to their legal maturity date only if, and to the extent that, funds are
available for that payment and, after giving effect to that payment, the required
subordination will be maintained for senior notes.

(Chase Issuance Trust

Prospectus (May 12, 2005), p. 8)
Thus, contractually there is a living will for the SPV. In particular, if the underlying pool cannot
pay the contractual coupons owed to holders of the asset-backed securities, the contractual
remedy is to use the available funds to start paying down principal early.

Other early

amortization events include the following (among other events):
•

For any month, the three-month average of the Excess Spread Percentage is less than
zero.

•

The issuing entity fails to designate additional collateral certificates or credit card
receivables for inclusion in the issuing entity of Chase USA fails to increase the
investment amount of an existing collateral certificate . . .

•

Any Issuing Entity Servicer Default occurs that would have a material adverse effect
on holders of the notes;

•

The occurrence of an event of default and acceleration of a class of tranche of notes.

The “excess spread” refers to the difference between what the underlying portfolio of loans
yields in a month minus the amounts owed to note holders in that month (the coupon payments),
the monthly servicing fee (paid to the servicer of the loans) and any realized losses on the loans.

9

Bankruptcy remoteness refers to the effect of the possible bankruptcy of Chase, the
originator/sponsor, on the assets held by the SPV. The potential problem is that the claimants on
the sponsor, Chase, could in bankruptcy seek to recover the assets that were “sold” to the
securitization SPV.5 In the early days of securitization there was some confusion about the
necessary accounting steps needed to ensure that the receivables had, in fact, been sold to the
SPV, rather than constituting a secured loan.

To clarify this, FASB required a two-step

approach, like the one shown in Figure 6. This is known as the “Norwalk two-step” because
FASB is located in Norwalk, Connecticut. As we discuss later, case law has to date upheld the
bankruptcy remoteness of securitization SPVs.
In the very early days of securitization, each time a pool of loans was securitized, a new SPV had
to be set up. Later, the master trust became the main vehicle and different vintages of loan pools
were sold to the same trust, with securities issued by the SPV as needed, corresponding to each
vintage of loan pool. Figure 7 shows the outstanding receivables in the Chase Issuance Trust
over time. It varies as new vintages of loans are sold to the SPV, while older vintages mature.
The Pooling and Servicing Agreement describes the eligible loans that can be sold into the trust
periodically, in this case credit card receivables. The agreement states that:
Chase USA has the right, subject to certain limitations and conditions described in
the transfer and servicing agreement, to designate from time to time additional
consumer revolving credit card accounts and to transfer to the issuing entity all
credit card receivables arising in those additional credit card accounts, whether
those credit card receivables are then existing or thereafter created. Any additional
consumer revolving credit card accounts designated must be Issuing Entity
Eligible Accounts as of the date the transferor designates those accounts to have
their credit card receivables transferred to the issuing entity and must have been
selected as additional credit card accounts absent a selection procedure believed
by Chase USA to be materially adverse to the interests of the holders of notes
secured by the assets of the issuing entity. (Emphasis added.)
5

The equitable right of redemption refers to the possible right that the transferor of the receivables might have to
recover the transferred assets, especially when the transfer of the receivables is found to be a secured loan rather
than a sale.

10

It is the job of the trustee and of the rating agencies to ensure that new loans sold to the trust
satisfy the contractual criteria for eligibility. The contract specifies the eligibility criteria for
loans to be securitized. The underlined part of the agreement above provides that, at least
contractually, if the eligibility criteria are not fine enough to prevent adverse selection, then there
will be ex post recourse.
2.4 Other Forms of Securitization
This survey focuses on securitization, the process of moving pools of loans off-balance sheet by
selling them to a special purpose vehicle, which in turn finances the purchase of the portfolio of
loans by selling securities in the capital markets. The SPV then owns claims on cash flows that
are essentially passive, and consequently the SPV is not an actively managed vehicle. There are
a number of other, related, securitization vehicles/methods which are not our focus, but which
are very briefly discussed in this subsection. These include loan sales, asset-backed commercial
paper (ABCP) conduits, structured investment vehicles (SIVs), collateralized debt obligations
(CDOs), and collateralized loan obligations (CLOs). What follows is a partial literature survey
about these forms of off-balance sheet activity.
Loan sales refer to the sale of a single commercial and industrial loan, or part of such a loan, by
writing a new claim that is linked to the loan, known as a secondary loan participation. Loan
sales are significant in size. For example, in 2006, the ratio of on-balance sheet loans (totaling
$1,126 billion) to the secondary loan market volume was 21 percent. See Gorton (2010). Not
only are loan sales quantitatively significant, they are important as well simply because they
occur. Loan sales are not supposed to happen according to the traditional theories of banking,
but following the advent of the junk bond market, banks began to sell loans. Although not
required to retain part of the loan, banks in fact do retain pieces, more so for riskier borrowers.
Also, loan covenants are tighter for riskier borrowers, whose loans are sold. On loan sales, see,
e.g., Pennacchi (1988), Gorton and Pennacchi (1995, 1989), Drucker and Puri (2009). Loan
sales are a topic in their own right, and we do not pursue them here.
ABCP conduits and SIVs are limited-purpose operating companies that undertake arbitrage
activities by purchasing mostly highly-rated medium- and long-term ABS and funding
themselves with cheaper, mostly short-term, highly-rated commercial paper and medium term

11

notes.

ABCP conduits peaked at just over one trillion dollars outstanding just before the

financial crisis. The differences between ABCP conduits and SIVs are described by Moody’s
(February 3, 2003), Moody’s (January 25, 2002), and Standard and Poor’s (September 4, 2003).
During the crisis many of vehicles were forced to unwind, or they were re-absorbed onto the
sponsors’ balance sheets, as investors refused to roll their short-term liabilities. See Covitz,
Liang, and Suarez (2009).
There are several important differences between the special purpose vehicles (SPVs) used in
securitization and ABCP conduits and SIVs. First, securitization SPVs are not managed; they
are robot companies that are not marked-to-market. New portfolios of loans may be sold into
these SPVs, but they simply follow a set of prespecified rules. Unlike securitization vehicles,
ABCP conduits and SIVs are managed, though there are strict criteria governing their decisions;
portfolio managers make active decisions. Secondly, they are market-value vehicles. That is,
they are required by rating agencies to mark portfolios to market on a frequent basis (daily or
weekly), and based on the marks they are allowed to lever more or required to delever. On SIVs,
see Moody’s (January 25, 2002), and on ABCPs see Moody’s (February 3, 2003).
CDOs and CLOS are special purpose vehicles that buy portfolios of ABS, in the case of CDOs,
and commercial and industrial loans, in the case of CLOs. These are financed by issuing
different tranches of risk in the capital market, rated Aaa/AAA, Aa/AA to Ba/BB. These
vehicles are also managed, that is, not completely passive. CDOs are described by Duffie and
Garleanu (2001) and Benmelech and Dlugosz (2009); also see Longstaff and Rajan (2008).
CLOs are discussed by Benmelech, Dlugosz, and Ivashina (2010).
The securitization that is the focus of this survey is by far quantitatively the most important.
3. Overview of the Performance of Asset-Backed Securities
In this section we briefly review the performance of asset-backed securities. First, we look at the
growth and size of the market.

Second, we examine the default performance and ratings

performance of asset-backed securities. Next we examine spreads. Finally, we briefly look at
ABS during the recent financial crisis.

12

3.1 The Size and Growth of the ABS Market
As discussed in the Introduction, securitization was sizeable prior to the recent financial crisis.
To briefly review, Figures 1-4 show the issuance amounts annually for U.S. mortgage-related
ABS, non-mortgage ABS and European issuance. Mortgage-backed securities represent a very
large asset class. See Table 1. By looking at non-mortgage ABS, and comparing that to U.S.
corporate issuance, a better sense of the significance of securitization is portrayed; see Figure 2.
Indeed Figure 2 shows that in 2005 issuance of non-mortgage ABS exceeded corporate bond
issuance by a small amount. The main categories of non-mortgage ABS include credit card
receivables, automobile loans, and student loans. Table 2 and Table 3 show the amounts of nonmortgage ABS outstanding amounts and amounts by issuance, respectively.
Securitization is not just a U.S. phenomenon. It is a global phenomenon. The amounts issued in
Europe are also significant. Figure 4 shows European issuance of some selected asset classes of
ABS. Tables 4 and 5 show European securitization outstanding amounts and amounts by
issuance, respectively. Table 6 breaks down European issuance by country. Securitization is
also important in Asia and Latin America; see, e.g., Gyntelberg and Remolona (2006) and
Scatigna and Tovar (2007).
Further, securitization prior to the financial crisis was growing in the sense that new asset classes
were increasingly securitized.

Table 7 lists some of the asset categories that have been

securitized. The securitization of life insurance assets and liabilities is an important new asset
class; see Cummins (2004) and Cowley and Cummins (2005).
3.2 The Default and Ratings Performance of ABS
We next present a general overview of the default and ratings performance of asset-backed
securities. There are several ways to describe performance. One way is to examine default rates.
Another is to look at credit rating changes. Our goal is modest. We want to convey some sense
of performance, by these measures. We do not present an analysis of this asset class in a
portfolio context. We start by looking at Standard and Poor’s default rates, in Table 8. The table
shows cumulative default rates (conditional on survival) as a percentage for all globally-issued
asset-backed securities, over the period 1978-2010.

Also, for comparison purposes are

13

cumulative default rates for U.S. corporate bonds. The table looks at cumulative default rates for
one year through ten years. Standard errors are in parentheses. The table shows the following:
•

Comparing AAA-rated ABS to AAA-rated corporate bonds, ABS AAA-rated securities
have significantly higher cumulative default rates compared to corporates.

•

This is also true of all other rating categories, but the differences lessen as ratings worsen.

•

The standard errors of the default rates are also higher for ABS.

Table 9 is similar in that it looks at cumulative impairment rates for ABS, and separates ABS
without excluding subprime-related securities, the top panel, from subprime mortgage-backed
securities, in the middle panel. In the bottom panel is comparable information for globally
issued corporate securities.

Impairment is different than default, which is a more certain

endpoint for the security. Default is relevant to debt and includes: (1) a missing or delayed
contractually obligated interest of principal payment; (2) bankruptcy or receivership; (3)
distressed exchange; or (4) change in terms of payment imposed by a sovereign that result in a
lower financial obligation. “Impairment” includes those four events and also includes cases
where: (1) there has been an interest shortfall or principal write-down or loss that has not been
cured; (2) the security has been downgraded to Ca or C; or (3) has been subject to a distressed
exchange. Impairment status may change over time if a security cures an impairment event. See
Moody’s (2011).
Table 9 breaks out subprime, revealing some very important differences:
•

ABS impairment rates, excluding subprime, are still higher than the default rates for
global corporate (non-ABS) securities, but the difference is not as great.

•

Impairment rates for subprime mortgage-backed securities are significantly higher than
for ABS excluding subprime.

•

As in the previous table, default rates for global corporate (non-ABS) securities are lower
than for subprime.

Table 10 shows time series 5-year default rates for global ABS over the period 1978-2010, by
year and rating. The financial crisis took place during 2007-2008, but the effects on ABS

14

defaults have a lag. These data show that the years of 2009 and 2010 account for the higher
default rates. This is the effect of the financial crisis. Below we will look at the financial crisis in
terms of spreads.3.3 ABS Performance in Terms of Spreads
We next examine ABS spreads. As with credit ratings, we use the spreads on AAA corporates,
namely, Industrials, as a benchmark. The Industrials are in the form of credit default swaps. We
focus on AAA because corporate bonds and asset-backed securities with this rating should be the
most comparable. We compare Prime Auto ABS with a 3-year maturity and Credit Card ABS
with a 5-year maturity, to AAA Industrials with a maturity in the 3-5 year bucket.
The data are from a dealer bank and represent on-the-run bonds. We focus on the difference in
spreads to highlight the difference between AAA Credit Card ABS and Industrial Corporates,
conditional on rating. Figure 8 shows the difference in spreads over the period 2001-2005, a
relatively normal period. Several points stand out. First, the difference in spreads is typically
positive, that is, AAA Credit Card ABS trade higher than AAA Industrial Corporates. Secondly,
looking at the scale on the y-axis, the difference in spreads is typically very low, around 10 basis
points. Also, not observable is the observation that the Industrial Corporate spreads are more
volatile. No research that we know of has investigated whether these observations are true more
generally.
3.4 Performance During the Financial Crisis
In terms of ratings we saw the effects of the financial crisis above. Figure 9 again looks at the
difference in spreads between AAA Credit Cards and Industrial Corporates, as in Figure 8, but
now for the period 2005 through March 2011, spanning the financial crisis. The spread on AAA
Credit Cards spikes during the crisis, relative to Industrial Corporates. Figure 10 shows the level
of the spread for AAA Credit Cards and Industrial Corporates, as well as AAA Prime Auto
receivables.

During the crisis, all three asset classes moved together, although none are

subprime. See Gorton and Metrick (2010a).
Although SPVs are separate legal entities, during the financial crisis sponsors brought their credit
card off-balance sheet vehicles back on balance sheet.

For example, in December 2007

Citigroup brought $49 billion of SPV assets that had been securitized back on balance sheet. JP

15

Morgan and Bank of America also did this. See Scholtes and Guerrera (2009). We discuss this
later.
In Section VIII we further discuss the financial crisis and related literature.
4. A Simple Model of the Securitization Decision
In this section we discuss the theory concerning the private securitization decision. Gorton and
Souleles (2006) present a slightly more complicated version of this model and solve for the
equilibrium. The point of the model outline is to provide a framework for discussing the
empirical and institutional literature in later sections.
Suppose the riskless interest rate, r, is 0 and that all agents are risk neutral. Borrowers and
lenders must then break-even.

A competitive bank has two one-period loans, each of $1

principal; each dollar is to be repaid at the end of the period (since r=0). Suppose each loan
defaults with independent probability p. If a loan defaults it repays nothing. The loans are
financed with equity (E) and debt (D). The debt (demand deposits) is special in the sense that it
is used as a transaction medium, so it has a convenience yield of ρ. We assume that E<$2, so
some debt is needed. The debt is one-period and promises to repay F at the end of the period
(since r=0). Debt is tax-advantaged so that effectively only (1-τ)F needs to be repaid, where τ is
the relevant tax rate. If the bank defaults then there is a bankruptcy cost, c, borne by the
creditors. Further, for simplicity, we assume that 2>F>1, i.e., both loans must pay off in order to
repay the debt holders without losses.6 In other words, there are effectively two outcomes: both
loans payoff, which occurs with probability (1-p)2, in which case creditors are repaid in full;
there is a default by the bank, in which case creditors lose c.
In order for investors to be willing to buy the debt of this bank, the repayment amount F must
satisfy:
1

2 1

1

,

(1)

6

Since F is endogenous this assumption is really an assumption concerning the underlying parameters, but we omit
these details.

16

where the probability that both loans succeed is (1-p)2, and the other three cases involve the bank
failing and the creditors recovering nothing and bearing the bankruptcy cost c.7
From (1), the lowest promised repayment amount that the lenders will accept is:
.
The bank’s expected profit is:
Π

2 1

1

2 1

1

.

(2)
It is apparent that on-balance sheet debt is more advantageous to the extent that it is taxadvantaged and less desirable to the extent that the bankruptcy cost is higher. Further, if there is
a convenience yield on the bank debt, ρ>0, then that also makes debt desirable.
Equation (2) is a simple representation of the traditional bank business model. The bank borrows
in the demand deposit market and lends the money out. As long as Π

, where E is the initial

investment of the equity holders, then this is a successful business model. Moreover, because of
limitations on entry and subsidized deposit insurance, it may be that Π

. That is, because of

limited entry into banking and local monopoly power, the bank may earn monopoly rents, not
included in the above model. In the banking literature, such rents are referred to as “charter
value” or “franchise value” and potentially play an important role.
Later we will be interested in the question of why securitization developed. One motivation for
the development is that this traditional bank business model became less profitable, and charter
value declined in the face of competition. For example, if money market mutual funds entered
the market to compete with demand deposits then D would fall to D’ ceteris paribus. If junk
bonds entered to compete with loans, then possibly the remaining lending opportunities became
riskier, p rising to p’. We review the evidence on this below.
Now, consider the case where one loan is securitized. This means that the bank sells one loan to
a special purpose vehicle (SPV), which finances the purchase of the loan by issuing debt in the
7

The bank can fail when only one loan defaults, but the model assumes that in bankruptcy nothing is recovered from
the nondefaulting borrower. This is for simplicity.

17

capital markets. The SPV will borrow DSPV promising to repay FSPV at the end of the period.
The bank then has two assets on its balance sheet, an equity claim on the SPV and one loan.
Suppose that the bank uses the proceeds of the loan sale to the SPV to pay down on-balance
sheet debt.
The SPV has no bankruptcy costs; its debt is not tax-advantaged. The asset-backed security
issued by the SPV, DSPV, may also provide a convenience yield to its holder, ρ’.8
With securitization (sec) investors in the on-balance sheet debt require:
1

1

.

indicates the on-balance sheet debt when the bank has securitized a loan, to be distinguished
from D above, the case where there is no securitization.

Both of these may involve a

convenience yield, but we keep such notation suppressed.
And investors in the off-balance sheet debt require:
1

1

′ ,

where 0<ρ<1 is the convenience yield.
′

and

So,

.

With securitization (sec), bank profits now are:
1

Π

1

1

On-balance sheet

2 1

′

1

Off-balance sheet

Assume that the on- and off-balance sheet positions are symmetric, i.e., Dsec=Dspv=0.5D. Then:
Π
2 1

Π
p

1

τ

. D

ρ

. D

ρ′

2 1

p

1

τ

D

ρ

If (3) is positive, then securitization is profitable, otherwise not. To understand (3), let:
8

This is because ABS were used as collateral in sale and repurchase agreements, as we discuss later.

(3)

18

2 1

2 1

;
;

.

.

.

So, Π

Π

Note that
.

′

.

A

B

2 1

; and
.

C

′

=

.

′

.

D.
0.

Also,

0;

0.5

1

;

.

The four terms identify some possible sources of value to securitization, as compared to
financing all assets on-balance sheet.

Term A (bankruptcy optionality) is unambiguously

positive because the bank now has the option of going bankrupt in pieces. That is, the offbalance sheet loan can default without the bank going bankrupt. Term B (bankruptcy costs) is
unambiguously positive because expected bankruptcy costs are lower, since the SPV does not
face bankruptcy costs. Term C (taxes) is ambiguous. There is a loss of a valuable tax shield
because less debt is issued on-balance sheet. This favors on-balance sheet debt financing, unless
expected bankruptcy costs, cp, are too large. Finally, term D (relative convenience yield) is
ambiguous. Its sign depends on the relative convenience yields of on- and off-balance sheet debt.
On-balance sheet debt refers primarily to demand deposits. If there is no convenience yield to
off-balance sheet debt (i.e., ρ’=0), then term D is unambiguously negative, that is, it favors onbalance sheet debt. If the debt issued by the SPV has a convenience yield then this term
becomes ambiguous.
Term A appears straightforward, but is perhaps not. All firms would like to be composed of
parts, say divisions, which can go bankrupt as stand-alone entities, so that equity holders retain
control of the remaining divisions. But, this is not possible because decisions need to be made
about the activities of each division and these decisions are made by the “firm.” Value is added
presumably by corporate decisions, overseen by the equity holders. Corporate control over the

19

activities ties control rights to cash flow rights. Thus, the divisions are part of the firm, and it is
this entity—the firm—that borrows and faces the possibility of bankruptcy. How can a financial
firm divide itself into parts, the on-balance sheet firm and the off-balance sheet SPV? The
answer is that the cash flows sold to the SPV are passive; there are no further decisions to be
made since the loans have already been granted. What remains is for borrowers to repay the
loans (servicing is outsourced) and, if they do not, for repossession to take place (also
outsourced). In this sense, the cash flows are passive. Consequently, cash flow rights and
control rights can be separated.
The sign of B, the bankruptcy costs, is unambiguous because the SPV cannot become bankrupt.
This was an innovation. That is, the design of SPVs to have this feature is an important part of
the value of securitization. Moreover, it has economic substance. Since the cash flows are
passive, there are no valuable control rights over corporate assets to be contested in a bankruptcy
process. Thus, it is in all claimants’ interest to avoid a costly bankruptcy process. Below, we
review some of the legal features which make the SPV liquidation-efficient.
The tax advantage of on-balance sheet debt, term C, is straightforward. The tax advantage does
not apply to SPV debt because SPVs are tax neutral. If they were not, then the profits from
lending would be taxed twice, making securitization infeasible. However, the model does not
include taxes on corporate profits. Han, Park, and Pennacchi (2010) point out that the presence
of profit taxation favors securitization. On-balance sheet funding requires some equity financing
because of regulatory capital requirements or internal risk management. But, such bank equity is
costly because it does not have a tax shield like debt does. Consequently, the bank will end up
paying taxes on the returns from its equity capital financing. Compare this to securitization.
When the bank funds off-balance sheet, the SPV pays no corporate taxes. So, on-balance sheet
financing, to the extent that it is equity financed, is disadvantage to the bank’s shareholders. We
discuss Han, Park, and Pennacchi’s (2010) empirical tests of this mechanism in Section VII.
Finally, there is the issue of the relative convenience yield. Demand deposits are used as a
transaction medium, and consequently may earn a convenience yield. Since there are now
competitors to demand deposits, in particular, money market mutual funds, this convenience
yield may have eroded in the last thirty years. We discuss the literature on this below. Also, as
we discuss below, there may also be a convenience yield that derives from the debt issued by

20

SPVs, since this debt was used as collateral for sale and repurchase agreements prior to the crisis.
Even if not used as collateral, there may be a demand for AAA-rated assets if they are easier to
sell (if need be) without incurring losses (to better informed agents).
5. The Origins of Securitization
Securitization is a fairly recent development, having started roughly thirty-five to forty years
ago.9 Why did it start? In this section we outline some of the hypotheses about the origins of
securitization, and tie these hypotheses and some evidence to the components of the model from
Section IV. We first discuss the literature related to the possible changes that caused financial
intermediaries to move increasingly to off-balance sheet financing. Then we briefly outline
possible explanations for where the demand for asset-backed securities came from, that is, who
are the investors? And, what are the uses of asset-backed securities? Here, there is even less
literature and so we are necessarily speculative. Thirdly, we ask whether there was financial
innovation specific to securitization that reduced its cost and assisted its introduction and growth.
5.1 The Supply of Securitized Bonds
Why did banks switch from on-balance sheet financing to off-balance sheet financing? Above,
we have outlined the factors affecting this decision. In this subsection we ask what changed to
alter this calculation. Banking scholars have documented important changes in U.S. banking
starting in the early 1980s that caused the traditional banking model to become less profitable.10
Securitization appears at the same time, suggesting that it was a response to the decline in
profitability. In the context of the model, these changes can take many forms or it could just be
that increased competition forces managers closer to the profit-maximizing ideal of our model,
and less likely to rely on monopoly rents to lead a quiet life. We briefly review these factors
below, although no one has explicitly linked these changes to the origins of securitization.
Basically, the argument is that commercial banks were protected from competition in various
ways following the legislation passed during the Great Depression, allowing them to earn
monopoly profits.
9

But, this position starts to erode in the 1980s due to competition and

McConnell and Buser (2011) detail the history of the development and evolution of the mortgage-backed securities
market, which started in 1968. Goetzmann and Newman (2009) discuss the commercial real estate mortgage bond
market in the 1920s.
10
See Keeley (1990), Barth, Brumbaugh, and Litan (1990, 1992), Boyd and Gertler (1993, 1994), and Berger,
Kashyap, and Scalise (1995), among many others.

21

innovation. Coming out of the Great Depression banks had unique products, bank loans and
demand deposits. Demand deposits were insured and access to corporate debt markets was
limited to large firms. Entry into banking was limited for two reasons. First, entry was limited
because until 1994 branching across state lines was prohibited.11 Secondly, entry into banking
was restrictive because banks had to obtain a charter from either the federal or state government
and could not branch across state lines. Peltzman (1965), in a famous paper, concluded that
competition for chartering banks was reduced by the passage of the Banking Act of 1935. He
found that the federal control of chartering reduced the rate of bank entry by at least 50 percent,
based on a comparison of the rate of entry before 1936 to the rate during the period 1936-1962.
Due to limited entry, banks had local monopolies on demand deposits, e.g., see Neumark and
Sharpe (1992), and Hannan and Berger (1991). There were also more direct subsidies to banks
in the form of interest rate ceilings on deposit accounts (Regulation Q, which had its origin in the
original deposit insurance legislation), until lifted by the Monetary Control Act of 1980.12 On
the asset side of bank balance sheets, bank loans were the main source of external funding for
nonfinancial firms. In particular, prior to the 1980s firms with no presence in the capital markets
relied on banks for funding. In short, having a bank charter was valuable. In the banking
literature this became known as “charter value.”
The traditional and comfortable model of banking changed dramatically during the 1980s and
1990s. These changes have been much noted and much studied, so we only briefly review them
here. Berger, Kashyap, and Scalise (1995), who exhaustively document the changes, put it this
way in 1995: “Virtually all aspects of the U.S. banking industry have changed dramatically over
the last fifteen years” (p. 55). They go on to describe the 1980s and the first half of the 1990s as
“undoubtedly the most turbulent period in U.S. banking history since the Great Depression” (p.
57). Limited entry protection disappears during the 1980s. Keeley (1985) argued that: “The

11

The Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act eliminated branching interstate restrictions
when it was enacted in 1994. This act allowed banks to establish branches nationwide, eliminating barriers to
interstate banking. Prior to this legislation, however, banks had themselves been deregulating intrastate branching
restrictions. See Jayarante and Strahan (1997).
12
The Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935 prohibited the payment of interest on demand deposits; the Federal Reserve
was authorized to set interest rate ceilings on time and savings deposits. See Gilbert (1986). Congress passed the
Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act in late 1980 and the Garn-St Germain Depository
Institutions Act in late 1982. These acts phased-out Regulation Q and allowed banks to offer interest-bearing money
market deposit accounts to compete with MMMFs. The economic effects of Regulation Q are less clear. See, e.g.,
Friedman (1975) and James (1983).

22

recent deregulation of banking, in particular the removal of deposit-rate ceilings on almost all
types of consumer accounts, appears to be taking place in an environment in which entry
restrictions have been effectively eliminated or at least have been substantially relaxed.” A large
literature documents the decline in bank charter value; see, e.g., Keeley (1990).
Two particular changes are worth briefly noting, one on each side of the bank balance sheet. On
the asset side, substitutes for bank loans arose and took market share away from banks. In the
1980s there was a dramatic shift in corporate finance: junk bonds and commercial paper became
substitutes for bank longer-term and shorter-term loans, respectively, and represent an important
step in the unbundling of the traditional intermediation process. Junk bonds (high yield bonds or
below investment-grade bonds) substituted for bank loans. Instead of regulated commercial
banks, other firms, notably Drexel Burnham Lambert, specialized in underwriting debt for below
investment-grade companies. Taggart (1988a,b) documents this change, observing that bank
loans accounted for 36.6 percent of the total credit market debt raised during the period 19771983, but only 18.2 percent of the total debt raised between 1984 and 1989. Borrowing via
public debt markets increased from 30.5 percent to 54.2 percent over this period. The junk bond
market grew from $10 billion in the early 1980s to over $200 billion by the end of the decade
(see Taggart (1990)). This growth came at the expense of bank loans. Benveniste, Singh, and
Wilhelm (1993) provide evidence that junk bonds and bank loans are substitutes. They examine
the abnormal returns to money-center banks associated with the SEC’s actions against Drexel
and find statistically and economically excess returns associated with these events. E.g., bad
news for Drexel was good news for large commercial banks; and good news for Drexel was bad
news for the money center banks. Small banks’ stocks were not affected, but other investment
banks benefited when there was bad news for Drexel, and vice versa.
The competitor with short-term bank loans is commercial paper (CP), a short-term debt contract
issued directly by firms into the capital markets. The growth in this market is described by Post
(1992). Over the 1980s, the CP market (outstanding) grew at a 17 percent average annual
compound growth rate (see Post (1992). Also see Hurley (1977). CP has many of the attributes
of short-term, unsecured, bank loans, but it is not a good substitute for loans for all firms because
only the largest most credit-worthy firms can issue CP.

23

Commercial banks also came under attack on the liability side of the balance sheet; see Keeley
and Zimmerman (1984, 1985). Another very marked transformation to the financial system was
the shift in the source of transaction media away from demand deposits towards money market
mutual funds (MMMFs).13 MMMFs were a response to interest rate ceilings on demand deposits
(Regulation Q). In the late 1970s MMMFs were around $4 billion. In 1977 interest rates rose
sharply and MMMFs grew in response, growing by $2 billion per month during the first five
months of 1979 (see Cook and Duffield (1979)). The Garn-St. Germaine Act of 1982, however,
authorized banks to issue short-term deposit accounts with some transaction features, but with no
interest rate ceiling. These were known as “money market deposit accounts.” In the three
months after their introduction in December 1982 these accounts attracted $300 billion. Keeley
and Zimmerman (1985) argue that the response of banks resulted in a substitution of wholesale
for retail deposits, and direct price competition for nonprice competition, both responses
resulting in increased bank deposit costs.
Competition and deregulation lowered bank profits starting in the early 1980s. The traditional
model of banking broke down. This is the environment in which securitization arose. If banks
found that off-balance sheet financing was cheaper than on-balance sheet financing, given that
the cost of bank capital rose, for example, due to deposit rate ceilings being lifted, among other
things, then there was an incentive to securitize. This, however, remains an important topic for
future research.
5.2 Relative Convenience Yield and the Demand for Securitized Bonds
If banks had an incentive to supply asset-backed securities starting in the 1980s, where did the
demand for these securities come from? Institutional investors no doubt provided one source of
the demand. The amount of money under the management of institutional investors also grew
exponentially during this period. But, the demand for securitized bonds may also be linked to a
significant extent to the growth in the demands for collateral. In different parts of financial
markets participants need to post collateral. The collateral must be high-grade bonds. If the
demand for collateral exceeds the available stock of U.S. Treasury bonds and agency bonds, then
asset-backed securities would be needed as collateral.
13

In the language of our model, the

Money market funds are registered investment companies that are regulated by the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) in accordance with Rule 2a-7 adopted pursuant to the Investment Company Act of 1940.

24

increased demand for safe collateral would be an increase in the convenience yield of securitized
bonds (ρ’) and a decrease in the relative convenience yield of bank deposits (ρ). This appears to
have been the case, though the evidence is very indirect.
Demands for collateral come primarily from three areas. First, in the last thirty years derivative
products, e.g., interest rate swaps and swaptions, foreign exchange swaps, have grown from
nothing to many trillions of dollars of notional. Derivatives require posting collateral when the
position becomes a liability for one side of the transaction. Secondly, clearing and settlement
requires the posting of collateral. Ironically, securitization increases the volumes in clearing and
settlement as it creates securities out of previously non-tradeable loans. Thirdly, with the rise of
institutional investors and more sophisticated corporate treasury departments, the use of sale and
repurchase agreements (repo) appears to have increased dramatically. Repo requires the use of
collateral. Added to these increases in demands is the fact that a very large fraction of U.S. fixed
income securities are held abroad and not available for use as collateral. Prior to the government
response to the financial crisis, it seems that there was an insufficient amount of U.S. Treasuries
available for use as collateral, and ABS have many design features that make them a useful
substitute.
Securitization has important features that make it very attractive as collateral. A desirable
feature of collateral is that it is information-insensitive (see Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), and
Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2011)), so it preserves value. “Information-insensitive” refers to
the property of debt that it is not (very) profitable for an agent to produce private information
about the payoffs of the security. Such securities can be traded without fear of adverse selection.
ABS are debt claims, and so are senior securities. Further, asset-backed securities have some
unique features that make them particularly valuable as collateral. First, the SPV organized as a
trust has no equity that is traded, so no one has an incentive to produce information about this
residual claim, and so as a by-product there is no information produced that would have an
impact on the ABS. Second, there is no managerial discretion that can dramatically alter the risk
profile of the underlying assets. Since the assets are passive cash flows, emanating from many
contractual arrangements, the assets of the SPV are expected to retain their value. In other
words, the payoffs are more certain, since they are not affected by managerial discretion.
Schwarcz (2003, p. 561): “The essential difference between [commercial trusts and corporations]

25

turns on the degree to which assets need to be at risk in order to satisfy the expectations of
residual claimants.

In a corporation, the residual claims are sold to third-party investors

(shareholders) who expect management to use corporate assets to obtain a profitable return on
their investments. But that creates a risk that the corporation will become insolvent . . . In
contrast, a commercial trust’s residual claimant is typically the settler of the trust, who . . . does
not expect a risk-weighted return. The expectations of the trust’s senior and residual claimants
are therefore the same: to preserve the value of the trust’s assets.”
With respect to the use of collateral for derivatives positions, there are surveys conducted by the
International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA). According to ISDA (2009), “the
amount of collateral used in connection with over-the-counter derivatives transactions grew from
$2.1 to $4.0 trillion during 2008, a growth rate of 86 percent, following 60 percent growth in
2007” (p. 2). Growth in collateral for derivatives grew not only because the use of derivatives
grew, but also because the use of collateral to mitigate counterparty risk in derivatives grew, and
the use of two-way collateral agreements has grown.14

Also, see Bank for International

Settlements (BIS) (2007).
With regard to clearing and settlement, real-time gross settlement systems (RTGS) have been
widely adopted in the last twenty years (see, e.g., BIS (1997)).15 Problems can arise in a RTGS
system when one bank does not have enough funds in its central bank account, in which case the
transaction can be rejected or the central bank can extend intraday credit. The possibility that
credit may be extended to a bank raises the question of collateral requirements. Many central
banks provide intraday credit through fully collateralized intraday overdrafts or intraday repos.
In general, the amount of collateral required varies across different RTGS systems and across the
parties involved. There are no data available to determine how much collateral is used for
clearing and settlement.
The final source of demand for collateral is the repo market. In a sale and repurchase agreement
(or repo) one party (the lender) deposits cash with another party, the borrower. The transaction is
14

A two-way collateral agreements is one in which both counterparties to the trade are required to post collateral
whenever they generate an exposure that exceeds a certain agreed threshold, which can be set at zero. In one-way
collateral agreements, only one of the counterparties is required to post collateral. The other counterparty is usually
of much higher credit standing.
15
A RTGS effects final settlement of fund transfers on a continuous basis during the processing day rather than at
pre-specified times.

26

short-term, usually overnight, and the depositor receives interest on their deposit. To ensure the
safety of the deposit, the depositor receives collateral, which he takes physical possession of.
The issue is, what is this collateral?
The repo market appears to have grown enormously over the last 30 years, but there is limited
data with which to measure this growth. Although there a variety of suggestive evidence, the
unfortunate reality is that no official data are available on repo other than what the Federal
Reserve collects with regard to the repo amounts done by the 19 primary-dealer banks.
According to Fed data, primary dealers reported financing $4.5 trillion in fixed income securities
with repo as of March 4, 2008. But, this covers only a fraction of the repo market in the U.S.16
The U.S. Bond Market Association (now known as the Securities Industry and Financial Markets
Association) conducted a survey of repo and securities lending in 2005, estimating that the total
exceeded $5.21 trillion. Estimates of the size of the repo market in total lead roughly to a market
that is about $10 trillion. See Gorton and Metrick (2010a), Singh and Aitken (2009), and
Hördahl and King (2008) for different approaches to estimate the size of this market. While the
available evidence is very suggestive that the repo market is very large, it is impossible to say
exactly how large.
As mentioned, these three sources of demand for collateral may have outstripped the available
collateral in the form of agency and Treasury bonds. In fact, of all the available collateral
consisting of U.S. Treasuries, agency bonds, corporate bonds, and asset-backed securities, a large
fraction is held abroad. But this is reduced by foreign holdings of U.S. securities, which may not
then be available to use as collateral. Foreign holdings of U.S. securities have grown
significantly in recent years. In June 2007, foreigners held 57 percent of U.S. Treasuries, 21
percent of U.S. government agency debt, and 23 percent of U.S. corporate and asset-backed
securities. See U.S. Treasury (2010). It is not known how much of this is unavailable for use as
collateral.
There is no direct evidence that these demands for collateral led to increased asset-backed
security supply. With a lack of relevant data, the evidence that there is a shortage of collateral is
indirect. For example, the Bond Market Association Research (February 1998, p. 2) writes:
16

Federal Reserve Flow of Funds data on repo only cover the U.S. primary dealers and so are even lower than the
Federal Reserve numbers.

27

. . . repo activity involving financial assets other than U.S. government obligations
are increasing due to dealers’ and investors’ desire to achieve the least expensive
and most efficient funding sources for their inventories. In recent years market
participants have turned to money market instruments, mortgage and asset-backed
securities, corporate bonds and foreign sovereign bonds as collateral for repo
agreements. Many market participants expect the lending of equity securities to
become a growing segment of the repo market, in light of recent legislative and
regulatory changes.
And the Bank for International Settlements (2001):
The use of collateral has become one of the most important and widespread risk
mitigation techniques in wholesale financial markets. Financial institutions
extensively employ collateral in lending, in securities trading and derivatives
markets and in payment and settlement systems. Central banks generally require
collateral in their credit operations.
Over the last decade, the use of collateral in wholesale financial markets has
grown rapidly. The collateral most commonly used and apparently preferred by
market participants are instruments with inherently low credit and liquidity risks,
namely government securities and cash. With the growth of collateral use so
rapid, concern has been expressed that it could outstrip the growth of the effective
supply of these preferred assets. Scarcity of collateral could increase the cost of
financial transactions, slow or inhibit financial activity and potentially encourage
greater reliance on more inefficient non-price rationing mechanisms, such as
restricting access to markets. (p. 2)
The demands for collateral may have led to demands for asset-backed securities, raising their
issue prices and thus making them more attractive to issue. This too is a subject for future
research.

28

5.3 Securitization and Financial Innovation
Since the use of ABS as collateral rests on its contractual features, the growth of securitization
may be related to financial innovation in the structure and design of the special purpose vehicle.
Securitization requires that some legal entity buy the pool of loans sold by the originator. One
important issue concerns the legal form of this entity, the special purpose vehicle or special
purpose entity. The first question to be broached in this subsection concerns the choice of legal
entity for the SPV, and further, whether there was some innovation with regard to the legal entity
that facilitated the growth of securitization. The second question concerns “bankruptcy
remoteness.” This is the issue of the separation of the assets sold to the SPV from the originator,
in the legal sense that if the originator enters bankruptcy, the assets sold cannot be clawed back.
Finally, there is the issue of the structure of the SPV so that it cannot enter bankruptcy.
The SPV cannot be an incorporated firm because incorporation faces double taxation, at the
corporate level when the income is earned and then again at the shareholder level when the firm
pays dividends to distribute the income. (Although Subchapter S allows this to be avoided, it has
some drawbacks.) There are alternatives. Many new legal forms for business organizations are
relatively recent arrivals. In the last thirty years limited liability companies, limited liability
partnerships, and statutory business trusts have all come into existence. See Hansmann,
Kraakman and Squire (2005). These legal forms are alternative legal structures for housing
businesses.
In the example considered above, the Chase Issuance Trust, the SPV was a Delaware Trust, a
statutory business trust. The business trust appears to be the basic legal form of the SPV used in
securitization. Trusts are also the dominant form of organizations for structuring mutual funds
and pensions.17 There is little research on why this is so. In fact, Schwarcz (2003, p. 560) notes
that “There are not even clear answers to the fundamental question of whether trusts are a better
form of business organization than corporations or partnerships.” Innovation, if it did occur, is
related to the use of the business trust and its subsequent evolution into a statutory trust, as
explained below.

17

Jones, Moret and Storey (1988) discuss the history of registered investment companies using the Massachusetts
business trust form.

29

Trusts are very old, and most commonly were donative trusts, that is, they were used to holds
gifts of property, for a beneficiary. Historically, the property was land and buildings. However,
the legal form of the trust was adapted to a more modern use. As Langbein (2007) puts it:
“What is new is that the characteristic trust asset has ceased to be ancestral land and has become
instead a portfolio of marketable securities . . . modern trust property typically consists of these
complex financial assets…” (p. 1072). This evolution of the type of property held by trusts, also
described by Langbein (1995), required legislation to adapt the trust form for this new purpose.
For example, trustees need expanded powers and more discretion. Sitkoff (2011) discusses
fiduciary obligations in trust law. The Uniform Trusts Act of 1937 and the Uniform Act for
Simplification of Fiduciary Security Transfers of 1958 were two such pieces of legislation (see
Langbein (2007)). For securitization, another issue was prominent.
There was legal uncertainty about the legality of the trust form and about the limited liability of
trusts. Some states explicitly rejected trusts as a legal form, viewing them is incompatible with
corporate regulatory rules. There was no statutory recognition of limited liability. Consequently,
the promulgation of the Delaware Business Trust Act (1988) was important; it eliminated this
uncertainty. The motivation for this act, according to Sitkoff (2005, p. 36) was to provide a
viable alternative legal form for business organizations. This act removed the uncertainty about
limited liability (see Hansmann and Mattei (1998), p. 474, note 8), and contained no restrictions
on the form of business (see Ribstein (1992, p. 423)). Sitkoff (2005, p. 32), under this act: “The
statutory business trust is not only exceedingly flexible, but more importantly it resolves the
problems of limited liability and spotty judicial recognition that have cast a pall over the use of
the common-law business trust.”
It is also important that Delaware took this step, as this state dominates corporate law. As
Levmore (2005, p. 205) put it: “ . . . Delaware is significant, and perhaps as important, in
partnerships and limited liability companies as it is for corporations. Whatever the source of if
its dominance in corporate law, that . . . carries over to uncorporate law.” Various states adopted
general business trust statutes following Delaware (though a few states predate Delaware).
Delaware’s laws, and similar laws adopted by other states, can suffer from the fact that not all
states recognize these laws. The Uniform Law Commission, adopted in 1892, centralizes the
drafting of laws so that all states can adopt the same set of rules.

The commission has

30

commissioners appointed by the governors of all the states. This commission has, historically,
played an important role in transforming traditional donative trust law into stature (see Langbein
(2007)). In 2003 a drafting committee for a Uniform Business Trust Act was set up by the
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Law. Sitkoff (2005, p. 6): “The
Uniform Statutory Trust Entity Act, now in draft form, validates the statutory trust as a
permissible form of business organization.” In 2009 the Uniform Statutory Trust Entity Act was
passed, and is currently being revised. See Rutledge and Habbart (2010) for a summary.
The Delaware act was important for modifying and clarifying a number of troublesome features
of the traditional trust. But, the issue of bankruptcy remoteness was still troubling. One of the
most important issues in securitization concerns the status of the claims of the SPV investors in
the event that the originator of the SPV’s assets goes bankrupt. That is, the issue is that of
whether there was a “true sale” so that the creditors of the originator cannot claim to be entitled
to the securitized assets. This issue first arose in the bankruptcy case of LTV Steel Company in
which LTV challenged its own securitizations, claiming that they were not true sales.
The LTV Steel case (In re LTV Steel, Inc., No. 00-43866, 2001 Bankr. LEXIS 131 (Bankr. N.D.
Ohio Feb. 5, 2001)) threatened the bankruptcy remoteness concept, but the parties settled prior to
a court decision and the parties agreed that there had been a “true sale” of the assets to the SPV.
18

Although the outcome was ambiguous, it did not seem to hamper the growth of securitization.

In part, that may have been due to another change, the Bankruptcy Reform Act (2001), which
provided a safe harbor for ABS. According to Schwarcz (2002, p. 353-54), writing before the
act was passed: “ . . . the Reform Act would create, for the first time, a legislative ‘safe harbor’
regarding what constitutes a bankruptcy true sale in securitization transactions.” Under the Act,
there is an explicit exclusion from the estate of the bankruptcy entity of an “eligible asset”
transferred to an “eligible entity” related to an “asset-backed securitization.” The Act also more
broadly defines “transferred” with regard to the sale of the assets to the SPV.
The safe harbor part of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 2001 was still viewed as being uncertain.
So, the State of Delaware enacted the Asset-Backed Securities Facilitation Act (“the
Securitization Act”) in January 2002. This Act also addressed the issue of what constitutes a

18

Because there was a settlement, no precedent was set in this case. Stark (2002) discusses the case.

31

“true sale” for the purpose of bankruptcy, attempting to strengthen it further. Why was this
needed? Carbino and Schorling (2003): “The entire federal interest issue might be moot,
however, because an argument exists that the plain language of Bankruptcy Code section 541
expressly preempts the Securitization Act.” But, “Our review of federal interests that have been
implicated in bankruptcy cases did not reveal a federal interest that expressly trumps the
Securitization Act’s purpose to ensure that receivables transferred to a SPV are not recaptured as
‘property of the estate’ in the originator’s bankruptcy.” The authors conclude that “ … the
efficacy of the Securitization Act remains uncertain. While the Securitization Act may provide
some additional level of comfort to investors when Delaware law applies, it is by no means a
panacea.”
President Bush signed “The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of
2005” on Wednesday, April 20, 2005, making it law. Section 541(b)(8) states “any eligible asset
(or proceeds thereof), to the extent that such eligible asset was transferred by the debtor, before
the date of commencement of the case, to an eligible entity in connection with an asset-backed
securitization, except to the extent such asset (or proceeds or value thereof) may be recovered by
the trustee under section 550 by virtue of avoidance under section 548(a).”
Despite all this, on April 16, 2009, General Growth Properties, Inc. (GGP), a publicly-traded real
estate investment trust, filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code and
included in its filing more of its solvent SPVs that owned property and acted as borrowers under
the property-specific loans, which were performing in most cases. The case came as a shock to
participants in the securitization market. The issue essentially was whether the SPVs’ assets
would be substantively consolidated with GGP.
On August 11, 2009 the bankruptcy court delivered a fifty-page opinion that denied the motions
to dismiss the case brought by several property-level lenders. See Memorandum of Opinion
(2009). The court found that the issues should be evaluated based on the group (the company
together with the SPVs), but did not substantively consolidate the entities. The opinion is
colored by the financial crisis. The court says, “Faced with the unprecedented collapse of the
real estate markets, and serious uncertainty as to when or if they would be able to refinance the
project-level debt, the Debtors’ management had to reorganize the Group’s capital structure.
[Secured lenders] do not explain how the billions of dollars of unsecured debt at the parent levels

32

could be restructured responsibly if the cash flow of the parent companies continued to be based
on the earnings of subsidiaries that had debt coming due in a period of years without any known
means of providing for repayment or refinance” (p. 30). GGP exited bankruptcy in November
2010. It is not clear what the future impact will be.
Another issue related to the above discussion concerns the case when the originator is an FDICinsured institution. In 2000, the FDIC adopted a rule that when it acted as conservator or
receiver it would not use its statutory authority “to disaffirm or repudiate contracts to reclaim,
recover, or recharacterize as property of the institution or the receivership any financial assets
transferred by an [insured depository] institution in connection with a securitization” (Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (2010, p. 2).

During the financial crisis there was some

uncertainty about how the FDIC would behave with respect to securitizations. But, the FDIC
ended up continuing the safe harbor for financial assets in securitizations.
Aside from the above issue of the bankruptcy remoteness of the SPV, there is the issue of the
SPV itself going bankrupt. The design of the securities issued by the SPV includes early
amortization, as discussed above, so holders of these securities are never in a position to put the
SPV into bankruptcy if there is not enough cash generated by the underlying portfolio to pay the
coupons on the ABS. However, the SPV might still, for other reasons, voluntarily enter
bankruptcy. The right cannot be contractually waived under U.S. law (see Klee and Butler
(2002)). Consequently, the structure of the SPV must be such as to achieve this waiver in
substance. As described by Klee and Butler (2002): “The use of SPVs is simply a disguised
form of bankruptcy waiver” (p. 34).
How is this avoidance of the likelihood of voluntary bankruptcy achieved? Standard and Poor’s
(2002) lists the following traditional characteristics for the SPV to be liquidation-efficient:
restrictions on objects, powers, and purposes; limitations on ability to incur indebtedness;
restrictions or prohibitions on merger, consolidation, dissolution, liquidation, winding up, asset
sales, transfers of equity interests, and amendments to the organizational documents relating to
“separateness”; incorporation of separateness covenants restricting dealings with parents and
affiliates; “non-petition” language (i.e., a covenant not to file the SPV into involuntary
bankruptcy); security interests over assets; an independent director whose consent is required for

33

the filing of a voluntary bankruptcy petition. These are all features designed to ensure that the
SPV will never be bankrupt.
There is no research that we know of that discusses the history of how these features of the trust,
designed to prevent it from ever going into bankruptcy, evolved over time.
In summary, the legal form and structure of the SPV used in securitizations has evolved in
significant ways over the last thirty years. Whether this evolution was a passive response to the
growth of securitization or whether the innovations spurred the growth of securitization is not
clear.
6. Security Design and the Cost of Capital: Theory
Securitization raises the obvious possibility of adverse selection (only low quality loans are
securitized) and moral hazard (loans that can be sold are not initially screened, or securitized
loans are not subsequently monitored). In order to entice investors to buy asset-backed securities
there must be explicit or implicit contractual design features that mitigate these obvious
problems. Indeed, originators do not have discretion over what loans are sold to the SPV. In
general, the criteria for loan eligibility for a pool are carefully set out in the pooling and servicing
agreement (a contractual part of securitization). Loans that are securitized are scrutinized by the
servicers and the rating agencies. Nevertheless, it may well be the case that originators know
more about loan characteristics than outsiders. To the extent that these asymmetric-information
costs exist, they could offset any efficiency gains from the full-information model of Section IV.
This section lays out some theoretical issues of security design surrounding asymmetric
information, and then Section VII examines the empirical evidence.
In models of securitization the issues of moral hazard and adverse selection have been examined
by focusing on two, non-mutually exclusive, features of securitization. One has to do with the
design of securitization. Design refers to the issues of pooling (the choice of assets to pool and
sell to the SPV) and tranching (the capital structure of the SPV). In principle assets could be sold
separately, or in portfolios. What should these portfolios look like? Once the pool has been
selected, the SPV will purchase the pool with the proceeds from issuing securities of different
seniority in the capital markets. These are called “tranches.” The originator retains the most
junior, equity, tranche. The second issue is the notion of “implicit recourse,” which refers to the

34

originator’s possible incentives to support securitizations in which loans in the portfolio do not
perform as expected.
The SPV capital structure design problem is no different, in principle, than the capital-structure
design problem of any corporation. There is one important difference, however. A firm choosing
to raise money externally already has assets-in-place, when it seeks to finance a new project. A
securitization SPV can choose the assets to finance.19 This means that the issue of which loans
to pool is potentially related to the design of the capital structure (i.e., the layers of debt or
tranches). DeMarzo (2005), Glaeser and Kallal (1997), and Riddiough (1997) look at this issue.
DeMarzo (2005) is interesting because he analyzes the interaction between pooling and
tranching. That is, he includes the issue of pooling, the question of whether the loans should be
sold separately or “pooled” into a single portfolio, as we observe in securitization. DeMarzo
analyzes the different consequences of pooling.

On the one hand, pooling assets is not

advantageous for an informed issuer because it eliminates the advantage of his asset-specific
private information – the “information destruction effect.”

On the other hand, there is a

beneficial “risk diversification effect” of pooling, which is important to buyers precisely because
it creates a potentially large low-risk pool, and associated securities, that are less sensitive to the
seller’s private information. Pooling is diversifying, and together with tranching, maximizes the
size of the low-risk security that can be constructed from the pool of assets.
In Glaeser and Kallal (1997) information production by the seller is endogenous. The seller of
the asset or pool of assets can produce information at a cost. Also, the seller can choose an
amount of information to disclose. In this work the issuer of the securities has a choice of
whether to gather information. In that case, pooling assets does not have a clear effect on the
issuer’s incentives to gather information, and hence on the liquidity of the pool.
Both DeMarzo and Glaeser and Kallal look at securitization as a two-step process, where the first
step involves the originator selling a pool of loans to an intermediary, which in turn sells
securities to investors. The originator is either uninformed (DeMarzo) or can commit not to take
19

This depends in part on whether the SPV is a master trust or not. Typically, SPVs are master trusts that finance
many vintages of pools of loans. The issue then concerns how the cash flows from different vintage are related, i.e.,
can the cash flows from one vintage of loans be used to finance asset-backed security obligations of a different
vintage, or not. In socialized trusts, such cross subsidization is possible. Socialized trusts then have the equivalent
of assets-in-place.

35

advantage of private information (Glaeser and Kallal). The second step involves an informed
issuer designing and selling securities to investors. This requires the creation of the low-risk,
low information-sensitivity securities, discussed above. Both papers argue that securitization
involves creating liquidity by decreasing the amount of information relevant for valuing the
asset-backed securities. Riddiough (1997) has similar results, but also focuses on the governance
issues for an SPV, that is, which tranche, junior or senior, should control liquidation or
renegotiation issues.
Axelson (2007) considers the case where the buyers are privately informed and sellers are
uninformed. An example might be the Resolution Trust Corporation set up in the 1990s to sell
the assets of failed savings and loan associations. In this case, the opposite result is achieved. It
is optimal for the seller to issue a security that is information-sensitive, such as equity.
Fender and Mitchell (2009) examine the seller’s choice of effort in screening borrowers, when
making loans that are subsequently securitized. They consider three security designs for aligning
incentives: the seller holds the equity tranche, the seller holds a vertical slice (a pro rata portion
of each security issued); the originator holds the mezzanine tranche, rather than the equity
tranche. Incentives are not always aligned via equity tranche retention. When the probability of
a large systemic shock rises, the equity tranche will be wiped out, and a seller/originator will not
have an incentive to make a screening effort. In that case, it would be better for the seller to hold
the mezzanine tranche. The optimal design can depend on the state of the macroeconomy.
In the model of Greenbaum and Thakor (1987) the low-quality loans are retained and financed
largely with insured deposits, while the high-quality loans are securitized. In their setting
borrowers are of different default likelihoods. Each borrower knows his own type, but no one
else knows borrower type. But, banks and investors/depositors can learn a borrower type at a
cost; bank information production costs are lower than the cost to the investors/depositors. A
loan can be funded on-balance sheet, in which case bank equity is used to honor the deposit
contract should the borrower fail. On-balance sheet funding involves both the bank and the
depositors paying information production costs. Alternatively, securitization is modeled as a
partial guarantee of the loan, that is, the borrower buys some insurance from the bank. The bank
produces information about the borrower and then offers a borrower-specific loan that is
observable to investors and credibly communicates borrower type to investors, who then fund the

36

loan directly. Low types however are better off with on-balance sheet financing because the
bank provides too little insurance. There is a separating equilibrium.
There are some features of securitization that seem important but are not directly addressed by
the theoretical literature to date. One issue is the fact that the creation of asset-backed securities
always involves pooling loans that are homogeneous, that is, a pool consists exclusively of auto
receivables, or credit-card receivables. It is not the case that different asset classes are mixed,
even when the originator in fact originates many different asset classes. The theories suggest
that diversification of the loan pool is important, but we do not observe that in the world. Asset
classes are sold separately.
Another important feature of securitization is that there is no secondary (and usually no primary)
market for the equity tranche. The most information-sensitive security is held by the originator,
so there is no market like the equities market for firms. Originators, historically, have not been
obligated to hold the equity tranche, but seem to behave that way, quite likely for incentive
reasons. But, the fact that there is no incentive to produce information, and then trade the equity
tranche, means that no information is revealed in the way that it is for corporations, via the stock
market. This is consistent with the idea that ABS make good collateral. ABS are informationinsensitive, in the parlance of Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2011).
Implicit recourse is the focus of the model in Gorton and Souleles (2006). The idea is that the
bank originating the two loans may have an incentive to support the SPV if the loan in the SPV
defaults, but the on-balance sheet loan does not default, in the parlance of the above model.
“Support” means that bank provides extra-contractual resources to the SPV such that the SPV
can honor the debt. (How this happens is discussed below.)

In Gorton and Souleles (2006)

there are two incentive problems not incorporated in the model in Section IV. First, the bank
must make an effort choice, which determines the likelihood of loan default (think of this as a
screening effort) and second, the bank selects which loan to put into the SPV after this choice has
been made. In other words, there is both a moral-hazard problem (the effort choice) and an
adverse-selection problem (which loan type unobservably is placed in the SPV). The bank has
an incentive to provide such support via implicit recourse only if the bank has a reputation at
stake, which is essentially the present value of the future profits from securitization above the
cost of on-balance sheet financing. Implicit recourse, if it exists, is an implicit contract,

37

supported by economic relationships not by courts of law. The benefits of securitization may
depend on the presence of implicit recourse.
The other mechanism for controlling adverse selection and moral hazard is for the originator of
the loans being sold to the SPV to retain an equity position in the portfolio. The issue then arises
of how large this equity tranche needs to be to convince investors that there are no incentive
problems. This issue is analogous to a firm issuing a security to investors, a problem that has
been studied extensively in the corporate finance literature. For example, see DeMarzo and
Duffie (1999) and Leland and Pyle (1977). In these models a firm is viewed as a privately
informed seller of a security which signals a high project value by retaining a portion of the
issue.
There has been less attention, either theoretically or empirically, on the pricing of asset-backed
securities, and on what those prices (or spreads) reflect (Gorton and Souleles (2006) is one
exception). In the model of Section IV, there was a possible convenience yield associated with
asset-backed securities. In other words, if there was a demand for ABS due to their use as
collateral in sale and repurchase agreements (see Gorton and Metrick (2010a)), then there might
be an incentive to issue more ABS because, in this case, there would be a positive convenience
yield. On the other hand, if financial intermediaries have an incentive to reduce regulatory
capital requirements by moving assets off-balance sheet, they might accept a lower price than
otherwise, a “negative convenience yield.” Moreover, the price might be lower because of
residual investor concerns about moral hazard and lemons problems. It may be that these
problems can be contained, but not eliminated. Figures 8 and 9, which show spreads on AAA
auto and AAA credit card ABS relative to industrials, strongly suggests that there is something
here to explain, another area for future research.
7. Security Design and the Cost of Capital: Evidence
In this section, we examine the evidence on the security design and the tradeoff between the
symmetric-information benefits of securitization (Section IV) and the asymmetric-information
costs of securitization (Section VI). In Section VII.A we look at the summary statistic for this
tradeoff: other things equal, do securitized loans have lower rates than loans held on-balance
sheet? Although the perfect experiment to answer this question has not yet been run, the

38

evidence that does exist suggests that securitized loans are indeed cheaper for borrowers. So in
Section VII.B we investigate the components of this difference, using inputs from the perfectinformation model of Section IV and the asymmetric-information theories discussed in Section
VI.
7.1 Does securitization lower the cost of capital?
The ideal experiment to answer this question would be to take all new loan applications,
randomly assign some fraction to be securitized, and then see what happens to market rates
depending on securitization. Alas, no bank has been willing to run this test yet, so researchers
are forced into clever attempts to identify the effect of securitization. This literature is small and
needs to get larger. But there are a few informative papers.
Nadald and Weisbach (2010) study the effects of securitization on the cost of corporate loans.
Using a sample of 3000 corporate loans, they find a raw difference of 10-17 basis points between
securitized and non-securitized loans. The hard part is to identify the securitization effect in this
gap, which they accomplish through a difference-in-differences approach, exploiting the
“securitization boom” of CLOs from 2004-2007 as the time-series driver. To combine with the
securitization boom, the authors identify an important institutional feature of CLOs, driven by
the types of corporate loans that tend to be included. Corporate loans are either amortizing
(“Term A loans”), non-amortizing (“Term B loans”), or revolving. For a variety of reasons,
Term B loans are the best raw material for securitizations, so if securitization lowers the cost of
capital, then we should expect a differential effect in Term B loans over Term A loans and
revolvers. And this is exactly what the authors find, with spreads on Term B shrinking by 17 and
35 bp, respectively, relative to Term A loans and revolvers. The authors also find that these
spread differences are driven entirely by banks active in the securitization market, with no
difference in the spreads for banks that do not securitize. Taken together, these results strongly
suggest that securitization lowers the cost of corporate loans.
An at al. (2009) study the securitization differential in the commercial mortgage-backed-security
(CMBS) market. The central comparison in the paper is between non-securitized “portfolio
loans” on the balance sheets of banks and “conduit” loans intended for securitization. The CMBS

39

market does not provide a clean setting for difference-in-difference estimates, so the paper uses a
reduced-form regression and finds that, subject to a long list of controls, conduit loans are 10 bps
lower than portfolio loans.
Of course, it is not possible to know whether this reduced-form regression has important omitted
factors or endogeneity problems. The authors look for differences in prepayment and default
across the two samples and find none, leaving the onus on any critics to identify other missing
factors. Furthermore, inclusion of originator fixed effects increases the estimated differential to
16 basis points, as does restricting attention to a single large originator (Bank of America).
Finally, to address concerns that rates and loan-to-value may be jointly determined, the authors
estimate a simultaneous equation system and find an even higher spread of 20bp.

7.2 Components of the Return Differential
In this subsection we discuss the evidence on each of the components of the return differential.
7.2.1

Bankruptcy Costs

Ayotte and Gaon (2010) provide the only available empirical estimates for the role of bankruptcy
in securitizations. They begin with the observation that the bankruptcy process forces
claimholders into costly bargaining over the future of the assets. This costly bargaining could
result in an efficient outcome, but could also lead to inefficient discontinuation of a positive NPV
firm or inefficient continuation of a negative NPV firm.

Inefficient continuation occurs if

managers are able to extract value from secured claimholders (who are barred from seizing
collateral in a judicial bankruptcy). Securitization – by removing such collateral from the control
of managers – reduces the risk of inefficient continuation. However, to the extent that the
issuing firm has maintained some equity stake in the securitized assets, they are now subject to
hold-up by the other claimants on the SPV, and such a hold-up would increase the risk of
inefficient discontinuation in bankruptcy.
The formal model of this intuition allows for several predictions. Most relevant to our discussion
here, the model predicts that a “shock” to the bankruptcy remoteness of SPVs should increase
spreads on securitized bonds. To test this prediction, the authors need a shock, and they find one

40

in the court decisions during the bankruptcy of LTV in 2001: there, a bankruptcy judge’s interim
decision pulled some securitized assets back from the SPV to be considered by the bankruptcy
court, and this clouded the issue for all other securitizations in bankruptcy. The control group is
insured depository institutions subject to FDIC-based receivership, where the remoteness of
SPVs was well-established and was not affected by this court decision. Then, using a differencein-differences approach, the authors find that relative spreads on bankruptcy-eligible ABS issuers
rose between 26 and 29 basis points in the six months following the LTV decision.
7.2.2

Taxes

Taxes have an ambiguous effect on securitization. In the model presented above, tax shields
create an incentive for banks to hold loans on balance sheet and finance them with deposits or
other debt. There is little empirical evidence available on this effect. Gorton and Souleles
(2006) find that lower-rated firms with little income to shield using the tax shields are more
likely to securitize. Thomas (2001) finds that the average abnormal returns are greater the poorer
the creditworthiness of the sponsor, a result that is also consistent with this.
Han, Park, and Pennacchi (2010) show that if deposits are inelastically supplied and non-deposit
debt is unavailable, the tax effects would go in the other direction: loans held on balance sheet
would require equity, and the returns to such equity would be taxed. In this setting, banks with a
low supply of deposits and high opportunities to make loans would have strong incentives to
securitize. The authors test the sensitivity to taxes by exploiting state-level differences in
corporate taxes. They find that securitization activity moves with corporate taxes, supporting the
mechanism of their model.
7.2.3

Asymmetric Information

The moral-hazard problems of lax screening and monitoring are well-understood by the market,
which uses various methods to mitigate them. Nevertheless, popular accounts of the financial
crisis place much blame on the weakened screening of the originate-to-distribute model, and the
2009 Dodd-Frank Law – silent on most aspects of securitization – contains a provision intended
to reduce moral hazard by requiring a minimum level of risk retention by originators. Several

41

papers, discussed below, estimate the size of this moral hazard problem, but thus far the evidence
is limited to the important but still special case of subprime securitizations.
Keys at al. (2010) looks at subprime securitizations from 2001 to 2006, using data on over 16
million loans. To capture the effect of screening, they exploit an institutional feature in subprime
securitizations: buyers of loans use a FICO credit score cutoff of 620 as a rule-of-thumb for
accepting loans. This rule of thumb is confirmed in the data, with a sharp discontinuity in the
number of securitized loans at exactly this cutoff. The same discontinuity also appears in default
rates, with loans just above the threshold defaulting at higher rates than loans just below.
The authors interpret this paradoxical result on defaults as evidence for lax screening of
securitized loans. Since loans below the FICO threshold are harder to securitize, banks expect to
hold more of them on balance sheet and expend more resources in their screening. Some other
natural experiments further support this interpretation. In two states, anti-predatory lending laws
were passed that restricted securitizations around the threshold; in both cases, the discontinuities
around 620 FICO score were significantly attenuated while the laws were in effect, and then
went back to normal when the laws were repealed. The paper also finds no evidence that the
results are driven by selection rather than screening, in part by showing that the results are just as
strong among originators that have no discretion to select specific loans for securitization.
In Keys at al. (2009), these same authors expand their analysis of the moral-hazard problem to
consider the mitigating role of regulation and market incentives. Using the same rule-of-thumb
threshold of 620 FICO scores, the paper compares the default performance for securitized loans
of various institutional types.

They find that default rates were higher overall for loans

originated by regulated banks than for less regulated independent brokers, suggesting that
regulatory oversight alone is not the solution to the moral-hazard problem. Instead, they find
evidence for mitigation of the moral-hazard problem from specific regulations requiring skin-inthe-game for brokers, a result supportive of the Dodd-Frank approach.
The Keys at al. papers analyze only subprime securitized loans, using the rule-of-thumb FICO
cutoff for identification. Elul (2009) takes a different approach, using a large sample of both
securitized and portfolio loans in 2005 and 2006, both prime and subprime, with a regression to
identify the relationship between securitization and loan performance. The more comprehensive

42

sample allows estimation of securitization impacts across a broader range of mortgages; the
disadvantage is that it is not possible to separately identify screening and selection as drivers of
these impacts.
Elul finds that securitized mortgages perform worse than portfolio loans, with the biggest
differences in prime mortgages in private (non-GSE) securitizations. He attributes this result to
adverse selection of poorer loans into securitized pools, but it is not possible to rule out lax
screening as the cause. He further finds that subprime securitizations actually perform better
than equivalent portfolio loans, but shows that this result is driven entirely by subprime defaults
that occur before these loans can be securitized; that is, a loan is classified as “portfolio” during
the lag between loan origination and securitization, so any early defaults would be by definition
on portfolio loans.20 Once he adjusts for this effect, subprime securitized loans perform worse
than equivalent portfolio loans. Like Keys at al. (2009), he finds this latter result only occurs for
low-doc/no-doc loans, and that there are no differences for full documentation loans.21
A more direct test of adverse selection is performed by An at al. (2009), in a follow-up study to
their 2010 paper on the CMBS market. Once again, these authors exploit the difference between
conduit and portfolio lenders, where the former have no flexibility to keep loans on balance
sheet, and the latter do. Given that portfolio lenders choose which loans to securitize, a lemonstype model shows that the market should discount loans from portfolio lenders. The empirical
results support this prediction, with an average discount of 34 basis points for loans originated by
portfolio lenders as compared to conduits. In this case, the very fact that conduit lenders have no
incentive to produce private information (since they cannot keep the good loans), means that the
markets do not expect any adverse selection from them. This result shows the dark side of
creating screening incentives, as rules that could fix moral-hazard problems can then give rise to
adverse selection – an unfortunate tradeoff.
Downing, Jaffee, and Wallace (2009) provide a sharp-test of adverse selection in the context of
federally guaranteed mortgages. In this setting, since all mortgages are guaranteed, the main risk
to investors is prepayment. The source of adverse selection is then based on homeowners
20

Jiang at al.. (2010) were the first to demonstrate this statistical artifact of securitizations, a timely reminder to all
researchers of the pitfalls of relying on regression results without understanding the institutional structure.
21
As further evidence of adverse selection in MBS, Drucker and Mayer (2008) find that underwriters possess and
exploit inside information in secondary market transactions.

43

differing propensities to optimally repay their mortgages, with information about such
differences available to originators but not to purchasers of the MBS. For example, some pools
of mortgages will have borrower characteristics suggesting low prepayment propensity, so that
even when interest rates fall, many borrowers will not refinance their mortgages. These
mortgages have high relative value, and should be retained by originators. On the other hand,
pools with characteristics that forecast optimal prepayment would be lemons and should be sold
by originators. Since the institutional rules do not require originators to disclose all information
about these characteristics, we would expect this setting to give rise to an adverse-selection
problem, and it does: the authors find that pools retained by originators have lower prepayment
propensities than do pools that have been sold.22 Using a model that translates prepayment
propensity into yield, they find expected yields on retained pools that are 4-6 bp higher than on
sold pools.
The papers discussed above on asymmetric information all use MBS as their unit of study.
Benmelech at al. (2010) extend this analysis to CLOs built from corporate loans, and find very
different results.23 CLOs are a crucial part of the corporate-loan intermediation chain, especially
in non-investment grade loans, where they hold about half of all loans. These loans are typically
syndicated before they are securitized, which means that CLOs are built from pieces of loans,
unlike the full loans that make up MBS. The syndication step is important, since asymmetricinformation problems must be solved by lead arrangers in order to form a loan syndicate. This
extra step proves crucial, as Benmelech at al. show that there is no difference in performance
between CLO loans and non-CLO loans. They do, however, find some weak evidence that when
CLO underwriters contribute loans from their own portfolio – about 10% of all CLO loans –
these loans do underperform. The authors conclude that the asymmetric-information problems in
securitization can be alleviated by syndication, and that generalizations from MBS to all
securitizations can be dangerous.
Albertazzi at al. (2011) analyze the rich dataset on securitizations in Italy to investigate adverse
selection and its mitigation. The Italian data has detail unavailable in any single study in the
22

The exact mechanism used in the paper is transfer of the MBS pool to a multi-class resecuritization known as a
Real-Estate Mortgage Investment Conduit (“REMIC”), but for our purposes this resecuritization can be thought of
as a sale.
23
Ambrose at al. (2005) also studies the securitization of corporate loans, with some attention to asymmetric
information and consistent results to Benmelech at al.. (2010).

44

United States: loan-level information for securitized and non-securitized loans, details on tranche
structure in the MBS, and information about retention of tranches by the originator. The authors
exploit this rich detail to simultaneously estimate the probability of securitization and the
probability of default, directly handling endogeneity issues that other authors have either
sidestepped or required clever natural experiments to solve. Given regulatory constraints in
Italy, there is no subprime market and the data includes only prime loans, but none of the loans
are government guaranteed. They find that securitized loans perform just as well as nonsecuritized loans. The evidence shows that the adverse-selection problem – present in other
contexts – is mitigated here by modest originator retention and by the incentive for less
experienced originators to intentionally place good loans into securitization, in an effort to build
reputation for future securitizations.
An important issue in analyzing whether there are issues with moral hazard and adverse selection
is whether potential investors and issuers are aware of these issues and structure the
securitization to account for the potential problems. For example, the issues associated with 620
FICO score cut-off are well-known on Wall Street. Several researchers have looked into this.
Chen, Liu and Ryan (2008) examine the determinants of the size of the equity tranche retained
by the sponsor. They find that banks retain more risk when the loans are more opaque (the credit
risk is less verifiable to an outsider) and banks retain larger equity tranches when the pool is
riskier based on public information. In other words, the structure of the securitization is not
independent of the risks of the pool. These hypotheses are framed and tested by estimating the
association between banks’ equity risk and the characteristics of the loan securitizations. Park
(2011) studies subprime securitization, in particular the structure and pricing.

Subprime

securitizations are more complicated than other securitizations, presumably because the asset
class is riskier. Indeed, Park shows that credit enhancement mechanisms, including tranching,
reflect the risk of the underlying portfolio.
7.2.4. Regulatory Arbitrage and Implicit Recourse
One possible reason for the return advantage of securitization is regulatory arbitrage.

If

regulatory capital is costly, and securitization allows banks to economize on regulatory capital,
then securitization can lower the private cost of bank capital. This form of regulatory arbitrage
can be especially valuable when the originator implicitly promises to cover any shortfall in the

45

securitization, so that the “off-balance” sheet vehicle never actually leaves the balance sheet. In
the case of complete implicit recourse, there is no shifting of credit risk from the originator, but
regulatory capital requirements would be unambiguously lower. In principle, such arbitrage can
be efficient (if bank capital rules are not socially optimal) or it can be an abuse of the bank safety
net.

In this subsection, we review the evidence for this role of these mechanisms in

securitization.24
Before delving in to the empirical work on this topic, we give three important caveats. First,
regulatory arbitrage cannot possibly explain securitization by non-financial corporations, since
those corporations do not have any capital requirements. Since such securitization is significant
(as shown in Section III), regulatory arbitrage will never be a complete explanation of
securitization. Second, even for regulated financial institutions, there is still no universally
accepted theory or evidence about why regulatory capital is expensive. Banks may behave as
though regulatory capital is expensive, but the reason for such behavior is not well-understood.
There is a long literature on this topic, and we will not attempt to do it justice here. Instead, we
proceed under the assumption the regulatory capital is privately costly and economizing on it is
valuable (even in the absence of non-regulatory reasons). Third, even under the assumption that
regulatory capital is privately costly, it remains an open question about whether it is socially
beneficial. We leave that issue for Section VIII.
The empirical evidence on implicit recourse comes primarily through studies of credit-card (CC)
securitizations. These securitizations are an ideal study object for implicit recourse because
sponsors have a variety of methods they can use to hide recourse from regulators. Higgins and
Mason (2004) identify several of these methods used in 17 separate instances by ten different
sponsors. On average, they find that the stock prices of sponsors reacts positively to recourse
actions, which they interpret as evidence that such recourse, while costly in the short-run to
sponsors, can be an efficient method of building reputation necessary for future securitizations.
The model of Gorton and Souleles (2006), discussed above, formalizes the intuition in Higgins
and Mason with a model of a repeated securitization game, where originators benefit from a
reputation of bailing out their SPVs. As evidence for this mechanism, the authors show that
24

Implicit recourse can also alleviate asymmetric-information problems, but explicit recourse would be a more
efficient way to serve this purpose, since explicit recourse would be, by definition, more explicit. So we focus on
implicit recourse as mitigating asymmetric-information problems only when combined with regulatory arbitrage.

46

credit-card securitization spreads depend on the credit risk of the sponsor, even though sponsors
are not contractually obligated to bail out their vehicles.
Vermilyea at al. (2008) also use CC securitizations to study a very specific form of implicit
recourse: the discretion of sponsors to designate CC losses as due to fraud. The rules of CC
securitizations force fraud losses back upon the sponsor, while pure credit losses fall on the
investors in securitized bonds. Since sponsors have discretion in their designation of fraud or
credit losses, they can exercise this discretion as a form of difficult-to-detect support for their
vehicles. And, indeed, the paper finds support for this implicit recourse mechanism. First, banks
that securitize have higher fraud losses than banks that do not securitize, suggesting that
securitizing banks use their discretion as a means of support. Second, other things equal, banks
with poorly performing vehicles have higher fraud losses. While this could suggest that fraud
losses and credit losses are positively correlated, it could also be evidence of implicit recourse.
Implicit recourse could be an efficient contract – as suggested by some of these results – or it
could be used to take advantage of the safety net. Calomiris and Mason (2004) attempt to
disentangle these two possibilities through a cross-sectional analysis of securitization patterns
and capital levels across banks. Overall, their evidence points to the “efficient contracting”
view: capital levels appear to be set by the riskiness of the assets, banks that securitize do not
appear to have binding capital constraints, and differences in deposit insurance do not explain
differences in capital structure.
Minton at al. (2004) also find no evidence for the dark side of regulatory arbitrage. First, they
observe that the most active securitizers – unregulated finance companies and investment banks
– are not even subject to capital rules. Second, among regulated banks, leverage is negatively
correlated with securitization activity, so that the most capital-constrained banks securitize the
least.
In a world with active securitization markets, regulatory arbitrage can also influence the types of
assets used in the vehicles. For example, to the extent that regulators “misprice” the capital costs
of different assets, originators can choose to securitize the expensive (high capital charge) assets
and keep the cheap (low capital charge) assets on balance sheets. Ambrose et al. (2005) show
this to be the case using loan-level data from a single bank, where they find that relatively risky

47

loans stayed on balance sheet, while relatively safe loans were securitized. One interpretation is
that the bank kept loans that justified their price in regulatory capital, and sold those that did
not.25
Overall, the literature on implicit recourse and regulatory arbitrage finds evidence that implicit
recourse is assumed and viewed favorably by the market, and that socially costly regulatory
arbitrage is not a main driver of securitization.26 The main caveat to these results is that they all
use pre-crisis and non-subprime data sources and these latter sources may yield very different
results. If regulatory arbitrage was a contributor to the recent financial crisis, then the literature
still awaits the seminal evidence.
7.2.5. Other Considerations
There are two other potential benefits to the sponsors of securitization. Loutskina (2010) argues
that since securitization allows sponsors to sell their otherwise illiquid assets, they need not hold
as many liquid assets on balance sheet. She finds this to be the case for commercial banks.
Moreover, she finds that since banks that securitize can fund new loans by selling old ones,
rather than just relying on issuing new liabilities, banks are more likely to extend credit when
there is an external shock to the cost of funds.
Another possible benefit to the sponsors may be that they use the discretion associated with fairvalue accounting rules to manage the size of reported securitization gains. Dechow, Myers and
Shakespeare (2009) find weak evidence of “less earnings management in firms with independent
boards” and no evidence that various director characteristics matter. Dechow and Shakespeare
(2009) argue that managers will time their securitizations to be at the end of the quarter. They
find that securitization issuance tends to bunch in the last few days of the third quarter,
suggesting that there is window-dressing –an attractive feature of the ability to securitize.
Karaoglu (2004) also argues empirically that banks use the accounting for the retained equity
tranche in ways consistent with managing earnings and regulator capital.

25

The authors also suggest reputational concerns as another possible interpretation. Note that the retention of riskier
loans by itself does not say anything about adverse selection, since this study does not analyze the difference
between public and private information about these loans.
26
Thomas (2001) presents event study evidence which, among other findings, shows that first time securitizers,
more frequent securitizers, and securitizers with actively traded bonds show abnormal gains to their shareholders.

48

8. Securitization, Regulation, and Public Policy
In this section we review the literature on some of the larger issues to do with securitization,
asking in particular whether the net private benefits of securitization are consistent with the net
social benefits.
8.1 Securitization and Financial Stability
There may be social benefits to securitization because the marketability of loan portfolios allows
risk to be spread and asset-backed securities can be used as collateral in repo, for example.
These factors may lead to an increase in lending, furthering economic growth. There is no
evidence on this issue of the social benefits to date, however. The financial crisis has
dramatically raised the issue of the social costs of securitization. Asset-backed securities played
a role in the crisis, as they were used as collateral for repo. See Gorton (2010), and Gorton and
Metrick (2010a). Did ABS lead to fragility or to real effects during the crisis?
The crisis involved market participants losing confidence in asset-backed securities.

ABS

thought to be information-insensitive appeared to become sensitive to information. When repo
haircuts increased and investors refused to renew commercial paper for asset-backed commercial
paper conduits (limited purpose firms that held ABS and financed it mostly with commercial
paper), firms were forced to delever, selling billions of dollars of ABS. Gorton (2010), and
Gorton and Metrick (2010a,c) document the increase in repo haircuts on ABS and show that
spreads on ABS completely unrelated to subprime mortgages moved together more in line with
measures of counterparty risk than with subprime risk. Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009)
document the contraction in the asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) market, a market that
fell by 20 percent when investors refused to roll over their commercial paper. Gorton (2010),
Gorton and Metrick (2010a,c) and Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009) describe the events in the
repo and ABCP markets as runs.
Manconi, Massa and Yasuda (2010) document how the price declines of ABS led to price
declines in corporate bonds. They study mutual funds and find that when the prices of ABS fell,
funds that faced outflows, as investors withdrew, sold corporate bonds. Yield spreads increased
more for corporate bonds where the fund had a higher fraction of the portfolio in ABS, compared

49

to bonds of the same issuer that were held by funds less exposed to ABS. The price declines in
the ABS market due to fire sales led to price declines in the corporate bond market, a contagion.
These papers document aspects of the role of ABS during the crisis, but they are only suggestive
about the social costs related to ABS. There are social costs to crises, but what specifically are
the social costs of securitization? At this point there are some theory papers that suggest that
there are social costs.
Shliefer and Vishny (2010) introduce a model of financial intermediation in which banks
originate loans, but then securitize and trade these loans. They also can borrow using their ABS
as collateral. Banks are profit maximizing, but their activity is driven by investor sentiment,
which they want to cater to. When asset prices are high banks expand their balance sheets. To do
this they borrow short-term, accepting the risk that they may have to sell assets if prices go
down. Security prices can deviate from fundamentals due to the investor sentiment and these
deviations translate into fragility for the banks. Further, this affects real investment because the
banks are making loans. Securitization increases the level of investment, but also its volatility.
The model highlights how capital markets and financial intermediation have changed with
securitization. But, it is not clear what the welfare implications are, because the investor
sentiment is exogenous.
Hanson and Sunderam (2010) focus on the issuance, performance, and information properties of
ABS. In the model, investors must determine initially, once and for all, whether they want to be
informed investors or not. This choice is made before the state of the macroeconomy is known.
Because they expend resources to become informed, they must be compensated for this. After
this choice is made, the state of the macroeconomy is revealed. In the model “good times”
means that the difference in quality between good loan pools and bad loan pools is small (though
the type of each loan pool is not known, except to informed investors).

After the state of the

macroeconomy is realized, lending decisions are made. Following that there is a date when
some investors face liquidity shocks, requiring them to trade. This is a problem for uninformed
investors, as they will face adverse selection. To minimize funding costs originators want to sell
as much information-insensitive ABS as possible. Informed investors earn little in the good state
of the macroeconomy, so this reduces their incentive to become informed ex ante. But, then in
the bad state, there are too few informed investors, and the amount that can be originated is much

50

lower. The key private problem is that the information-production infrastructure must be built
prior to knowing whether the state of the economy is good or bad.
Stein (2011) also builds on the idea that there is a demand for information-insensitive debt. Stein
views this debt as money and assumes that it has a convenience yield. In his model banks
produce as much of this short-term debt as they can because it is cheap financing for loans, due
to the convenience yield. If there is a need to sell loans or assets (to patient investors) to honor
this debt at an interim date, then there is a discount. The patient investor have a fixed amount to
spend at the interim date, and can either make real investments at that date or can buy assets
being sold by banks. Their indifference condition determines the discount, which each bank
takes as given. This discount constrains the amount of safe short-term debt that can be issued. It
imposes a collateral constraint on each bank. (Long-term debt is always risky because the loans
are risky.) There is an externality because when the collateral constraint binds, an increase in
short-term debt by one bank lowers the value of other banks’ collateral; the discount is lowered,
and the patient investors end up making less real investment if banks need to sell assets. The
social planner would prefer less private money and more real investment.
Gorton and Ordoñez (2011) also consider short-term debt backed by collateral, in their case, in
the context of a dynamic production economy. Firms finance themselves by issuing short-term
debt backed by collateral. Collateral is either high or low value, but all firms are of the same
efficient-type.

The issue central to the model concerns whether investors produce costly

information about the collateral or not.

It is not always optimal to produce information.

Collateral value can evolve through time and investors do not know for sure its true quality, but
they have beliefs about its quality.

If information is not produced, and the perceived

(uninformed) value of collateral is high, then more and more firms can borrow. For example, a
firm that has low-value collateral initially can borrow subsequently because the value of its
collateral will in fact evolve such that it can borrow. As this happens firms with low-quality
collateral end up borrowing. There is a credit boom. In fact, first best would be the case where
no information is ever produced. But, short of that the economy can be very fragile because after
a credit boom a small shock can cause investors to produce information or constrain lending.
Endogenously, the economy would select collateral to be complex, such as mortgage-backed
securities.

51

Geanakoplos’ (2009, 2003, 1997) focuses on collateral, which could naturally be interpreted as
ABS.

In Geanakoplos (2009) agents are either optimists or pessimists in a market for assets,

such as houses or mortgages, or ABS. Optimists want to buy and pessimists want to sell.
Collateral and haircuts arise because less optimistic agents must be convinced that the asset is
safe. If bad news arrives, some optimists will have their equity wiped out and so the marginal
buyer is someone who is less optimistic. That means that the effect of the shock is amplified.
Like Shliefer and Vishny (2010), Shin (2009) emphasizes the effects of market prices on the
behavior of financial intermediaries. If the market value of ABS rises, the risk-taking capacity of
the intermediaries can increase and they expand their balance sheets. Shin does not propose a
mechanism for why the market prices rise, or perceived default risk fall, but Adrian and Shin
(2010) provides empirical evidence for the procyclicality of leverage. They show that changes in
dealer bank repos, the main way that leverage is altered, forecasts changes in financial market
risk, as measured by innovations in the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (the
VIX).
8.2. The Federal Reserve and Asset-Backed Securities during the Crisis
Asset-backed securities were at the core of the financial crisis of 2007-2008 because they were,
to a large extent, used as collateral in sale and repurchase agreements (repo) and as the assets
held by asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) conduits. Moreover, repo and ABCP were
sizeable. ABCP peaked at about $1.2 trillion in July 2007. Repo was around $10 trillion (see
Gorton and Metrick (2010a) for a discussion of the size of the repo market). These markets are
two of the larger money markets, that is, short-term debt obligations that serve essentially like
demand deposits in the wholesale market.
In a repo transaction one party deposits/lends money overnight and receives the repo rate. In
addition, bonds are provided as collateral to the depositor/lender. The collateral is valued at
market and is returned to the borrower when the repo matures if it is not rolled over. This
collateral was often ABS, although there are no data to measure the extent of this. Asset-backed
commercial paper conduits are managed vehicles which issue short-term debt to finance longer
term ABS. Conduits have sponsors, which are financial intermediaries, and the sponsors manage
the conduits.

52

When there was a run on repo and on ABCP conduits, the demand for cash led these
intermediaries to sell assets, depressing their prices, leading to further sales, and so on. This is
why the prices of ABS completely unrelated to subprime mortgages fell dramatically. Covitz,
Liang and Suarez (2009), Gorton (2010) and Gorton and Metrick (2010a,c) describe these
dynamics of the crisis.
The financial intermediaries at the center of the crisis were dealer banks (the old investment
banks), not regulated depository institutions.27 The short-term liabilities of dealer banks are not
insured by the government and dealer banks do not have access to the discount window of the
Federal Reserve System. Consequently, the U.S. Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve
System introduced a number of programs, involving hundreds of billions of dollars, in response
to the financial crisis. Several of these programs were either specifically aimed at asset-backed
securities or ABS were eligible to be part of the program. In this subsection we briefly discuss
these programs and their effectiveness. Table 11 lists some of the lending facilities related to
ABS adopted by the Federal Reserve System during the Crisis. Johnson (2010) provides some
detail about each facility.
The Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) was adopted on March 11, 2008 to specifically
address the problem that dealer banks were having with ABS that had become difficult to use as
collateral. The haircuts on this type of collateral were rising. A “haircut” refers to a situation
where the depositor in repo demands overcollateralization for the deposit. For example, if a
deposit of $90 million requires collateral worth $100 million, there is said to be a ten-percent
haircut. Gorton and Metrick (2010a,c) document the increases in haircuts. This facility is
unique in that the dealer borrows U.S. Treasury bonds from the Fed, posting agency bonds, ABS,
or investment-grade corporate bonds as collateral. The exchange is one type of bond for another.
Fleming, Hrung, and Keane (2010a,b) and Hrung and Seligman (2011) describe and analyze the
TSLF.

27

A dealer bank operates as a securities dealer by underwriting and trading publicly registered securities.
“Investment banks” are dealer banks that do not have any depository function. Dealer banks which have been
designated as “primary dealers” engage transact with the Federal Reserve System’s open market desk when it
engages in open market operations.

53

All the other facilities involve posting collateral in exchange for cash (funds). The Primary
Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) was adopted on March 16, 2008 during the extremes of the Bear
Stearns failure and takeover by JP Morgan. The PDCF allows the primary dealers to borrow
cash from the Federal Reserve System on a collateralized basis. The PDCF is akin to the Federal
Reserve’s discount window, which was not available to dealer banks, the institutions at the heart
of the financial crisis. The PDCF exchanges eligible bonds as collateral for cash funds. See
Adrian, Burke and McAndrews (2009) for further details.
The remaining two facilities listed in the table were aimed at alleviating the problems that arose
for the holders of ABCP and the issuers of CP. The Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money
Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF) was created to provide collateralized loans to
depository banks and bank holding companies allowing them to buy ABCP from money market
mutual funds (MMMFs). The AMLF was intended to increase the liquidity of the ABCP market
and also to provide a way for MMMFs to sell their ABCP holdings as they faced runs following
the failure of Lehman Brothers –to avoid “breaking the buck.” See the discussion in DuyganBump at al. (2010).
MMMFs are a very important set of buyers of commercial paper, so when these funds faced
massive redemptions following Lehman Brothers’ demise, issuers faced a problem: there were
few buyers when it came time to roll over their commercial paper. The Commercial Paper
Funding Facility was intended to address this liquidity problem by extending the discount
window to issuers of commercial paper. A special purpose vehicle was created (CPFF LLC) to
purchase 90-day commercial paper from highly rated U.S. issuers and essentially pledge it to the
Federal Reserve System for cash. See Adrian, Kimbrough, and Marchioni (2011).
An important issue concerns whether these special liquidity facilities were effective or not.
There is a small, but burgeoning literature on this topic. The most common approach is a timeseries approach that tries to determine if spreads changed when a program was initiated; see, e.g.,
Fleming, Hrung and Keane (2010a,b), Christensen, Lopez, and Rudebusch (2009), Taylor, John
B., and John C. Williams (2009). An alternative uses cross-sectional variation. For example,
Duygan-Bump at al. (2010) have rich micro data to evaluate the AMLF, and find that it was
successful.

54

The most relevant study is Hrung and Seligman (2011) who study the TSLF in the context of
other programs that increased the amount of U.S. Treasuries outstanding. The TSLF increase the
amount of Treasuries outstanding because it allows other bonds to be used as collateral to borrow
Treasuries. Open market operations exchange cash for Treasuries or vice versa. In addition
there was the Supplementary Financing Program (SFP), introduced on September 17, 2008 – two
days after Lehman’s collapse. The SFP was designed to help the Federal Reserve manage bank
reserves. Reserves had to be drained as cash was building up in the banking system. The
Treasury was also selling debt for budgetary purposes.
Hrung and Seligman focus on the unique feature of the TSLF, in the context of all the various
programs that are changing the overall amount of Treasuries in the economy. The unique feature
of the TSLF is that it did not just provide a way to get cash into the system. It was very specific
in that instead of cash it allowed high-quality collateral to be substituted for low-quality
collateral, i.e., Treasuries for ABS. Hrung and Seligman look at the effect on the spread between
the repo rate when Treasuries are used for collateral (the “general collateral” or GC rate) and the
federal funds rate, using daily data and the daily changes in the TSLF amounts, conditional on all
other programs. Federal funds are uncollateralized transactions while repo is collateralized;
collateralized rates are lower, so this spread is negative.
Their main finding is that an increase in collateral due to the TSLF narrows the fed funds-repo
spread. An increase of $1 billion of Treasury collateral via the TSLF narrows the fed funds-repo
spread by 12 basis points. This is consistent with the notion that the problem was a run on repo
and that dealer banks needed higher quality collateral. The TSLF was a success in this sense.
8.3 Securitization and Monetary Policy
In recent years, an active group of researchers from central banks and international organizations
has begun to explore the impact of securitization on monetary policy. The intuition for an effect
is securitization provides banks with an alternative funding source, and thus may weaken central
banks’ impact on the bank-lending channel.

Researchers have focused on two different

mechanisms: the role of securitization on central bank control of interest rates, and the role of
securitization on the elasticity of interest rates to output, either analyzed directly through timeseries regressions or indirectly through effects on bank lending.

55

Kuttner (2000) is an early paper in this literature, looking for indirect evidence by comparing the
relative growth of securitization and portfolio loans over the business cycle. He finds support for
the hypothesis that these two forms of finance are substitutes in the mortgage market, suggesting
a weakening role for monetary policy. Estrella (2002), another paper out of the New York
Federal Reserve, followed up this work with both direct and indirect evidence and found an
interest-rate elasticity close to zero in recent years, suggesting that any impact of monetary
policy must come from mechanisms beyond the interest rate.
Recent papers have confirmed these results, with evidence that securitization has both
strengthened the direct impact of monetary policy on interest rates while simultaneously
reducing the elasticity of interest rates for output and leaving banks more dependent on capital
markets for funding. Work by Altunbas at al. (2007), Goswami at al. (2009), and Gambacorta
and Marquez-Ibanez (2011) tells a consistent story: with securitization, banks are less reliant on
deposits and buffered against interest-rate shocks, whether or not these shocks are policy-driven.
With banks more reliant on securitization and capital markets, they are more subject to funding
shocks in these markets, thus forcing central banks to take a broader view of “liquidity policy.”
With banks more closely tied to capital markets, monetary policy is more easily translated into
market interest rates, it is just that these rates are less important for bank lending then they used
to be.
Loutskina and Strahan (2006) break the central bank monopoly on this research with a clever
natural experiment to study the role of securitization on bank lending. In the United States, GSE
securitizations are limited to “conforming” mortgages, which have an upper limit above which
loans are classified as “jumbo” and are ineligible for federal insurance. Since jumbo loans have
less liquid secondary markets than do conforming loans, the authors exploit the cutoff between
the two types to investigate the relationship between mortgage lending and bank balance sheets.
They find that asset liquidity and deposit costs are correlated to jumbo lending, but not to
conforming lending. That is, banks that appear illiquid or deposit-funding constrained do not
reduce their mortgage lending when securitization is relatively easy, but do reduce their lending
where securitization is relatively difficult.
Overall, this literature is consistent in finding that securitization has weakened banks reliance on
traditional funding sources and sensitivity to interest-rate shocks. While this buffering by capital

56

markets has some benefits, it has also increased sensitivity to the vagaries of securitization
markets (a harsh lesson during the recent crisis) and likely reduced the efficacy of the traditional
interest-rate policy of central banks. These findings have opened up an important set of policy
questions about the proper evolution of central bank instruments for measurement and control,
and indeed the very meaning of “monetary policy” as distinct from “capital markets policy” and
“financial regulation.”
8.4 The Future of Securitization
The future of securitization is uncertain. Securitization was a very significant source of funding
for mortgages and consumer finance and remains important. It was also an important source of
collateral for repo and ABCP. The sheer size of the securitization market, and its decimation
during the financial crisis, makes the future of this market a question to ponder. The decimation
is clear from Table 2, for example, which shows that credit card ABS issuance fell from almost
$100 billion in 2007 to $7 billion in 2010. And, from Table 3, non-agency residential mortgagebacked securities fell from an issuance amount of $740 billion in 2005 to $12 billion in 2010.
Figure 12 shows the nose dive in issuance for the major categories of asset-backed securities.
Only automobile receivables show some sign of recovery. Of course, part of the failure to
recover for the other categories is the recession. But, the issues are these: Will securitization
come back? On its own? What will happen if it remains a dormant market? As John Dugan, the
then Comptroller of the Currency (February 2, 2010) put it: “ . . . we are at a crossroads: the
collective decisions we make in the next year in an effort to reform and revitalize the
securitization market will have profound consequences for consumer and business credit in the
United States and abroad. . . . I believe we need a vibrant, credible securitization market to help
fund the real economy going forward.”
Despite the prominent role often ascribed to securitization in the recent financial crisis, national
and international regulatory efforts have focused predominantly on traditional financial
institutions in writing new laws and regulations. For example, the proposed Basel III rules,
while addressing the capital requirements of securitization done by banks, is focused on banking
institutions and does not address securitization vehicles themselves. Other international efforts
through the G20 and the Financial Stability Board have spoken of securitization and other
components of the “shadow banking” system, but have not proposed any specific rules. Reform

57

efforts in many European countries are ongoing, but so far there have been no strong regulations
for securitization adopted.
In the United States, the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 is mostly silent on securitization, except for a
still-to-be-finalized “skin-in-the-game” requirement for securitization that would require
originators to maintain some stake in their vehicles. Even this provision has been hotly debated
and fiercely resisted by the industry, with claims that a severe rule could have a major impact on
the cost-of-capital. On this important policy debate, there is no direct research to provide
guidance to regulators, a gap in the literature that badly needs to be filled. It is likely that there
will be a number of changes to how securitization is done. But, it is less clear whether these
changes will foster securitization or repress it. Among other possible changes are alterations to
accounting rules, making it harder to move assets off balance sheet.
While Dodd-Frank did not focus on securitization, the Law did create a council of regulators
with significant power to identify and manage systemic risks. Most importantly, this Financial
Stability Oversight Council has the power to recommend significant changes in regulation, if
such changes are deemed necessary for financial stability. With this authority in mind, Gorton
and Metrick (2010b) propose the creation of “Narrow-Funding Banks” as a mechanism for the
regulation of securitization. Under their proposal, these limited-purpose institutions would be
the only legal conduits for securitization, and their chartering and oversight would provide
regulators with the ability to exercise some control over this part of the shadow banking system.
The main use of oversight would be to give regulators a direct look into a formally dark part of
the financial system, and the main use of control would be to monitor tranches of securitization
so as to minimize regulatory arbitrage.
9. Final Comments and Open Questions
Surprisingly, given the importance of securitization, the most basic questions remain open
questions. Studying securitization offers an opportunity to examine some basic issues in financial
economics and macroeconomics. In this final section we try to spell out some of these issues,
and offer some speculations and hypotheses about them.
Some open questions are:

58

1. Why did securitization arise? Was there innovation? What are the sources of value? These
seem like the most basic and pressing questions. Policy recommendations concerning the
future of securitization depend on the answers to these questions. They also strike at the
heart of the process of financial innovation. How and why does innovation occur? Further,
the view that financial intermediation is most importantly about the creation of bank loans
which have to be held on balance sheet until maturity is inconsistent with selling the loans.
But, banks still make the credit decision and hold the residual. Is that sufficient for incentive
compatibility?
2. The tranching of pools sold to SPVs remains a puzzle. Securitization is about the creation of
mostly low-risk debt. The debt issued by a securitization SPV has no tax advantages and
there are no expected bankruptcy costs associated with ABS. From the point of view of
Modigliani and Miller, no particular capital structure for the SPV would be predicted.
However, securitization appears to maximize the amount of AAA/Aaa debt that is created.
What is the violation of M&M? Is debt optimal because of privately-informed sponsors or is
it because there is a demand for high-quality collateral?
3. The choice of loans to pool and sell to the SPV also remains a puzzle. Existing theories
cannot address why securitized-loan pools are homogeneous – all credit cards or all prime
mortgages, for example. The existing theory suggests that credit card receivables, auto
receivables, mortgages, and so on should be in the same pool - -for diversification, but this
never happens. Nor have any of the theories suggested a prominent role for the lack of trade
of the equity residual. Explaining the structure of securitization appears to have a long way
to go.
4. The contractual nature of securitization also needs more attention. Implicit recourse may be
part of the structure of securitization. Indeed, during the crisis we saw sponsors absorb many
vehicles back onto their balance sheets.

SIVs, ABCP conduits, and credit-card

securitizations were often reabsorbed. But, mortgage securitizations do not appear to be
reabsorbed. There appears to be important variation, depending on the asset class being
securitized. The reasons for this are not known.

59

5. The structure of securitization, that is, the internal workings of the SPV, has received little
attention. The internal allocation of cash flows, amortization structure, triggers, and other
features vary by the asset class being securitized. This is important as market participants are
aware of adverse selection and moral hazard and it is most likely reflected in ABS prices and
structures. But, there is little work on the pricing and structure of securitization.

For

example, little is known about tranche thickness across various asset classes and sponsors.
6. Bankruptcy remoteness has received much more attention (in the legal literature) than
liquidation-efficiency, that is, the living will aspect of the SPV. There are a few examples
(that we know of) where SPVs have been liquidated following the contractual rules, but there
are no studies of the contractual rules, or of their evolution. Because there have not been
legal cases, the examples of liquidation have not surfaced. But, liquidation efficiency may be
an important source of value.
7. The market pricing of ABS, both primary and secondary, are very under-studied. While
there is some evidence of misaligned incentives in forming asset pools, there is little about
whether such pool attributes are priced.

Similarly, it is clear whether the contractual

structure of the ABS bonds is priced. As an important asset class, asset pricing of ABS is
woefully lacking.
8. The legal form of the special purpose vehicle, typically a trust, has not been studied. It is not
clear, for example, that this has always been the legal form of choice for SPVs. It is also not
clear whether there was any innovation with regard to the legal form, which facilitated the
growth of securitization. Many countries other than the U.S. had to pass special legislation to
create tax neutral legal vehicles. But, this international dimension has also not been studied.
9. In fact, little is known about the international cross section of securitization, other than that it
has grown. Whether there is important national variation is not known.
10. Nothing is known about servicers of securitized portfolios or about the contractual
arrangements with servicers. Pooling and servicing contracts govern how loans can or
cannot be renegotiated, for example. This is important because once the sponsor has sold the

60

loan, it is no longer in a position to renegotiate, which is often cited as an important function
of banks.
11. Could securitization evolve further?

For example, why does an SPV need a sponsor?

Couldn’t an SPV contract with an entity for credit decisions to be made, which the SPV then
finances via ABS? That is, what are the limits to unbundling banks?
12. An important asset class securitized in Europe is “whole businesses” – whole business
securitization. In traditional securitization, discussed here, assets are sold to a stand-alone
SPV. In whole-business securitization, the SPV is not an orphan but a member of the
corporate group. Whole business securitization does not involve a specified pool of assets
but the income stream of an entire business or business unit. In the U.S. whole-business
securitization was quite embryonic but growing prior to the crisis. For example, the revenue
generated by franchise agreements and real estate leases created by Dunkin’ Donuts, BaskinRobbins and Togo’s fast food enterprises was securitized.

What are the limits of

securitization?
13. What are the implications of securitization for monetary policy? While there is no consensus
view on the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, all views are some version of how
the central bank affects the pricing and volume of credit instruments, prominently those
created by the traditional banking system. Securitization, repo, and ABCP changed all this.
Securitization seems to create collateral for repo, a kind of private money. Has this had an
effect on the effectiveness of monetary policy?
14. Asset-backed securities were at the core of the financial crisis. Their value as collateral was
questioned, causing runs on repo and ABCP. What is the social calculus as to costs and
benefits of securitization? Can a new regulatory design retain the benefits while minimizing
the costs?

Answering these questions will, in large part, require an interdisciplinary approach involving
scholars of accounting, finance, and law. The institutional and legal details are very important. It
is also clear that answering many of these questions will require much more data collection than

61

has happened to date. The data to address these questions is not obtainable at low cost. It can’t
simply be downloaded. Time to get to work!

62

References
Adrian, T. Shin, H.S. (2010). “Liquidity and Leverage”. Journal of Financial Intermediation 19,
418-437.
Adrian, T., Burke, C., McAndrews, J. (2009). “The Federal Reserve’s Primary Dealer Credit
Facility”. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance
15 (August).
Adrian, T., Kimbrough, K., Marchioni, D. (2011). “The Federal Reserve’s Commercial Paper
Funding Facility”. FRBNY Economic Policy Review (May), 25-39.
Albertazzi, U. Eramo, G., Gambacorta, L.,l Salleo, C. (2011). “Securitization is not that Evil
After All”. Bank for International Settlements, Working Paper No. 341.
Altunbas, Y., Gambacorta, L. Marques, D. (2007). “Securitization and the Bank Lending
Channel”. European Central Bank, Working Paper Series, No. 838.
Ambrose, B., Lacour-Little, M., Sanders, A. (2005). “Does Regulatory Capital Arbitrage,
Reputation, or Asymmetric Information Drive Securitization?”. Journal of Financial
Services Research 28(1), 113-133.
An, X., Deng, Y., Gabriel, S. (2009). “Value Creation through Securitization: Evidence from
the CMBS Market”. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 38, 302-326.
Axelson, U.(2007). “Security Design with Investor Private Information”. Journal of Finance 62,
2587-2632.
Ayotte, K., Gao, S. (2010). “Asset-Backed Securities: Costs and Benefits of ‘Bankruptcy
Remoteness”. Review of Financial Studies 24, 1299-1335.
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) (2007). “New Developments in Clearing and Settlement
Arrangements for OTC Derivatives”. Committee on Payments and Settlements Systems.
Bank for International Settlements, Committee on the Global Financial System (2001). “Collateral
in Wholesale Financial Markets: Recent Trends, Risk Management and Market Dynamics.”
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) (1997). “Real Time Gross Settlement Systems”.
Committee on Payments and Settlements Systems.
Barth, J., Brumbaugh, R.D. Jr., Litan, R.E. (1992). The Future of American Banking (London:
Sharpe).
Barth, J., Brumbaugh, D., Litan, R. (1990). Banking Industry in Turmoil: A Report on the
Condition of the U.S. banking Industry and the Bank Insurance Fund, Report of the

63

Financial Institutions Subcommittee of the House Banking Committee (Washington:
Government Printing Office).
Benmelech, E., Dlugosz, J. (2009). “The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings”. Journal of Monetary
Economics 56, 617-634.
Benmelech, E., Dlugosz, J. Ivashina, V. (2010). “Securitization without Adverse Selection: The
Case of CLOs”. Harvard University, working paper.
Benveniste, L., Singh, M., Wilhelm, W. (1993). “The Failure of Drexel Burnham Lambert:
Evidence on the Implications for Commercial Banks”. Journal of Financial Intermediation,
Vol. 3, p. 104-137.
Berger, A., Kashyap, A. Scalise, J. (1995). “The Transformation of the U.S. Banking Industry:
What a Long, Strange Trip It’s Been”. Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, vol. 2, 55218.
Boyd, J., Gertler, M. (1994). “Are Banks Dead? Or, Are the Reports Greatly Exaggerated?” in
The Declining Role of Banking? (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago).
Boyd, J., Gertler, M. (1993). “U.S. Commercial Banking: Trends, Cycles, and Policy”. in NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1993, edited by Olivier Blanchard and Stanley Fischer (MIT
Press: Cambridge, MA).
Calomiris, C. Mason, J. (2004). “Credit Card Securitization and Regulatory Arbitrage”. Journal
of Financial Services Research 26(1), 5-27.
Carbino, J.,Schorling, W. (2003). “Delaware’s Asset-Backed Securities Facilitation Act: Will the
Act Prevent Recharacterization of a Sale of Receivables in a Seller’s Bankruptcy?”.
Delaware Law Review, Vol. 6, p. 367-400.
Chase Issuance Trust Prospectus (2005). May 12, 2005.
Chase Issuance Trust, Third Amended and Restated Pooling and Servicing Agreement,
December 19, 2007.
Chen, W., Liu, C.C., Ryan, S. (2008). “Characteristics of Securitizations that Determine Issuers’
Retention of the Risks of the Securitized Assets”. The Accounting Review, 83(5), 11811215.
Christensen, J.,Lopez, J., Rudebusch, G. (2009). “Do Central Bank Liquidity Facilities Affect
Interbank Lending Rates?”. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper No.
2009-13.

64

Cook, T., Duffield, J. (1979). “Money Market Mutual Funds: A Reaction to Government
Regulations or a Lasting Financial Innovation?”. Economic Review of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond (July/August), 15-31.
Covitz, D., Liang, N., Suarez, G. (2009). “The Evolution of a Financial Crisis: Panic in the
Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market”. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, working paper.
Cowley, A.,Cummins, D. (2005). “Securitization of Life Insurance Assets and Liabilities”.
Journal of Risk and Insurance 72, 193-226.
Cummins, D. (2004). “Securitization of Life Insurance Assets and Liabilities”. Wharton
Financial Institutions Center, working paper #04-03.
Dang, T.V., Gorton, G., Holmström, B. (2011). “Ignorance and Financial Crises”. working
paper.
Dechow, P., Myers, L., Shakespeare, C. (2009). “Fair Value Accounting and Gains from Asset
Securitizations: A Convenient Earnings Management Tool with Compensation SideBenefits”. University of Michigan, working paper.
Dechow, P., Shakespeare, C. (2009). “Do Managers Use Securitization Volume and Fair Value
Estimates to Hit Earnings Targets?”. The Accounting Review, 84(1), 99–132.
DeMarzo, P. (2005). "The Pooling and Tranching of Securities: A Model of Informed
Intermediation". Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 1-35.
Demarzo, P., Duffie, D. (1999). “A Liquidity-Based Model of Security Design”. Econometrica
67, 65-99.
Downing, C., Jaffee, D. Wallace, N. (2009). “Is the Market for Mortgage-Backed Securities a
Market for Lemons?”. Review of Financial Studies 22, 2457-2494.
Drucker, S., Mayer, C. (2008). “Inside Information and Market Making in Secondary Mortgage
Markets”. Working Paper.
Drucker, S. Puri, M. (2009). “On Loan Sales, Loan Contracting, and Lending Relationships”.
Review of Financial Studies 22, 2835-2872.
Duffie, D., Garleanu, N. (2001). “Risk and Valuation of Collateralized Debt Obligations”.
Financial Analysts Journal 57, 41-59.
Duygan-Bump, B., Parkinson, P., Rosengren, E., Suarez, G., Willen, P. (2010). “How Effective
Were the Federal Reserve Emergency Liquidity Facilities? Evidence from the Asset-

65

Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Facility”. Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston, Quantitative Analysis Unit, Working Paper No. QAU10-3.
Elul, R. (2009). “Securitization and Mortgage Default”. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Working Paper, No. 09-21/R.
Estrella, A. (2002). “Securitization and the Efficacy of Monetary Policy”. Federal Reserve Bank
of New York Economic Policy Review (May), 243-255.
Fender, I., Mitchell, J. (2009). “Incentives and Tranche Retention in Securitization: A Screening
Model”. Bank for International Settlements, Working Paper No. 289.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) (2010). 12 CFR Part 360, RIN 3064-AD55,
“Treatment by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation as Conservator or Receiver of
Financial Assets Transferred by an Insured Depository Institution in Connection with a
Securitization or Participation After September 30, 2010”.
Fleming, M., Hrung, W., Keane, F. (2010a) “Repo Market Effects of the Term Securities
Lending Facility”. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 426.
Fleming, M., Hrung, W. Keane, F. (2010b). “Repo Market Effects of the Term Securities
Lending Facility”. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 100, 591-96.
Friedman, B. (1975), “Regulation Q and the Commercial Loan Market”. Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 7: 277-296.
Gambacorta, L., Marques-Ibanez, D. (2011). “The Bank Lending Channel: Lessons from the
Crisis”. Bank for International Settlements, Working Paper No. 345.
Geanakoplos, J.(2009). “The Leverage Cycle”. NBER Macroeconomic Annual (University of
Chicago Press), edited by Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford.
Geanakoplos, J.(2003). “Liquidity, Default, and Crashes: Endogenous Contracts in General
Equilibrium”. in Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications,
Econometric Society Monographs. Eighth World Conference, 2:170–205 (New York:
Cambridge University Press).
Geanakoplos, J. (1997). “Promises, Promises”. in The Economy as an Evolving Complex System
II, ed. W. Brian Arthur, Steven Durlauf, and David Lane (Reading, MA:
Addison‐Wesley), 285–320.
Gilbert, R.A.(1986). “Requiem for Regulation Q: What it Did and Why it Passed Away”. Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review (February), 22-37.

66

Glaeser, E., Kallal, H. (1997). “Thin Markets, Asymmetric Information, and Mortgage-Backed
Securities”. Journal of Financial Intermediation 6, 64-86.
Goetzmann, W., Newman, F. (2009). “Securitization in the 1920’s”. Yale University, working
paper.
Gorton, G. (2010). Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007. Oxford University Press.
Gorton, G., Metrick, A. (2010a). “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo”. Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
Gorton, G., Metrick, A. (2010b). “Regulating the Shadow Banking System”. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Fall 2010, 261-312.
Gorton, G., Metrick, A. (2010c). “Haircuts”. with Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review
92(6) (November/December 2010).
Gorton, G., Ordoñez, G. (2011). “Collateral Crises”. Yale University, working paper.
Gorton, G., Pennacchi, G.. (1995). "Banks and Loan Sales: Marketing Non-Marketable Assets".
with, Journal of Monetary Economics 35(3), p. 389-411.
Gorton, G., Pennacchi, G. (1989). "Are Loan Sales Really Off-Balance Sheet?" with George
Pennacchi, Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance 4:2 (Spring 1989), p. 125-45.
Gorton, G., Pennacchi, G. (1990). “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation". Journal of
Finance 45, 49-72.
Gorton, G., Rosen, R. (1995). "Corporate Control, Portfolio Choice, and the Decline of Banking".
Journal of Finance, Vol. 50, No. 5 (December 1995): 1377-1420.
Gorton, G., Souleles, N.S. (2006). “Special Purpose Vehicles and Securitization”. chapter in The
Risks of Financial Institutions, edited by Rene Stulz and Mark Carey (University of
Chicago Press; 2006).
Goswami, M., Jobst, A., Long, X. (2009). “An Investigation of Some Macro-Financial Linkages
of Securitization”. International Monetary Fund, Working Paper, No. WP/09/26.
Greenbaum, S. Thankor, A. (1987). “Bank Funding Modes: Securitization versus Deposits”.
Journal of Banking and Finance 11, 379-401.
Gyntelberg, J. , Remolona, E. (2006). “Securitization in Asia and the Pacific: implications for
Liquidity and Credit Risks”. Bank for International Settlements Quarterly Review (June),
65-75.
Han, J. , Park, K., Pennacchi, G. (2010). “Corporate Taxes and Securitization”. University of
Illinois, working paper.

67

Hannan, T., Berger, A. (1991). “The Rigidity of Prices: Evidence from the Banking Industry”.
American Economic Review, 81, 938-945.
Hansmann, H., Kraakman, R., Squire, R. (2005). “The New Business Entities in Evolutionary
Perspective”. University of Illinois Law Review, Vol. 2005, 5-14.
Hannsmann, H., Mattei, U. (1998). “The Functions of Trust Law: A Comparative Legal and
Economic Analysis”. New York University Law Review 73, 434-479.
Hanson, S., Sunderam, A. (2010). “Are There Too Many Safe Securities? Securitization and the
Incentives for Information Production”. Harvard University, working paper.
Higgins, E., Mason, J. (2004). “What is the Value of Recourse to Asset-Backed Securities? A
Clinical Study of Credit Card Banks”. Journal of Banking and Finance, 28, 875-899.
Hördahl, P. King, M. (2008). “Developments in Repo Markets During the Financial Turmoil”.
Bank for International Settlements Quarterly Review (December), 37-53.
Hrung, W. Seligman, J. (2011). “Responses to the Financial Crisis, Treasury Debt, and the
Impact on Short-Term Money Markets”. New York Federal Reserve Bank, working
paper.
Hurley, E. (1977). “The Commercial Paper Market”. Federal Reserve Bulletin 63: 525-536.
International Swaps and Derivatives Association (2009). “ISDA Margin Survey 2009”.
James, C. (1983). “An Analysis of Intra-Industry Differences in the Effect of Regulation: The Case
of Deposit Rate Ceilings”. Journal of Monetary Economics 12: 417-432.
Jayarante, J., Strahan, P. (1997). “The Benefits of Branching Deregulation”. Federal Reserve Bank
of New York Economic Policy Review 3: 13-29.
Jiang, W., Nelson, A., Vytlacil, E. (2010). “Securitization and Loan Performance: A Contrast of
Ex Ante and Ex Post Realtions in the Mortgage Market”. Columbia University, working
paper.
Johnson, C. (2010). “Exigent and Unusual Circumstances: The Federal Reserve and the U.S.
Financial Crisis”. European Business Organization Law Review, forthcoming.
Jones, S., Moret, L., Storey, J. (1988). “The Massachusetts Business Trust and Registered
Investment Companies”. Delaware Journal of Business Law 13, 421-458.
Karaoglu, N. E. (2004). “Regulatory Capital and Earnings Management in Banks: The Case of
Loan Sales and Securitizations”. University of Southern California, working paper.

68

Keeley, M. (1990). “Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market power in Banking”. American Economic
Review 80(5), 1183-1200.
Keeley, M. (1985). “Bank Entry and Deregulation”. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Weekly Letter (August 23, 1985).
Keeley, M., Zimmerman, G. (1985). “Competition for Money Market Deposit Accounts”. Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review 2: 3-27.
Keeley, M., Zimmerman, G. (1984). “Competition for Money Market Deposit Accounts”. Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Weekly Letter (July 13, 1984).
Keys, B.J., Mukherjee, T., Seru, A., Vig, V. (2010). “Did Securitization Lead to Lax
Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, p.
307-362.
Keys, B.J., Mukherjee, T., Seru, A., Vig, V. (2019). “Financial Regulation and Securitization:
Evidence from Subprime Loans”. Journal of Monetary Economics 56, p. 700-720.
Klee, K., Butler, B. (2002). “Asset-Backed Securitization, Special Purpose Vehicles and Other
Securitization Issues”. Uniform Commercial Code Law Review, 35(2), 23-67.
Kuttner, K. (2000). “Securitization and Monetary Policy”. Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
working paper.
Langbein, J.H. (2007). “Why Did Trust Law Become Statute Law in the United States?”
Alabama Law Review 58(5), 1069-1082.
Langbein, J. (1995). “The Contractarian Basis of the Law of Trusts”. Yale Law Journal 105, 625675.
Leland, H. Pyle, D. (1977). ‘‘Information Asymmetries, Financial Structure and Financial
Intermediaries’’. Journal of Finance, 32, 371–387.
Levmore, S. (2005). “Uncorporations and the Delaware Strategy”. University of Illinois Law
Review, Vol. 2005, No. 1, 195-208.
Longstaff, F. A., Rajan, A. (2008). “An Empirical Analysis of the Pricing of Collateralized Debt
Obligations”. Journal of Finance 63, 529-563.
Loutskina, E.(2010). “The Role of Securitization in Bank Liquidity and Funding
Management”.Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Loutskina, E., Strahan, P. (2006). “Securitization and the Declining Impact of Bank Finance on
Loan Supply: Evidence from Mortgage Originations”. Journal of Finance 64(2), 861-889.

69

Manconi, A., Massa, M., Yasuda, A. (2010). “The Role of Institutional Investors in Propagating
the Crisis of 2007-2008”. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
McConnell, J., Buser, S. (2011). “The Origins and Evolution of the Market for Mortgage-Backed
Securities”. Annual Review of Financial Economics 3, forthcoming.
Memorandum of Opinion, In re: General Growth Properties, Inc., No. 09-11977 (Bank. S.D.N.Y.
Aug. 11, 2009)
Minton, B., Sanders, A., Strahan, P. (2004). “Securitization by Banks and Finance Companies:
Efficient Financial Contracting or Regulatory Arbitrage?” Ohio State University, working
paper.
Moody’s Investors Service (2011). “Semi-Annual Performance Statistics Update: 2010H2”.
Special Comment, February 14, 2011.
Moody’s Investors Service (2010a). “Corporate Default and Recovery Rates, 1920-2010”.
Special Comment, February 28, 2011.
Moody’s Investors Service (2010b). “Default and Loss Rates of Structured Finance Securities:
1993-2009”. Special Comment, September 24, 2010.
Moody’s Investors Service (2003). “The Fundamentals of Asset-Backed Commercial Paper”.
Structured Finance Special Report, February 3, 2003.
Moody’s Investors Service (2002). “An Introduction to Structured Investment Vehicles”.
International Structured Finance Special Report, January 25, 2002.
Nadauld, T., Weisbach, M. (2011). “Did Securitization Affect the Cost of Corporate Debt?”
Ohio State University, Dice Center Working Paper No. 2010-16
Neumark, D. Sharpe, S. (1992). “Market Structure and the Nature of Price Rigidity: Evidence
from the Market for Consumer Deposits”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 107, no.
2, 657-680.
Park, S.Y.(2011). “The Design of Subprime Mortgage-Backed Securities and Information
Insensitivity”. Yale University, working paper.
Peltzman, S.(1965). “Entry into Commercial Banking”. Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 8,
11-50.
Pennacchi, G. (1988). “Loan Sales and the Cost of Bank Capital”. Journal of Finance XLIII, 375396.
Ribstein, L.(1992). “The Deregulation of Limited Liability and the Death of Partnership”.
Washington University Law Quarterly 70, 417-475.

70

Riddiough, T. (1997). “Optimal Design and Governance of Asset-Backed Securities”. Journal of
Financial Intermediation 6, 121-152.
Rutledge, T., Habbart, E. (2010). “The Uniform Statutory Trust Entity Act: A Review”. The
Business Lawyer 65, 1056-1103.
Scatigna, M., Tovar, C. (2007), “Securitization in Latin America”. Bank for International
Settlements Quarterly Review (September), 71-82.
Scholtes, S., Guerrera, F. (2009). “Banks Come to the Aid of Card Securitization Vehicles”.
Financial Times, June 25, 2009.
Schwarcz, S. (2003). “Commercial Trusts as Business Organizations: Unraveling the Mystery”.
The Business Lawyer 58, 559-585.
Schwarcz, S. (2002). “The Impact of Bankruptcy Reform on ‘True Sale’ Determination in
Securitization Transactions”. Fordham Journal of Corporate & Financial Law, Vol. 7, p.
353-365.
Shin, H.S. (2009). “Securitization and Financial Stability”. Economic Journal 119, 309-332.
Shleifer, A. Vishny, R. (2010). “Unstable Banking”. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Sitkoff, R. (2011). “The Economic Structure of Fiduciary Law”. Boston University Law Review
91, 1039-1049.
Sitkoff, R. (2005). “Trust as ‘Unincorporation’: A Research Agenda”. University of Illinois Law
Review 2005, 31-47.
Singh, M., Aitken, J. (2009). “Deleveraging after Lehman – Evidence from Reduced
Rehypothecation”. International Monetary Fund, Working Paper, WP/09/42.
Standard and Poor’s (2002). U.S. Legal Criteria for “Recycled”. Special Purpose Entities.
Standard and Poor’s (2011a). “Global Structured Finance Default Study—1978-2010: Credit
Trends Started to Improve in 2010, but RMBS Faces Challenges”. March 28, 2011.
Standard and Poor’s (2011b). “2010 Annual Global Corporate Default Study and Rating
Transitions”. March 30, 2011.
Standard and Poor’s (2007). “Structured Investment Vehicles: Under Stormy Skies, An Updated
Look at the Weather”. Ratings Direct, August 30, 2007.
Standard and Poor’s (2003). “Structured Investment Vehicle Criteria: New Developments”.
September 4, 2003.

71

Stark, R. (2002). “Viewing the LTV Steel ABS Opinion in its Proper Context”. Journal of
Corporation Law 27: 211-230.
Stein, J.(2011). “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation”. Harvard University, working
paper.
Taggart, R. (1990). "Corporate Leverage and the Restructuring Movement of the 1980s". Business
Economics 25, 12-18.
Taggart, R. (1988a). “The Growth of the ‘Junk’ Bond Market and its Role in Financing
Takeovers”. in A.J. Auerbach, ed., Mergers and Acquisitions, University of Chicago Press,
1988.
Taggart, R. (1988b). “The Growing Role of Junk Bonds in Corporate Finance”. (with Kevin J.
Perry), Continental Bank Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 1, 37-45.
Taylor, J.B., Williams, J.C. (2009). “A Black Swan in the Money Market". American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 1, 58-83.
Thomas, H.(2001). “Effect of Asset Securitization on Seller Claimants”. Journal of Financial
Intermediation, 10(3), 306-330.
U.S. Treasury (2010), Report on Foreign Portfolio Holdings of U.S. Securities.
Vermilyea, T., Webb, E. Kish, A. (2008). “Implicit Recourse and Credit Card Securitizations:
What do Fraud Losses Reveal?” Journal of Banking and Finance 32, 1198-1208.

72
Table 1: U.S. Asset‐Backed Securities Outstanding ($ billions)

Year
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

Auto1
0.9
10.5
14.3
13.6
14.6
19.4
27.4
37.0
42.9
41.0
54.8
69.8
82.7
90.9
110.6
133.1
187.9
221.7
234.5
232.1
219.7
202.4
198.5
137.7
135.9
126.9

Credit
Card2
2.5
9.4
20.3
42.7
59.5
71.2
75.2
98.3
130.0
167.1
190.8
199.4
215.4
306.3
361.9
397.9
401.9
390.7
356.7
339.9
347.8
314.1
292.0
205.8

Equipment3
0.3
0.7
0.4
0.3
0.1
0.5
0.9
1.8
4.6
5.2
5.1
10.2
14.6
19.2
21.6
25.0
22.8
18.2
20.4
22.0
24.2
28.2
27.8
19.4
16.5
13.8

Home
Equity4

Manufactured
Housing

2.2
7.3
15.8
16.6
17.9
22.8
31.5
57.1
102.2
141.6
329.5
151.5
185.1
286.5
346.0
454.0
551.1
581.2
585.6
395.5
320.0
276.9

0.2
2.5
3.4
4.3
4.8
6.7
8.0
10.8
16.1
22.1
28.6
36.2
46.3
50.2
50.7
47.4
38.9
33.8
29.2
25.4
22.3
20.0
17.9
16.5

Student
Loans

Other

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.8
3.4
6.5
14.3
25.9
31.5
36.4
41.1
60.2
74.4
99.2
115.2
153.2
183.6
243.9
239.5
246.1
248.4

0.5
2.1
1.5
1.4
1.1
2.6
4.4
8.8
12.3
23.7
46.7
114.8
163.6
377.9
420.6
500.0
547.4
571.6
615.8
766.3
1,041.9
1,545.6
1,400.5
1,263.4

Total
1.2
11.3
18.0
27.9
41.9
75.6
109.7
136.2
154.0
190.4
256.3
364.4
491.5
633.7
923.4
1,085.1
1,289.2
1,546.1
1,688.3
1,819.4
1,949.9
2,127.0
2,472.4
2,671.8
2,428.9
2,150.2

1. Auto includes truck loans and wholesale auto receivables, and as of 2008 include floorplans,
motorcycles, rentals, and recreational vehicles. Prior years have not been revised to include these
categories yet.
2. Credit Cards include charge cards.
3. Equipment does not include aircraft leases.
4. Home Equity contains both 1st and junior lien home equity loans and lines of credit, subprime, small
balance issues and servicing rights; these numbers do not overlap with mortgage‐related issuance in
other SIFMA statistics.
Sources: Bloomberg, Dealogic, Fitch Ratings, Moody's, prospectus filings, Standard and Poor's, Thomson
Reuters, compiled by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association.

73

Table 2: U.S. Asset‐Backed Securities Issuance ($ millions)

Year
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

Auto1
33,223.00
36,442.00
39,504.30
43,000.10
67,468.30
70,175.90
88,764.30
75,988.40
66,909.20
84,945.70
81,926.10
74,103.80
36,164.20
62,748.00
57,856.96

Credit
Card2
48,736.80
40,570.90
43,070.00
40,676.80
57,143.30
68,618.40
70,336.90
66,730.90
53,742.30
67,833.50
66,899.00
99,527.20
59,059.50
46,094.50
7,433.34

Equipment3
12,391.20
8,321.80
10,142.80
12,527.30
11,464.90
8,499.60
6,419.50
9,451.40
8,462.80
10,442.80
8,777.60
5,768.90
3,070.30
7,655.10
7,624.57

Home
Equity4
36,157.80
65,723.80
83,952.80
74,814.60
74,402.30
112,209.50
150,774.60
229,074.20
425,029.10
460,494.30
483,913.10
216,890.20
3,815.70
2,070.40
3,506.90

Manufactured
Housing
8,117.70
9,581.10
11,893.70
15,009.60
11,277.30
7,149.90
4,619.50
399.20
368.90
439.90
200.60
413.00
307.80

Student
Loans
8,047.50
12,563.90
10,229.20
11,092.90
18,562.00
14,883.90
27,739.90
42,993.00
48,042.80
63,239.60
67,129.20
61,370.90
28,204.00
22,095.90
17,719.10

Other
20,081.60
28,862.80
48,312.10
38,976.60
41,148.80
44,668.40
25,247.90
36,905.20
48,976.20
66,119.60
45,030.30
51,658.30
8,870.20
10,249.50
13,353.27

Total
166,755.60
202,066.30
247,104.90
236,097.90
281,466.90
326,205.60
373,902.60
461,542.30
651,531.30
753,515.40
753,875.90
509,732.30
139,491.70
150,913.40
107,494.14

1. Auto includes truck loans and wholesale auto receivables, and as of 2008 include floorplans,
motorcycles, rentals, and recreational vehicles. Prior years have not been revised to include these
categories yet.
2. Credit Cards include charge cards.
3. Equipment does not include aircraft leases.
4. Home Equity contains both 1st and junior lien home equity loans and lines of credit, subprime,
small balance issues and servicing rights; these numbers do not overlap with mortgage‐related
issuance in other SIFMA statistics.
Sources: Bloomberg, Dealogic, Fitch Ratings, Moody's, prospectus filings, Standard and Poor's, Thomson
Reuters, compiled by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association.

74

Table 3: U.S. Mortgage‐Related Securities Issuance1
(USD billions)

4

1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

Agency
427.1
508.9
923.6
846.0
558.3
1,451.0
1,985.5
2,661.8
1,347.2
1,285.4
1,179.4
1,420.3
1,317.1
2,029.8
1,707.3

FDIC/NCUA

21.3

3

Non-Agency2
CMBS
RMBS
12.8
39.8
14.0
54.6
66.1
128.4
48.4
91.1
43.9
57.8
63.7
149.3
50.0
247.6
72.3
350.2
93.5
438.4
156.7
740.2
183.8
725.6
229.2
536.7
12.8
32.4
0.7
9.2
6.2
12.1

Total
479.7
577.6
1,118.1
985.4
660.0
1,663.9
2,283.0
3,084.3
1,879.0
2,182.4
2,088.8
2,186.2
1,362.2
2,039.7
1,746.8

1. Includes GNMA, FNMA, FHLMC mortgage‐backed securities, CMOs, private‐label MBS/CMOs. Does
not include certain subprime categories, which are included in the Home Equity category of ABS.
2. Non‐agency includes CMBS and RMBS, and may include re‐REMICs.
3. FDIC transactions are structured transactions backed by assets of failed banks and may include non‐
mortgage related collateral; NCUA transactions are structured transactions backed by assets of
failed credit unions and may include non‐mortgage related collateral.
4. Agency transactions include both single and multifamily MBS and CMOs.
Sources: FDIC, GSEs, Thomson Reuters, Bloomberg, compiled by the Securities Industry and Financial
Markets Association.

Table 4: European Securitization Outstanding, USD millions

Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

Auto

481.02
481.02
481.02
984.37
923.64
1,570.17
3,832.33
5,128.54
8,989.30
17,775.95
19,179.07
23,950.40
24,192.43
30,933.87
42,170.51
51,154.83
57,473.83
50,533.15

Asset-Backed Securities
Credit
Consumer
Cards
Leases

30.02
682.00
1,260.70
1,640.20
3,218.60
5,326.76
6,433.37
11,755.78
16,550.78
23,923.25
20,381.68
19,878.43
30,169.52
37,960.65
63,480.73
75,267.65
68,616.33

41.78
184.28
210.15
1,925.31
3,314.93
6,913.59
8,765.41
14,213.46
19,678.51
26,188.06
37,251.67
37,881.34
29,995.65
34,904.96
29,471.55
23,906.15

520.12
4,369.26
11,197.63
13,538.00
21,247.12
27,557.15
30,604.96
28,579.48
39,958.75
43,072.38
36,208.36

CDO

Mortgage-Backed Securities

Other

CDO

CMBS

Mixed

6.63
340.23
1,277.90
1,446.57
3,537.14
8,334.43
10,156.07
22,738.88
32,360.71
37,542.79
49,994.63
70,313.70
93,936.84
94,899.99
86,500.70
88,398.39
79,267.49

431.28
519.05
4,768.55
10,630.32
24,924.42
63,163.35
79,547.61
101,357.36
129,946.09
171,330.24
236,561.81
294,132.04
379,601.92
356,292.25
311,593.66

42.44
532.54
1,741.69
2,424.60
6,905.82
21,780.89
32,935.87
46,878.05
53,593.56
60,156.49
86,192.88
129,597.10
163,343.54
158,169.17
161,426.47
156,069.87

895.68
902.09
776.88
2,683.92
3,182.91
4,781.45
4,021.60
4,586.91
5,632.75
7,620.29
12,250.00
23,081.98
21,273.28

RMBS
179.25
179.25
481.36
854.53
1,839.90
2,427.75
3,271.44
8,822.80
19,505.18
40,258.38
73,134.57
138,147.28
211,305.17
307,510.35
398,603.98
506,935.79
712,048.42
1,068,671.74
1,667,348.49
1,777,379.86
1,686,223.43

SME

Whole Business

SME

Other

Pubs

3,391.61
4,843.39
18,857.35
25,213.14
31,684.90
40,480.77
70,017.82
88,802.13
157,538.23
189,769.88
221,706.21
226,182.45

51.14
1,161.88
2,128.58
3,038.79
8,236.96
15,166.79
23,266.92
25,839.30
26,955.42
29,149.82
31,276.14
30,938.99
30,556.30
35,379.24

677.94
2,513.27
2,944.14
3,063.95
6,666.84
11,339.37
11,985.85
14,333.60
15,856.63
15,347.37
15,052.19
14,479.19
14,219.32

Total
179.25
179.25
481.36
1,335.55
2,357.57
4,015.23
7,942.51
15,355.24
39,685.05
87,538.53
160,594.75
323,707.30
480,059.03
647,395.54
812,795.96
1,059,546.05
1,441,175.19
1,971,535.64
2,729,130.60
2,878,606.08
2,709,472.72

Sources: AFME & SIFMA Members, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, prospectus filings, Fitch Ratings, Moody's, S&P, AFME & SIFMA, compiled by
the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association.

76

Table 5: European Securitization Issuance, USD millions

Year
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

Auto

Asset-Backed Securities
Credit
Consumer
Cards
Leases

CDO

Mortgage-Backed Securities

Other

CDO

CMBS

6.63
336.24
962.51
259.59
2,275.99
5,317.65
2,904.41
13,559.46
12,362.61
9,209.56
18,658.94
27,831.69
32,885.76
11,895.99
4,957.10
16,324.98
2,787.11

431.28
242.95
4,705.47
7,664.50
17,227.72
40,522.19
20,857.00
24,659.24
41,242.11
51,016.84
81,004.35
82,677.01
125,863.27
53,911.21
38,802.04

42.44
492.22
1,262.57
780.25
4,663.61
15,720.32
12,021.02
17,472.69
9,944.05
15,388.41
41,762.96
65,002.52
59,356.52
8,674.79
18,664.57
8,019.94

Mixed

481.02

503.35
420.29
1,151.76
2,690.56
1,909.17
6,077.02
11,244.78
4,680.37
9,530.89
7,956.32
14,668.18
19,259.22
18,886.13
19,769.34
18,847.18

30.02
651.99
578.70
379.50
1,594.33
2,516.16
2,254.17
6,022.94
5,882.14
12,260.42
2,490.38
3,857.64
15,963.78
11,432.14
35,957.83
20,306.32
9,649.21

41.78
142.50
25.88
1,715.15
1,389.63
3,711.88
1,948.35
6,495.86
6,983.19
6,587.57
13,535.44
3,189.93
597.34
15,823.95
795.37
7,584.18

520.12
3,849.14
6,828.38
2,946.45
10,971.33
8,747.60
8,566.69
5,572.24
18,548.60
11,304.14
2,459.29

942.92
117.58
2,065.79
1,018.75
1,959.40
56.00
1,540.20
2,177.68
3,535.83
7,864.86
12,237.00
841.44

RMBS
302.11
373.18
1,061.26
827.83
1,098.60
5,946.11
13,257.01
25,782.32
39,501.19
74,845.21
91,236.15
132,379.90
143,099.49
181,633.91
306,371.78
503,777.07
790,743.24
295,817.99
367,921.12

SME1

Whole Business

SME

Other

Pubs

59.90
1,118.59
973.61
917.22
5,218.29
6,986.62
8,310.95
3,364.89
2,318.23
2,411.24
6,547.62

677.94
1,835.34
430.86
183.09
3,614.52
4,728.26
1,949.53
3,306.75
2,572.38
484.01

3,391.61
1,451.78
14,075.12
10,809.64
10,025.34
14,501.26
39,452.63
31,545.18
92,261.25
67,690.98
83,711.77
52,101.48

1,815.88
5,904.89

Total
302.11
854.20
1,097.90
1,900.28
4,209.16
8,596.78
28,219.43
56,342.56
86,548.83
180,387.62
194,809.14
228,087.11
267,840.81
382,960.22
566,359.48
797,396.25
1,095,010.76
534,658.57
514,917.88

1. SME: Small and Medium Enterprises
2. WBS: Whole Business Securitization. Certain WBS structures may be bucketed in other categories (ABS and CMBS) based on the nature
of the transaction and are evaluated on a case by case basis.
Sources: AFME & SIFMA Members, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, prospectus filings, Fitch Ratings, Moody's, S&P, AFME & SIFMA, compiled by
the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association.

77

Table 6: European Securitization Issuance, USD millions

United
Kingdom

Total

1992

302.11

302.11

1993

854.20

854.20

522.18

282.26

1,097.90

272.11

153.54

1,900.28

484.41

1,002.17

4,209.16

730.17

1,430.35

8,596.78

244.44

3,301.71

9,308.87

28,219.43

Year

Belgium

France

1994

293.46

1995

612.90

Germany

Greece

Ireland

Italy

Multinational1

Netherlands

161.79

Other1

PanEurope3

363.70
79.52

Portugal

Russian
Federation

336.24

382.90

Spain

1996

718.96

1,541.21

1997

1,544.83

3,197.98

1998

1,796.63

3,265.25

3,240.31

1999

821.58

5,665.23

9,167.09

1,213.93

1,537.29

2,581.53

5,951.09

721.10

378.35

1,111.69

7,095.42

20,098.25

56,342.56

2000

213.55

2,168.10

5,103.10

624.41

1,538.63

8,838.41

12,758.42

5,449.88

3,018.25

1,306.94

419.70

7,319.19

37,790.26

86,548.83

2001

5,881.06

5,299.04

509.11

2,624.98

35,489.88

41,361.93

20,947.22

7,278.26

3,199.92

3,809.73

10,694.91

43,291.59

180,387.62

2002

7,610.54

10,208.97

43,738.14

19,519.76

24,357.53

2,670.87

7,595.05

4,588.27

20,608.26

53,911.75

194,809.14

33,543.10

21,917.67

28,139.04

6,911.93

1,552.28

13,039.20

28,524.63

75,399.77

228,087.11

35,660.61

38,214.40

19,639.22

2,756.41

3,257.80

9,576.12

1,550.00

40,064.24

97,658.22

267,840.81

1,693.44
583.60

1,678.05

793.82

3,827.84

1,040.81

816.15

2003

2,778.10

7,173.29

7,007.01

423.04

2004

2,482.51

7,693.47

8,366.30

921.53

2005

586.10

4,027.72

27,649.62

2,770.65

2,042.95

33,935.67

57,861.65

49,645.54

5,382.40

4,645.77

9,127.54

391.88

50,801.11

134,091.61

382,960.22

2006

2,943.66

9,029.52

45,740.07

4,475.50

13,140.88

42,442.28

79,965.39

51,747.80

4,940.68

16,632.89

7,942.57

5,096.01

86,493.15

195,769.06

566,359.48

2007

5,715.55

7,645.27

27,870.90

7,488.24

21,216.03

47,889.74

75,293.50

173,590.67

11,778.01

34,058.36

12,088.45

2,988.44

157,601.53

212,171.54

797,396.25

2008

69,465.12

16,164.84

92,433.25

16,686.68

50,876.46

137,387.27

58,778.16

105,918.61

10,889.72

29,175.14

21,943.99

7,172.55

146,762.32

331,356.66

1,095,010.76

2009

33,730.83

8,258.72

19,926.81

30,248.41

19,222.35

93,928.48

38,985.31

58,335.61

650.00

29,278.32

18,591.08

4,061.95

84,224.56

95,216.12

534,658.57

2010

23,037.77

12,058.18

18,164.42

1,295.28

8,745.23

21,123.60

998.95

190,263.41

3,886.09

3,464.96

22,710.55

201.90

70,837.14

138,130.40

514,917.88

1. "Multinational" contains collateral from multiple and/or unknown countries; most CDOs are bucketed in this group.
2. "Other" countries include countries too small to be displayed: Austria, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, the Channel Islands, Hungary, Iceland,
Poland, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, and the United States.
3. "PanEurope" collateral consists of collateral predominantly sourced from multiple European countries.
Sources: AFME & SIFMA Members, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, prospectus filings, Fitch Ratings, Moody's, S&P, AFME & SIFMA.

Table 7: Major Securitized Asset Classes
Aircraft leases
Auto loans (prime)
Auto loans (subprime)
Auto leases
Commercial real estate
Computer leases
Consumer loans
Credit card receivables
Equipment leases
Equipment loans
Franchise loans
Future flows receivables
Healthcare receivables
Health club receivables
Home equity loans
Intellectual property cash flows
Insurance receivables
Motorcycle loans
Music royalties

Source: Rating agency reports.

Manufactured housing loans
Mortgages (prime)
Mortgages (alt‐A)
Mortgages (subprime)
Mortgages (commercial)
RV loans
Small business loans
Stranded utility costs
Student loans
Trade receivables
Time share loans
Tax liens
Taxi medallion loans
Viatical settlements
Whole businesses

79

Table 8: S & P Global Structured Finance Cumulative Default Rates Conditional on Survival, 1978‐2010
(%; standard errors in parentheses)
ABS
1-yr
0.12
(0.11)
0.64
AA
(0.27)
0.64
A
(0.58)
1.46
BBB
(1.28)
3.41
BB
(12.41)
8.18
B
(5.12)
CCC/C 40.59
(17.25)
Invest- 0.56
grade
(0.49)
18.35
Specgrade
(11.76)
4.45
All
(3.00)
Rating
AAA

Corp
1-yr
0.03
(0.20)
0.07
(0.12)
0.19
(0.21)
0.70
(0.60)
2.83
(2.32)
10.40
(5.69)
36.79
(13.97)
0.13

ABS
3-yr
0.14
(0.39)
0.15
(0.19)
0.33
(0.27)
1.19
(0.88)
5.03
(3.39)
15.22
(6.93)
42.12
(13.61)
7.28

Corp
3-yr
0.17
(0.60)
0.20
(0.45)
0.42
(0.37)
1.21
(0.74)
5.47
(3.19)
15.78
(6.77)
45.51
(14.75)
0.59

ABS
5-yr
1.98
(0.05)
13.75
(1.18)
13.75
(0.85)
22.79
(3.81)
31.85
(12.32)
48.31
(8.81)
69.25
(24.09)
10.55

Corp
5-yr
0.38
(0.59)
0.37
(0.36)
0.68
(0.44)
2.43
(1.32)
9.04
(4.64)
21.76
(8.10)
47.64
(14.05)
1.21

ABS
7-yr
2.15
(0.06)
14.80
(1.23)
14.80
(1.37)
25.18
(4.91)
35.66
(16.56)
54.63
(9.92)
72.84
(25.03)
11.30

Corp
7-yr
0.56
(0.75)
0.58
(0.56)
1.15
(0.54)
3.59
(1.59)
12.48
(4.78)
25.82
(7.33)
49.72
(12.70)
1.83

ABS
10-yr
2.38
(0.07)
15.57
(1.30)
15.57
(1.47)
26.70
(5.62)
38.28
(17.51)
58.59
(9.37)
75.30
(24.27)
11.78

Corp
10-yr
0.79
(0.83)
0.82
(0.72)
1.84
(0.77)
5.22
(1.57)
16.54
(4.24)
29.94
(5.97)
52.88
(10.47)
2.68

(0.12)
4.36

(2.58)
38.71

(0.41)
12.17

(0.70)
48.51

(0.61)
17.48

(0.75)
52.79

(0.69)
21.13

(0.72)
55.64

(0.84)
25.16

(2.80)
1.61
(1.06)

(7.65)
13.84
(3.08)

(5.61)
4.60
(2.40)

(7.89)
17.72
(1.23)

(6.41)
6.79
(2.88)

(8.65)
19.97
(1.30)

(5.61)
8.38
(2.68)

(6.53)
19.69
(1.10)

(4.07)
10.18
(2.39)

Source: Standard and Poor’s (2011a,b).

80
Table 9: Cumulative Impairment and Default Rates

Rating
Aaa
Aa
A
Baa
Ba
B
Caa-C
Investgrade
Specgrade
All

U.S. ABS Cumulative Impairment Rates, excluding Subprime ABS, 1993-2009 (%)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0.02
0.05
0.15
0.28
0.39
0.54
0.95
1.41
1.79
0.71
1.93
3.26
4.77
6.27
7.63
8.98
10.69
12.47
0.42
1.27
2.30
3.31
4.42
5.86
6.74
7.62
8.40
1.61
4.23
7.49
10.71
15.88
22.45
28.98
33.77
36.45
8.68
18.64
26.82
37.03
45.53
55.05
61.21
65.59
70.77
13.22
22.69
31.18
39.42
50.51
57.97
59.56
61.62
64.62
30.07
48.50
63.05
78.29
90.52
95.26
NA
NA
NA
0.31
0.87
1.59
2.36
3.36
4.57
5.81
6.99
7.93
13.09

24.30

0.88

33.69

44.38

54.24

62.20

66.28

69.39

1.92
3.06
4.29
5.61
6.94
8.21
9.41
U.S. Subprime ABS, Cumulative Impairment Rates, 1993-2009 (%)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0.74
2.18
3.09
3.24
3.27
3.29
3.30
3.32
6.70
19.76
26.46
27.73
27.91
28.09
28.28
28.39
8.62
25.34
35.09
38.98
40.69
42.42
44.22
45.47
15.12
33.38
46.90
55.50
60.60
62.84
64.34
65.23
31.23
47.25
58.50
64.53
67.17
68.93
70.30
71.47
61.03
66.80
71.35
74.94
77.60
79.35
80.54
81.42
93.32
95.02
95.94
96.69
97.37
98.15
98.43
98.82
3.92
10.75
15.46
17.67
18.72
19.44
19.93
20.24

10
1.99
14.58
8.85
38.82
70.77
66.03
8.80

73.22

73.63

10.39

11.24

Rating
9
10
3.33
3.37
Aaa
28.53
28.81
Aa
46.32
47.50
A
66.13
66.88
Baa
72.57
73.97
Ba
82.51
83.82
B
99.22
99.22
Caa-C
20.53
20.66
Investgrade
49.16
59.90
67.60
72.13
74.51
76.13
77.29
78.26
79.26
80.47
Specgrade
6.81
13.93
18.92
21.41
22.66
23.53
24.15
24.58
24.99
25.48
All
Average Cumulative Issuer-Weighted Global Default Rates, Corporates, 1970-2010 (%)
Rating
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0.013
0.013
0.037
0.104
0.172
0.244
0.321
0.404
0.494
Aaa
0.021
0.059
0.103
0.184
0.273
0.363
0.443
0.512
0.559
0.619
Aa
0.055
0.177
0.362
0.549
0.756
0.984
1.239
1.535
1.844
2.136
A
0.181
0.51
0.933
1.427
1.953
2.504
3.031
3.575
4.195
4.904
Baa
1.157
3.191
5.596
8.146 10.453 12.581 14.44 16.295 18.178 20.101
Ba
4.465 10.432 16.334 21.51 26.173 30.562 34.721 38.353 41.646 44.573
B
18.163
30.204 39.709 47.317 53.768 58.079 61.181 64.813 68.506 72.384
Caa-C
0.087
0.253
0.476
0.73
1.006
1.296
1.587
1.895
2.225
2.574
Investgrade
4.673
9.564 14.195 18.27 21.804 24.89 27.595 30.038 32.313 34.445
Specgrade
1.63
3.308
4.86
6.188
7.314
8.281
9.116
9.872 10.585 11.266
All

Source: Moody’s (2010 a, b).

81
Table 10: S & P Global Structured Finance 5‐Year Default Rates, 1978‐2010 (%)
5 years
ending
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Average
Median
Stn. Dev.
Minimum
Maximum

AAA
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.11
0.13
0.12
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.22
1.53
0.07
0.00
0.29
0.00
1.53

AA
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
4.23
4.12
3.10
1.61
0.00
0.16
0.12
0.76
0.90
0.39
0.40
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.21
0.37
0.51
0.60
0.72
0.51
0.07
0.64
5.91
0.90
0.38
1.53
0.00
5.91

A
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.91
2.28
2.27
2.41
1.72
0.10
0.09
0.30
1.34
1.01
1.19
1.68
1.67
1.13
0.42
2.14
12.14
1.13
0.30
2.28
0.00
12.14

BBB

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.85
15.52
6.25
2.13
1.81
0.46
0.58
3.85
9.21
9.55
5.79
5.14
4.14
4.26
7.93
22.33
4.90
3.85
5.69
0.00
22.33

Source: Standard and Poor’s (2011a).

BB

B

CCC

0.00
0.00
0.00
20.00
11.76
8.77
14.81
12.50
11.64
12.77
14.60
15.31
28.92
25.00
10.69
10.10
22.18
50.89
15.00
12.64
12.00
0.00
50.89

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
44.44
33.33
70.97
44.00
35.29
53.33
44.44
22.73
48.94
53.93
52.91
40.00
40.26
50.68
31.76
40.13
23.35
0.00
70.97

57.14
0.00
0.00
0.00
40.0
15.38
17.46
8.33
5.65
3.37
7.91
10.81
11.99
10.05
8.53
5.83
3.95
9.98
33.73
13.90
9.26
15.01
0.00
57.14

CC/C

71.43
100.0
75.00
50.00
38.46
25.00
30.00
22.73
55.74
48.86
57.55
52.17
52.24
51.09
22.40
22.73
100.0

Investmentgrade
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.86
1.67
1.20
0.69
0.00
0.07
0.11
0.68
1.01
0.74
0.52
0.12
0.05
0.10
0.63
1.33
1.62
1.28
1.33
1.17
1.13
2.67
10.34
1.05
0.68
1.92
0.00
10.34

Specgrade

0.00
44.44
0.00
0.00
0.00
23.08
20.51
15.15
20.47
12.30
9.66
11.99
13.40
13.69
19.27
16.99
11.68
9.13
16.96
40.56
14.96
13.54
11.85
0.00
44.44

All
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.86
1.67
1.20
0.69
0.42
0.07
0.11
0.68
1.10
0.92
0.89
0.96
0.69
0.74
1.45
2.36
2.73
3.17
3.19
2.63
2.33
4.83
14.96
1.71
0.92
2.83
0.00
14.96

Table 11: Selected Forms of Federal Reserve Lending Adopted during the Financial Crisis

Announcement
Date
Eligible
borrowers
Facility type
Operation
frequency

Type of
borrowing

Term Securities
Lending Facility
March 11, 2008

Primary Dealer
Credit Facility
March 16, 2008

ABCP Money Market
Fund Liquidity Facility
September 19, 2008

Commercial Paper
Funding Facility
October 7, 2008

Primary dealers

Primary dealers

Funds

Eligible CP issuers

Auction
Weekly

Standing
As requested

Standing
As requested

Standing
As requested

U.S. Treasuries

Funds

Funds

Funds

U.S. Treasury
Tri‐party repo
First‐tier ABCP
Newly‐issued 3‐month
securities, agency
system collateral
unsecured and asset‐
debt, agency MBS,
backed CP from
investment grade
eligible U.S. issuers
debt
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/Forms_of_Fed_Lending.pdf .

Eligible
collateral

Term Asset‐Backed
Securities Facility
November 25, 2008
All U.S. persons that own
eligible collateral
Standing
Twice a month,
alternating
between non‐mortgage
backed ABS and CMBS
collateral types
Funds
Recently originated
U.S. dollar‐denominated
AAA ABS, CMBS and
legacy CMBS

Figure 1

U.S. Corporate Debt Issuance vs. U.S. Non‐
Agency Securitization Issuance
2,000
1,800
1,600

$ billions

1,400
1,200

Straight Corporate Debt

1,000
Total Non‐Agency
Securitization

800
600
400
200
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Sources: Bloomberg, Dealogic, Fitch Ratings, Moody's, prospectus filings, Standard and Poor's, Thomson
Reuters, compiled by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association.

84

Figure 2

Non‐Mortgage ABS Issuance vs. Corporate Debt
Issuance
1,200
1,000

$ billions

800
Straight Corporate Debt

600

Asset‐Backed Debt

400
200
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Sources: Bloomberg, Dealogic, Fitch Ratings, Moody's, prospectus filings, Standard and Poor's, Thomson
Reuters, compiled by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association.

85

Figure 3

U.S. Mortgage‐Related Securities Issuance
3,500
3,000

USD Billions

2,500
Agency

2,000

CMBS

1,500

RMBS

1,000

Total

500
0
1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Source: SIFMA ( FDIC, GSEs, Thomson Reuters, Bloomberg).

2006

2008

2010

86

Figure 4

European Issuance of Selected Non‐Mortgage
ABS
100,000

USD Millions

80,000
Auto

60,000

Consumer

40,000

Credit Cards

20,000

SME

0
1994

1999

2004

2009

87
Figure 5: Overview of Securitization

88

Credit card
Borrowers

Figure 6

Chase USA

Credit Card
Receivables

First USA
Master
Trust

Chase
Master
Trust

Collateral
Certificate

Collateral
Certificate

Master
Trust Pooling
and Servicing
Agreements

Series
Supplements

Transfer and
Servicing
Agreement

Master Owner
Trust

Indenture

Asset Pool One

Asset Pool One
Supplement

CHASEseries
Indenture
Supplement

CHASEseries
Notes

Class A
Notes

Class B
Notes

Noteholders

Class C
Notes

Term
Documents

89
Figure 7

Chase Issuance Trust: Outstanding Principal
Receivables
100

$ billions

80
60
40
20
0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Source: JP Morgan Chase, static pool data; see
http://www.jpmorgan.com/cm/cs?pagename=Chase/Href&urlname=jpmc/ir/financial/abs/static/cc

90

Figure 8

Difference in Spreads: AAA Credit Card ABS
Minus AAA Industrials, 2001‐2005
50
40

Basis points

30
20
10
0
1/4/01
‐10
Source: Dealer Bank.

1/4/02

1/4/03

1/4/04

1/4/05

91
Figure 9

Difference in Spreads: AAA Credit Card ABS
Minus AAA Industrials, 2005‐March 2011
400

Basis Points

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1/6/05
‐50
‐100
Source: Dealer Bank.

1/6/06

1/6/07

1/6/08

1/6/09

1/6/10

1/6/11

92
Figure 10

Spreads, 2005‐March 2011
1600
1400

Basis Points

1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
‐200

Industrials Swaps AAA
3‐5 year
Prime Auto AAA 3‐
year
Credit Cards AAA 5
year

93
Figure 11

Spreads: AAA ABS vs. Subprime (10 year
maturity)
600

Basis Points

500
400
AAA Credit Cards 10 yr
300
200
100
0
1/8/2005 5/23/2006 10/5/2007 2/16/2009 7/1/2010

AAA SL 10 yr
AAA Subprime 10 yr

94

Figure 12

Auto, Credit Cards, Student Loan ABS Issuance
120,000

USD Millions

100,000
80,000
Auto

60,000

Credit Cards

40,000

Student Loans

20,000
0
1996

2001

2006

RMBS and CMBS Issuance
800
700
USD Billions

600
500
400

CMBS

300

RMBS

200
100
0
1996

1998

2000

Source: Thomson Reuters, SIFMA.

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

