NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A POLL TAX BY ANY OTHER NAME:
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DISENFRANCHISEMENT
Daniel B. Jones
Werner Troesken
Randall Walsh
Working Paper 18612
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18612
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

We thank George Krause for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Daniel B. Jones, Werner Troesken, and Randall Walsh. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Poll Tax by any Other Name: The Political Economy of Disenfranchisement
Daniel B. Jones, Werner Troesken, and Randall Walsh
NBER Working Paper No. 18612
December 2012
JEL No. H0,J15,N11
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we examine the political economy of voting rights in the American South. We begin
by measuring the impact of both formal laws and informal modes of voter suppression on African-American
political participation. In contrast to prior research, we find evidence that both formal and informal
modes of voter suppression were important and mutually reinforcing. Part of our analysis includes
explicitly identifying the magnitude and causal effects of lynching on black voter participation. We then
turn to analyzing to the relatively unexplored question of how disenfranchisement–and the accompanying
shifts in political power–affected policy outcomes, congressional voting, and partisan control of state
and federal legislatures.
Daniel B. Jones
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
dbj3@pitt.edu
Werner Troesken
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER
troesken@pitt.edu

Randall Walsh
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
4901 WW Posvar Hall
230 S. Bouquet St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER
walshr@pitt.edu

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 1

There is a clear consensus that historically African Americans have enjoyed fewer economic
and political freedoms and reduced material and social welfare relative to whites.1 There is,
however, much less consensus regarding the sources of this disadvantaged status.

Many

economists attribute the dearth of black economic and political advancement to informal
institutions such as the crop lien system; 2 paternalism; 3 discrimination in labor markets; 4 and
more recently to social networks that have historically excluded disadvantaged groups (see, for
example, Currarini et al. 2009). Others focus on formal laws and political decisions. For
example, Margo (1990) shows how, by segregating blacks into separate and inferior schools,
Southern governments impaired human capital accumulation both within and across
generations.5 This, in turn, resulted in persistent racial disparities in economic and educational
outcomes. 6 Along the same lines, scholars across many disciplines attribute residential
segregation and the creation of ghettoes to various federal policies and state laws inhibiting
efforts by blacks to acquire mortgages and move into white neighborhoods (Cutler et al. 1997;
Jackson 1985; Massey and Denton 1993).
Perhaps nowhere is the debate about formal and informal institutions more salient than in the
literature on black disenfranchisement. As is well known, from shortly after the end of
1

Compared to whites, African-Americans had lower literacy and schooling rates (Margo 1990, pp. 5-17);
less occupational mobility (Fishback 1984; Craig and Fearn 1993; Whatley 1990; Wright 1996; Meeker
and Kau 1977); more work-related injuries (Maloney 1998); lower wages (Smith 1984; Margo 1990, pp.
87-108); higher unemployment (Sundstrom 1992); lower life expectancies (Haines 2002; Ewbank 1987;
Meeker 1976); reduced nutrition and stature (Carson 2009); higher infant mortality rates (Fishback et al.
2000; Haines 2002); and lower rates of home ownership (Collins and Margo 2001).
2
Ransom and Sutch (1977, 2001) argue that the crop lien system locked poor black farmers in the South
into debt peonage. For contrary interpretations, see Goldin (1979), Fishback (1989) and Irwin and
O’Brien (2001).
3
Alston and Ferrie (1985, 1993, 1999) present evidence that paternalism worked as a protection racket
that inhibited black mobility and undercut political support for a welfare state.
4
See for instance: Neil and Johnson (1996); Rodgers and Spriggs(1996); and, Lang and Manove (2011).
For a broad overview of this literature, see Lang and Lehmann (2011).
5
See also Naidu (2012).
6
See Badel (2010) for a treatment of these issues in a quantitative treatment of these issues in a dynamic
locational equilibrium framework.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 2

Reconstruction to passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, southern blacks were denied the
right to vote.

In his now classic treatment, The Shaping of Southern Politics:

Suffrage

Restriction and the Establishment of the One-Party South, 1880-1910, J. Morgan Kousser (1974)
argues that formal legal institutions such as poll taxes and literacy requirements were
instrumental; without these laws and state enforcement of the laws, Southern racists never would
have succeeded in denying blacks access to the ballot box. By contrast, in his seminal work,
V.O. Key (1949) claims that formal laws were epiphenomenal, secondary to, and symptomatic
of, a deeper set of social forces.

In Key’s words, the passage of poll taxes and literacy

requirements at the state level were “a fait accompli brought about . . . by more fundamental
political processes,” where the phrase “fundamental political processes” refers to a host of
informal modes of disenfranchisement initiated by private individuals, election officials, and
organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan. Informal methods of voter disenfranchisement involved
all manner of privately-initiated fraud, violence, and intimidation. Put another way, in Key's
view, it was white animus toward blacks that mattered; the actions of the state merely reflected
the preferences of the white populace and the white populace sought to suppress black political
action through every means possible.
In this paper, we examine the political economy of voting rights in the American South. We
begin by measuring the impact of both formal laws and informal modes of voter suppression on
African-American political participation. While previous scholarship tends to emphasize the
impact of either formal or informal institutions to the exclusion of the other, our analysis
suggests a middle-way path: we find that both formal and informal institutions undercut black
political participation, and that formal and informal modes of disenfranchisement were mutually
re-enforcing. In particular, we present the strongest empirical evidence to date of the primal role

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 3

played by informal activities in the loss of suffrage by southern blacks; not only identifying the
relative magnitude of these activities but also providing the first empirical evidence of the link
between violence (lynchings) and black disenfranchisement in the post-Reconstruction south.
We additionally provide suggestive evidence of the role that party control of the election process
(election judges, poll locations and times, etc.) played in disenfranchising southern blacks. On
the other hand, our work suggests that the adoption of formal laws establishing poll taxes and
literacy requirements, while not the primary drivers of disenfranchisement, did hasten the total
disenfranchisement of blacks by approximately ten to thirteen years.
After analyzing the processes that disenfranchised blacks, we turn to the relatively
unexplored question of how disenfranchisement–and the accompanying shifts in political power–
affected policy outcomes. We examine this question on both the extensive margin (the
composition of legislatures) and the intensive margin (congressional voting behavior, conditional
on party affiliation). It is generally believed that disenfranchising southern blacks impacted
legislation on issues of economic policy and race. This belief has both logical and historical
appeal. During Reconstruction, when recently emancipated slaves had access to the ballot box,
blacks were able to form coalitions with white Republicans and promote a legislative agenda
that, at least at the federal level, was friendly to African-American interests. Between 1866 and
1875, Congress passed and enacted four civil rights laws designed to guarantee blacks equal
access to the voting booth, housing, hotel accommodations, private property, the administration
of justice, and other rights and privileges. Although the courts eventually struck down parts of
the civil rights laws, these measures illustrate how black interests could affect positive political
change by forming coalitions with white Republicans, so long as blacks had access to the ballot.7

7

See Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3 (1883)

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 4

Only when blacks were disenfranchised were Southern legislatures able to wholly undo these
federal protections.
To measure the effects of disenfranchisement on policy, we evaluate the voting records of
southern congressmen. This analysis builds on a simple historical observation about Southern
politics: because blacks were a minority in so many districts, they could only garner political
power by forming coalitions with white Republicans. The opportunity to work in coalition with
Republican interests increased the legislative impact of the franchise for the country's minority
black population. By the same token, black votes were key to Republican efforts to build an
electoral majority. In evaluating the impact of black political disenfranchisement on voting on
Republican priorities, we use the well-known Poole-Rosenthal DW-NOMINATE scores.8 As a
way of capturing the effects of disenfranchisement on voting behavior over policies directly
relevant to black voters, we identify 12 key house floor votes on issues related to civil rights and
suffrage. We then evaluate legislative voting records on these bills. To measure the effects of
disenfranchisement on the extensive margin of policy – that is, which party is elected – we gather
data on the party control of state legislatures. With these data, we measure, in both absolute and
relative terms, the extent to which formal and informal methods of disenfranchisement altered
the party composition and control of state legislatures. We also gather data on congressional
election outcomes to assess the likelihood of a Democrat being elected to office before and after
disenfranchisement.

Presumably, as blacks were denied access to the ballot box and lost

whatever political power they had, Democrats would have cemented their hold on the political
process.
Consistent with our findings regarding the path to disenfranchisement, we find that both
formal and informal methods of disenfranchisement are important for explaining changes in the
8

See Poole and Rosenthal (1997).

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 5

composition of state legislatures and the election of Democrats to Congress. Further, with the
loss of franchise, the relationship between the size of a district’s black population and
representative voting on issues important to black interests switches from a significant and policy
relevant positive relationship to a significant negative relationship. Finally, we document that the
coalition between black and Republican interests yield results for Republican concerns as well.
We find that when southern blacks had the franchise, the presence of a large black population in
a given Congressional district was associated with the adoption of more conservative policies at
both the extensive (election of republicans) and intensive (congressional voting – given party)
margins. To our knowledge, ours is the first work to quantify these relationships.9

A Brief History of Disenfranchisement

Over the course of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, state legislatures throughout
the American South passed laws designed to restrict and forestall black political participation.10
We call these laws franchise restriction laws. Most franchise restriction laws fall into one of
three categories: the poll tax, literacy requirements, and ballot box laws. Poll tax laws required
individuals to provide evidence that they have paid their “poll tax” for the current year (and in
some cases required evidence that individuals were current over a long-number of years) in order
to vote. Literacy-test laws typically required individuals to read and explain a portion of the
9

The two papers in economics most closely related this analysis are Naidu (2012) which identifies a
causal link between disenfranchisement and reductions in state level spending on black schools and a
recent paper by Cascio and Washington (2012), which finds that the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (which
reversed the processes we analyze and returned the franchise to southern blacks) led to dramatic increases
in black voter participation and induced a shift in the distribution of state aid toward localities with large
black populations.
10
For an excellent historical treatment of the Southern disenfranchisement of blacks see Perman (2001).

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 6

state constitution, to the arbitrary satisfaction of an election official, prior to voting. Finally,
several states passed collections of onerous election laws that required individuals to cast
separate ballots for different offices into a set of up to 8 different ballot boxes (invalidating all
votes by an individual if even one ballot was miscast), blocked the use of party symbols or color
coding on ballots, and barred any assistance in navigating the complicated voting procedure by
imposing a “secret ballot” requirement. One might, therefore, consider ballot box laws as a type
of literacy test. Accordingly, in our empirical analysis, we collapse the ballot box and literacy
test laws into a single treatment.
Table 1 lists all of the franchise restriction laws passed by Southern states between 1877
and 1910. 11 Except for Georgia and Virginia, which passed their first poll tax as soon as
Reconstruction ended, Southern states passed their first poll tax laws after 1889 and before 1905.
Arkansas and Virginia passed multiple poll tax laws because earlier measures were struck down
by the courts or were repealed and later revived by the legislature. Seven of the eleven states
passed laws requiring a literacy test to establish voting eligibility. Mostly, these laws were
enacted during the 1890s or very early 1900s. Ballot box measures were passed by every state in
the South except Alabama, Georgia, and Virginia. Outside of Florida, which passed its law in
1889, all of the ballot-box laws were enacted during the 1890s.
The question that first motivated our research (and a long list of prominent scholars
before us) is directed at understanding the efficacy of these laws: did they drive
disenfranchisement, or were black voter participation rates already trending down even before
their passage so that blacks would have been disenfranchised even without their passage? With
11

We include the state of Texas in Table 1 for completeness. However, we exclude Texas from our
subsequent analysis for two reasons. First, having been recently admitted to the union, Texas' postreconstruction experience was different from that of the other southern states. Second, and more
importantly, the voting data for Texas appears to be systematically corrupted, with voter turnout rates
recorded in the data that are unbelievably high -- often exceeding county populations.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 7

the right data, answering this question would be a simple econometric exercise: compile a panel
of Southern states and, using a difference-in-differences set up, identify how franchise restriction
laws alter the level and trend in black voter participation rates. The difficulty arises because
voter participation rates for nineteenth and early twentieth century are aggregated across racial
groups and are not reported separately for blacks and whites. To address this problem, Kousser
for example, works one state at a time and uses ecological decomposition techniques. He
computes mean suffrage changes for the periods immediately preceding and following passage
of a combination of a literacy test and poll tax. He finds that suffrage rates dropped less in the
period directly preceding the passage of these laws than they did in the period immediately
following their passage. Based on this analysis, Kousser concludes that “the relatively small
declines in Negro voting previous to disfranchisement [laws]” were important only to the extent
that they facilitated the passage of poll taxes and literacy tests.
As a way of previewing our turnout analysis, Figure 1 summarizes the relationship
between percent black and voter participation in Mississippi counties for the years 1876, 1888,
1892 and 1904. Notice that for 1876, while Reconstruction was still in play and federal troops
still occupied parts of the South to prevent violence at the polls, the estimated relationship is
positive, and voter turnout rises slightly with the proportion of the population that is black. This
suggests that blacks were voting at higher rates than whites in Mississippi at this point in time,
and/or that as the proportion of the population that was black rose (along with black political
influence) it spurred whites to vote at higher rates. In either case, the pattern suggests a high
degree of black political participation, which is consistent with the available anecdotal and
fragmentary quantitative evidence.

Yet by 1888, the relationship has reversed itself and

increases in percent black are associated with sharp reductions in voter turnout. Just four years

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 8

later, disenfranchisement is almost complete: to see this note that for both 1892 and 1904, as
percent black approaches 100 percent, predicted turnout is almost zero.

This basic pattern is

repeated across all southern states over this time period. In our formal analysis, we explore the
extent to which the relationship between voter turnout and black population level changed as a
result of the implementation of poll taxes, literacy requirements, and ballot-box measures.
Because of a lack of directly measured data on black turnout rates, in our turnout analysis we are
forced to infer turnout rates based on ecological decompositions that are in spirit similar to this
graphical analysis.
While we are sensitive to general concerns about ecological decompositions, we are
confident of our approach and the interpretations that flow from that approach. The primary
concern is that systematic patterns that we observe at the county-level between voter turnout and
percent black are driven by white responses to the relative size of the black population. There
are several reasons why we do not think that this is a plausible explanation for the results we
present below. First, our analysis is focused on federal elections. Thus, the relevant electorate to
which white voters should respond is at the Congressional District and/or State level. We base
our analysis on inter-county variation and as a result this source of bias should be attenuated.
Second, a large number of our counties contain populations that are more than 65% black.
Explaining the magnitude of the changes we see in voting turnout in these counties based on
white response to black populations would require unrealistically large shifts in the behavior of
these white voters. Third, and perhaps most important, the patterns that we see in the data are
inconsistent with this explanation. Relative turnout in black counties is decreasing as anti-black
activism (both formal and informal) is increasing. If turnout patterns were driven by white
response to black voters, we should expect to see white turnout increasing in highly black

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 9

districts as Democrats and vigilante groups such as the Klan moved aggressively to restore the
"Solid South". Fourth, our results are robust to the inclusion of a broad set of interacted fixed
effects and trends. Finally, variation in our imputed measures of disenfranchisement have the
expected statistical relationship to both our measures of informal disenfranchisement activities
and the behavior of elected officials. These observations and the strong internal consistency that
appears in our analysis suggest our approach is sound.

Identifying the Causes of Disenfranchisement

Before turning to the specifics of empirical strategy, a few words about data are in order.
We use county-level data on election turnout in Congressional and Presidential Elections.12 The
data were originally compiled by Jerome Clubb, William Flanigan, and Nancy Zingale.13 The
original dataset reports total votes cast at the county-level for every congressional and
presidential election between 1840 and 1972. We merge a subset of the years from this dataset
with county-level population data to create panels of year-by-county turnout measures – one
panel for congressional elections and one panel for presidential elections. These turnout
measures are constructed simply as total votes cast divided by total population in a given county
and year. Our final data set covers voter turnout data for congressional and presidential elections
and the percent of each county's population that is black for the years 1872 to 1912. In later
analysis the data are also aggregated at the congressional district level. Limitations inherent in

12

In later analyses, we use state-level data on gubernatorial election turnout. We omit gubernatorial
elections from this particular analysis because of a lack of readily available data on county-level turnout
in these elections.
13
Electoral Data for Counties in the United States: Presidential and Congressional Races, 1840-1972.
This dataset is publicly available online at http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/ (study number 8611).

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 10

the available census data and occasional changes in county boundaries provide challenges on this
front, and these challenges will be identified and discussed below.
Percent black is computed simply as total black population divided by total population in
a given county and year.14 The counts of total black population and total population are taken
from the 1860-1920 Decennial Censuses of Population. In most cases, we linearly interpolate
between the two nearest Census years to obtain intercensal estimates of each of these counts and
the corresponding percent black. One challenge in constructing the data is the fact that a number
of new counties are created during the time period of interest. The creation of these new
counties is accompanied by changes in the boundaries of existing counties. When this occurs,
linear interpolation misrepresents changes in the percent of the population that is black within a
county in non-Census years. For instance, suppose that a county’s boundaries change in 1876 in
a way that increases the percentage of the population that is black. It would be inappropriate to
use the change in the black population in that county between the 1870 and 1880 Censuses to
construct a continuous linear growth rate for all years within this decade, when in reality there is
a discrete jump at 1876.
To address this issue, we identify all distinct “versions” of each county throughout the
panel, where a county is coded as a new “county version” each time that its boundaries change.
Using this approach, we construct percent black using only Census data from the same county
version. Specifically, we begin by identifying new counties that appear in each of the decennial

14

One might also be interested in the percent of the voting-eligible population that is black. However,
there is not sufficient information in all of the Censuses to consistently construct such a measure. In
particular, the 1870 and 1880 Censuses do not report counts of population that are broken down by race,
gender, and age.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 11

Censuses. Then, we identify (1) the specific year that each new county was created and (2) the
surrounding counties that were modified in order to create this county.15
There are two categories of problem counties to address: counties that are newly created
and counties that are modified. Of 841 counties in our sample, 643 (76 percent) counties exist
and are unmodified during the entire period of interest (1875-1912). 78 counties are newly
created. 102 counties are modified once (including several of the created counties) and 11 are
modified twice. For a newly created county, total and black populations for the few years prior
to its first year in the Census are estimated using a linear extrapolation of these counts from the
two following Censuses. For instance, to obtain percent black in 1876 for a county that appears
in 1876 we linearly extrapolate the rates of change in total and black population back based on
the trend between 1880 (the first Census for which the county is observed) and 1890.
For pre-existing but modified counties, we conduct a similar procedure with the added
complication that we must extrapolate from future Censuses to obtain estimates for the new
“county version” and we must extrapolate from previous Censuses to obtain estimates for the
pre-existing county version. To make this clear, consider the pre-existing counties that were
modified to create a new county. Estimates of total and black population for years strictly
between 1870 and 1876 are constructed using rates of growth from the 1860 and 1870 Censuses.
Estimates for 1876 and the remaining years of the decade are constructed using rates of growth
from the 1880 and 1890 Censuses.16

15

We use the Atlas of Historical County Boundaries to accomplish this. This resource can be found at
http://publications.newberry.org/ahcbp/. Using the Atlas, we manually record the date that a new county
is created and the counties that were modified to create it.
16
We lose six observations as a result of this method. In particular, to use this method to estimate percent
black for non-Census years, there must be two Census observations of the relevant county version on
either side of the change. Thus, if a county changes twice within one decade, we cannot construct percent
black for any years in between the first and second changes.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 12

The Relative Importance of Formal vs. Informal Disenfranchisement

Our analysis begins with a series of cross-sectional regressions run separately for each unique
state x presidential election pair17. The goal is to show how the relationship between countylevel racial composition and voter turnout evolves over the study period. Our approach was
previewed above in the discussion of Mississippi counties in figure 1; here, however, we develop
a formal apparatus which, though simple, undergirds our approach to the relevant ecological
decomposition. We start with the regression model:

#

∗

∗

(1)

where j indexes county version and t indexes election (year). For a given state x presidential
election pair, assuming that black and white turnout rates are independent of county demographic
composition, the estimated coefficients from this regression (α and β) recover white and black
turnout percentages for each state in each election.
Ideally, we would like to observe black turnout rates and study the impact of
disenfranchising interventions directly. As discussed above, such data do not exist, so we rely on
an ecological decomposition approach that assumes that high turnout in a district with a high
concentration of blacks implies a high black turnout rate, whereas low turnout -- perhaps after
disenfranchisement -- implies low black turnout. One minor issue is that because our analysis
17

Here we focus on presidential elections because data are missing for some states for some
congressional elections -- making the visual presentation of the data that follows more difficult. In the
statistical analysis that follows, our results are not sensitive to the choice of Presidential vs. Congressional
turnout data.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 13

takes total white and black populations as controls and not the corresponding voting-eligible
populations, our estimates of turnout and the impact of disenfranchisement will be smaller in
magnitude than had we based our percentages on voting-eligible populations.18 However, as we
are interested primarily in documenting changes in turnout in response to formal and informal
interventions, this is a minor concern.
With these caveats in mind, once we have estimated equation (1), we can tie the
estimated relationship to the fitted regression lines in the scatter plots from figure 1 above
through the following relationship:

∗

.

(2)

From equation (2) it is apparent that the slope of the fitted line in the Mississippi scatter plots
recovers an estimate of the difference in mean turnout rates for blacks and whites.
For each state, Figure 2 plots the evolution over time of estimated white turnout
(diamonds), estimated black turnout
estimated white turnout

(squares), and estimated black turnout as a percentage of

(triangles). The vertical lines in the figure denote the years in which

different ballot restrictions first came in to force.

While there is substantial noise in the

relationships, in all ten states the steady erosion of the black franchise is clear.

18

In some

As discussed above in the data section, due to limitations in the census data, we constructed our data
based on black and white populations per county rather than voting eligible populations (race specific
counts of males over the age of 18). In earlier versions of our work, we analyzed interpolated data for
eligible voters – yielding results consistent with those presented here. However, our concern about
potential biases that could be introduced by this interpolation led us to focus our analysis on turnout as a
percentage of population. With the obvious limitation that systematic changes in the relative age
compositions of the black and white populations could impart bias into our estimates. Such systematic
changes do not seem to occur; the difference between the voting-eligible fraction of the white population
and the same measure for the black population remains essentially constant over our study period.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 14

instances the importance of legalized ballot restrictions are readily apparent: the combination of
poll tax, secret ballot and literacy test which all came into effect in Mississippi for the 1892
election; the poll tax and literacy test initially in effect in North Carolina in 1904; Tennessee's
poll tax and multi-box ballot law effective for the 1892 election; and, the combination of literacy
test and re-enactment of a poll tax in Virginia in effect for 1904. However, in the remaining
states it is difficult to differentiate the effects of ballot restrictions from the secular trends; and in
all instances (with the possible exception of Tennessee) the data suggest that the passage of legal
ballot restrictions is preceded by an erosion of the black franchise.
Having summarized the data in figure 2, we turn now to a formal statistical analysis and
adopt a more elaborate regression framework. Equation (3) presents our baseline specification:

∗
∗

∗

∗
.

∗

∗

∗

(3)

Note that j indexes county-version, s indexes state and t indexes election (year). County-version
( ) and year (

fixed effects are included in all specifications. Pct Vote and Pct Black are

percentages based of the entire county population. Finally, tax is an indicator for a poll tax being
in force and lit is an indicator that either an explicit literacy test or combination of ballot law and
secret ballot were in force (see Table 1). For the regression analysis, our sample consists of
elections from 1876 to 1912. (Note that we start in 1876 because that is commonly seen as the
last election of the Reconstruction era, and because, based on Figure 2, it is the peak of black
turnout in many states).

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 15

Tables 2.A and 2.B present results from these regressions for Congressional and
Presidential elections. They decompose the overall reduction in Congressional (Presidential)
election turnout from 14.9% (15.6%) to 7.16% (6.98%) that occurred between 1876 and 1912
into its component parts.19
Model 1 is our baseline specification from equation (3). Both the literacy test (along with
secret ballot and multi-box laws) and the poll tax are predicted to have a significantly negative
impact on black turnout. For instance, using data from Congressional elections (Table 2A), the
model predicts that the poll tax decreases black turnout by roughly 2.2 percentage points relative
to whites while the literacy test is predicted to decreases black turnout by roughly 9.0 percentage
points relative to whites. Notably, the poll tax – which also impacted white voters – is predicted
to significantly decrease their turnout as well, but at less than half the rate that it is predicted to
decrease black turnout.
Model 2 adds a trend variable to equation (3). The trend captures the secular decrease in
black franchise relative to white franchise (presumably driven by informal mechanisms such as
fraud, violence and intimidation) that began following Reconstruction: (year – 1876) * percent
black. The inclusion of this trend diminishes the estimated effects of the laws observed in
Column 2, highlighting the importance of controlling for these informal means of
disenfranchisement. One way to characterize these results is to compute how many years of
secular/informal disenfranchisement (as measured by the interaction between trend and percent
black) would be required to achieve the same level of disenfranchisement as occurred in
response to the passage of the Poll Tax and Literacy laws. This "years" equivalency is reported in
the row labeled “Impact of Poll Tax + Literacy Requirement.” The results of model 2 suggest
that these laws accelerated black disenfranchisement by roughly 22 to 31 years. However, model
19

The figures quoted are cross-county averages.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 16

2 markedly underestimates the coefficient on trend because it fails to account for the change in
trend that occurred following the passage of poll tax and literacy laws.
In models 3 and 4, we explicitly address the issue of changing trends. In model 3 we
allow the trend to change after the imposition of both a poll tax and a literacy test through the
inclusion of a "Post-law trend" variable and its interaction with percent black. Thus, the
coefficient on “Trend X Pct. Black” can now be interpreted as the trend in turnout prior to formal
disenfranchisement; that is, one might interpret the coefficient as a rough measure of the impact
of informal methods of disenfranchisement that gradually stripped blacks of their voting rights
even in the absence of poll taxes and literacy laws. Model 4 replicates model 3, but further
strengthens identification through the inclusion of a fully interacted set of state and year fixed
effects. This sharper identification comes at the expense of identifying the main effects of the
laws. It is our most robust specification. With the exception of a slightly diminished predicted
impact of the laws in model 4 relative to model 3, results across the two specifications are
roughly similar. Thus, in the remaining discussion we focus on Model 4. Using data from either
congressional or presidential elections, we find that – in the absence of poll taxes or literacy tests
– black turnout decreases by roughly 1.5 percentage points every four years relative to white
turnout. Consistent with the suggestion that the laws themselves achieved near-total
disenfranchisement, this trend in relative black turnout flattens significantly with the passage of
formal disenfranchisement measures. Also, post-law black turnout decreases, relative to that of
whites, by just 0.5 percentage points every four years following passage of the formal laws.
Finally, model 4 indicates that, if both poll taxes and literacy tests were passed
simultaneously (as was often the case), black turnout would decrease by 4-5 percentage points
(depending on whether we consider presidential or congressional data). Thus, it is clear that both

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 17

informal and formal means of disenfranchising blacks had a meaningful impact. Based on our
estimates, the introduction of disenfranchising polices accelerated total black disenfranchisement
by approximately 11-12 years.

The Path from Informal to Formal Disenfranchisement

While it is clear that informal and formal means of disenfranchisement each had significant
direct impacts on restricting blacks’ access to the ballots, years of violence and intimidation may
have been causal in the sense that they paved the way to allowing the formal voting restrictions
to pass (Kousser, 1974). In this section, we assess this claim. Put differently, we ask: To what
extent was an increase in informal disenfranchisement a necessary condition for the
establishment of formal disenfranchisement?
To answer this question, we construct a continuous state- and year-specific measure of
disenfranchisement, which we then use to examine the growth in disenfranchisement
immediately prior to the passage of poll tax and literacy laws. In particular, we begin with the
(black turnout) estimates that were used to construct the graphs in Figure 2 (which resulted from
state- and year- specific regressions of turnout on percent black). Within each state, we create a
normalized ′ which runs between 0 and 1.

Our “continuous disenfranchisement” measure is

then constructed as (1- ′). Thus, for a particular state, when this value is equal to zero black
voting rates are at their highest point and when the value reaches one disenfranchisement has
reached its peak.
Table 3 reports the means of election-to-election (two year) growth in this continuous
disenfranchisement measure prior to the enactment of disenfranchising laws. We report the

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 18

increase in disenfranchisement experienced immediately prior to a law being enacted (that is, the
difference between the measure one election prior to the law and the measure two elections prior
to the law) and also the average growth across all other previous elections. Notably, there is a
sharp increase in disenfranchisement one period prior to a law being introduced, which provides
initial evidence that an acceleration in the degree of informal disenfranchisement is associated
with the passage of formal mechanisms.
Table 4 provides more direct evidence. Here we estimate a Cox proportional hazard
model, predicting the probability of passage of any policy (column 1), a literacy test or ballot law
(column 2), or poll tax (column 3) as a function of the same one-period lagged increase in
disenfranchisement as is reported in Table 3. In column 1 we find that increasing growth in this
measure is a significant predictor of introducing a law, providing further support for the means
comparisons of table 3. Turning to columns 2 and 3, we find that this result is largely driven by
the introduction of literacy tests/ballot laws. While the coefficient estimate is positive, this model
does not provide a statistically significant prediction that growth in informal disenfranchisement
accelerates the introduction of poll taxes.
To summarize our results, we find that both informal and formal means of
disenfranchisement were important, with restrictive voting laws accelerating the process of
disenfranchisement started by informal means. Moreover, tables 3 and 4 (in combination with
the preceding results) suggest that informal disenfranchisement played two roles: actively
disenfranchising blacks (at a rate of roughly 3% points per decade) but also paving the way to
the passage of voting restrictions to achieve near-complete disenfranchisement of blacks.

Direct Tests for Mechanisms of Informal Disenfranchisement

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 19

To this point, our analysis has implicitly identified informal disenfranchisement as that
disenfranchisement which cannot be explained by the passage of formal barriers to the vote.
While the vast majority of these disenfranchising activities are unrecorded, we are able to
identify and test two direct proxies for informal modes of disenfranchisement: (1) lynching and
(2) Democratic control of state government which gave the party direct administrative control of
the electoral process.
Historians and contemporary commentators have described the transition from
Reconstruction-era suffrage to the implementation of “formal” disenfranchisement as taking
place in three phases which can be characterized as: (1) the intimidation stage, (2) the dilution
stage, and (3) disenfranchisement.20 Our lynching and state government control measures are
meant speak to the first and second of these phases respectively. The "intimidation" stage is
characterized by violence and threats of violence towards blacks. Democrats had not yet regained
power and as such were unable to restrict blacks’ ballot access through institutional mechanisms.
Instead, blacks who supported Republicans were threatened with violence (and economic
sanctions), allowing Democrats to gain some footing in returning to office despite facing largely
black, pro-Republican electorates. Anecdotal evidence suggests that violence played a significant
role. For instance, when Democrats regained power of the state legislature in North Carolina for
the first time since Reconstruction, “Klan activity was reported in at least ten of the fifteen
counties gained by the conservatives, and the conservatives victory was due less to an increase in
their vote than to a decline in that of the Republicans” (Olsen, 1980). While such anecdotal
evidence abounds, we are aware of only one attempt to provide quantitative evidence of this
20

For contemporary references, see for instance Hamm (1899), Dunning (1901) and Poe (1902). For
examples of the treatment of these phases of disenfranchisement by historians, see for instance Perman
(2001) and Kousser (1999). Kousser, in particular, is responsible for the language used here.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 20

relationship. As we discuss below, this prior work finds no evidence of a link between violence
and disenfranchisement.
The “dilution” phase is characterized by fraud and government attempts to minimize the
influence of the black electorate without yet formally preventing blacks from voting (as
eventually occurs with the passage of laws such as literacy requirements an poll taxes).21 Once in
control of state government, Democrats leveraged their control of the election apparatus,
employing a variety of methods to maintain their power. Democratic governors were able to
appoint their preferred agents to supervise elections. In some instances, this led to polling
locations purposefully located a great distance from largely black communities or last-minute
changes to polling locations of which only white voters were notified (Dunning, 1901). This also
facilitated fraud and bribery that was both blatant and unpunished; Hamm (1899) for instance
notes that “ballot boxes were stuffed with tissue ballots and forgery on tally sheets was freely
committed.” Gerrymandering was another widely used approach; an extreme example is
Mississippi’s “shoestring district” which packed most of the state’s highly black communities
into an electoral district three hundred miles long and twenty miles wide.
We cannot observe or measure the vast majority of these dilutive activities. However, a
large number of these mechanisms are only possible if Democrats are in control of state
government. Thus, controlling for the formal disenfranchising actions of government and level of
electoral support for Democrats, the impact of these state-sponsored informal actions should
appear in our data as a discontinuous drop in black voting that occurs after a Democrat takes
control of the governors’ office.
21

Consistent with the extant literature, we classify the poll tax and literacy laws as formal barriers to
black franchise. However, we note that one alternative interpretation of these laws was that while not
erecting a "formal" barrier they instead empowered the party in control of the election mechanisms to
become more successfull in their efforts at informal disenfranchisement through their unchecked
discretion in the application of these laws.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 21

Lynching

While most all scholars agree that violence was used to suppress black voter turnout in the postReconstruction South, there is very little quantitative evidence establishing a causal link between
violence and turnout, or in measuring the magnitude of that link. In the only quantitative
assessment we are aware of, Kousser (1999) examines Republican vote share in a handful of
counties that had experienced a violent incident in the year preceding an election. In most of the
counties he examines, Republican vote share roughly matches the fraction of the population that
is black, which he takes as suggestive evidence that violence did not lead to the “once and for all
destruction of the Republican vote” that one might have expected.
Using a comprehensive database of lynchings that occurred in the south between 1882
and 1930 22 , we construct a more comprehensive county-level dataset that indicates which
counties have experienced lynchings in the year preceding all biennial elections occurring
between 1882 and 1912. We use this dataset to evaluate the empirical link between violence and
disenfranchisement. Thus, we begin by extending our previous specifications to include a
county-level indicator for the occurrence of a lynching within each given county in the year
leading up to each election. We then fully interact this variable with percent black and the
presence of a poll tax or literacy test/ballot law. For simplicity, we also collapse our controls for
the presence of voting laws into a single indicator for the presence of either of these laws. For
parsimony, we only report results from our most rigorous model specification, which includes

22

We use the “Historical American Lynching” (HAL) data collection, which is constructed and made
available by Elizabeth Hines and Eliza Steelwater (http://people.uncw.edu/hinese). The data records
lynchings for all of the states in our sample except for Virginia. The original lynching-level database
indicates the race of the victim. In constructing our dataset, we only use lynchings with black victims.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 22

controls for county fixed effects, state-year fixed effects, and trends. Simpler specifications yield
similar (but stronger) results.
We begin with the coefficients on “% black X lynching” and “% black X Lynching X
Law,” which estimate the differential impact of a within-county lynching on black turnout before
and after the introduction of formal disenfranchising policies. These coefficients are reported in
Column 1 of Table 5, with estimates from Congressional elections in Panel A and Presidential
elections in Panel B. The estimates imply that when no formal disenfranchising policies have
been passed lynching decreases black turnout by roughly 1-2 percentage points (relative to white
turnout). This negative impact disappears once formal disenfranchising polices are in place. At
least with regard to the signs of the coefficients, this is what we would expect: the presence of
laws, typically associated with Democratic control of government,

achieves almost total

disenfranchisement. As such, lynching only affects turnout in the absence of such laws.
However, these results – particularly when examining presidential elections – are
relatively weak. There are two potential explanations for this finding. First, there are relatively
few lynchings in our data. This fact paired with the smaller number of presidential elections may
drive the lack of precision in Panel B. Second, and perhaps more importantly, although a
lynching occurs within a particular county it is likely to impact turnout in surrounding areas as
well. That is, this first specification might conflate treatment and control:

many “treated

counties” are coded as though they are in the “control group.” This would lead our included State
X Year fixed effects to absorb some of the general treatment effect.
To address the second issue, we broaden our definition of the lynching “treatment,”
considering an observation to be treated if a lynching occurred either within the given county or
in a neighboring county. A county is considered “neighboring” if it is less than 100 miles from

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 23

the reference county (measured from county centroid to county centroid). Model 2 replaces the
within-county treatment with the within-100 miles treatment. For increased flexibility, model 3
includes both measures to allow for differential impacts as a function of distance from the
lynching. In model 3, the within-county and within 100 miles measures are constructed to be
mutually exclusive. The “within 100 miles” coefficients should therefore be interpreted as the
impact of a lynching that occurs in a closely neighboring county.
Relative to model 1, models 2 and 3 generate results that are both larger in magnitude and
more precise, suggesting that the impact of a lynching does extend beyond the location of the
lynching itself and serves as a more general form of intimidation. Model 2 predicts that a
lynching within 100 miles decreases turnout by 2 to 4 percentage points prior to
disenfranchisement, with little impact afterwards. Model 3 confirms the existence of both a
within-county and neighboring county effect with the within-county effect being roughly 45%
greater in magnitude than the neighboring county effect. Overall, our results suggest that the
within-county change is between 3 and 6 percentage points. For comparison, this effect is
roughly 2 to 3 times larger than the estimated effect of a poll tax under the same empirical
specification (Table 2, Model 4).23
Are these effects genuinely driven by the intimidation associated with lynching? An
alternative explanation is that our lynching measure merely serves as a proxy for some
unobserved characteristic of the legal environment that may be depressing turnout. While this
would be instructive in its own right, it would not be the direct indication of “informal”
disenfranchisement that we are attempting to provide in this section. To assess this possibility,
model 4 extends model 3 by interacting the coefficients of interest with an indicator variable set
23

Of course, the black turnout rate is substantially lower by the time poll taxes and literacy tests are
introduced, so comparisons between percentage point changes are made for illustrative purposes only.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 24

to one when the neighboring-county lynching is in a different state. If our lynching measures are
picking up characteristics of the state legal environment, we would expect to see very little
impact of lynchings that are within 100 miles but out of state. Model 4 suggests that this is not
the case. In presidential elections, the effect is identical regardless of whether the nearby
lynching is in- or out-of-state. In congressional elections, the impact of an out-of-state lynching
is marginally smaller, but still significantly negative.

Control of Government

We now examine the impact of a sitting Democratic governor (at the time of an election) on
black turnout. When a Democrat is elected Governor, the party takes control of the state's
election machinery and gains power to appoint election judges and officials. This in turn
empowers the party to pursue the types of informal activities that characterized the "dilution"
stage of informal disenfranchisement.
There are two potentially important sources of endogeneity between black turnout and
Democratic control of state government. First, any other unobserved factors that are associated
with depressed black voter turnout will also likely be associated with increased electoral success
for Democrats. However, if changes in party control of the election apparatus results in access to
new modes of informal disenfranchisement then there should be a discrete drop in black turnout
once a Democratic governor is in power. This is in contrast to factors which are not associated
with actual control of the governorship. The impact of these factors should vary continuously
and thus can be controlled for by incorporating in our models flexible functional forms of

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 25

gubernatorial vote share, as well as controls for the proportion of legislative seats held by
Democrats.
The second potential confounder is the possibility that control of the Governor's office is
associated with other formal means of disenfranchisement - beyond the literacy tests/ballot laws
and poll taxes for which we control. Given our review of the available information we believe
that the laws that we have identified represent a major proportion of the formal rules adopted to
disenfranchise blacks.

We do however concede that one interpretation of the results of this

particular set of analyses is that it captures the net effect of all formal and informal
disenfranchisement associated with Democratic control of the levers of state - exclusive of those
laws specifically modeled in our analysis.
We take as our “treatment” an indicator variable that is equal to one if the governor in office
at the time of an election is a Democrat.24 We include as controls a quadratic in the Democratic
vote share in the most recent Governor's race. These controls, as well as the Democratic
governor indicator, are fully interacted with percent black. To more fully capture the state
political environment, we also include controls for the composition of the state legislature in a
subset of the regressions.25
Table 6 reports the impact of a Democratic governor on black voter turnout. Here, we are
primarily interested the interaction of percent black with our treatment (% black X Dem.
governor) – reported in columns 1 and 3. To provide a parallel to the analysis of lynching, in
columns 2 and 4 we report specifications which include the interaction of percent black,
Democrat governor, and the presence of a law (% black X Dem. gov. X Law). However, in this
24

We observe two third-party governors in our dataset – a “Readjuster” and an “Anti-lottery Democrat.”
In both cases, they are closely aligned (and thus recoded) as either Republican or Democrats.
25
In particular, we include controls for a quadratic function of fraction of the state legislature that are
Democrats (separately for both upper and lower houses). When included, these state legislature controls
are also fully interacted with percent black and the presence of a formal policy.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 26

specific analysis, Models 1 and 3 are our preferred specifications - for two reasons. First, unlike
lynching, it is less clear that we should expect a difference in the impact of a sitting Democratic
governor before and after a suffrage-restricting policy is passed. Just as a Democrat can interfere
with the election process informally prior to the passage of a law, a Democrat can also allow
loose and potentially harsher interpretations of suffrage-restriction laws after they have passed.
Second, and perhaps more importantly, because passage of literacy tests and poll taxes are so
closely linked to the election of Democratic Governors, there is very little independent variation
in these two measures. This problem is most acute the models that include both time trends and
legislative controls .26
Considering results for both Congressional and Presidential elections, Models 1 and 3 predict
that when a state has a Democratic governor black turnout is reduced by between 3.5 and 6
percentage points. Under the tighter identification strategy in Model 3, we get a prediction that
black voter turnout was reduced by between 4.5 (4.25) percentage points in Congressional
(Presidential) elections. Models 2 and 4 provide some weak evidence that this effect may be
higher with the passage of a poll tax or literacy test. However, we do not place much emphasis
on these results because, as already stated, there is a lack of post-law observations where
Democrats are not in control; of a total 115 post-law state-year combinations, there is a nonDemocratic governor in just five instances.
To summarize, in this section we more explicitly explored the impact of “informal”
disenfranchisement on turnout using two proxies motivated by the historical narrative of
disenfranchisement: (1) lynching and (2) Democratic control of state government, which
provided the Democratic Party control of the election machinery. Qualitatively, our results are
26

This problem is most acute in the data for Presidential elections because we have roughly half as many
Presidential election observations as we do for Congressional elections.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 27

consistent with what one might expect: lynching and Democratic control of government, even
before the introduction of a law, suppresses turnout. What is somewhat surprising is the
magnitude of the effects: both lynching and Democratic control generate relative turnout
reductions that exceed our estimates of the impact of poll taxes and literacy laws. To some extent
this lends credence to Key’s “fait accompli” argument. At a minimum, however, these results
emphasize the importance of viewing disenfranchisement as a gradual, continuous process
accomplished by the collective impact and interaction of informal and formal measures. Moving
into the next section, these findings motivate us to employ both discrete, policy-based measures
and continuous measures of disenfranchisement in analyzing the impact of disenfranchisement
on electoral outcomes and Congressional voting behavior.

The impact of disenfranchisement on policy outcomes

We now turn to perhaps the most novel part of our analysis:

an examination of how

disenfranchising blacks affected legislative and policy outcomes during the late nineteenth and
early twentieth century. In particular, and as already noted, disenfranchisement undermined the
coalition of black voters and Republican politicians formed during the Reconstruction era.
Hence, in this section we explore how the gradual weakening of this coalition affected the
election of Republicans (extensive margin) and voting behavior within the congress of
representatives of the two major parties (intensive margin). On the extensive margin, we assess
the likelihood of a Democrat being elected to the United States House of Representatives (as a
function of the racial composition of the electorate) and also explore the evolution of Democrats’

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 28

control of state legislatures. On the intensive margin, we first study how politicians voted on bills
of specific interest to black voters (civil rights bills). Then, using a measure of politicians’
ideology based on their roll-call voting behavior (Poole & Rosenthal’s DW-NOMINATE
scores), we study the impact that disenfranchisement had on the location of policy positions
(voting behavior) of both Congressional Democrats and Republicans relative to the fiscal
ideologies of these two parties.

Data

In addition to panel data on disenfranchising laws and the constructed “continuous
disenfranchisement” measure discussed above, we utilize several supplementary data sources in
the remaining analysis. First, for all district-level analyses, we construct race and population
measures at the congressional district level by aggregating county-level Census data.27 As before,
we obtain intercensal estimates of population through simple linear interpolation of Census data.
Table 7 summarizes this district-level measure of black population for Census years within the
relevant time span. Notably, the black population is very high in a majority of counties; even in
1910 (when average black population is at its lowest point), blacks make up at least 10% of the
population in more than 95% of congressional districts.
Data on the composition of state legislatures is taken from the Partisan Division of
American State Governments, 1834-1985.28 The data include the numbers of legislators by party

27

In most cases, counties fully map into congressional districts. When this is the case, we simply
aggregate county-level population data to create congressional district-level data. In some cases, counties
are split across multiple congressional districts, by town and or City Ward. When possible, we allocate
town and/or City Ward-level data to the appropriate congressional district.
28
Compiled by Dean Burnham (ICPSR Study No. 16).

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 29

for every state legislature (upper house and lower house) between 1834-1986, from which we
construct “fraction democrat” for each observation between 1872-1910.
Data on the election and behavior of US Representative is taken from the Database of
United States Congressional Historical Statistics, 1789-1989 (ICPSR Study No. 3371). This
database includes several tables; relevant to this study are:



Election Table: includes one observation for each candidate in an election; provides party
affiliation for all candidates and congressional district of election.



Serves Table: one observation for each term served by each representative; provides party
affiliation and congressional district served.



Roll Call Table: includes one observation for every roll call vote that every representative
participated in.

We keep only southern state observations that are from the relevant time period (1872-1910, plus
a handful of Roll Call Votes between 1870-1872). The bills we examine are summarized in the
Table 8. By focusing on this set of bills, we attempt to capture all prominent civil rights-related
roll call votes in the relevant time period.
Finally, as a measure of politicians’ voting behavior, we use the first dimension of Poole
& Rosenthal’s DW-NOMINATE score. This dimension of the DW-NOMINATE score locates a
politician along a left-right axis based on their voting patterns in each particular Congress
relative to others in the same Congress. Increasingly positive DW-NOMINATE scores indicate a
politician who is farther right (Republican-held positions) on economic issues, while increasingly
negative scores indicate a politician who is farther left (Democrat-held positions). One final issue

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 30

to note is that the dispersion of DW-Nominate scores varies across Congresses. To increase the
comparability of the DW-Nominate scores across congresses we normalize these scores, dividing
each individual’s score for a given congress by the standard deviation of scores within that
Congress. Our findings are not sensitive to this normalization.

General empirical strategy

In the following analyses we are interested in the relationship between disenfranchisement
interacted with the percentage of an electorate that is black and a variety of outcomes. These
include the likelihood of democrat being elected, civil rights roll-call voting, and DW-Nominate
scores. Our baseline specification for these analyses is:

.

.

where

.

is the percentage of the population that is black within district d at time t
is one of two measures of disenfranchisement. Of particular interest are the

and

coefficients on “percent black” and “pct. black X disenfranchised.” The former informs us of the
influence that a largely black electorate can have on shaping policy outcomes when allowed to
vote, while the latter documents the extent to which that influence diminishes as voting rights are
stripped.
In some specifications (labeled “policy” in the tables that follow), the disenfranchisement
measure is simply an indicator variable with

1 if there is a disenfranchising policy

(literacy test or poll tax) enacted in the state that district d is located in at time t. For simplicity,

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 31

throughout this section we assess the impact of the presence of any disenfranchising policy,
rather than separating the impacts of literacy tests and poll taxes as in the previous section. In
other specifications (labeled “cont. disenf.” in tables that follow),

is our constructed

continuous disenfranchisement measure.
The dependent variable

and additional controls vary with the question of interest, but

all specifications include state and year fixed effects. We also include controls for party
affiliation. In the analysis of Congressional election outcomes, the unit of observation is a single
election outcome and thus we are able to control for the number of terms that the incumbent had
served at the time of the election. Whatever the unit of observation, however, standard errors are
clustered at the congressional district level (with each change in a district’s boundaries being
coded as a new district.)
Throughout this section, “percent black” is re-centered around its mean, which varies
across our different datasets but is roughly 42%. This does not change the estimation or
interpretation of the coefficient on “percent black” or any of the terms with which “percent
black” is interacted. It merely allows us to interpret the “disenf.” coefficient as the impact of
disenfranchisement in the average county, rather than in a county with no black citizens. This
facilitates easier interpretation of the estimated coefficients as most counties have relatively high
percentage black (as documented in Table 7.)
Finally, when we assess the effect of disenfranchisement on party politics, we look at
legislatures rather than individual representatives/candidates.

Accordingly, in regressions

looking at the party composition of legislatures, we regress “fraction of members of the
legislature that are Democrats” on some measure of disenfranchisement, either policy indicators

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 32

or the continuous measure. Again, state and year fixed effects are included. Bootstrapped
standard errors are clustered at the state-level.

Results: Political outcomes on the extensive margin

This section documents the impact that disenfranchisement had on the election of politicians
(and in turn, the election of policies). Democrats pushed disenfranchisement forward (at least
partially) with the goal of reducing Republicans’ influence, so not surprisingly they were the
party to benefit from disenfranchisement. In our analysis of the extensive margin we first
examine the impact of disenfranchisement on the partisan composition of state legislatures and
then estimate the impact of disenfranchisement on the likelihood that a Democrat will succeed in
an election for the US House of Representatives in a Southern district.
Table 9 documents Democrats’ gains at the state legislature level. Taking as the unit of
observation a state legislative term. The table reports the results of regressing the fraction of
members of each legislature that are Democrats on our measures of disenfranchisement, for both
Upper Houses (columns 1 and 3) and Lower Houses (columns 2 and 4). In columns 1 and 2 our
results suggest that a formal anti-black voting policy (such as a poll tax, literacy test, or ballot
law) is in place, while in columns 3 and 4 we employ our constructed continuous measure which
incorporates both formal and informal disenfranchisement.
Regardless of which measure we use, we find a significant increase in Democrat control
as disenfranchisement takes hold. Notably, the magnitude of the effect of our continuous
measure is much larger. Recall that the continuous measures captures the effects of both formal
and informal modes of disenfranchising black voters. Thus, the larger magnitude of coefficients

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 33

on the continuous measure (which therefore indirectly contains the “policy” measure)
emphasizes the importance of both of these mechanisms in determining the relative partisan
compositions of the state legislatures.
In Table 10 we evaluate the impact of disenfranchisement on Congressional elections
Taking each election for US House of Representatives (within the relevant states and time
period) as the unit of observation, we estimate linear probability models assessing the likelihood
that a Democrat is elected as a function of the electoral environment they face (the racial
composition of the electorate and disenfranchisement status). Whether we measure
disenfranchisement strictly with respect to formal policies (column 1) or using our more general
continuous measure (column 2), two important patterns emerge, both of which are more
pronounced under the use of our continuous measure of disenfranchisement (Column 2). First,
when blacks have access to the ballot, the presence of a large number of blacks within a district
markedly reduces the probability that a Democrat wins the district (albeit insignificantly so when
using the “policy” measure). Second, as blacks were stripped of voting rights, this influence not
only disappeared but was reversed. The positive coefficients on “Disenf. X Pct. Black”
demonstrate that Republicans’ advantage in high-black districts shrank as disenfranchisement
increased. More striking is the fact that the marginal impact of “pct. black” conditional on blacks
being disenfranchised (the linear combination Pct. Black + (Disenf. X Pct. Black)) is also
positive and significant. Thus, disenfranchisement accomplished more than eliminating
Republicans’ advantage: it also shifted the advantage to the Democrats, perhaps driven by white
animosity towards blacks in high-black districts.

Results: Political outcomes on the intensive margin

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 34

We conclude our analysis of the political economy of disenfranchisement by exploring its impact
on the voting behavior of Congressional Representatives. We explicitly consider both sides of
the Republicans’ coalition with black voters.

It is not surprising that the black franchise

impacted congressional outcomes at the extensive margin, aiding the election of Republicans.
Less clear is the impact that black voting had on the intensive margin. Did the black franchise
just lead to the election of Republicans who strongly supported civil rights for blacks ex ante?
Or, did the franchise actually empower black constituencies to demand stronger policy positions
from Republicans once they were elected?

Conversely, did large enfranchised black

constituencies embolden Republican congressmen to take more partisan positions on economic
issues? With these issues in mind, we first assess representatives’ roll call voting behavior in the
context of civil rights bills and then in the context of unrelated bills (as summarized by the first
dimension of the DW-Nominate score.) In both sets of analyses, we first examine the impact of
disenfranchisement on legislator voting behavior in general to provide some sense of how
disenfranchisement shifted policy outcomes. We then examine how the disenfranchisement
differentially impacted the behavior of Republicans and Democrats.
Pooling votes from all of the bills listed in Table 8, Table 11 presents the results of linear
probability models assessing the likelihood that a representative voted against the interest of
blacks. Column 1 uses the simple “policy” indicator as our measure of disenfranchisement, while
column 2 uses the continuous measure. 29 As before, the results are qualitatively similar
regardless of which measure is used. First – and unsurprisingly – Republicans are less likely to

29

We have fewer observations in Column 2 because our continuous measure only goes as far back as
1872 and several roll call votes of interest take place before 1872. Dropping the pre-1872 bills from
column 1 to achieve a set of bills directly comparable to column 2 does not substantially change the
existing results.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 35

vote against the interest of blacks. However, conditional on party affiliation, we find that the
likelihood of voting anti-black varies substantially with the degree of disenfranchisement and the
percent of a representative’s electorate that is black. In particular, when blacks have access to the
ballots, representatives from increasingly black districts are significantly less likely to vote
against the interest of blacks. However, as disenfranchisement takes hold, these representatives
become significantly more likely to vote anti-black (the linear combination of Pct. Black and
(Disenf. X Pct. Black) coefficients is positive and significant.) This, we think, is a striking
finding, highlighting how large black populations in a given place promoted black political
interests before disenfranchisement but undermined them afterward. In columns 3 and 4, we
repeat the analysis from columns 1 and 2 but allow for a differential response by Democrats and
Republicans. While the responses of legislators from the two parties move in the same direction
with respect to percent black and disenfranchisement, columns 3 and 4 demonstrate that
Republicans largely drive the results. Republicans from high-black districts are significantly less
likely to vote anti-black prior to disenfranchisement, while both Democrats and Republicans
from high-black districts are more likely to vote against the interest of blacks after
disenfranchisement.
These patterns of course mirror our findings from the previous section. When blacks have
the franchise, democrats are at a disadvantage in high-black districts and representatives from
high-black districts (controlling for party) are more willing to support black interests. With
disenfranchisement, Democrats gain a relative advantage in high-black districts and
representatives actually become more antagonistic to black policy concerns than are their
Democratic colleagues in low-black districts. The combination of these results provides evidence
of the strength and importance of the role that the black franchise plaid in facilitating black

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 36

access to the political process through their coalition with Republican interests. Further, they
highlight the fact that loss of the franchise not only led to the loss of access to the political
process, but actually paved the way to the election of legislators who actively worked against the
interests of the black populations living within their districts.
Finally, we examine how this coalition (and its demise) affected voting on Republican
interests, exclusive of civil rights. Tables 12a and 12b reports the results of regressions that take
as the dependent variable the first dimension of the DW-Nominate score. Recall that the DWNominate score places each representative (with one observation per congress) along a left-right
spectrum based on how they voted on economic-related issues. Increasingly positive (negative)
scores are associated with increasingly conservative (liberal) voting records.
In Table 12a, we employ the same general empirical specification that has been used
throughout this section, including state and year fixed effects. In Table 12b, we take advantage of
the fact that most congressmen serve in multiple congresses and include congressman fixed
effects. 30 This allows us to better identify how a politician reacts to a changing electorate,
whereas the state and year fixed effects specifications may partially capture a changing
electorate’s propensity to elect a more (or less) extreme candidate. Results are qualitatively
similar regardless of which approach we use.
Models 1 and 2 (in both Tables 12a and 12b) estimate the average impact of
disenfranchisement and percent black on policy outcomes (as measured by DW-Nominate
scores) using each of our two measures of disenfranchisement. 31 The significant positive

30

This approach is not feasible in the analysis of voting on civil rights bills, as we do not work with
consecutive congresses there. Thus, there are far fewer repeated observations of individuals.
31
A shortcoming of this approach is that because the sample consists of every representative from every
Congress (between 1872-1910), any individual who served multiple terms in Congress appears in the
dataset several times. To address this issue, we have run alternative specifications which aggregate the
data to the representative level, averaging DW-Nominate score and relevant covariates across all of an

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 37

coefficient on “pct. black” suggests that, controlling for party, in the presence of a black
franchise large black constituencies lead legislators to adopt more conservative voting behavior.
However, this result is eliminated with disenfranchisement. Despite the strong relationship that
exists in the absence of a policy, once a policy is enacted there is no statistical relationship
between the between percent black within a representative’s district and his voting behavior.
Again, this seems striking. It shows that black disenfranchisement not only affected legislative
voting on civil-rights types of issues, but on a broad range of public policies. To our knowledge,
no previous scholarship has documented empirically such an effect.
Note that unlike our previous analysis, there is no actual reversal in the impact of black
constituencies on the intensive voting margin. In other words, under disenfranchisement we do
not see large black populations being associated with increasingly Democratic voting positions.
Also of interest is that the result here is not more pronounced when we use the continuous
measure of disenfranchisement (and in some cases is insignificant where the policy dummy picks
up a significant relationship).

Recall that the continuous measure in some sense (albeit

indirectly) captures both the effects of formal and informal disenfranchisement. Thus, this can be
interpreted as suggestive evidence that, in the context of legislative roll-call votes, it is primarily
the formal disenfranchisement policies that influence behavior. As before, in Models 3 and 4,
we explore whether these results vary by party. Here, the results are mostly driven by Democrat
voting behavior. That is, we find that – prior to disenfranchisement – Democrats from high black
districts are forced to adopt positions closer to those of Republicans. This is no longer true after
disenfranchisement.

individual representative’s terms. The results are essentially identical whether aggregated to
representative-level or not, so we report only main specifications here.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 38

Concluding Remarks

The central conclusions of this paper are twofold.
economy of the path to disenfranchisement.

First, we consider the political

In doing so, we provide a new quantitative

assessment of the Key-Kousser debate over the relative importance of formal vs. informal efforts
to disenfranchise black voters. While Kousser was correct in arguing that legal institutions were
an important instrument of political disenfranchisement, he overstated their importance when he
claimed that they were significantly more important than violence and informal institutions.
Specifically, the evidence that we provide suggests that formal disenfranchisement hastened an
extant process of informal disenfranchisement on the order of 10 to 12 years. We also provide
empirical evidence that passage of disenfranchising legislation was predicated on increases in the
level of informal disenfranchisement. Furthermore, we provide statistical evidence supporting
the role of two different informal mechanisms to explain informal disenfranchisement. Of most
note is our finding that having a lynching occur within a given county in the year prior to a given
election reduces black turnout by approximately three to six percentage points; lynchings in
proximate counties suppress black turnout by two to four percentage points.
Our second set of results regard the impact of disenfranchisement on legislative
outcomes. This is an area that to date has received minimal quantitative analysis. We find that
through their coalition with Republican interests the franchise gave black voters an effective
political voice. However, once the franchise was removed black citizens in predominately black
congressional districts not only lost their political voice, but faced representatives that were
actively hostile to their interests. While this is an intuitive finding, our regressions are the first to
document its magnitude and significance. In addition, and perhaps more surprising, we also find

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 39

that, by undermining the coalition between blacks and Republicans, voting on issues unrelated to
civil rights also changed, moving toward more liberal, pro-Democrat outcomes. One mechanism
driving these shifts was a move from a competitive political system, where there was a real
chance for Republicans to win office, to one where the Democratic Party dominated state
legislatures and faced little risk of defeat from Republicans.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 40

References
Alston, Lee J. and Joseph P. Ferrie. 1985. “Labor Costs, Paternalism, and Loyalty in Southern
Agriculture: A Constraint on the Growth of the Welfare State.” Journal of Economic History,
45:95-117.
Alston, Lee J. and Joseph P. Ferrie. 1993. “Paternalism in Agricultural Labor Contracts in the
U.S. South: Implications for the Growth of the Welfare State.” American Economic Review,
83:852-76.
Alston, Lee J. and Joseph P. Ferrie. 1999. Paternalism and the American Welfare State:
Economics, Politics, and Institutions in the U.S. South, 1865-1965. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Badel, Alejandro. 2010. "Understanding Permanent Black-White Earnings Inequality." Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper #2010-047B.
Boustan, Leah Platt and Robert A. Margo. 2009. “Race, Segregation, and Postal Employment:
New Evidence on Spatial Mismatch.” Journal of Urban Economics, 65:1-10.
Carson, Scott Alan. 2009. “African-American and White Inequality in the Nineteenth Century
American South: A Biological Comparison.” Journal of Population Economics, 22:739-55.
Cascio, Elizabeth U. and Ebonya L. Washington. 2012. “Valuing the Vote: The Redistribution
of Voting Rights and State Funds Following the Voting Rights Act of 1965.” NBER Working
Paper No. 17776. Cambridge, MA.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. 2001. “Race and Home Ownership: A Century-Long
View.” Explorations in Economic History, 38:68-92.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. 2003. “Race and the Value of Owner-Occupied
Housing, 1940-1960.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 33:255-86.
Craig, Lee A. and Robert M. Fearn. 1993. “Wage Discrimination and Occupational Crowding
in a Competitive Industry: Evidence from the American Whaling Industry.” Journal of
Economic History, 53:123-38.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 1999. “The Rise and Decline of the
American Ghetto.” Journal of Political Economy, 107:455-506.
Dunning, William A. 1901. "The Undoing of Reconstruction," The Atlantic Monthly" Vol 88. No
528: 437-449.
Ewbank, Douglas C. 1987. “History of Black Mortality and Health before 1940.” Milbank
Quarterly, 65 (Supplement 1):101-28.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 41

Fishback, Price. 1984. “Segregation in Job Hierarchies: West Virginia Coal Mining, 19061932.” Journal of Economic History, 44:755-74.
Foote, Christopher L., Warren C. Whatley, Gavin Wright. 2003. “Arbitraging a Discriminatory
Labor Market: Black Workers at the Ford Motor Company, 1918-1947.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 21:493-532.
Hamm, Walter C. 1899. "The Three Phases of Colored Suffrage," The North American Review,
Vol. 168, No. 508: 285-296.
Irwin, James R. and Anthony Patrick O’Brien. 2001. “Economic Progress in the Postbellum
South? African-American Farmers in the Mississippi Delta, 1880-1910,” Explorations in
Economic History, 38:166-180.
Jackson, Kenneth T. 1985. Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States.
New York: Oxford University Press.
King, Gary. 1997. A Solution to the Ecological Inference Problem: Reconstructing Individual
Behavior from Aggregate Data. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kousser, J. Morgan. 1974. The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the
Establishment of the One-Party South 1880-1910. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kousser, J. Morgan. 1999. Colorblind Injustice: Minority Voting Rights and the Undoing of the
Second Reconstruction. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Lang, Kevin and Jee-Yeon Lehmann. 2011. "Racial Discrimination in the Labor Market: Theory
and Empirics," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #17450.
Lang, Kevin and Michael Manove. 2011. "Education and Labor Market Discrimination,"
American Economic Review, 95(4):1327-40.
Maloney, Thomas N. 1998. “Racial Segregation, Working Conditions, and Workers’ Health:
Evidence from the A.M. Byers Company, 1916-1930.” Explorations in Economic History,
35:272-95.
Maloney, Thomas N. and Warren C. Whatley. 1995. “Making the Effort: The Contours of
Racial Discrimination in Detroit’s Labor Markets, 1920-1940.” Journal of Economic History,
55:465-93.
Margo, Robert A. 1990. Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy A. Denton. 1993. American Apartheid: Segregation and the
Making of the Underclass. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 42

Meeker, Edward. 1976. “Mortality Trends of Southern Blacks, 1850-1910: Some Preliminary
Findings.” Explorations in Economic History, 13:13-42.
Naidu, Suresh. 2012. “Suffrage, Schooling, and Sorting in the Post-Bellum U.S. South.” NBER
Working Paper, No. 18129. Cambridge, MA.
Neal, Derek A. and William R. Johnson. 1996. "The role of Premarket Factors in Black-White
Wage Differences," Journal of Political Economy, 104(5): 869-95.
Olsen, Otto. 1980. “North Carolina: An Incongruous Presence.” Reconstruction and Redemption
in the South. Louisiana State University Press, pp. 156-201.
Perman, Michael. 2001. Struggle for Mastery: Disfranchisement in the South, 1888-1908. Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Poe, Clarence H. 1902. "Suffrage Restriction in the South; Its Causes and Consequences." North
American Review. Vol. 175, No. 551 (Oct., 1902), pp. 534-543.
Poole, Keith, and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call
Voting. New York : Oxford University Press.
Ransom, Roger and Richard Sutch. 1977. One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences
of Emancipation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ransom, Roger and Richard Sutch. 2001. “One Kind of Freedom: Reconsidered (and Turbo
Charged),” Explorations in Economic History, 38:6-39.
Redding, Kent and David R. James. 2001. “Estimating Levels and Modeling Determinants of
Black and White Voter Turnout in the South: 1880 to 1912,” Historical Methods, 34:4: 141-158.
Redding, Kent. 2003. Making Race, Making Power. Champaign-Urbana: University of Illinois
Press.
Rodgers, William M. and William E. Spriggs. 1996. "The Effect of Federal Contractor Status on
Racial Differences in Establishment-Level Employment Shares: 1979-1992," American
Economic Review, 41(8): 1589-1613.
Sundstrom, William A. 1992. “Last Hired, First Fired? Unemployment and Urban Black
Workers During the Great Depression.” Journal of Economic History, 52:415-29.
Sundstrom, William A. 1994. “The Color Line: Racial Norms and Discrimination in Urban
Labor Markets, 1910-1950.” Journal of Economic History, 54:382-96.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 43

Table 1: Years in Effect for Voting Laws in the Southern States
State
Alabama
Arkansas
Florida
Georgia
Louisiana
Mississippi
North Carolina
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Virginia
a.
b.

Poll Tax
1902
1893-1904a, 1910
1889
1877
1900
1891
1902
1896
1890
1903
1877-1882g, 1904

Literacy Test
1903
1908
1899
1892
1902
1896
1902

Secret Ballot/Multi-Box
1892b
1889c
1896d
1891e
1899c
1882c
1890f
1894h

Invalidated by U.S. Circuit Court January 7, 1905, reenacted prior to the Election of 1910.
The Election Law of 1891 mandated a secret ballot and standardized ballots. In concert, these requirements were a type of de-facto
literacy test. Illiterate voters could no-longer rely on party symbols and/or similar devices to vote straight party and the secret ballot
requirement created barriers to voting assistance.
c.
Several States adopted complicated “multi-box” election laws that required multiple ballots (typically 8) each to be placed in a
separate ballot box. A mistake in filing a single ballot would disqualify all ballots – thus, these laws operated much like a de facto
literacy test.
d.
Combination of Secret Ballot requirement and an onerous change in registration requirements.
e.
Secret Ballot.
f.
Secret Ballot w/out Party Identifiers & New Registration Law.
g.
Virginia’s Poll Tax was repealed 1882 and then re-instated in 1904.
h.
Secret Ballot w/ out Party Identifiers
Sources: Alabama, Literacy Requirement & Poll Tax– Revised Alabama State Constitution Adopted 1901; Arkansas, Poll Tax – state
constitutional amendments ratified in 1892, Invalidated by U.S. Circuit Court due to electoral challenge January 7, 1905 (Knight v. Shelton),
reinstated as an amendment to Arkansas Constitution in 1909. Secret Ballot – BRANAM C. “Another Look at Disfranchisement in Arkansas”,
1888-1894. Arkansas Historical Quarterly. September 2010; 69(3):245-256; Florida, Multi-Box & Poll Tax – Constitutional amendment of
1885 empowers state to adopt Poll-Tax & Multi-Box adopted by legislature in 1889. See Perman, M. “Struggle for Mastery: Disenfranchisement
in the South 1888-1908” 2001, UNC Press. & Lee, R.W. “The Florida Election Canvassing System” Nova L. Rev. 851, spring, 2002. ; Georgia,
Poll Tax – Cumulative Poll Tax requirement included in 1877 Amendments to State Constitution. Literacy Test – Amendment to the state
constitution in Fall of 1908.; Louisiana, Poll Tax & Literacy Test – Amendments to the State Constitution adopted in 1898. Ballot Law –
Perman (2001).; Mississippi, Poll-Tax, Literacy Test & Multi-Box – Amendments to the state constitutions adopted in 1890.; North Carolina,
Poll Tax & Literacy Test – Amendments to the State Constitution adopted August 1900, Multi-Box – Enacted by State Legislature on 6 March
1899.; South Carolina, Poll Tax & Literacy Test – Amendments to State Constitution ratified December 1895. Multi-Box – Perman (2001).;
Tennessee, Ballot & Registration Laws – Legislative Acts of 1889 Ch.s 188, 207, 218 & Legislative Acts of 1890 Ch. 23 – Ch. 25. Poll Tax –
Legislative Acts of 1890, Ch. 26 Effective March 1890.; Texas, Poll Tax – Amendment to State Constitution adopted November 1902.
“American Government and Politics: The Poll Tax: The Case of Texas”, Donald S. Strong The American Political Science Review Vol. 38, No. 4
(Aug., 1944), pp. 693-709.; Virginia, Poll Tax – Poll Tax requirement for voting established in the State Constitutional Amendments adopted
November, 1876, subsequently removed in an Amendment to the State Constitution ratified in November, 1882. An Amendment to the State
Constitution adopted by the State Legislature July,1902 reinstated the Poll Tax effective 1904. Literacy Requirement – established in
constitutional amendments adopted by the state legislature July, 1902. Ballot Law – Acts of General Assembly 1894 Ch. 746 adopted March
1894.

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 44

Table 2.A: Turnout Regressions - Congressional Elections
VARIABLES
Pct. Black
Polltax
Polltax X Pct. black.
Literacy
Lit. X Pct. Black

(1)
Baseline

(2)
Baseline w/ Trend

(3)
Pre- and Posttrends

(4)
State X Year
Fixed-Effects

0.00781
(0.0311)
-0.0123***
(0.00213)
-0.0222***
(0.00588)
0.0129***
(0.00255)
-0.0902***
(0.00611)

0.0304
(0.0320)
-0.0158***
(0.00210)
-0.00967
(0.00630)
-0.00204
(0.00251)
-0.0495***
(0.00606)
-0.00274***
(0.000323)

0.107***
(0.0224)

0.129***
(0.0117)

0.0568
(0.0362)
-0.0138***
(0.00209)
-0.0159**
(0.00644)
-0.00722***
(0.00254)
-0.0383***
(0.00627)
-0.00490***
(0.000502)
-0.00204***
(0.000275)
0.00474***
(0.000737)
0.156***
(0.0143)

21.59 years
(xxx)

11.06 years
(2.13)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

12,273
0.722

12,273
0.727

12,273
0.731

12,273
0.826

Trend X Pct. Black
Post-law trend
Post-law trend X Pct. black
Constant

0.104***
(0.0108)

Impact of Poll Tax + Literacy
Requirement
Year FE’s
State X Year FE’s
County Version FE’s
Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Clustered @ County-Version Level

-0.0185***
(0.00588)
-0.0289***
(0.00562)
-0.00438***
(0.000440)
0.00491***
(0.000718)
0.0747***
(0.00787)
10.83 years
(2.15)

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 45

Table 2.B: Turnout Regressions - Presidential Elections
VARIABLES
Pct. Black
Polltax
Polltax X Pct. black.
Literacy
Lit. X Pct. Black

(1)
Baseline

(2)
Baseline w/ Trend

(3)
Pre- and Posttrends

(4)
State X Year
Fixed-Effects

0.0147
(0.0205)
-0.0168***
(0.00204)
-0.0292***
(0.00556)
0.0207***
(0.00235)
-0.0869***
(0.00550)

0.0335*
(0.0202)
-0.0216***
(0.00204)
-0.0155***
(0.00568)
0.00754***
(0.00241)
-0.0535***
(0.00627)
-0.00223***
(0.000256)

0.0579***
(0.0212)

0.126***
(0.00817)

0.0368*
(0.0221)
-0.0213***
(0.00196)
-0.0209***
(0.00542)
0.00642***
(0.00237)
-0.0486***
(0.00604)
-0.00310***
(0.000360)
-0.000273
(0.000241)
0.00269***
(0.000545)
0.129***
(0.00946)

30.94 years
(xxx)

22.44 years
(4.21)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

7,765
0.794

7,765
0.797

7,765
0.800

7,765
0.867

Trend X Pct. Black
Post-law trend
Post-law trend X Pct. black
Constant

0.103***
(0.00771)

Impact of Poll Tax + Literacy
Requirement
Year FE’s
State X Year FE’s
County Version FE’s
Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Clustered @ County-Version Level

-0.0164***
(0.00470)
-0.0258***
(0.00555)
-0.00327***
(0.000344)
0.00195***
(0.000520)
0.0981***
(0.00803)
12.92 years
(2.82)

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 46

Table 3: Means of growth in continuous disenfranchisement measure before laws
(1)
Any policy enacted

(2)
Literacy/Ballot law enacted

(3)
Poll tax enacted

0.0383
(0.0101)
0.113
(0.0239)

0.0431
(0.00914)
0.0950
(0.0256)

0.0494
(0.00959)
0.0908
(0.0244)

80

104

91

> 1 election prior to law
1 election prior to law

Observations

Table 4: Hazard Model – Prediction the introduction of a law
VARIABLES
Lagged growth in
disenf. measure
Observations
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

(1)
Any policy

(2)
Literacy/Ballot

(3)
Poll tax

11.83*
(6.063)

17.46*
(9.084)

7.001
(5.053)

80

104

91

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 47

Table 5: The Impact of Lynching on Turnout
VARIABLES
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Congressional elections
% black X Lynching
-0.0211*
-0.0578***
(within county)
(0.0115)
(0.0123)
% black X Lynching X Law
0.0266**
0.0710***
(within county)
(0.0127)
(0.0155)
% black X Lynching
-0.0412***
-0.0399***
(within 100mi)
(0.00762)
(0.00776)
% black X Lynching X Law
0.0503***
0.0486***
(within 100mi)
(0.00953)
(0.00955)
% black X Lynching X Out-of-state
(within 100mi)
% black X Lynching X Law X Out-of-state
(within 100mi)
Panel B: Presidential elections
% black X Lynching
-0.0120
-0.0346*
(within county)
(0.0150)
(0.0190)
% black X Lynching X Law
0.0199
0.0498**
(within county)
(0.0150)
(0.0202)
% black X Lynching
-0.0242**
-0.0238**
(within 100mi)
(0.0118)
(0.0118)
% black X Lynching X Law
0.0322**
0.0314**
(within 100mi)
(0.0128)
(0.0126)
% black X Lynching X Out-of-state
(within 100mi)
% black X Lynching X Law X Out-of-state
(within 100mi)
All specifications include county fixed effects, state-year fixed effects, and trends controls.
Standard errors are clustered at the county level.

(4)
-0.0735***
(0.0141)
0.0773***
(0.0170)
-0.0480***
(0.00869)
0.0513***
(0.0102)
0.0198**
(0.00778)
-0.00689
(0.00879)
-0.0387*
(0.0209)
0.0567***
(0.0214)
-0.0263**
(0.0123)
0.0353***
(0.0129)
0.00457
(0.00847)
-0.00663
(0.00900)

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 48

Table 6: The Impact of a Democratic Governor on Turnout
VARIABLES
Panel A: Congressional elections
% black X Dem. governor

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0618***
(0.00624)

-0.0420***
(0.00848)
-0.00734
(0.0138)

-0.0452***
(0.00590)

-0.0398***
(0.0110)
0.00383
(0.0165)

-0.0375***
(0.00617)

-0.0359***
(0.0106)
-0.0372**
(0.0150)
X
X
X

-0.0427***
(0.00592)

-0.0161
(0.0138)
-0.0771***
(0.0194)
X
X
X
X

% black X Dem. gov. X Law
Panel B: Presidential elections
% black X Dem. governor
% black X Dem. gov. X Law
County Version FEs
Year FEs
Trends
Legislature composition controls

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

“Law” equals one for observations in states and years where there is a poll tax or literacy test. All specifications include controls
for Democratic governor’s vote share in the most recent election he faced, (Dem. governor vote share)2, and the full interaction
of these variables with percent black and “Law”. Specifications with “legislature composition controls” include controls for
fraction of upper house legislators who are Democrats, fraction of lower house legislators who are Democrats, both of these
variables squared, and the full interaction of these variables with percent black and “Law.” Robust standard errors – clustered at
county-level -- in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Table 7: Congressional district-level fraction black by Census year
Census year

Total districts

Mean

5th-95th percentile

1880
1890

68
74

0.46
0.42

[0.13, 0.69]
[0.11, 0.67]

1900
1910

76
84

0.41
0.39

[0.10, 0.65]
[0.09, 0.65]

Page 49

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 50

Table 8: Summary of civil rights bills assessed
Republicans
Votes against
Votes for

Date of vote

Bill/Issue

May 27, 1870
April 19, 1871
April 19, 1871
January 15, 1872
May 31, 1872
June 20, 1874
February 4, 1875
February 4, 1875
May 18, 1878
December 16, 1884
December 17, 1884
July 2, 1890

First Civil Rights Act
HR 320
HR 320
HR 500
Ku Klux Klan Act
S. 1
HR 796
HR 796
Posse Comitatus Act
Railroad Act
Railroad Act
Federal Control of
Elections
Reapportionment

January 3, 1901

Democrats
Votes against
Votes for

1
4
0
8
0
7
18
8
6
0
7
1

24
17
19
8
21
26
14
26
1
3
0
8

5
16
17
0
18
15
18
17
1
48
0
60

0
0
0
15
0
1
1
2
52
2
54
0

0

6

38

0

Table 9: Fraction of Democrat state legislators

Disenfranchisement
Constant

House

(1)
policy

(2)
policy

(3)
cont. disenf.

(4)
cont. disenf.

0.0946*
(0.0506)
0.440***
(0.0809)

0.0873*
(0.0456)
0.487***
(0.0692)

0.233**
(0.0940)
0.420***
(0.0922)

0.174**
(0.0848)
0.471***
(0.0757)

Upper

Lower

Upper

Lower

Observations
180
180
180
180
R-squared
0.613
0.645
0.582
0.606
All specifications include state and year fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors (clustered at
state-level) in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Table 10: Likelihood of a Democrat Winning a Congressional Election

Pct. Black
Disenf. X Pct. Black
Disenfranchisement
Constant

(1)
policy

(2)
cont. disenf.

-0.245
(0.161)
0.500***
(0.160)
0.0408
(0.0302)
0.500***
(0.115)

-0.521**
(0.242)
0.933***
(0.293)
0.144**
(0.0616)
0.623***
(0.140)

Observations
1,188
1,217
R-squared
0.188
0.198
Both specifications include controls for incumbents’ number of terms served, plus
state and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors (clustered at congressional
district-level) in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Page 51

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 52

Table 11: Likelihood of voting anti-black on civil rights bills
VARIABLES
Pct. black
Disenf. X Pct. black
Disenfranchised

(1)
policy

(2)
cont. disenf.

(3)
policy

(4)
cont. disenf.

-0.277**
(0.132)
0.563***
(0.181)
-0.0414
(0.0413)

-0.410**
(0.197)
0.875***
(0.332)
-0.00905
(0.102)

-0.690***
(0.0541)
1.177***
(0.0877)

-0.688***
(0.0562)
1.174***
(0.0902)

0.00109
(0.111)
0.151
(0.164)
-0.0164
(0.0401)
-0.670**
(0.291)
0.703**
(0.319)
-0.297***
(0.0630)
-0.656***
(0.0594)
1.181***
(0.0872)

-0.0757
(0.215)
0.230
(0.324)
0.125
(0.107)
-0.568
(0.378)
0.950
(0.676)
-0.687***
(0.159)
-0.562***
(0.0721)
1.150***
(0.0810)

Repub. X Pct. black
Repub. X Disenf. X Pct. black
Repub. X Disenf.
Republican
Constant

Observations
489
489
489
489
R-squared
0.666
0.666
0.683
0.697
All specifications include state and bill fixed effects. Robust standard errors (clustered at congressional districtlevel) in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 53

Table 12a: Partisanship of voting record (DW-Nominate score)

Pct. black
Disenf. X Pct. black
Disenfranchised

(1)
policy

(2)
cont. disenf.

(3)
policy

(4)
cont. disenf.

0.264***
(0.0825)
-0.241***
(0.0873)
-0.0330
(0.0260)

0.257**
(0.112)
-0.220
(0.145)
0.0317
(0.0573)

1.992***
(0.0314)
-1.147***
(0.0497)

1.998***
(0.0312)
-1.125***
(0.0518)

0.286***
(0.0931)
-0.267***
(0.0974)
-0.0393
(0.0265)
-0.0767
(0.170)
0.173
(0.216)
0.0670
(0.0617)
1.975***
(0.0390)
-1.147***
(0.0497)

0.332**
(0.132)
-0.325*
(0.172)
0.00643
(0.0601)
-0.270
(0.225)
0.635*
(0.334)
0.213**
(0.0897)
1.930***
(0.0481)
-1.125***
(0.0518)

1,487
0.903

1,487
0.903

1,487
0.903

1,487
0.903

Repub. X Pct. black
Repub. X Disenf. X Pct. black
Repub. X Disenf.
Republican
Constant

Observations
R-squared

NOTE: Dependent variable is DW-Nominate score. Positive values indicate increasingly conservative
(Republican) positions. Negative values indicate increasingly liberal (Democratic) positions.
All specifications include state and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors (clustered at congressional
district-level) in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Page 54

Table 12b: Partisanship of voting record (DW-Nominate score)
with Congressman Fixed Effects

Pct. black
Disenf. X Pct. black
Disenfranchised

(1)
policy

(2)
cont. disenf.

(3)
policy

(4)
cont. disenf.

0.306*
(0.182)
-0.238**
(0.102)
0.0918*
(0.0505)

0.414*
(0.248)
-0.373
(0.248)
0.152
(0.124)

-1.160***
(0.0978)

-1.202***
(0.128)

0.342*
(0.186)
-0.287**
(0.118)
0.110*
(0.0561)
-0.634
(0.568)
0.422
(0.348)
-0.133
(0.212)
-1.160***
(0.0948)

0.477*
(0.258)
-0.457*
(0.275)
0.185
(0.136)
-1.231
(1.042)
0.898
(0.565)
-0.298
(0.229)
-1.196***
(0.130)

1,487
0.990
0.306*
(0.182)

1,487
0.990
0.414*
(0.248)

1,487
0.990
0.342*
(0.186)

1,487
0.990
0.477*
(0.258)

Repub. X Pct. black
Repub. X Disenf. X Pct. black
Repub. X Disenf.
Republican
Constant

Observations
R-squared

NOTE: Dependent variable is DW-Nominate score. Positive values indicate increasingly conservative
(Republican) positions. Negative values indicate increasingly liberal (Democratic) positions.
All specifications include congressman and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors (clustered at
congressional district-level) in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Figure 1: Racial Composition and Presidential Election Turnout Rates (Mississippi, 1876-1904).
1876
1888

Page 55

0

.05

# Votes/Total Population
.1
.15
.2

# Votes/Total Population
.05
.1

.25

.15

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

0

.2

.4
.6
Percent Population Black

.8

1

0

.2

.8

1

.8

1

1904

.02
0

0

.02

# Votes/Total Population
.04
.06
.08
.1

# Votes/Total Population
.04
.06
.08

1892

.4
.6
Percent Population Black

0

.2

.4
.6
Percent Population Black

.8

1

0

.2

.4
.6
Percent Population Black

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Figure 2 (Part I): Cross-Sectional Relationship Between Pct. Black and Voter Turnout
Alabama

Arkansas

Florida

Georgia

Louisiana

Mississippi

Page 56

A Poll Tax by Any Other Name: The Political Economy of Post-Reconstruction Disenfranchisement

Figure 2 (Part II): Cross-Sectional Relationship Between Pct. Black and Voter Turnout
North Carolina
South Carolina

Tennessee

Virginia

Page 57

