NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISAGREEMENT AND ASSET PRICES
Bruce I. Carlin
Francis A. Longstaff
Kyle Matoba
Working Paper 18619
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18619

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

We would like to thank Karen Chaltikian, Anna Cieslak, Andrea Eisfeldt, Mark Grinblatt, Chris Hrdlicka,
Terry Nercessian, Praveen Kumar, Hanno Lustig, Jeff Pontiff, Mike Rierson, Jules van Binsbergen,
and Jialin Yu, and seminar participants at the University of Houston for their helpful insights and suggestions.
All errors are our responsibility. All authors are from the Anderson School of Management at the University
of California, Los Angeles, 110 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095. The corresponding authors
are Bruce Carlin (bruce.carlin@anderson.ucla.edu) and Francis Longstaff(francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.˛˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Bruce I. Carlin, Francis A. Longstaff, and Kyle Matoba. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Disagreement and Asset Prices
Bruce I. Carlin, Francis A. Longstaff, and Kyle Matoba
NBER Working Paper No. 18619
December 2012
JEL No. G12,G14
ABSTRACT
How do differences of opinion affect asset prices? Do investors earn a risk premium when disagreement
arises in the market? Despite their fundamental importance, these questions are among the most controversial
issues in finance. In this paper, we use a novel data set that allows us to directly measure the level
of disagreement among Wall Street mortgage dealers about prepayment speeds. We examine how
disagreement evolves over time and study its effects on expected returns, return volatility, and trading
volume in the mortgage-backed security market. We find that increased disagreement is associated
with higher expected returns, higher return volatility, and larger trading volume. These results imply
that there is a positive risk premium for disagreement in asset prices. We also show that volatility in
and of itself does not lead to higher trading volume. Rather, it is only when disagreement arises in
the market that higher uncertainty is associated with more trading. Finally, we are able to distinguish
empirically between two competing hypotheses regarding how information in markets gets incorporated
into asset prices. We find that sophisticated investors appear to update their beliefs through a rational
expectations mechanism when disagreement arises.

Bruce I. Carlin
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
bruce.carlin@anderson.ucla.edu
Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

Kyle Matoba
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles CA 90095
kyle.matoba.2014@anderson.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

Understanding how disagreement affects security prices in financial markets is one of the
most important issues in finance. When participants in a market disagree with each other,
an investor who goes out on a limb and takes a position based on his unique information
may face a greater risk of being wrong. Such trading risk or adverse-selection risk differs
fundamentally from the traditional types of market risks that are priced in asset values.
This means that investors who trade when there is disagreement may require additional
compensation for bearing this risk. Despite the fundamental nature of this issue, though,
there still remains significant controversy in the literature about how disagreement risk affects
expected returns and asset prices.
On one hand, there is an extensive theoretical literature that implies that divergence in
beliefs or opinions should lead to a positive risk premium. For example, Varian (1985, 1989),
Abel (1989), David (2008), and many others argue that the equity premium puzzle may be
explained in terms of a risk premium for heterogeneous beliefs, differences of opinion, or
both. As such, it appears that investors should be compensated for bearing trading risk or
the risk due to adverse selection when disagreement arises.
On the other hand, Miller (1977) argues that differences of opinion in the market can
lead to lower expected returns (higher prices) when short-sale constraints are present. This
occurs because pessimists sit out of the market and asset prices reflect only the valuation
of optimists. Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002) and Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002)
find compelling support for the Miller hypothesis in several markets in which there are
1

binding short-sale constraints. However, Boehme, Danielsen, Kumar, and Sorescu (2009)
and Avramov, Chordia, Jostova, and Philipov (2009) find evidence to the contrary. Either
way, this still leaves open the more fundamental issue of how disagreement is priced in general
markets without significant short-sale constraints, illiquidity, or other trading frictions.
To best resolve the controversy, we would ideally want to study a market with several
key characteristics. First, the market should be highly liquid and essentially free from shortsale constraints. Second, the key drivers of the asset’s value should be easily defined and
common knowledge. Finally, disagreement about these key drivers among the institutions
that actually trade the assets should be directly observable. This latter condition bypasses
the measurement uncertainty that results when an indirect proxy for disagreement is used.
In this paper, we study how disagreement affects asset pricing in such a setting. Specifically, we analyze a time series of prepayment speed (PSA) forecasts issued by major Wall
Street mortgage dealers and then analyze how disagreement affects expected returns, return
volatility, and trading volume in the agency mortgage-backed security market.1
This market provides several unique advantages. First, since the PSA forecasts are given
for various interest rate scenarios and the mortgage-backed securities are guaranteed by the
U.S. government, credit risk and interest rate risk do not affect the dealers’ PSA estimates.
Thus, the only cash flow uncertainty associated with a mortgage-backed security is the timing
of prepayments. In turn, the timing of cash flows is a key factor affecting how investors value
1

Providers of PSA estimates included Barclays, Bank of America, Bear Stearns, Credit Suisse, Deutsche
Bank, Donaldson, Lufin, and Jenrette, Goldman Sachs, HSBC, JP Morgan Chase, Lehman Brothers, Merrill
Lynch, Morgan Stanley, Nations Bank, Prudential, Greenwich Capital, Salomon Brothers, Smith Barney,
and UBS Warburg.

2

mortgage-backed securities. This allows us to precisely correlate disagreement with the
return characteristics of mortgage-backed securities. Second, the PSA forecasts are made
by the same institutions that trade mortgage-backed securities. Therefore, we know directly
what the dealers’ best estimate is for the key input to valuing the assets under consideration,
and this allows us to best study the relationship between disagreement and asset prices. Last,
it is unlikely that disagreement stems from differences in either private or public information.
Specifically, since none of the dealers service the underlying mortgages, they have little or no
private information about the prepayment behavior of specific mortgage-backed securities.
On the other hand, these dealers clearly have full access to all available public information
given the enormous budgets they devote to prepayment modeling. Thus, it is much more
likely that disagreement among dealers is due to differences in their model choice, underlying
assumptions, and interpretation of economic news.
Using PSA estimates during the period from July 1993 to January 2012, we construct
a disagreement index and document a surprisingly high level of disagreement among the
participants in the survey. We show that disagreement is time-varying, correlated with
financial and macroeconomic variables, and magnified when major events occur in financial
markets (e.g., the failure of Long Term Capital Management, the September 11 attacks, and
Lehman Brothers default).
Following this, we study whether disagreement is priced in the market. To examine
whether disagreement about prepayment rates affects the expected returns of mortgagebacked securities, we use the standard approach of regressing ex post realized returns on

3

the ex ante measures of disagreement and other proxies for risk premia. For disagreement
to be priced in expected returns, the disagreement index should have predictive power for
subsequent returns on mortgage-backed securities even after controlling for the other ex
ante risk premium proxies. Using a proprietary data set of daily returns on the Fannie
Mae (FNMA) “To Be Announced” (TBA) security closest to the current coupon mortgage
rate, we construct a measure of monthly returns.2 Including the disagreement index in
the regression increases the predictive power nearly two-fold, and the coefficient on the
disagreement variable is positive and highly significant. Based on this, we can conclude that
increased disagreement is associated with higher expected returns, which supports the thesis
that disagreement is associated with a positive risk premium, as posited by Varian (1985,
1989) and Abel (1989). Further, since we control for several measures of market risk in our
empirical specification (e.g., interest rate risk, the S&P 500 volatility index (VIX), and the
monthly excess return on the CRSP Value Weighted Index), this implies that disagreement
risk is likely to be a form of trading risk or risk due to adverse selection.
Finally, we analyze the relationship between disagreement, return volatility, and trading volume. We use a simple vector-autoregression (VAR) framework in which we include
all three variables with lags and controls. We find that increasing disagreement is followed
by periods of higher volatility and trading volume. This is consistent with Shalen (1993)
and Zapatero (1998) who posit that disagreement and price volatility should be positively
correlated. More strikingly, though, we find that volatility in and of itself does not lead to
2

The “To Be Announced” (TBA) market is a highly liquid market in which buyers and sellers agree on the
future sale prices of mortgage-backed securities, but do not specify which particular assets will be delivered.
Details about this market are in Section 3.2.

4

higher trading volume. Rather, it is only when there exists more disagreement that trading
volume increases. Our findings lend support to the predictions of Harris and Raviv (1993)
who predict that differences in opinion is the primary channel through which uncertainty
leads to higher trading volume. To our knowledge, our study is the first paper to empirically
document the importance of this channel. Our results are also consistent with the empirical
findings of Kandel and Pearson (1995) who document that dispersion in analyst forecasts
affects trading volume, particularly around anticipated earnings announcements. Interestingly, we find that higher trading volume is associated with lower subsequent disagreement.
We view this as intuitive: as investors learn through trade, this gives them opportunities to
update their beliefs about the drivers of asset value.
Besides providing evidence that disagreement is associated with a positive risk premium,
we are able to distinguish between two competing hypotheses regarding how information in
markets gets incorporated into asset prices. As Banerjee (2011) highlights, investors may
update their beliefs via a rational expectations mechanism or may agree to disagree, which
results in persistent differences in opinion. According to Banerjee (2011), these two mechanisms can be distinguished empirically by comparing how return-volume characteristics vary
with disagreement in the market. We find that higher disagreement is associated with higher
expected returns, higher subsequent return volatility, and higher trading volume. These results directly support the rational expectations channel. Especially given our finding that
higher trading volume is associated with lower subsequent disagreement, this makes it more
likely that rational investors do learn from prices and opinions in the market, updating

5

their beliefs using Bayes rule via a rational expectations channel. To our knowledge, these
channels have not been distinguished empirically in previous studies.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature in
this area to highlight our contribution. In Section 3, we review the data that we collect
and some important institutional details regarding the estimation of prepayment speeds, the
agency mortgage-backed security markets, and the TBA market. In Section 4, we construct a
measure of disagreement and describe its empirical properties. In Section 5, we characterize
the relationship between disagreement and expected returns, return volatility, and trading
volume. Section 6 provides some concluding remarks.

2
2.1

Literature Review
Disagreement and Learning

At any point in time, disagreement may arise due to heterogeneous beliefs or due to persistent
differences of opinion. Much attention has been devoted to whether the former eventually
leads to asymptotic agreement when learning occurs. Starting with Blackwell and Dubins
(1962), Aumann (1976), and Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1982), investigators have
focused on conditions that make disagreement impossible in a rational setting. As Aumann
(1976) shows in a remarkably clear way, if agents share a common prior and have common
knowledge of each other’s posterior beliefs, they cannot agree to disagree. Geanakoplos
and Polemarchakis (1982) extend this analysis showing that communication, either direct or

6

indirect, results in an equilibrium with common posterior beliefs. In their words, “we can’t
disagree forever”.
Later work, however, shows that permanent disagreement can arise even when agents
have common priors and observe the same time series of public information. As Acemoglu,
Chernozhukov, and Yildiz (2006) point out, there are many empirical settings where such
permanent disagreement arises. As such, they study a setting in which individuals are
uncertain about the interpretation of the signals they receive, which implies they have nondegenerate probability distributions over the conditional distribution of signals given the
underlying parameter of interest. In such case, Acemoglu, Chernozhukov, and Yildiz (2006)
show that agreement may be impossible, despite the fact that all agents update their beliefs
as Bayesians.
Given this, at any given time there may be several mechanisms whereby disagreement
in a financial market may arise. First, investors may update according to Blackwell and
Dubins (1962), but at the time of observation investors’ beliefs have yet to fully converge.
Second, investors update their beliefs rationally, but because they are uncertain about the
quality of their signal, may fail to converge. Last, market participants may simply “agree to
disagree”, in that they observe the same public information but adhere to different models.
This etiology may have an added behavioral component, but has been used by Varian (1985),
Harris and Raviv (1993), and David (2008).
Given this, the evolution of beliefs may occur via two learning mechanisms. Investors may
learn over time via a rational expectations channel in which heterogeneous beliefs are more

7

likely to converge. Alternatively, disagreement may persist as differences of opinion lead to
dispersion in forecasts. As pointed out by Banerjee (2011) in a theoretical model, these two
channels can be distinguished empirically. With the rational expectations channel, Banerjee
(2011) predicts that increased disagreement should induce higher expected returns, higher
volatility, higher market betas, and higher covariance between volume and absolute returns,
but lower return autocorrelation. When investors agree to disagree (i.e., differences in opinion
persist), the opposite trends should be present. In both channels, disagreement is positively
correlated with trading volume. However, which of these channels exists empirically has not
been addressed in the previous academic literature.

2.2

Disagreement and Risk-Premia

As mentioned earlier, much of the extant theoretical work posits that there should be a positive risk premium associated with disagreement in the market. Following the seminal work
of Mehra and Prescott (1985), several authors rationalized the equity premium puzzle by
considering that investors may have heterogeneous beliefs or differences of opinion. Varian
(1985) considers an Arrow-Debreu economy with agents who have different subjective probabilities. In equilibrium, an increase in the range of probability beliefs typically decreases
asset values, as long as risk aversion is not abnormally high. As such, disagreement is associated with a positive risk premium under reasonable preferences. Varian (1989) provides
an elegant summary of these results.
Likewise, Abel (1989) investigates an equilibrium asset pricing model in which investors’

8

demands for risky stocks and riskless bonds depend on their subjective belief about payoffs
to the risky capital. When beliefs are more heterogeneous, this reduces the stock’s price, and
can dramatically increase the equity premium relative to bonds. Abel (1989) concludes that
the equity premium under homogenous beliefs understates the premium that would arise
under heterogeneous beliefs.
Subsequent theoretical work has confirmed these findings. Basak (2005) provides a good
survey. More recently, David (2008) studies a general equilibrium exchange economy in
which two types of agents have heterogeneous beliefs. The agents have a difference of opinion
and “agree to disagree”, in that they update their beliefs differently about the state of the
economy even though they observe the same signals. Agents trade and may speculate on
the relative accuracy of their respective models. David (2008) shows that less risk-averse
agents speculate more, but demand higher risk premia. Chen, Joslin, and Tran (2010) study
an equilibrium model with “affine” disagreement about fundamentals, which allows them to
consider stochastic disagreement about growth rates, volatility dynamics, and the likelihood
and size of jumps. They show that the risk premium depends on whether disasters strike: in
normal times, optimistic agents accumulate wealth and there is a decline in the risk premium,
whereas when disasters strike, pessimistic agents become more wealthy, which causes the risk
premium to increase.
One important exception in this literature is Miller (1977), who posits that short-sale
constraints should cause disagreement to have a positive effect on stock prices. The intuition
is that when pessimists are forced to sit out of the market, stock prices only reflect the

9

demand from optimists, which causes prices (returns) to increase (decrease). This intuition
is supported in Liu and Seasholes (2011) who study dual-listed shares in China and Hong
Kong. They show that when there is a short-sale ban in China, the prices of Chinese stocks
are 1.8 times higher compared to those in Hong Kong.
Miller (1977) has been tested in several empirical studies and has been shown to be
plausible. Chen, Hong, Stein (2002) develop a stock market model in which an increase
in divergence of opinion results in a decrease in the breadth of stock market ownership,
causing a high stock price and a lower expected return. Then, they show empirically that
reducing the breadth of mutual fund ownership of stocks forecasts a lower stock return.
Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002) analyze the role of dispersion in analysts’ earnings
forecasts in predicting the cross section of future stock returns. They find that stocks with
higher dispersion in analysts’ earnings forecasts earn significantly lower future returns than
otherwise similar stocks. Park (2005) extends this work by testing whether the aggregate
stock market also becomes overpriced when differences in expectations are high. According
to Park (2005), the dispersion in expectations among market analysts has predictive power
for future stock returns: higher dispersion predicts lower stock returns. Similarly, Yu (2011)
uses the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (I/B/E/S) database on analyst forecast and
finds that the ex post market return is negatively related to the bottom-up disagreement.
These findings have led others to study disagreement and expected returns in other
settings where short-sale constraints exist. Moeller, Schlingermann, and Stulz (2007) study
the impact of divergence of opinion on acquirer returns in M&A activity. They find that

10

increasing diversity of opinion about an acquirer’s value causes the acquirer’s return in stock
payment acquisitions to decrease, but have no effect in cash transactions. Chatterjee, John,
and Yan (2012) show that the total takeover premium, pre-announcement target stock price
run-up, and post-announcement target stock price run-up are all higher when investors have
a higher divergence of opinion. They use analysts forecasts, change of breadth of mutual fund
ownership, and idiosyncratic volatility as three proxies for divergence of analyst opinions.
In contrast, Avramov, Chordia, Jostova, and Philipov (2009) show that the negative relationship between dispersion in analysts’ forecasts and stock returns may be simply explained
by financial distress risk. Specifically, they show that the profitability of dispersion-based
trading is only high when credit conditions deteriorate and is concentrated in a small number
of firms with the worst credit ratings. However, the authors find that when their dispersion
measure is adjusted by credit risk, even for this small group of firms, the negative dispersionreturn relationship disappears. Likewise, Boehme, Danielsen, Kumar, and Sorescu (2009)
demonstrate a positive relationship between dispersion of beliefs and expected returns, after
controlling for short-interest and investor recognition as proxied by institutional ownership.
Given this, the support for Miller (1977) is mixed. However, as we note in the introduction, this still leaves open the more fundamental issue of how disagreement is priced in
general markets without short-sale constraints, illiquidity, or other trade frictions.

11

2.3

Disagreement, Trading Volume, and Price Volatility

The earlier literature, both theoretical and empirical, has documented a positive relationship
between disagreement, trading volume, and price volatility. Harris and Raviv (1993) study
the effect of news announcements on trading prices and volume. They assume that traders
receive the same common information, but differ in the way they interpret the information.
Additionally, each trader believes absolutely in the validity of his own interpretation, so
there is difference in opinion. Some of their key findings are that absolute price changes and
volume are positively correlated, and that absolute changes in the mean forecast of the final
payoff and volume are positively related.
Shalen (1993) examines a two-period noisy rational expectations model of a futures market and studies the effect that dispersion in expectations has on price volatility and trading
volume. Higher dispersion causes higher price volatility, higher expected trade volume, and
increases the correlation between absolute price changes and both contemporaneous and
lagged trade volume.
Kandel and Pearson (1995) study how dispersion in analyst forecasts affects trading
volume and asset prices. They analyze trading activity around anticipated announcements
and document increases in trading volume, even when there are no changes in price. Authors
posit that this occurs because traders are using different likelihood functions when they
Bayesian update.
Zapatero (1995) considers a model with two logarithmic utility maximizers that observe
aggregate consumption but disagree about its expected rate of change. Additional infor-

12

mation, which induces heterogeneous beliefs, causes higher volatility of interest rates in the
economy.
Finally, Banerjee and Kremer (2010) study the relationship between disagreement and the
dynamics of trade in a theoretical model in which investors disagree about the interpretation
of public signals. They show that disagreement exacerbates volatility and leads to higher
trading volume, and that there is a positive correlation between volatility and trading volume.

3

The Data

In this paper, we focus on generic agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in which the
monthly principal and interest payments are pooled in a passthrough and distributed to
investors on a pro-rata basis.3 The speed at which homeowners prepay their mortgages is
a key driver of value for these securities. In what follows, we describe PSA estimates that
were made by major MBS dealers for Ginnie Mae (GNMA) mortgage-backed securities. We
then describe how we construct a return series of Fannie Mae (FNMA) forward contracts
that are traded in the “To Be Announced” (TBA) market.

3.1

Prepayment Speed Forecasts

In the mortgage industry, prepayments speeds are typically quoted according to the Public
Securities Association (PSA) convention in which an annualized constant prepayment rate
(CPR) is adjusted for the age of the underlying mortgages. New mortgages tend to have very
3

For in-depth discussions of passthough securities and the MBS market, see Hayre (2001) and Fabozzi,
Bhattacharya, and Berliner (2007).

13

low prepayment speeds and the rate of prepayment rises with age until the mortgages become
seasoned, at which point the rate of prepayment remains constant. The PSA benchmark
curve was introduced in the 1980’s and is often referred to as the 100% curve. At 100%,
the prepayment rate starts at 0% for new mortgages, rises by 0.2% per month until month
30, after which the prepayment speed remains constant at 6%. PSA estimates are quoted
relative to this benchmark. For example, a GNMA with a PSA of 200% would experience
prepayments at a rate twice that of the usual benchmark rate and a GNMA with a PSA of
50% would experience prepayments at a rate that is half the usual benchmark rate.
The expected rate of mortgage prepayment is a key driver of value for valuing MBS,
but is challenging to forecast. Many factors affect prepayments: home sales, refinancings,
defaults, and curtailments. In turn, these are driven by changes in housing supply, mobility,
inflation, interest rates, income, employment, and consumer confidence. Estimating prepayment speeds requires careful modeling, and given the degree of complexity involved may be
a significant source of heterogeneous beliefs about the value of generic MBS.
Major Wall Street dealers in the MBS market participate in a monthly survey, in which
they provide Bloomberg with their best estimate of what the PSA would be for a generic
GNMA with a given coupon rate.4 PSA estimates are given for several interest rate scenarios,
ranging from 300 basis points below the current rate to 300 basis points above. As such,
4

Although there may be slight differences in the characteristics of the mortgage-backed securities for which
the dealers provide forecasts, these differences have a negligible effect on prepayment speeds. This is because
any mortgage-backed security that does not have a generic prepayment speed behavior is excluded from the
pool of mortgages that are traded in the TBA markets and for which dealers have provide forecasts. Instead,
mortgage-backed securities with non-generic prepayment behavior are traded in the separate specified pool
market (Hayre, 2001).

14

the forecasts not only reflect the dealers’ expectations of current prepayment speeds, but
also how those speeds would change in response to interest rate shocks. This has important
ramifications to our analysis: since the PSA estimates offered by the dealers vary with interest
rate changes, any difference of opinion or beliefs that they exhibit is only a function of their
calculation of prepayment risk, not of expected interest rate dynamics. As such, the dealers’
opinions regarding the prepayment speeds are the only source of variation driving returns
of the MBS. In Section 5, this will allow us to study the relationship between disagreement
and asset prices.
Table 1 provides an illustration of the prepayment forecasts provided by survey participants for a generic GNMA I 4.0 percent passthrough security as of January 31, 2012.
Figures 1 plots the forecasts. Not surprisingly, forecasted prepayment speeds are very sensitive to changes in interest rates. As interest rates decline, PSA forecasts increase and vice
versa. More interestingly, however, there is considerable cross-sectional variation in the pattern of PSA forecasts across dealers. In particular, these PSA forecasts differ by a factor of
roughly two at current and lower rate levels, but tend to converge for rate levels substantially
above the current rate level.
Another way to compare prepayment forecasts is to consider measures based on normalized values. For each date and each MBS, we normalize the PSA forecasts provided by a
participant in the survey by their PSA forecast for the current rate level. As such, the normalized value represents the relative change or slope in the PSA forecast for a given change
in the level of rates. Figure 2 plots the normalized version of the data in Table 1. Even with

15

this normalization, Figure 2 shows that there remains significant cross-sectional variation
across the various dealers in terms of their estimates of the sensitivity of prepayment speeds
to changes in the level of mortgage rates.
Figure 3 provides three more snapshots of disagreement during extreme market events:
the failure of Askin Capital Management in 1994, the attacks of September 11, 2001, and
the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008. In the top three plots, there is substantial crosssectional variation in dealer prepayment forecasts for nine interest rate scenarios ranging
from 300 basis above the current rate to 300 basis points below. The three bottom plots use
normalized prepayment forecasts for the same nine interest rate scenarios. As is evident, not
only is disagreement present during the three distinct time periods, but also its severity is
time-varying.
We collected monthly survey data from Bloomberg during July 1993 to January 2012.
In total, 18 dealers participated in the survey at some time during the sample period. The
participants are listed in Table 2. On average, in each month the survey includes forecasts
from 8.42 dealers, with the actual number ranging from 3 to 14. Table 2 also reports the
average ratio of each dealer’s forecast relative to the cross-sectional average across all dealers
for a given date and coupon rate. As shown, the average ratios are all in the range from
0.90 to 1.10, suggesting that none of the dealers are producing forecasts that are, on average,
fundamentally different from the others on average. This last point highlights the fact that
disagreement about prepayment speeds are not likely due to asymmetric access to public or
private information.

16

Indeed, the very nature of the mortgage passthrough market inherently makes it unlikely
that differences in access to public information drives variation in PSA estimates. All of the
dealers in the survey are large financial institutions that have devoted extensive resources
to the mortgage market and each has the ability to obtain all publicly available information
about the term structure of interest rates, interest rate forecasts, volatility, fixed income
markets, mortgage prepayment rates, market liquidity, funding availability, and macroeconomic fundamentals. As such, the inputs to most PSA models are readily available to the
dealers.
It is also unlikely that variation in estimates rests on access to private information. This is
simply because there is actually very little private information available to anyone about the
mortgage pools underlying the MBS or TBA markets. For example, the generic pools traded
on a forward basis in the TBA market tend to be based on recently-originated mortgages
for which there is little prepayment history. In addition, the dealers generally do not hold
or service the mortgage passthrough securities for which they provide forecasts. Thus, they
are likely to have little or no private information about the performance of the underlying
mortgages. Finally, all of the data about the characteristics of individual mortgage borrowers
(such as income, FICO score, appraisals, etc.) are readily available to all market participants.
Taken together, these considerations suggest that asymmetric information is unlikely to
drive disagreement about prepayment speeds. Rather, a more likely explanation is that
variation in PSA estimates is driven by differences in interpretation and beliefs about the
common set of information available to them. These differences in interpretation and beliefs

17

might manifest themselves as differences in the assumptions and/or the structure of the
models that each dealer uses to estimate mortgage prepayments.
Finally, one concern that might arise is whether the dealers have an incentive to disclose their best estimate of prepayment speed truthfully. We believe that they do. First,
as Table 2 suggests, none of the dealers systematically provide different forecasts from their
contemporaries. Second, based on a time series of disagreement that we present in Section 4,
times of larger variation in estimates correspond to large economic events in which uncertainty is present in the market. Last, the estimates themselves are observable to potential
clients of the dealers and therefore provide a signal of technical expertise. As such, dealers
have a strong incentive to demonstrate their skills as they compete for customers.

3.2

Returns on TBA securities

The TBA market is an attractive setting to study returns on MBS since it is such a highly
liquid market. In a TBA trade, the buyer and seller agree on a future sale price, but do not
specify which particular securities will be delivered. Instead, only five additional parameters
are promised: the settlement date, issuer, maturity, coupon, and par amount. According
to Vickery and Wright (2010), this convention simplifies trade, but also ameliorates asymmetric information conflicts in the MBS market, leading to higher agency MBS liquidity.
In the context of our analysis, though, this makes our study of the relationship between
disagreement and returns more precise. That is, since the TBA market is so liquid, we can
be confident that the asset pricing results we document are not merely due to time-varying

18

transaction costs or other trading frictions.
To measure the returns on mortgage-backed securities, we make use of a proprietary data
set provided to us by a major fixed-income asset management firm. This data set consists
of daily returns on Fannie Mae TBA’s closest to the current coupon mortgage rate. Since
TBA’s are forward contracts, the return series consists of the return from going long a onemonth TBA, investing the TBA price in a riskless margin account, and then rolling the
portfolio over every month on the monthly TBA settlement date. Constructing it this way
provides continuity over the monthly roll date in the TBA settlement. We then compute
monthly returns by aggregating the daily returns during the month.

4

Measuring Disagreement

Our extensive data set of PSA forecasts provides us with a unique opportunity to measure
the amount of disagreement in the market directly. Not only does the data set cover a broad
cross section of dealers over nearly 20 years, but there are a number of key features of the
data that allow us to obtain more accurate measures of disagreement. First, since dealers
provide multiple forecasts for each passthrough security, we can normalize each dealer’s
forecasts before estimating cross-sectional variation among dealers. This allows us to control
for the possibility that the levels of PSA forecasts might vary across dealers because of model
calibration issues rather than because of actual disagreement. Second, each PSA forecast
is conditional on a specific term structure scenario. Thus, we can compare forecasts across
dealers while holding fixed assumptions about the evolution of the term structure. Finally,
19

since all of the forecasts are visible in the Bloomberg system, dealers are aware of the extent
to which they disagree with other dealers.
To measure the amount of disagreement in the mortgage markets about prepayments,
we construct a monthly index based on the cross-sectional dispersion among dealers in their
normalized PSA forecasts. Specifically, we first identify the GNMA coupon that is closest to
the current yield of par mortgage-backed securities (the current coupon) and for which three
or more dealer forecasts are available. Generally, the GNMAs closest to the current coupon
tend to have the greatest homogeneity across dealers in terms of their maturity, pricing, and
information availability. Then, for each dealer providing forecasts for the GNMA with the
closest coupon, we take the ratio of the PSA forecast for the −100 basis point scenario to
the PSA for the +100 basis point scenario. Thus, this ratio is a measure of the relative
(normalized) change in prepayment forecast as rates move from 100 basis points above the
current level of interest rates to 100 basis points below. Alternatively, this ratio can be
viewed as a measure of the slope or sensitivity (duration) of prepayments to changes in
interest rates. Finally, we compute the simple standard deviation of the ratios across dealers
providing forecasts for that month. We repeat the same process for all 223 months in the
study period to form the index.
The top panel of Table 3 presents summary statistics for the disagreement index, and
Figure 4 plots its time series. The index has a number of interesting features which may
provide some insight into the nature of disagreement in financial markets. First, there is a
surprisingly high level of disagreement among the participants in the survey. The average

20

value of the index is 40.29 percent, and the median value is 35.43 percent. Thus, even after
normalizing the data, there is wide dispersion among the dealers in their views about changes
in prepayment rates. Second, there is considerable time series variation in the amount of
disagreement among dealers. In particular, the index varies from a low of 1.96 percent,
reflecting almost perfect agreement among dealers, to a high of 138.60 percent, representing
extreme diversity among dealers in terms of their forecasts. The standard deviation of the
index is 24.80 percent. Thus, disagreement is a dynamic phenomenon. Finally, disagreement
among the dealers tends to be persistent in nature; the first-order serial correlation coefficient
for the index is 0.6298. On the other hand, the disagreement index is also strongly mean
reverting as evidenced by the serial correlation of monthly changes in the index of −0.455.
Intuitively, this suggests that the persistence of a period of higher (or lower) disagreement
can be measured in terms of months, rather than years.
Figure 4 also shows that there is an strong episodic nature to period of higher disagreement. In particular, the graph illustrates that peaks in the level of disagreement tend to
coincide with major events in the mortgage and financial markets. Important examples include the mortgage crisis in early 1994 during which the prominent mortgage hedge fund
Askin Capital Management failed. Similarly, the highest level of disagreement during the
study period occurred in August 1998 during the Long Term Capital Management crisis
in the financial markets. Other major events associated with high levels of disagreement
include September 11, 2001, and the Lehman Brothers default of September 2008. Clearly,
disagreement increases during times of extreme uncertainty in the financial markets.

21

To explore this in more depth, we examine the relation between the disagreement index
and a number of key financial and macroeconomic variables that could potentially affect
aggregate prepayment behavior. It is important to stress that in estimating this regression,
we are not implying causality in the relation between the level of disagreement and these
financial and macroeconomic variables. In fact, the level of disagreement and the financial
variables are likely all endogenously determined. Rather, our objective is simply to describe
the contemporaneous relation between the disagreement index and the other variables.
Table 4 reports the results from the regression and lists the independent variables that we
included. As shown, a number of the variables are significantly related to the disagreement
index. For example, the mortgage refinancing index is positively related to the level of
disagreement. This is intuitive since an increase in prepayments is likely to result in greater
dispersion among dealers in their estimates of subsequent prepayments. Similarly, both of
the volatility measures are significantly related to the disagreement index. Interestingly,
however, the sign of the two volatility measures differ. An increase in stock market volatility
results in higher disagreement, while the opposite is true for Treasury yield volatility. An
increase in the slope of the term structure is associated with an increase in disagreement.
Stock returns are negatively related to disagreement. Finally, an increase in unemployment
is associated with a decline in disagreement.

22

5

Is Disagreement Priced?

5.1

Disagreement and Expected Returns

To examine whether disagreement about prepayment rates affects the expected returns of
mortgage-backed securities, we use the standard approach of regressing ex post realized
returns on the ex ante measures of disagreement and other proxies for risk premia. If disagreement is priced in expected returns, then the disagreement index should have predictive
power for the subsequent returns on mortgage backed securities even after controlling for the
other ex ante risk premium proxies.
As discussed in Section 3, we make use of a proprietary data set provided to us by a
major fixed-income asset management firm to construct a monthly return series on mortgagebacked securities. The lower panel of Table 3 provides summary statistics for the FNMA
TBA returns.
Table 5 reports the results from the regression of the monthly mortgage returns on the
risk premium and disagreement proxies. The first specification in the table reports the
results when only the risk premium proxies are included. The second specification reports
the results when the change in the disagreement index added to the regression. To control
for other factors besides disagreement that may drive the expected returns of mortgagebacked securities we include a number of ex ante financial and macroeconomic variables in
the regression. Note that in forecasting the mortgage-backed security return for month t + 1,
we use only the ex ante values of these variables measured from the end of month t − 1 to the

23

end of month t. By including the lagged mortgage return, we control for the possibility of
persistence in the returns. The various fixed income variables control for any term premia,
credit risk premia, or liquidity premia that might be present in expected returns. The stock
return and volatility variables potentially capture any equity risk or volatility risk premia in
mortgage returns. The refinancing index, inflation, and unemployment variables are include
to control for any macroeconomic related risk premia not captured by the other variables.
As shown in the first specification, the risk premium proxies collectively have a significant
amount of predictive power for the mortgage returns. The coefficients for the lagged mortgage
return, the change in the mortgage rate, the stock return, and the inflation rate are significant
at either the five-percent or ten-percent levels. The adjusted R2 for the regression is 8.07
percent. Thus, variation in expected mortgage returns is clearly predictable on the basis of
these risk premium proxies.
The second specification, however, shows that the predictive power of the regression
nearly doubles to 13.83 percent when the disagreement variable is included. The coefficient
is positive and highly significant with a t-statistic of 2.88. Thus, the expected return on
mortgage-backed securities increases when disagreement increases. This is consistent with
the existence of a risk premium for disagreement (i.e., Varian, 1985, 1989; Abel, 1989; David,
2008). Finally, the same risk premium proxies that are significant in the first panel remain
significant when the change in disagreement is added to the regression specification.

24

5.2

Disagreement, Volatility, and Trading Volume

To explore the effects of disagreement on volatility and trading activity we use a simple
vector-autoregression (VAR) framework in which we include measures of all three of these
variables. To measure mortgage return volatility, we use the daily return data described
previously to calculate the standard deviation of returns for each month in the sample
period. As the measure of trading volume, we use the total agency mortgage trading volume
of primary government bond dealers reported by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. This
series is aggregated to the monthly level and includes both trading activity among primary
government bond dealers and trading activity among customers of these bond dealers. An
important advantage of this series is that it covers the trading activity of virtually every
major dealer included in the PSA surveys. Summary statistics for the mortgage return
volatility and trading volume measures are also presented in the lower panel of Table 3. We
estimate the VAR using a specification that includes three lags of the monthly change in the
disagreement index, mortgage return volatility, and trading volume.
Table 6 reports the results from the estimation of the VAR system. Focusing first on the
regression for disagreement, Table 6 again shows that disagreement is strongly mean reverting
since two of the three lagged changes in disagreement are negative and significant. Thus,
an increase in disagreement this month tends to be followed by a decrease in disagreement
in the next two months. There does not appear to be any significant relation between
volatility and subsequent changes in disagreement. The results indicate that there is a
relation between trading activity and subsequent changes in disagreement. In particular,

25

changes in trading activity are significantly related to disagreement. The negative sign of the
coefficient indicates that an increase in trading volume is associated with lower disagreement
in the second subsequent month. This result is intuitive: as investors learn through trade,
this gives them opportunities to update their beliefs about the drivers of asset value.
Turning next to the second regression for volatility, we also see that volatility is strongly
mean reverting, with all three lagged values of changes in volatility significantly negative.
This is not surprising given the well known properties of return volatility. What is interesting,
however, is that there is a strong positive relation between disagreement and subsequent
volatility. In particular, the second lagged change in disagreement is positive and highly
significant, indicating that an increase in disagreement tends to be followed by higher levels
of mortgage return volatility. This effect can be viewed as providing support for Shalen (2003)
and Zapatero (1998), who posit that there is a positive correlation between disagreement and
price volatility. The results also show that increases in trading activity tend to be followed
by higher levels of return volatility. All three lagged values of the change in trading volume
are positive and significant.
Finally, turning to the third VAR equation in which changes in trading volume are the
dependent variable, Table 6 shows that there is a strong relation between disagreement and
trading activity. Both the first and second lagged changes in disagreement are significantly
positively related to changes in trading volume. As discussed earlier, this effect can be
viewed as providing support for Harris and Raviv (1993) and consistent with the empirical
findings in Kandel and Pearson (1995). The results also show that increases in volatility

26

are not significantly related to subsequent changes in trading volume, after controlling for
disagreement. This provides evidence that uncertainty only increases trading volume when
disagreement arises. Alternatively, disagreement is the mechanism by which uncertainty
increases trading in the market. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to identify this
relationship. Finally, we again find that trading volume has a mean reverting tendency as
both the first and second lagged changes in trading volume and significant and negative in
sign.

6

Concluding Remarks

Understanding how information gets incorporated into asset prices may be one of the most
fundamental issues in finance. This paper contributes by helping us to understand whether
and how heterogeneous beliefs and differences in opinions are priced in the market. It also
clarifies how investors take disagreement into consideration and what effect that has on the
time-series of asset prices.
Previous theoretical work tends to support a positive risk premium that is associated
with disagreement. Indeed, the equity risk premium as identified by Mehra and Prescott
(1985) can be rationalized by introducing heterogeneous beliefs or differences of opinion
(Varian, 1985, 1989; Abel, 1989). To our knowledge, this paper is the first academic study
to document this fact empirically in a setting in which there are essentially no short-sale
constraints or other trade frictions.
Disagreement is also associated with higher volatility and trading volume. This relation27

ship has been studied in theoretical work (Harris and Raviv, 1993; Shalen, 1993; Zapatero,
1998) and documented empirically by Kandel and Pearson (1995). In our paper, we show
that disagreement is the primary channel through which uncertainty leads to higher trading
volume. That is, volatility in and of itself does not lead to higher trading volume. Rather, it
is only when there exists more disagreement that trading volume increases with uncertainty.
This distinction has not been identified empirically in previous work.
Finally, disagreement may become incorporated into asset prices via two different mechanisms. As Banerjee (2011) highlights, investors may update their beliefs via a rational
expectations mechanism or may agree to disagree, which results in persistent differences in
opinion. By studying how return-volume characteristics vary with disagreement in the market, we find support for the rational expectations channel. We find that higher disagreement
is associated with higher expected returns, higher subsequent return volatility, and higher
trading volume. Especially given our finding that higher trading volume is associated with
lower subsequent disagreement, this makes it more likely that rational investors do learn from
prices and opinions in the market, updating their beliefs using Bayes rule. These channels
have not been distinguished empirically in previous studies.

28

References
Abel, Andrew B. 1989. Asset Prices under Heterogeneous Beliefs: Implications for the Equity
Premium. Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Acemoglu, Daron, Chernozhukov, Victor, and Yildiz, Muhamet. 2006. Learning and Disagreement in an Uncertain World. NBER Working Paper Series, No. 12648.

Aumann, Rober B. 1976. Agreeing to Disagree. Annals of Statistics 4:1236-1239.
Avramov, Doron, Chordia, Tarun, Jostova, Gergana, and Philipov, Alexander. 2009. Dispersion in analysts’ earnings forecasts and credit rating. Journal of Financial Economics
91:83-101.

Banerjee, Snehal. 2011. Learning from Prices and the Dispersion in Beliefs. Review of
Financial Studies 24:3025-3068.
Banerjee, Snehal, and Kremer, Ilan. 2010. Disagreement and Learning: Dynamic Patterns
of Trade. Journal of Finance 65:1269-1302.
Basak, Suleyman. 2005. Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Beliefs. Journal of Banking and
Finance 29:2849-2881.
Blackwell, David, and Dubins, Lester. 1962. Merging of Opinions with Increasing Information. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 33:882-886.

29

Boehme, Rodney, Danielsen, Bartley, Kumar, Praveen, and Sorescu, Sorin. 2009. Idiosyncratic Risk and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns: Merton (1987) meets Miller (1997).
Journal of Financial Markets 12:438-468.

Chatterjee, Sris, John, Kose, and Yan, An. 2012. Takeovers and Divergence of Investor
Opinion. Review of Financial Studies 25, 227-277.

Chen, Hui, Joslin, Scott, and Tran, Ngoc-Khanh. 2010. Affine Disagreement and Asset
Pricing. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 100, 522-526.
Chen, Joseph, Hong, Harrison, and Stein, Jeremy C. 2002. Breadth of Ownership and Stock
Returns. Journal of Financial Economics 66, 171-205.
David, Alexander. 2008. Heterogeneous Beliefs, Speculation, and the Equity Premium.
Journal of Finance 63:41-83.
Diether, Karl B., Malloy, Christopher J., and Scherbina, Anna. 2002. Differences of Opinion
and the Cross Section of Stock Returns. Journal of Finance 57:2113-2141.
Fabozzi, Frank, Bhattacharya, Anand, and, Berliner, William. 2007. Mortgage-Backed
Securities, Products, Structuring, and Analytical Techniques. John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken,
NJ.
Geanakoplis, John D., and Polemarchakis, Heraklis M. 1982. We Can’t Disagree Forever.
Journal of Economic Theory 28:192-200.

30

Harris, Milton, and Raviv, Artur. 1993. Differences of Opinion Make a Horse Race. Review
of Financial Studies 6:473-506.
Hayre, Lakhbir. 2001. Salomon Smith Barney Guide to Mortgage Backed Securities. Lakhbir
Hyre, ed., John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ.
Kandel, Eugene and Pearson, Neil D. 1995. Differential Interpretation of Public Signals and
Trade in Speculative Markets. Journal of Political Economy 103, 831-872.
Liu, Clark and Seasholes, Mark. 2011. Dual-Listed Shares and Trading. Working paper,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Mehra, Rajnish and Prescott, Edward C. 1985. The Equity Premium: A Puzzle. Journal of
Monetary Economics 15, 145-161.
Miller, Edward M. 1977. Risk, Uncertainty, and Divergence of Opinion. Journal of Finance
32:1151-1168.
Moeller, Sarah, Schlingemann, Frederik, and Stulz, Rene. 2007. How Do Diversity of Opinion
and Information Asymmetry Affect Acquirer Returns? Review of Financial Studies 20, 20472078.
Park, Cheolbeom. 2005. Stock Return Predictability and the Dispersion in Earnings Forecasts. Journal of Business 78:2351-2376.
Shalen, Catherine T. 1993. Volume, Volatility, and the Dispersion in Beliefs. Review of
Financial Studies 6:405-434.
31

Varian, Hal R. 1985. Divergence in Opinion in Complete Markets: A Note. Journal of
Finance 40:309-317.
Varian, Hal R. 1989. Differences of Opinion in Financial Markets. Chapter 1 in Financial
Risk: Theory, Evidence, and Implication, edited by Courtney C. Stone, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Boston, MA.

Vickery, James, and Wright, Joshua. 2010. TBA Trading and Liquidity in the Agency MBS
Market. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports no. 468.
Yu, Jialin. 2011. Disagreement and return predictability of stock portfolios. Journal of
Financial Economics 99:162-183.
Zapatero, Fernando. 1998. Effects of financial innovations on market volatility when beliefs
are heterogenous. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 22:597-626.

32

PSA

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

-300

0

100

Change in interest rates (basis points)

-100

200

Figure 1. Prepayment speed forecasts. This figure plots the PSA forecasts
from seven mortgage dealers for a GNMA mortgage security with a 4 percent coupon
on January 31, 2012. Each dealer provided forecasts for nine term structure scenarios ranging from an upward shift of 300 basis points to a downward shift of 300
basis points.

-200

Prepayment Speed Forecasts

300

Normalized PSA

0

1

2

3

4

5

-300

0

100

Change in interest rates (basis points)

-100

200

Figure 2. Normalized prepayment speed forecasts. This figure plots the
prepayment forecasts described in Figure 1, scaling each dealer’s forecast by their
forecast for no change in interest rates.

-200

Normalized Prepayment Speed Forecasts

300

PSA

Normalized PSA

200

200

300

300

-300

-200

-100

0

100

200

300

6

8

10

-300

-200

-100

0

100

200

300

1.5

2.0

2.5

200

200

-300

-300

-200

-200

Figure 3. Prepayment speed forecasts. This figure plots prepayment forecasts
and normalized forecasts for three distinct time periods: the failure of Askin Capital
Management in 1994, the attacks of September 11, 2001, and the failure of Lehman
Brothers in 2008. As in Figure 1, the top three plots show the cross-section of dealer
prepayment forecasts for nine interest rate scenarios ranging from 300 basis above the
current rate to 300 basis points below. As in Figure 2, the bottom row shows normalized
prepayment forecasts for the same nine interest rate scenarios.

0

0.5

100

100

400

400

2

0

0

600

600

1

-100

-100

800

800

1.0

-200

-200

1000

1000

4

-300

-300

1200

1400

1200

1400

September 2001

2

3

4

200

400

600

800

April 1994

-100

-100

0

0

100

100

September 2008

200

200

300

300

0

0.5

1

1.5

2000

}|

Fed funds rate ≤ 3.5%
Refinancing Wave
{

2005

Resumption
of Fed MBS
purchases

2010

Lehman Bankruptcy

Fed begins MBS purchases under QE1

z

9/11 Attack

Figure 4. The time series of disagreement: July 1993 through January
2012. The disagreement measure is the cross-sectional standard deviation of a
dealer’s normalized prepayment duration forecast, which is the ratio between the
normalized forecast prepayment forecasts conditional upon a -100 and a +100 basis
point shift in the term structure. We use the forecast on the instrument having a
coupon closest to the current par yield, which generally has the best coverage and
most uniform terms.

1995

MBS
Crisis

LTCM
Crisis

Table 1
An Example of the PSA Forecasts Provided by Survey Participants. This table shows the PSA forecasts provided by the survey participants
on January 31, 2012 for a four-percent GNMA mortgage backed security. The PSA forecasts are given for term structure scenarios ranging from a
downward shift of 300 basis points to an upward shift of 300 basis points. The PSA forecasts for the current term structure are given in the column
denoted by zero. Maturity denotes the weighted-average maturity of the mortgages underlying the GNMA mortgage backed security. Coupon denotes
the weighted-average coupon or mortgage rate of the mortgages underlying the GNMA mortgage backed security.

Term Structure Shift in Basis Points

Dealer

Barclays
Bank of America
Credit Suisse
Deutsche Bank
JP Morgan Chase
Morgan Stanley
UBS Warburg

Maturity

Coupon

−300

−200

−100

−50

0

50

100

200

300

348
358
357
359
354
356
355

4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00

819
909
969
1230
844
1456
751

728
881
969
1045
761
1497
736

391
533
789
578
579
1283
417

241
333
598
373
402
875
387

172
226
357
255
205
496
244

144
185
201
192
149
314
195

127
153
144
154
131
232
169

111
126
118
118
105
115
115

107
117
101
110
90
81
110

Table 2
Summary Statistics for PSA Forecasts Provided by Survey Participants. This table provides reports summary statistics for the PSA
forecasts provided by each of the participants in the survey. Number of Months denotes the number of months that the participant provided forecasts.
Total Observations denotes the total number of forecasts provided by the participant. Average Number of Observations denotes the average number
of forecasts provided by the participant during months in which the participant provided forecasts. Average Ratio denotes the average ratio of the
PSA forecast provided by the participant to the average PSA forecast provided by the other participants for the same mortgage backed security that
month. Standard Deviation of Ratio is the standard deviation of the average ratio.

Number
of Months

Total
Observations

Average
Number of
Observations

Average
Ratio

Standard
Deviation
of Ratio

Barclays
Bank of America
Bear Stearns
Credit Suisse
Deutsche Bank
Donaldson, Lufkin, and Jenrette
Goldman Sachs
Greenwich Capital
HSBC
JP Morgan Chase
Lehman Brothers
Merrill Lynch
Morgan Stanley
Nations Bank
Prudential
Salomon Brothers
Smith Barney
UBS Warburg

66
129
181
223
95
56
116
84
14
107
144
188
133
20
92
182
44
223

679
1157
1228
2145
801
504
1009
762
70
1022
826
2009
1212
140
671
1524
286
1617

10.29
8.97
6.78
9.62
8.43
9.00
8.70
9.07
5.00
9.55
5.74
10.69
9.11
7.00
7.29
8.37
6.50
7.25

0.967
1.091
0.993
0.985
0.903
1.011
1.025
1.059
1.072
1.069
0.919
0.999
1.089
0.901
0.948
0.978
1.026
0.977

0.262
0.269
0.161
0.227
0.271
0.212
0.295
0.271
0.119
0.258
0.167
0.174
0.322
0.223
0.130
0.245
0.186
0.232

Total

223

17662

8.42

1.002

0.242

Dealer

Table 3
Descriptive Statistics for the Disagreement Index, Mortgage Returns, Mortgage Return Volatility, and Mortgage Trading Volume.
This table reports the indicated summary statistics for the disagreement index (top panel), and for monthly FNMA mortgage backed security returns,
monthly mortgage return volatility (calculated as the standard deviation of daily mortgage returns for each month in the study period), and total
monthly mortgage trading volume (in $billions) by U.S. primary government bond dealers as reported by the New York Federal Reserve Bank.
Mortgage returns and volatility are expressed as percentages.

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Minimum

Median

Maximum

Serial
Correlation

N

Disagreement Index

0.4029

0.2480

0.0196

0.3543

1.3860

0.6198

223

Mortgage Returns
Mortgage Return Volatility
Mortgage Trading Volume

0.2069
0.1781
938.65

0.8715
0.0922
444.94

−4.2850
0.0441
212.56

0.2222
0.1609
992.31

1.9926
0.5331
1917.80

0.1077
0.6715
0.8959

165
165
165

Variable

Table 4
Results from the Regression of the Disagreement Index on Contemporaneous Variables. This table reports the results from the regression
of the disagreement index on its ﬁrst two lags and on the indicated contemporaneous ﬁnancial and economic variables. Reﬁnancing denotes the
reﬁnancing index reported by the Mortgage Bankers Association. Mortgage Rate denotes the current coupon rate for GNMA I mortgages as reported
by Bloomberg. VIX denotes the S&P 500 volatility index as reported by Bloomberg. Treasury Volatility denotes the Merrill Lynch MOVE index of
Treasury Volatility as reported by Bloomberg. Slope is the diﬀerence between the constant maturity ten-year and two-year Treasury rates as reported
by the Federal Reserve Board. Stock Return denotes the monthly excess return on the CRSP Value Weighted Index. Inﬂation is computed from the
CPI-U index (nonseasonally adjusted) reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Unemployment is the unemployment rate reported by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics. The monthly sample period is from July 1993 to January 2012. The reported t-statistics are based on the Newey-West estimate
of the covariance matrix (with four lags). The superscript ∗∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ﬁve-percent level; the superscript ∗ denotes signiﬁcance at
the ten-percent level.

Variable

Intercept
Indext−1
Indext−2
Reﬁnancing
Mortgage Rate
VIX
Treasury Volatility
Slope
Stock Return
Inﬂation
Unemployment
Adjusted R2
N

Coeﬃcient

0.26806
0.28294
0.29352
0.02140
0.01088
0.00446
−0.00210
0.08068
−0.00979
2.93231
−0.02856

t-Statistic
1.94∗
2.71∗∗
4.27∗∗
2.13∗∗
0.88
2.01∗∗
−2.81∗∗
3.04∗∗
−2.03∗∗
1.51
−2.25∗∗

0.5188
223

Table 5
Results from the Regression of Monthly Mortgage Returns on Ex Ante Mortgage Disagreement, Financial, and Economic Variables.
This table reports the results from the regression of the monthly mortgage return on the indicated ex ante variables, all of which are observed as
of the end of the prior month. Riskless Rate denotes the yield on one-month Treasury bills. Mortgage Rate denotes the current coupon rate for
GNMA I mortgages as reported by Bloomberg. Reﬁnancing denotes the reﬁnancing index reported by the Mortgage Bankers Association. Slope is the
diﬀerence between the constant maturity ten-year and two-year Treasury rates as reported by the Federal Reserve Board. Corporate Credit Spread
is the diﬀerence in the yields of Baa and Aaa rated bonds as reported by the Federal Reserve Board. Ten-Year Swap spread is the diﬀerence between
ten-year swap rates and the ten-year constant maturity Treasury rate as reported by Bloomberg. Stock Return denotes the monthly excess return of
the CRSP Value Weighted Index. VIX denotes the S&P 500 volatility index as reported by Bloomberg. Treasury Volatility denotes the Merrill Lynch
MOVE index of Treasury volatility as reported by Bloomberg. Inﬂation is computed from the CPI-U index (nonseasonally adjusted) reported by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics. Unemployment is the unemployment rate reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The monthly sample period is April
1998 to January 2012. The reported t-statistics are based on the Newey-West estimate of the covariance matrix (with four lags). The superscript ∗∗
denotes signiﬁcance at the ﬁve-percent level; the superscript ∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ten-percent level.

Variable

Intercept
Lagged Mortgage Return
Change in Riskless Rate
Change in Mortgage Rate
Reﬁnancing
Change in Slope
Change in Corporate Credit Spread
Change in Ten-Year Swap Spread
Stock Return
Change in the VIX Index
Change in Treasury Volatility
Inﬂation
Change in Unemployment

Coeﬃcient

0.00406
0.57504
−0.00134
0.01712
−0.00094
−0.00103
0.00147
0.00277
−0.00053
−0.00030
−0.00001
−0.17363
−0.00385

t-Statistic
2.72∗∗
2.65∗∗
−0.47
2.79∗∗
−1.58
−0.31
0.32
0.30
−2.65∗∗
−1.17
−0.26
−1.89∗
−0.93

Change in Disagreement Index
Adjusted R2
N

Coeﬃcient

t-Statistic

0.00394
0.64849
−0.00047
0.01939
−0.00091
−0.00086
0.00306
0.00595
−0.00049
−0.00041
−0.00001
−0.20228
−0.00417

2.68∗∗
3.28∗∗
−0.16
3.18∗∗
−1.57
−0.26
0.68
0.65
−2.30∗∗
−1.57
−0.09
−2.22∗∗
−1.09

0.00928

2.88∗∗

0.0807

0.1383

165

165

Table 6
VAR Estimation of Monthly Changes in Disagreement, Mortgage Return Volatility, and Mortgage Trading Volume. This table
reports the results from VAR estimation of the three indicated equations, where the dependent variable in each speciﬁcation is shown in the column
heading. Disagreement denotes the disagreement index. Volatility denotes the standard deviation of mortgage returns computed using daily returns
each month. Trading Volume denotes the total trading volume of mortgage backed securities by primary government bond dealers as reported by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The VAR is estimated using monthly data for the April 1998 to January 2012 period. The reported t-statistics
are based on the Newey-West estimate of the covariance matrix (with four lags). The superscript ∗∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ﬁve-percent level; the
superscript ∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ten-percent level.

Change in Disagreement

Variable

Lag

Intercept

t-Statistic

Coeﬃcient

t-Statistic

Coeﬃcient

t-Statistic

−0.00161

−0.12

−0.00009

−0.14

0.00971

0.77
2.49∗∗
2.58∗∗
0.69

1
2
3

−0.59158
−0.27546
−0.19971

−4.58∗∗
−2.24∗∗
−2.46∗∗

Change in Volatility
Change in Volatility
Change in Volatility

1
2
3

1.21180
−0.57288
−0.02100

1.08
−0.53
−0.02

Change in Trading Volume
Change in Trading Volume
Change in Trading Volume

1
2
3

−0.04493
−0.21791
−0.17262

−0.54
−2.03∗∗
−1.86∗

N

Change in Trading Volume

Coeﬃcient

Change in Disagreement
Change in Disagreement
Change in Disagreement

Adj. R2

Change in Volatility

0.00052
0.01746
0.00317

0.16
3.38∗∗
0.77

0.13705
0.12737
0.04341

−0.29826
−0.27740
−0.19749

−4.27∗∗
−3.71∗∗
−2.82∗∗

−0.04704
−1.74449
−1.01908

−0.03
−1.65
−0.95

0.00837
0.01619
0.01690

1.67∗
2.17∗∗
2.49∗∗

−0.63393
−0.22545
0.14746

−5.79∗∗
−2.20∗∗
1.65

0.3174

0.2380

0.3169

165

165

165

