NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A VOTING ARCHITECTURE FOR THE GOVERNANCE OF FREE-DRIVER EXTERNALITIES,
WITH APPLICATION TO GEOENGINEERING
Martin Weitzman
Working Paper 18622
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18622
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

Without tying them to the contents of this paper or implying that they neccesarily agree with it, I am
grateful for useful critical comments to Scott Barrett, Richard Cooper, Vincent Crawford, Jerry Green,
David Keith, Eric Maskin, Antony Millner, Hervé Moulin, Wilfried Rickels, and Gernot Wagner. I
acknowledge funding from NSF. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Martin Weitzman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

A Voting Architecture for the Governance of Free-Driver Externalities, with Application to
Geoengineering
Martin Weitzman
NBER Working Paper No. 18622
December 2012
JEL No. Q5,Q54
ABSTRACT
Climate change is a global "free rider" problem because significant abatement of greenhouse gases
is an expensive public good requiring international cooperation to apportion compliance among states.
But it is also a global "free driver" problem because geoengineering the stratosphere with reflective
particles to block incoming solar radiation is so cheap that it could essentially be undertaken unilaterally
by one state perceiving itself to be in peril. This paper develops the main features of a "free driver"
externality in a simple model based on the asymmetric consequences of type-I and type-II errors.
I propose a social-choice decision architecture based on the solution concept of a supermajority voting
rule and derive its basic properties. In the model this supermajority voting rule attains the socially
optimal cooperative solution, which is a new theoretical result around which the paper is built.
Martin Weitzman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 313
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mweitzman@harvard.edu

1

Introduction via Climate Change

Perhaps the most striking aspect of the economics of climate change is the enormity of the
international public-goods problem that it presents. Overcoming the free rider problem
on a global externality of such immense scope represents a world governance challenge of
unprecedented proportions. Not infrequently, one encounters statements in the literature
such as “climate change is the biggest market failure the world has ever seen” or “climate
change is the mother of all externalities” or the like.
This paper begins with the realization that there are really two diﬀerent externalities
involved in the climate change problem, that they have near-opposite properties, that they
interact, and that it seems diﬃcult to say oﬀhand which one is more threatening than the
other. The first externality, described by the above quotes, comes in the usual familiar
form of a public goods problem whose challenge is enormous because so much is at stake and
it is so diﬃcult to reach an international governing agreement that divides up the relatively
expensive sacrifices that would be required by each nation to really make much of a dent in
greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations. The classic governance problem here is to limit the
underprovision of a public good from free riding.
A second less-familiar externality shows up in the scary form of geoengineering the
stratosphere with reflective particles to block incoming solar radiation. This geoengineeringtype externality is so relatively cheap to enact that it might in principle eﬀectively be undertaken unilaterally by one nation feeling itself under climate siege, to the detriment of other
nations. The challenge with this second global externality also appears to be enormous,
because here too so much is at stake and it also seems diﬃcult to reach an international
governing agreement. If the first externality founders on the “free rider” problem of underprovision, then the second externality founders on what might be called the “free driver”
problem of overprovision. If the first externality is the “mother of all externalities,” then
the second externality might be called the “father of all externalities.” These two powerful
externalities appear to be almost polar opposites, between which the world is trapped.
This paper concentrates on the second or free-driver externality. The next section
describes in an extremely compressed form some of the most salient features of geoengineering
that are relevant for motivating the abstract model of this paper. Among the many questions
that need to be addressed seriously are the following. Who is allowed to do geoengineering?
Under what circumstances of national or international climate duress? Who decides? What
is the decision mechanism? Is there any solution concept, however hypothetical and abstract,
that theory suggests? Might this theory form the backbone of a governance architecture?
The paper treats geoengineering as one particular motivating example from a more gen-

2

eral family of public-good-like externalities, whose generic properties are the main subject
of investigation. This abstraction of geoengineering is called a “free driver” externality for
reasons that will become apparent. Governance is the key issue for a free-driver externality.
For example, geoengineering without a proper governance architecture could become a major global threat with the potential to cause serious international frictions and even outright
conflicts. Designing a social-choice architecture to deal with this free-driver governance
dilemma is the central theme of the paper.
I present the simplest formal analytical representation of a free-driver externality that
I can imagine. The model is based on the asymmetric consequences of type-I and type-II
errors as manifested in a kinked loss function with diﬀerent right-side and left-side slopes.
The socially optimal solution is derived. I attempt constructively to sketch the theoretical
outlines of a possible governance architecture for dealing with a free-driver externality. The
point of departure is the insight that a free-driver externality does not confront the thorny
issue of assigning compliance costs, which hobbles resolution of a free-rider externality. I
show that a free-driver externality may be more amenable to a reasonable resolution than a
free-rider externality because some of its worst features can be ameliorated by a relatively
simple voting mechanism.
In this paper I propose a social-choice decision architecture
based on a supermajority voting “solution” to the free-driver problem and I examine its
basic properties. In the model this supermajority voting rule attains the socially optimal
cooperative solution, which is a new theoretical result around which the paper is built. To
be sure, this proposed solution concept is presented and analyzed here only under very
strong assumptions and at such a high level of abstraction that it might seem remote from
geoengineering. Nevertheless, my hope is that the derived supermajority voting rule might
serve as a blueprint for a future governance architecture that is at least worth thinking about
and discussing.

2

Geoengineering as a Free-Driver Externality

I now want to describe very briefly some aspects of the spectre of geoengineering that are
Suppose, for the sake of argument, that the world is unable to
relevant to this paper.1
rise to the free-rider global public-good challenge represented by excessive GHG emissions
and that we continue more or less along the same lines of business as usual.
Suppose,
further for the sake of argument, that some kind of a tipping event like massive methane
1

There is a sizable literature on this subject, which is readily available on the internet by searching the
word “geoengineering.” In particular, Wikipedia provides a decent summary of the main issues with an
extensive bibliography for further reference. See also U.K. Royal Society (2009) and U.S. Academy of
Sciences (2010).

3

or carbon dioxide releases with strong bad feedbacks begins in earnest a half-century or so
from now. In this science fiction story we might then become very scared that we were
riding along a trajectory leading to a climate disaster. A high-temperature trajectory might
be accompanied by the threat of a rapid rise of sea level, altered oceanic and atmospheric
circulation patterns, harmful regional weather changes, and so forth. There could well be
other nasty tipping-point surprises, some of which are “unknown unknowns” in the form
of events that we cannot now even imagine.
What might we then do? In the face of
rapidly rising temperatures some might be tempted to try to deliberately geoengineer the
planet as a quick fix, which would be suﬃcient to restore temperatures to safer levels at least
temporarily while we try, this time hopefully seriously, to cut back drastically on greenhouse
gas emissions and to undertake other, more permanent if much more slower-acting, measures.
A U.S. National Academy of Sciences (2010) study defined geoengineering as “options
that would involve large-scale engineering of our environment in order to combat or counteract the eﬀects of changes in atmospheric chemistry.” Similarly, a study of the U.K. Royal
Society (2009) defined geoengineering as “the deliberate large-scale manipulation of the planetary environment to counteract anthropogenic climate change.” There are several possible
forms of geoengineering. But as of now it seems that there is only one type that would oﬀer
a quick fix to the problem of increasing temperatures. This form of geoengineering would
create an artificial sunshade by shooting reflective particles into the stratosphere that block
out a small but significant fraction of incoming solar radiation. Henceforth in this paper I
abuse terminology by identifying the term “geoengineering” specifically with providing an
artificial sunshade, which more technically is sometimes called “solar radiation management”
(SRM).
The planet itself naturally geoengineers a temporary sunshade every time there is an
explosive volcanic eruption. The resulting aerosol particles that coalesce around the sulfur
dioxide in the stratosphere reflect back incoming sunlight, thereby lowering the Earth’s surface temperatures almost immediately. The last time this naturally occurring phenomenon
transpired was during the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991, which was estimated to have
lowered the average surface temperature of the earth by about 0.5◦ C during the subsequent
year or so, returning to its baseline temperature shortly thereafter.
For better or for worse, discussion about researching a geoengineered sunshade has grown
enormously in the past five years or so. It is an extraordinarily controversial idea. A geoengineered sunshade of particles placed in the stratosphere introduces immense diﬃculties,
dangers, uncertainties, and dilemmas of its own making. Almost no serious observer is
advocating a geoengineered sunshade as a first line of defense against climate change. But it
might have an important niche role as an emergency fallback component in a complete port4

folio of options to deal with global warming. This might prove to be significant if very little
is done about averting climate change by way of curtailing GHG emissions until noticeably
disastrous eﬀects are first bearing down upon us seriously.
A geoengineered sunshade is now the only known measure that can lower worldwide surface temperatures immediately, and therefore it represents as of now the only human response
that might quickly ward oﬀ catastrophic impacts of accelerating-temperature trajectories.
By comparison, carbon dioxide emissions reductions are extremely slow acting on climate
change due to very long inertial lags. Even if it could be so ordained instantaneously, a
complete cessation of CO2 emissions would be unlikely to fend oﬀ many catastrophes by the
time that they appeared. Given the magnitude of the global public goods problem involved,
many observers reluctantly consider it unlikely that significant worldwide GHG reductions
will begin in earnest until and unless the threat of dangerous climate change is perceived
as being tangible and imminent at the grassroots level. If this is an accurate appraisal,
catastrophic climate outcomes have a built-in endogenous component and it becomes less a
question of whether or not they will occur than when they will occur.
The setting for this paper’s problem of geoengineering is a future world that has accumulated high enough GHG concentrations for a long enough time that some countries are
feeling under severe threat from climate changes. Perhaps Bangladesh is threatened by
inundation from melting ice sheets. Or maybe Indian agriculture is starting to wilt from
high temperatures and monsoon alterations. Or other countries like China are beginning
to be concerned with damaging climate change for other reasons. Suppose that the governments of one or more such concerned countries feel themselves under such intense domestic
political pressure that they cannot wait for gradual diminishment of GHG emissions, but
must come out in favor of geoengineering lower temperatures immediately, at essentially no
cost. Suppose that much of the rest of the world fears geoengineering and opposes anyone
doing it. What is the outcome?
A geoengineered sunshade has a long list of things going against it. It is scary and
potentially dangerous. Some of the negatives include continued ocean acidification, depletion
of stratospheric ozone, dependency eﬀects, changed regional weather patterns, a possible
weakening of resolve to cut GHG emissions, and so forth. My purpose here is not to discuss
in detail the pros or cons of an engineered sunshade approach to the climate change problem.
I merely want to convey the most rudimentary knowledge of the basic underlying idea for
the primary purpose of motivating the model of this paper.
The economics of geoengineering have been called “incredible.”2 It appears that the
2

The term is due to Scott Barrett (2009), who drew attention to this aspect. See also the more recent
papers of Klepper and Rickels (2012) and Goes, Keller and Turano (2011). These papers contain a more

5

direct costs of putting up a geoengineered particulate sunshade by rockets or high-altitude
airplanes or balloon-tethered hoses or other means are extraordinarily cheap relative to the
costs of mitigating GHG emissions. Essentially any determined country with even a mediumsized economy could, if unopposed, put up a geoengineered sunshade on its own, in answer
to its own perceived need to lower global temperatures and change its own climate quickly.
This is a true “twin externality” to the conventional externality of curtailing greenhouse
gases. The conventional CO2 emissions externality is sometimes called the “mother of all
externalities” because cutting back on greenhouse gases is so expensive that it is diﬃcult
to attain meaningful global agreement on apportioning compliance costs. But then a geoengineered sunshade might be called the “father of all externalities” because knocking down
global average temperatures is so cheap that in principle one country could do it unilaterally
to fit its own particular perceived needs, thereby imposing a dangerous “public bad” on a
multitude of other nations. So the world faces not one, but two global externalities from
climate change.
The first, conventional, externality of curtailing GHGs is already familiar as a global
public goods issue having a serious free-rider problem. The second, geoengineered-sunshadetype externality, is less familiar. I next move towards addressing this “free driver” externality
in a formal model. At the center of this formal model will be a generalization of the idea of
type-I and type-II errors, as extended to a continuum of possible choices. The next section
is intended to motivate this generalization by first discussing errors of type I and type II in
a simpler and more standard discrete binary setting.

3

Background: Errors of Type I and Type II

The purpose of this section is to motivate envisioning geoengineering as involving two types
of risks — the risk of overdoing it (here analogous to a type-I error), and the risk of underdoing
it (here analogous to a type-II error). In the paper, these two errors or mistakes will have
asymmetric expected losses akin to a two-part tariﬀ.
This section exposits the simplest zero-one binary choice model in a decision-theoretic
context with diﬀerent penalties for type-I and type-II mistakes. I give two examples. The
first involves a familiar aspect of the criminal justice system and is used primarily as a
conceptual device to motivate further applications. The second example involves a simple
discrete-choice version of a geoengineering decision, which will serve as a more direct motidetailed description of the economics of geoengineering than this paper, along with references. Ballpark
estimates of annual geoengineering costs of oﬀsetting projected heating this century might be in the neighborhood of a few billion dollars per year. Thomas Schelling (1996) should be credited with first articulating
the idea that the low cost of geoengineering turns the climate-change externality problem on its head.

6

vation for the more general continuous version of a free-driver externality that constitutes
the core model of this paper.
A type-I error is the rejection of a null hypothesis that is actually true. It is a false positive. By contrast, a type-II error is the acceptance of a null hypothesis that is actually false,
or a false negative. These two types of mistakes may have very diﬀerent risk consequences
with very diﬀerent penalty losses. The goal, which will later be made more explicit, is to
minimize some risk-weighted sum of the two types of losses.
Consider first a binary choice example from the legal system. Let the null hypothesis
be that the accused is innocent. Let  be a binary variable reflecting the judgment of a
hypothetical outside social observer representing the justice system as a whole.
If =0,
the outside observer believes that the accused is innocent. If =1, this outside observer
believes that the accused is guilty.
Let  be a binary variable representing the actual verdict. If =0, the accused is found
not guilty and is acquitted. If =1, the accused is found guilty and receives a severe
punishment.
A type-I error occurs when =0 and =1. To the hypothetical outside observer representing the justice system as a whole, an innocent person has wrongfully been found guilty.
Suppose the outside observer attaches a social-penalty loss of Λ to this false-positive outcome.
A type-II error occurs when =1 and =0. To the outside observer representing the
justice system as a whole, a guilty person has erroneously been acquitted. Suppose the
outside observer attaches a social-penalty loss of Λ to this false-negative outcome.
Throughout this paper it is more convenient to think in terms of relative penalty losses,
which are normalized so that
Λ
(1)
≡
Λ + Λ
is the penalty weight attributed to an error of type I, while 1 −  is the penalty weight
attributed to an error of type II. These two types of errors are unlikely to be equally costly.
In the justice example a type-II error is like a disturbing error of omission, whereas a type-I
error is more like a horrifying error of commission. Therefore, in this example,  is large
while 1 −  is small.
In some sense yet to be made precise, the social observer wishes to design an optimal
voting-like decision mechanism for a hypothetical jury that reflects the relative weights of
the two penalty losses for errors of type I and type II.
The second example concerns a vastly oversimplified and highly abstract formulation of
geoengineering as a binary choice problem. This discrete example will serve as a transition

7

bridge to the more general continuous version of the free-driver problem, which is the main
subject of the paper.
The null hypothesis here is that geoengineering is undesirable. Let  be a binary variable
reflecting the opinion of an interested party about whether or not geoengineering should be
undertaken. If =0, the interested party believes that geoengineering is harmful to them
and should not be undertaken. If =1, the interested party believes that geoengineering is
beneficial for them and should be undertaken.
Let  be a binary variable representing the actual outcome of geoengineering. If =0,
geoengineering is not undertaken. If =1, geoengineering is undertaken.
A type-I loss occurs when =0 and =1. In this case geoengineering is undertaken
despite the fact that it harms the interested party. From the point of view of the interested
party, geoengineering is overdone here, resulting in a type I error. Suppose that in this
situation the relative social loss is .
A type-II loss occurs when =1 and =0. In this case geoengineering is not undertaken
despite the fact that it benefits the interested party. From the point of view of the interested
party, geoengineering is underdone here, resulting in a type II error. In this situation the
relative social loss is 1 − .
As with the justice example, it seems reasonable to suppose that a type-II loss (geoengineering is underdone) might be disturbing to the interested party because of the risks
involved, whereas a type-I loss (geoengineering is overdone) might be horrifying to the interested party because it represents a relatively much riskier strategy with a relatively much
more heavily weighted downside. Therefore, in this binary geoengineering example,  is
relatively large while 1 −  is relatively small.
In a sense that is about to be made precise within a more general setting, the social
planner wishes to design a constitution for an optimal voting-like decision mechanism that
reflects the relative riskiness-weights of the two penalty losses. It is to this more general
formulation that we now turn.

4

The Pure Theory of a Free-Driver Externality

Geoengineering represents a kind of perverse public good having some distinctive properties.
I feel that the role of the geoengineering externality will be better appreciated when it is first
studied in its abstract pure form — as a particular example belonging to the public-good-like
family, but having special features whose generic properties warrant attention in their own
right.
A pure public good is typically defined as a commodity that is both nonexcludable (no
8

one can be excluded from consuming it) and nondiminishable (one person’s consumption
does not alter the amount available to others). A public good is standardly considered
to be good, meaning that almost everyone thinks more of it is better, at least throughout
the domain having policy relevance. Usual examples are police and fire protection, national
defense, weather predictions, and the like.
A pure public bad is typically defined as a commodity that is both nonexemptable (no one
can be exempted from consuming it) and nondiminishable (one person’s consumption does
not diminish the amount that others must consume). A public bad is standardly considered
to be bad, meaning that almost everyone thinks more of it is worse, at least throughout the
domain having policy relevance. A standard example of a public bad is pollution.
Because it is costly to increase the level of a public good or to decrease the level of a
public bad, such situations are plagued by the free-rider problem. Instead of paying their
fair share, everyone wants to free ride oﬀ the payments of everyone else. The problem of a
geoengineering externality has a diﬀerent structure.
I now want to introduce the idea of a gob.3 A “gob” is a commodity that may be good or
bad depending on who is consuming it and how much they are consuming. A pure public gob
is a pure public good (more of it is better) for some people under some circumstances and a
pure public bad (more of it is worse) for some other people under some other circumstances.
Throughout this paper, the primary example of a pure public gob is geoengineering in a
future world suﬃciently impaired by climate change that some countries would want to do
some of it on their own if allowed to act unilaterally. The key issue is that parties diﬀer in
their attitudes toward whether more or less gob is desirable and some mechanism is required
to reconcile these diﬀerences.
A free-driver externality is a pure public gob whose production happens to be free (or,
in practice, is suﬃciently inexpensive to be considered free). In this paper the inspiration
for, and primary application of, a “free-driver externality” is geoengineering the stratosphere
with reflective particles to reflect back incoming solar radiation. This would be so relatively
cheap that many nations could aﬀord to do it unilaterally.
The key abstraction about being “free” in a “free-driver externality” is that, absent the
rules of some overarching governance structure, each agent is in principle free to choose the
gob level that will be imposed on itself and all of the other agents. Depending on the nature
of the gob and its reversibility by other agents, this leads either to anarchy with an undefined
outcome (for free reversibility by other agents) or to an extreme outcome dominated by the
3
I think it is somewhat clearer for a reader if I use fresh terminology rather than attempting to shoehorn
this problem into the already existing terminology of public goods when this problem is not a fully comfortable
fit with the existing terminology.

9

agent with the most extreme preferences (for complete irreversibility by other agents). I
assume that the latter situation is relevant for geoengineering because it is diﬃcult to do
counter-geoengineering.
The theoretical core of this paper characterizes the socially optimal level of gob production in an abstract setting and shows that, under certain circumstances, it can be implemented by a relatively simple supermajority voting rule. It is possible to pose the free-driver
externality problem in somewhat more general form than I do here, but only at the expense
of dulling a sharp simple result. In this paper I aim for sharpness and simplicity. Therefore, in what follows, I abstract heroically — to put it mildly. At the very least, the crisp
formulation of this paper can serve as a benchmark point of departure for more complicated
analyses.
Let there be  “nations” indexed by  = 1 2  . There are  “citizens of nation ”
and a total of  “citizens of the world,” where
=


X

 

(2)

=1

The citizens of each nation have identical preferences with each other but (possibly)
diﬀerent preferences from the citizens of other nations. In this metaphor each citizen will
have one vote and it will not matter whether citizens of nation  vote individually or as a
bloc with  votes. At the highest level of abstraction, the { } are given voting weights
that have already been assigned on the basis of some or another criterion.
Suppose that a citizen of nation  prefers the gob level  ≥ 0 to any other level. Without
loss of generality, nations are arranged in ascending order of gob preference so that
   =⇒  ≤  

(3)

Let  ≥ 0 be the actual level of gob production. Let  () be the loss function for a
citizen of nation . This paper considers a very simple loss function, which embodies the
concept of constant per-unit penalties for type-I and type-II mistakes. When  ≥  , the
citizens of nation  suﬀer what to them is a type-I error of magnitude  −  (geoengineering
is overdone). When    , the citizens of nation i suﬀer what for them is a type-II error
of magnitude  −  (geoengineering is underdone).
All citizens of all nations have the same per-unit penalty of  for a type-I error, and the
same per-unit penalty of 1 −  for a type-II error. Therefore,
 ≥  =⇒  () = ( −  )
10

(4)

and
   =⇒  () = (1 − )( − )

(5)

The loss function (4), (5) is of a simple piecewise-linear form with a single kink at  .
In this sense,  acts as a kind of reference point for nation . The rightward per-unit loss
aversion is  for an error of type I, while the leftward per-unit loss aversion for an error of
type II is 1 − . Citizens diﬀer only by their preferred reference level of the geoengineering
gob, with the per-unit loss aversion for deviating in the same direction from their preferred
reference level being identical ( for errors of type I and 1 −  for errors of type II). This is
a strong assumption. For sure, the crisp voting result of the paper depends on this simple
kinked penalty function with the same slopes for everyone, where the only diﬀerence is the
location of the kink.
Without loss of generality it is assumed that   12. (The case   12 involves a
symmetric treatment, while the case  = 12 is familiar from median-voter theory.) Thus,
in what follows a gob level above the desired reference level involves a type-I penalty that is
greater than the type-II penalty for a gob level equally far below the desired reference level.
In the situation of geoengineering,  might well be deemed to be much larger than 1 − 
because overdone geoengineering involves risks that are potentially much more dangerous
than underdone geoengineering.
If states are sovereign and do not have binding treaty obligations they can, at least in
principle, act unilaterally in their own self interest by choosing their own favorite amount of
reflective particles to place in the stratosphere. (This is an abstraction of a more complicated
situation where states have a responsibility not to harm other states, are not giving or receiving behavior-altering side payments, and so forth.) The non-cooperative Nash-equilibrium
outcome e is then the maximum of the preferred geoengineering-gob level among all nations.
By (3), the nation who favors the most gob is nation . Therefore
e =  = max { }
1≤≤

(6)

The nation , which favors the most gob, is called the dominant free driver.
Even without yet defining formally the socially optimal gob level, what leaps out of (6)
is the extraordinary degree of non-optimality of e. In the Nash equilibrium, free-driven gob
is oversupplied because only the dominant driver is satisfied with the outcome — everyone
else wants less gob but is forced to accept a large per-unit type-I loss of . In this setup
there are not just winners and losers. Only the dominant free driver is a winner — everyone
else is a big-time loser from being exposed to the large risk of a type-I error.
Of course, this model is just a particularly heroic abstraction of a much more complicated
11

situation.
Even so, the message would appear to be that geoengineering looks like a
dangerous global externality accident waiting to happen, which has the potential to cause
serious international frictions and even outright conflicts if it is left to simmer away on
its own.
Overall, the externality-governance issues raised by geoengineering look severe
enough to warrant being addressed by the international community long before the problem
might actually raise its ugly head.
What is the socially-optimal level of geoengineering gob? To answer this question requires a bit more notation.
For any nonnegative gob level , let  () be the cumulative distribution function, meaning
the fraction of the population whose preferred gob level is less than or equal to . Thus,
1 X
=⇒  () =
 
 =1


 ≤   +1

(7)

The social loss function L () is postulated to be the utilitarian sum of each citizen’s
loss function. From (4), (5) this means that
L () = 

Z

0



( − )  () + (1 − )

Z

∞



( − )  ()

(8)

where the integration in (8) refers to a Riemann-Stieltjes integral that accommodates  ()
being a step function.
A -optimal gob level  ∗ satisfies
L ( ∗ ) = min {L ()}
0≤∞

(9)

where existence of such a minimizing  ∗ is guaranteed because L () is continuous in  ≥ 0
and L (∞) = ∞.
The next task is to show that a socially optimal gob level  ∗ is supported as a supermajority voting equilibrium and vice versa.
Much of the paper to this point has been devoted to justifying (8) with a story exposited
in terms of geoengineering gob. An alternative route would have been to begin with (8)
as a social loss function, leaving its justification in the background since (8) might apply
for many situations (with or without free driving). This alternative route might focus an
even sharper spotlight on the key analytical result of the paper, which is to show that there
is a tight duality connection between optimized social welfare (9) (when expressed by the
particular loss function (8)) and a simple voting implementation mechanism. In other words,
the pure theory has a stand-alone quality that does not require the motivational example of
12

free-driving geoengineering, although, in my opinion, it enhances the telling of the story.

5

The Socially-Optimal Gob as a Voting Equilibrium

We seek a robust governance architecture with “good” properties that can react automatically to balance ever-changing opinions and attitudes about individually-desired levels of
geoengineering gob { }.
Suppose  0   00 . Consider the following
Consider any two levels of gob 0 and  00 .
asymmetric pairwise -voting rule. To raise the level of geoengineering gob from 0 to  00
requires the approval of at least the fraction  of voters, in which case we write  00 %  0 
In the other direction, to lower the level of geoengineering gob from 00 to  0 requires the
approval of at least the fraction 1 −  of voters, in which case we write  0 %  00 .
A -voting equilibrium is a value b that defeats (or at least ties) every other possible
candidate in a -voting binary comparison — i.e., for all  ≥ 0 it holds that
b % 

(10)

In this setup with type-I and type-II errors, what is the relationship between a voting
equilibrium and a social optimum? The following proposition is a generalization of the
median-voter theorem. (The median-voter theorem corresponds to the special case  =
 = 12.) The result presented in the following theorem is new and constitutes the main
theoretical contribution of this paper.4
Theorem 1 The gob level  ∗ is -optimal if and only if  ∗ is a -voting equilibrium.
Proof. Diﬀerentiating (8) from the right, the right hand side derivative of L () is
L
=
+

Z

0

+

 () − (1 − )

Z

∞

+

 () =  () +  − 1

(11)

For all y0, define
 − () ≡ lim  ( − )
→0+

(12)

and define  − (0) = 0.
4

For the technically minded reader, the model is a special variant of choosing a one-dimensional public
outcome when preferences are single peaked. The voting mechanism I recommend is one of the classic
“positional dictator” mechanisms (Moulin (1991), section 10.2). Such mechanisms have the good properties
of group-strategy-proofness, eﬃciency, and fairness. My special contribution is to motivate and study a
special asymmetric pair of marginal disutilities as one moves away from the peak in each direction. (The
symmetric case is standard and associated with median-voter theory.)

13

Diﬀerentiating (8) from the left when   0, the left hand side derivative of L () is
L
=
−

Z

0

−

 () − (1 − )

Z

∞

−

 () =  − () +  − 1

(13)

Both  () and  − () are monotone non-decreasing in  with  − () ≤  (), signifying
from (11) and (13) that the function L () is convex. The necessary and suﬃcient condition
for L () to be minimized is therefore
0≤

L
+

(14)

for  = 0, and
L
L
≤0≤
−
+

(15)

for   0.
Combining (11) and (13) with (14) and (15), gob level  ∗ minimizes L () if and only if
it satisfies the condition
(16)
 − ( ∗ ) ≤ 1 −  ≤  ( ∗ )
We next show that (16) implies that  ∗ is a -voting equilibrium.
Pick any 00   ∗ . Then at least the fraction  ( ∗ ) of voters are “closer” to  ∗ than to
 00 , and therefore prefer  ∗ to  00 . Equivalently, no more than the fraction 1 −  ( ∗ ) prefers
 00 to  ∗ . But from (16), 1 −  ( ∗ ) ≤ , which then means that no more than the fraction 
of voters prefers  00 to  ∗ . This implies, by the -voting rule, that  ∗ %  00 .
Pick any  0   ∗ (if  ∗  0). Then at least the fraction 1 −  − ( ∗ ) of voters are “closer”
Equivalently, no more than the fraction
to  ∗ than to  0 , and therefore prefer  ∗ to  0 .
− ∗
0
∗
− ∗
 ( ) prefers  to  . But from (16),  ( ) ≤ 1 − , which then means that no more
than the fraction 1 −  of voters prefers  0 to  ∗ . This implies, by the -voting rule, that
 ∗ %  0 .
To show that ∗ being a -voting equilibrium implies (16), we employ a local smallperturbation argument. Let  = 0+ be an arbitrarily small positive number.
The fraction of voters who prefer  ∗ +  to  ∗ is 1 −  ( ∗ ). But  ∗ %  ∗ +  implies
by the -voting rule that no more than the fraction  of voters prefers  ∗ +  to  ∗ . Thus,
1 −  ( ∗ ) ≤ . In the other direction, if  ∗  0 then the fraction of voters who prefer  ∗ − 
to  ∗ is  − ( ∗ ). But  ∗ %  ∗ −  implies by the -voting rule that no more than the fraction
1 −  of voters prefers  ∗ −  to  ∗ . Thus,  − ( ∗ ) ≤ 1 − . Combining these two conditions
yields (16).
Theorem 1 is the primary result of this paper. However, one further insight is possible.
14

Extending the argument for a well-known result from the median voter ( = 12) literature5
to the case  6= 12 can be used to prove that a -voter rule applied to all pairs of alternatives
produces a group voting-preference relation that is complete and transitive.

6

A Naive Geoengineering-Governance Proposal

The idea of geoengineering is not about to go away any time soon. If anything, interest
in solar radiation management is likely to grow over time. Geoengineering is simply too
cheap and too tempting for it to recede politely from public view. My basic premise is that
we must do some serious thinking about the architecture of a geoengineering governance
structure — sooner, rather than later.
What are we to make of Theorem 1? Can it be taken seriously? I guess the answer
depends, at least in part, on the alternatives. An old adage has it that “you can’t beat
something with nothing.” Suppose we allow a willing suspension of disbelief. In the spirit
of putting something constructive on the discussion table, I propose the following idea.
Yes, we need advisory commissions with public participation for the governance of geoengineering. And yes, we need to balance standards of oversight with international political
reality and with principles of transparency and accountability. But at the end of the day
this is all too vague. At the end of the day we need to have some concrete governance structure with specific rules concerning how to make final decisions about geoengineering levels
that diﬀerently impact parties having diﬀerent interests.
Otherwise, with a free-driver
externality, we risk paralysis and conflict.
For the sake of specificity, I somewhat arbitrarily propose that a type-I error of overdone
geoengineering be given a relative penalty weight three times that for a type-II error of
underdone geoengineering. In the notation of this paper, I am setting  = 34. This value
corresponds to a voting system that requires a 3/4 majority. (A more cautious person who
puts a heavier weight on a type-I error of over-geoengineering relative to a type-II error of
under-geoengineering might prefer a value of  = 45, say, while a less cautious person might
prefer  = 23, say.6 )
A permanent “international governance structure for geoengineering” is established, at
the core of which is a body acting like a legislative general assembly. Each country has
a metaphorical representation in the general assembly, with voting weight proportional to
its population, say. Any proposal to increase the level of geoengineering requires at least
5

See, e.g., Easley and Kleinberg (2010), section 23.6.
Ideally, the appropriate value of  is thrashed out at some kind of constitutional convention of the
parties that occurs well before free-driver geoengineering becomes an actual threat. This is yet another
real-world detail that I am putting aside in favor of focusing sharply on the big picture.
6

15

a 3/4 supermajority of the general assembly. Any proposal to decrease the level of geoengineering requires at least a 1/4 “superminority” of the general assembly. An executive
arm is empowered to carry out decisions of the general assembly and to assess penalties for
noncompliance. A judicial arm adjudicates conflicts.
Is this proposal naive? Almost surely yes. To begin with, there are very few precedents
of international voting outcomes applying with binding force. More generally, I am simplistically brushing aside a great many truly important aspects of the real world of international
agreements.
There is already a sizable literature concerning the nuances and diﬃculties of geoengineering governance written by distinguished experts on international law and politics.7 The
tone of this literature is grounded in the realities of global politics and is largely pessimistic
about the prospects for workable geoengineering governance. This paper has somewhat different aims, being more theory-based, more speculative, more heroic, and more naive. The
proposal of this section is being mooted not so much as a reality-encapsulated operational
plan, but more in the spirit of a theory-based point of departure for further discussion.
Maybe the world is not yet ready for such heroic voting governance, but it could be worth
a try.
Why would countries voluntarily accede to a voting limitation on their sovereignty? I
do not have a good answer to this question except to ask another question. What are the
alternatives for geoengineering governance and on what alternative theory are they based?

7

Concluding Comments

At the beginning of this paper I posed the basic question of whether or not there exists a
solution-theoretic concept, however hypothetical and abstract, that might form the backbone
of a governance architecture for a free-driver externality. I think that Theorem 1 is giving
an aﬃrmative answer to this question in the form of a supermajority voting rule. But of
course readers are free to form their own opinions and to have their own answers. It is
true that a number of very strong assumptions have been made to obtain the basic result.
The model is subject to all of the many caveats that apply to the median voter theorem
(which is a special case of Theorem 1 corresponding to  =  = 12). That is on the one
hand. On the other hand, the conclusion of Theorem 1 is quite striking. There is not
really a comparable voting-optimality result available for a free-rider externality because the
7

See, e.g., Parson and Ernst (2012), Bodansky (2011), Victor (2008), Horton (2011) and the many
references cited therein.

16

problem of apportioning compliance costs adds an extra dimension of strategic complexity.8
In this sense I think that a free-driver externality may be more “solvable” than a free-rider
externality. Even though it may not be easy to apply the principle of Theorem 1 in practice,
at least there exists such a principle.
The assumptions behind Theorem 1 are very restrictive. Not only are preferences singlepeaked, but they take the specific form of a piecewise-linear loss function with everyone
having the same relative-penalty slopes for errors of type I and type II. As usual, however,
the restrictiveness of the assumptions behind the model must be weighed against the power
of the results coming out of the model. Here a relatively simple supermajoritarian rule
overcomes the free-driver externality to obtain the socially optimal solution. Readers must
judge for themselves the relevance of conclusions based upon this model in a domain where
strong results are scarce. Unsurprisingly, my own conclusion would be that Theorem 1 can
serve as a useful starting point for concentrating the mind on a serious discussion of a decent
architecture for the governance of geoengineering.

References
[1] Barrett, Scott (2008). “The incredible economics of geoengineering.” Environmental
and Resource Economics (39), 45-54.
[2] Bergstrom, Theodore (1979). “When Does Majority Rule Supply Public Goods Eﬃciently?”. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 216-226.
[3] Bipartisan Policy Center (2011). “Report of the Task Force on Climate Remediation
Research.” Bipartisan Policy Center, Washington DC..
[4] Bodansky, Daniel (2011). “Governing Climate Engineering: Scenarios for Analysis.”
Belfer Center Discussion Paper 2011-47.
[5] Easley, David, and Jon Kleinberg (2010). Networks, Crowds, and Markets. Cambridge
University Press.
[6] Goes, M., Keller, K., Turana, N. (2011). “The economics (or lack thereof) of aerosol
geoengineering.” Climatic Change, 109, 719-744.
8

But see Bergstrom (1979) for discussion of some special cases of apportioning costs in a majority voting
context.

17

[7] Horton, Joshua B. (2011). “Geoengineering and the Myth of Unilateralism: Pressures
and Prospects for International Cooperation.” Stanford Journal of Law, Science, and
Policy, vol. IV, 56-69.
[8] Klepper, Gernot, and Wilfried Rickels (2012). “The Real Economics of Climate Engineering.” Economics Research International, vol. 2012, article ID 316564.
[9] Moreno-Cruz, Juan (2011). “Mitigation and the geoengineering threat.” Mimeo, University of Calgary.
[10] Moulin, Hervé (1991). Axioms of Cooperative Decision Making. Cambridge University
Press.
[11] Parson, Edward A., and Lia N. Ernst (2012). “International Governance of Climate
Engineering.” UCLA Law School Research Paper no. 12-23 (forthcoming in 2013 Theoretical Inquiries in Law).
[12] Schelling, Thomas (1996). “The economic diplomacy of geoengineering.”
Change 33, 303-307.

Climatic

[13] U.K. Royal Society (2009). Geoengineering the Climate: Science, Governance and
Uncertainty. Mimeo.
[14] U.S. National Academy of Sciences (2010). Advancing the Science of Climate Change.
Mimeo.
[15] Victor, David G. (2008). “On the regulation of geoengineering.” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 24(2), 322-336.

18

