                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   ARE THE GAINS FROM FOREIGN DIVERSIFICATION DIMINISHING? ASSESSING
                  THE IMPACT WITH CROSS-LISTED STOCKS

                                           Karen K. Lewis
                                             Sandy Lai

                                        Working Paper 18627
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18627


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




We thank Choong Tze Chua, Magnus Dahlquist, Gangadhar Darbha, Bernard Dumas, Vihang Errunza,
Bob Hodrick, Andrew Karolyi, Craig MacKinlay, David Ng, Paolo Soderlind, Jessica Wachter, Frank
Warnock, Amir Yaron, and participants at the Darden Emerging Markets Conference, Duke University,
the International Monetary Fund, the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank, Singapore Management University,
the Society for Financial Econometrics Meetings, the Swedish Institute for Financial Research, and
the Wharton Finance and International Finance lunch seminars for useful comments and suggestions.
We acknowledge funding from the Wharton-SMU Research Center at Singapore Management University.
Of course, any errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Karen K. Lewis and Sandy Lai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Are the Gains from Foreign Diversification Diminishing? Assessing the Impact with Cross-listed
Stocks
Karen K. Lewis and Sandy Lai
NBER Working Paper No. 18627
December 2012
JEL No. C32,F36,G15

                                            ABSTRACT

How important is foreign diversification? In this paper, we re-examine this question motivated by
findings from the literature about foreign companies that are listed on US exchanges. Specifically,
domestic portfolios including cross-listed stocks can provide the same diversification as foreign market
returns without the need for US investors to go abroad. At the same time, the betas of these foreign
stock returns against the US market increase after cross-listing, suggesting diversification worsens
over time. In this paper, we assess the impact of these changes on foreign diversification for a US
investor. We test for and estimate breaks in the sensitivity of individual foreign stocks listed on US
exchanges. We find that roughly half of the changes in betas arise from greater integration between
the U.S. and the companies' home markets, not in the companies betas themselves. Moreover, the gains
from diversifying into these stocks has declined over time.


Karen K. Lewis
Department of Finance, Wharton School
2300 SHDH
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
lewisk@wharton.upenn.edu

Sandy Lai
School of Economics and Finance
Hong Kong University
Room 908. 9/F, K.K. Leung Building
Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
sandy_lai@hku.hk
       Over the past few decades an increasing number of companies have listed their equities across

international borders. The availability of these stocks on the exchanges of international markets

has put them at the nexus of academic and policy discussions about the degree of integration of

…nancial markets. These discussions have generated sometimes con‡icting di¤erent themes. On the

one hand, the domestic availability of foreign stocks may provide international diversi…cation for

domestic investors without these investors having to directly invest abroad. As such, these stocks

allow for a relatively low transaction cost way to acquire foreign assets.1 On the other hand, the

betas of these foreign company stock returns against the domestic market returns tend to increase

after cross-listing, mitigating the potential for diversi…cation.2 Moreover, the ability to cross-list in

another market is often taken as a sign of liberalization for emerging markets.3 Therefore, periods

when many stocks cross-list from a given country may coincide with changes in the comovement

between that country and the rest of the world.               As such, higher betas after crosslisting from a

foreign stock and the U.S. market may simply re‡ect a change in betas from the company’s home

market due to liberalization.

       Combining these observations leads to important questions. Since betas against the domestic

market increase after cross-listing, how much does this reduce the ability to use these stocks for

foreign diversi…cation without the need to invest abroad? And does this change in foreign com-

pany betas arise from a greater integration of the home country of that company, consistent with

liberalization notion?

       To address these questions, we study the diversi…cation potential for foreign stocks before and

after they are listed in the US exchanges. We …rst analyze the local market behavior of foreign
   1
     See Errunza, Hogan, and Hung (1999) as well as the discussion below.
   2
     On the changes in domestic betas, see for example Foerster and Karolyi (1999) and the survey by Karolyi (2006).
   3
     Indeed, some papers have used the earliest date when a domestic company could list abroad as a proxy for
liberalization while others have used the dates when domestic prices re‡ect world markets. For example, Bekaert,
Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002) and Henry (2000) use cross-listing dates as one of the liberalization date proxies. Also,
Bekaert and Harvey (1995,1997) analyze the time series process when domestic equity prices switch from domestic
to international pricing.



                                                          1
stocks listed in the two major stock exchanges in the United States, the New York Stock Exchange

and NASDAQ. We then examine whether and how their asset pricing sensitivities to the US market

have changed over time.        In order to allow for potential shifts in asset pricing characteristics at

any point in time, we do not want to impose a change at the cross-listing date unlike the existing

literature. Therefore, we require an empirical approach that allows for, but does not require, changes

in asset pricing characteristics over time. We also need a framework considers discrete changes in

stock price behavior to be consistent with both the emerging market liberalization literature and

the event study approach used in the cross-listing literature.              We therefore use the break-date

estimator of Bai and Perron (1998). For each stock price in local markets, we …rst test for the

number of breaks and estimate the break dates, if any are detected. We then use the parameter

estimates before and after these dates to provide a time series of asset pricing characteristics for

each stock. From this panel set of estimates we form portfolios of foreign stocks and consider how

much risk reduction would be provided to a U.S. investor from these portfolios.

       Our analysis delivers three main results that address the questions above. First, a large pro-

portion of foreign cross-listed companies do show evidence of a shift in their betas against the U.S.

market, consistent with the literature. Moreover, the evidence suggests that for about 80% of these

companies there is only one break. Second, however, much of the shifts in company betas against

the U.S. market appear to be driven by changes at the country level. In particular, roughly half of

the foreign company returns do not show any further evidence of shifts in betas once conditioned

on the relationship between their home market and the U.S. market. This result suggests that the

apparent shifts in the company betas may simply re‡ect a broader market shift, consistent with the

liberalization literature. Third, the foreign betas against the U.S. markekt are generally increasing

over time, both for the cross-listed companies and their home markets.4 As a result, we …nd that
   4
   This tendency may re‡ect a greater increase in institutional investor ownership. Bartram, Gri¢ n, and Ng (2012)
…nd that cross-listed stocks become more highly correlated with the new owner’s other stock holdings after listing.



                                                        2
the potential variance reduction possible through holding these foreign securities is declining over

time.

    While our results are consistent with …nding noted in the literatures above, our approach allows

us to investigate new questions.          For example, as in the literature on cross-listing events, we

…nd that betas against the U.S. market tend to be higher after this event. But we do not need

to condition on this event.         Moreover, we can decompose the changes into changing betas at

the country versus company level. Also, as in the diversi…cation literature, we …nd that foreign

cross-listed stocks provide hedging opportunities.           However, we also can analyze changes in the

diversi…cation bene…ts of these stocks over time.

    Finally, as in the liberalization literature, we test for and …nd breaks in the relationship between

foreign country and the U.S. market returns. For example, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002)

also use the Bai-Perron estimator to test for breaks in asset pricing relationships to date the implicit

liberalization events for some emerging market economies.5 While we share the use of the Bai-

Perron methodology, there are important di¤erences in our empirical strategy. Bekaert, Harvey,

and Lumsdaine study breaks in emerging market indices using vector-auto-regressions including

macro-economic variables that might be correlated with liberalization. By contrast, we test for

breaks at the individual …rm level and examine the implications for parameters in event time in

keeping with the event study-driven cross-listing literature. To our knowledge, this paper represents

the …rst study to analyze the potential for individual breaks for a large number of stocks and then

study the resulting portfolio implications. Moreover, while companies from emerging markets are

represented in our cross-listed portfolios, we are interested in the full range of foreign companies

including those from developed markets as well.6 Finally, our analysis allows us to consider whether
   5
     Another approach used to examine liberalization is to estimate a regime switching model. An early example in
the literature is Bekaert and Harvey (1995) while a more recent example that allows for regime-speci…c spillovers is
Baele (2005).
   6
     We discuss how our estimates compare the the Bekaert, Harvey and Lumbdaine (2002) results below.




                                                         3
the individual …rm returns re‡ect breaks at the country level, as noted earlier.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 gives an overview of the empirical framework

including the data and methodology. Section 2 reports the break date and parameter estimates for

the foreign companies as well as their home markets. To gain insight into the economic signi…cance

of these parameters, Section 3 considers a thought experiment in which a US investor observes

these parameters and then attempts to optimally diversify risk. Section 4 evaluates the robustness

of our results to various assumptions. Section 5 provides concluding remarks.



1     The Empirical Framework

In this section, we …rst describe the data and the basic asset pricing framework assuming no changes

in asset return behavior. In this framework, returns depend upon both local and foreign factors

in keeping with the cross-listing and liberalization literatures. We then develop the empirical

methodology that allows for potential changes in the sensitivity of foreign returns to the US, but

does not impose any changes a priori. Finally, we preview our thought experiment to evaluate the

economic impact of the diversi…cation gains.


1.1    Data

To address the questions posed in the introduction, we require a data set of foreign company returns

listed in the United States with su¢ cient history after cross-listing to analyze potential changes.

For this purpose, we choose foreign companies that are listed in the United States in July 2004

since this date implies at least …ve years of data before the …nancial crisis in 2009.7 Our analysis

therefore provides a clear picture of an investor’s decision in 2004. However, we are also interested

in how the set of stocks may have changed over time, both before 2004 and afterwards. To examine
   7
     Similarly, Sarkissian and Schill (2009) choose 1999 because they focus upon long run returns after cross-listing
of up to ten years.


                                                         4
how the investability of foreign stocks before 2004 would have a¤ected diversi…cation, we consider

various assumptions about when these stocks became available to US investors below. The e¤ects

of changes after 2004 are more straightforward, however. The set of stocks after 2004 is relatively

stable since less than 1% of our sample was delisted by 2009.

    Foreign stocks trade on a variety of exchanges in the US, including the over-the-counter market

(OTC) and institutional investor-only markets (RADR, 144A). In this paper, we restrict the analysis

to foreign stocks on the public exchanges for two main reasons. First, our goal in this paper is to

consider foreign company diversi…cation from the viewpoint of a representative small US investor,

not investments that are only available to large institutional investors. Second, OTC stocks do

not require the same level of disclosure requirements as do domestic and foreign stocks on the

public exchanges. As such, domestic investors may consider these foreign stocks to have higher

information costs. Moreover, the market value of these stocks tend to be quite small.

    Exchange-traded foreign companies in the US primarily trade on the NYSE and NASDAQ.8 In

this study, we use weekly stock returns in foreign markets for parent non-US companies that were

traded on the New York Stock Exchange or NASDAQ in 2004. The time period is from January

1970 or the earliest date of availability to October 2009. All return series are measured in US

dollars to represent the value from the point of view of a US investor.

    For non-Canadian companies, the data were collected in the following steps.9 In the …rst step, a

data set of all foreign companies with stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange were obtained

from the Bank of New York, the primary custodian bank for ADRs in this country. This set was

cross-checked with listings from the NYSE itself and JP Morgan, another ADR custodian bank.

In the second step, the company stock returns in the home market and market values for the full
   8
     In 2004, the market value of foreign stocks on the NYSE and NASDAQ together comprised 98% of the total
market value across public exchanges. At the 2000 peak of NASDAQ, the foreign companies hit a max of 27% of
this total. Thus, the companies listed on NYSE comprise most of the foreign market cap in the US. In 2004, only 10
foreign companies were traded on the AMEX and we exclude them for simplicity.
   9
     More details about the construction of the data are given in Appendix A of the paper.


                                                        5
available history were collected from Datastream.

      Canadian companies trade directly on US exchanges without ADR registration. As such, these

companies are not listed on custodian bank ADR directories. Instead, we used the Canadian

companies on the U.S. exchanges from Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004,2005).10

      To measure the local market index returns, we use the Data Stream Total Market indices for

the home market of each foreign company that lists in the US.11 Weekly returns are constructed for

each of these indices reconverted into US dollars from 1970, or the earliest available, until October

2009. The returns are transformed into excess returns by subtracting the weekly T-bill rate. We

do not generally require that US investors can invest in foreign market indices over time. We only

assume that these returns mimic the factors that US investors view as important drivers in foreign

return behavior.

      Table 1 provides summary information about this data set. Panel A reports on the break-

down of …rms across exchanges and industries. NYSE has 380 companies coming from 39 foreign

countries, while 196 foreign companies domiciled in 28 foreign countries are listed on NASDAQ.

There are three foreign countries represented on NASDAQ but not NYSE, Malaysia, Singapore,

and Sweden. Thus, the total number of foreign countries represented on the two exchanges is 42.

Panel A also gives the number of di¤erent industries represented.12 NYSE trades the equity of

foreign companies coming from all 47 industries, while NASDAQ foreign companies only produce

in 40 industries. Finally, Panel A shows that the foreign companies listed on NYSE are generally

older than those on NASDAQ. The average number of observations across …rms on the NYSE is

1092, or about 21 years, while that same average across …rms on NASDAQ is 862, or about 17

years.

      Panel B of Table 1 breaks down the information by the home country of the company. The
 10
    We thank Andrew Karolyi for providing the names for the Canadian companies used in these papers.
 11
    The index includes reinvested dividends converted into US dollars.
 12
    This breakdown uses the JP Morgan industry categorization.


                                                     6
…rst column gives the date at which the market index data begin for each country, ranging from

January 5, 1973 for many countries to June 24, 1994 for Portugal. The columns to the right provide

more information about the composition of the foreign company presence on each exchange. The

home country of the largest number of foreign companies is Canada, followed by the United King-

dom. Emerging markets generally have the lowest number of foreign companies on the exchanges.

Moreover, the average number of observations from these foreign companies is generally lower. For

example, the Phillipines has only two companies on the NYSE and one company on NASDAQ, and

across these three companies the average number of weekly observations is 411 or about 8 years.

Below we will discuss the impact of the di¤ering number of observations across countries on the

results.


1.2      Asset Pricing Framework

Standard factor pricing models used in the literature on international stock returns typically have

the form:

                                            rti` =   i`
                                                          +   i`0 `
                                                                 ft   + ei`
                                                                         t



Where rti` is the nominal return on the equity of company i that is domiciled in country ` at date

t in excess of the investor’s risk free rate, ft` is a vector of factors at time t that a¤ect the returns

                                                              i`
on stocks from the equity market of country `,                     is a vector of factor intensity parameters for

…rm i,     i`   is a constant parameter and ei`
                                             t is a residual. Since all the analysis below requires excess


returns, we will simply call these variables returns throughout the rest of the paper.

   The cross-listing literature often uses a one or two factor version of this model as the benchmark

for conducting event studies. For example, Sarkissian and Schill (2009) examine the e¤ects of cross-




                                                          7
listings by …rms around the world using market models of the form:13



                                             rti` =       i`
                                                               +      i`0 `
                                                                         rt   + ei`
                                                                                 t                                 (1)



Where rt` is the local market return so that equation (1) is the standard closed economy CAPM,

and of the form:

                                        rti` =   i`
                                                      +        i` `
                                                                 rt   +   iu u
                                                                            rt    + ei`
                                                                                     t                             (2)


Where equation (2) includes the return of the foreign market in which the stock is cross-listed.

Since we only consider companies that are cross-listed in the US, rtu refers to the US market return

below. Furthermore, we focus upon the U.S. return in equation (2) because we are interested in

examining the sensitivity of the foreign company returns on the US market.

       While the cross-listing literature has focused upon the parsimonious two factor model, there may

be more factors that are important for explaining international stock returns. For example, Karolyi

and Wu (2012) examine a multi-factor model of international returns but …nd the importance of

a hybrid model that depends upon "global" and "local" factors.                            Similarly, Bekaert, Hodrick,

and Zhang (2009) show that a factor model that includes additional global and local Fama-French

factors best explains the returns of companies that comprise the MSCI World Index. If these

factors are important for explaining the foreign companies listed in the US, they will appear in the

residuals and may a¤ect the variance of residuals. Below we describe analysis to explore the impact

of these ommissions.
  13
    Sarkissian and Schill (2009) also consider a third model that substitutes the world market return for the foreign
market. Preliminary estimates based upon the world market instead of the US market obtained similar results to
those reported below.




                                                                8
1.3    Parameter and Break-date Estimation

While the basic factor model has been used throughout international asset pricing studies, a number

of studies have shown that the parameters change over time. In studies of cross-listing events, for

example, the parameters are often allowed to shift at the time of cross-listing with signi…cant

changes.14 Similarly, analyses of market liberalizations such as Henry (2000, 2003) often consider

regime changes on the liberalization date that make the local market return depend upon the world

return. Furthermore, a large literature has found that the variance and covariances of international

stock returns are time-varying.15

    Given this evidence, therefore, we require an empirical strategy that allows the factor loading

parameters to shift on given dates, potentially discretely. But we also need a framework that does

not force the shift to occur at a point in time or at all. For this purpose, we use the break date

estimator developed by Bai and Perron (BP) (1998). This estimator …nds the date or dates in the

time series when the factor sensititives are most likely to have changed.16 Bekaert, Harvey and

Lumsdaine (2002) use this estimator to date liberalizations at the market level. By contrast, we

use the estimator to recover a time series of parameters. for each foreign company in our sample.

Given this time series for each …rm, we build a market-weighted portfolio of these companies.

    To understand the estimation procedure, we …rst describe the basic BP framework in a single

equation case before explaining how we extend this analysis to build up a cross-section of these

time-series estimates.
  14
     For example, Foerster and Karolyi (1999) let the alphas and betas on local and foreign markets shift at the event
date. Recently, Sarkissian and Shill (2009) assume that only the betas shift at the event date. See the survey in
Karolyi (2006) for other examples.
  15
     For early works examining the relationship between shifting variances and market liberalizations see Bekaert and
Harvey (1995, 1997). Bekaert, Hodrick and Zhang (2009) use time-varying betas to …nd the best …tting factor model
for the set of companies in the MSCI World Index.
  16
     The estimator can also be interpreted as a more gradual change in parameters that cumulates into a signi…cant
change at a given time. See Bai and Perron (2003a).




                                                          9
1.3.1    Single-Equation Estimation


The BP estimator requires specifying a maximum number of breaks in the parameters. Therefore,

our analysis begins by estimating this number of breaks. For now, we assume that this number of

breaks is simply given as m, although we estimate this number below. To economize on notation

for developing the estimator to be used below, we subsume the …rm superscripts and rewrite the

general factor model in (1) as:

                                                              0
                                                      rt =        ft + et                                            (3)


where rt is the asset return series, et is the residual, and                      is the parameter vector     = f ; g0

and where ft is rewritten to include a constant as the …rst factor. Clearly, the speci…cations in

equations (1) and (2) can be subsumed into this framework.

    We then consider m potential shifts in the parameter vector , so that the model in equation

(3) can be rewritten as:

                                                     rt =         ’ft + et                                           (4)


where      is a …xed parameter vector for each period ,                      = 1; :::; m + 1 on the intervals implied by:



                           t = f1; :::; T1 ; T1 + 1; :::; T2 ; T2 + 1; :::; T3 ; :::; Tm ; :::; T g



for T0 = 0 and Tm+1 = T . For instance,                 = 1 corresponds to the subperiod t = 1; :::; T1 ,            =2

corresponds to the subperiod t = T1 + 1; ::; T2 , etc. Note that the constant parameter model in

equation (3) is a special case of equation (4) where m = 0 and thereby                           = 1 corresponds to the

full sample t = 1; :::; T .17

    Bai and Perron (1998) show that unknown breakpoints can be estimated consistently by mini-
  17
     Stock (1994) describes the di¢ culties between testing for structural breaks versus parametric changes that would
suggest non-stationarity. As Bai and Perron (2003a) show, the algorithm for the model to be estimated below can
be extended to threshold switching models.


                                                             10
mizing over the sum of squared residuals for all possible partitions of the data into m + 1 di¤erent

intervals. In other words, T1 ; T2 ; :::; Tm can be consistently estimated by solving the following

minimization:

                                                 2    0                                         13
                 n                    o           m+1
                                                   X                  P
                  Tb1 ; Tb2 ; :::; Tbm = arg min 4    @                               [rt   ’ft ]2 A5   (5)
                                        T1 ;T2 ;:::;Tm        t2fT(               g
                                                         =1           1) ;:::;T




Bai and Perron (1998) also derive the limiting distribution of these break point estimates including

con…dence intervals on the breakpoint estimates.

   While the estimation of the break dates requires minimizing the sum of squared residuals for all

possible m partitions of the data, Bai and Perron (2003b) show that the estimator can have poor

properties when the minimal length of the partition becomes too small. The reason is intuitively

clear — …ner partitions of the intervals imply fewer observations and, therefore, less precise esti-

mates. Bai and Perron (2003b) propose constraining the minimal length of any partition segment

used to calculate the sum of squares in the argmin calculation in equation (5). They de…ne this

minimal length as h      min(Tb(   1)   + 1; ; ; Tb )8 and specify the parameter as proportional to the

total sample size.    That is, they de…ne a percentage “trimming” constraint " to construct the

minimal length of a segment: " = h=T . Bai and Perron (2003b) show that the size of this trimming

factor depends upon the number of maximum breaks, m, and derive critical values based upon this

statistic. Bai and Perron (2003a) report Monte Carlo simulations of the …nite sample properties of

various tests based upon ", a point to which we return below.


1.3.2   Multi-Equation Estimation


The Bai-Perron estimator described above was developed for an individual time series. Since our

goal is to provide a cross-sectional as well as time-series picture of the covariation pattern in foreign

relative to domestic returns, we apply this framework to multiple equations. That is, we examine

                                                         11
each company return separately to build up a set of: (a) the number of breaks; (b) the break date

estimates and their associated con…dence intervals; and (c) the parameters per sub-period interval.

   Speci…cally, we …rst test for the number of breaks, mi , for each company i. We then estimate
                       n                       o
the set of break dates: Tb1i ; Tb2i ; :::; Tbm
                                             i   and i 8 = 1; :::; mi + 1. De…ning L as the total number

of countries and N as the total number of companies, we can rewrite the two factor model for

company i allowing for breaks as in equation (2) over all companies i as:



                                    rti` =   i`
                                                  +   i` `
                                                        rt   +   iu u
                                                                   rt   + ei`
                                                                           t;                       (6)



                              8i = 1; :::; N ; ` = 1; :::; L; = 1; :::; mi + 1


Note that the number of parameter shifts, mi , di¤er by company and include as a possibility

that mi = 0; i.e., no breaks. Moreover, no restrictions are placed on the variance of the residual

over subperiods. Indeed, the variance will generally change over subperiods and across countries.

In the empirical estimates below, the standard errors are also corrected for general conditional

heteroskedasticity as in White (1980) and Andrews (1991).


1.4   Measuring Diversi…cation Gains

Given the estimated panel of parameters and variances of cross-listed companies, we will evaluate

the impact of these changes on foreign diversi…cation. To assess the impact of these changes, we

consider a representative US investor who seeks to reduce the variability in his equity portfolio

using foreign equity. To focus upon the relationship between the US and foreign markets, we form

a market-weighted portfolio of the foreign companies with returns de…ned by rtF , and as the other

portfolio use the US market with return, rtu . For comparison with companies not listed in the US,

we also consider portfolios of the foreign market indices as well de…ned as rtL .



                                                       12
       To evaluate the bene…ts of diversi…cation, we focus upon the minimum variance allocation for

three main reasons. First, variance reduction has been the focus of much of the international di-

versi…cation literature since its main motivation arises from the risk-reduction potential.18 Second,

studies examining optimal portfolio choice based upon mean estimates have found that portfolio

allocations respond to the market that has been doing well, but will not necessarily re‡ect expected

future returns.19 Third, an extensive literature has found that the excess returns are typically

insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero implying imprecisely measured portfolio shares.20 Thus, recent

studies such as Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang (2009) ignore variations in alphas and focus exclusively

on the implications of betas on the variability of returns.

       When returns are exogenous and i.i.d., minimum variance optimization implies portfolio allo-

cation weights for each asset k given by ! kt such that:21


                                                          V    1
                                                !t =      0V   1
                                                                                                                (7)



where ! t is the K      1 vector of optimal portfolio shares ! kt , is a K dimensional vector of ones, and

V is the variance-covariance matrix of returns. We use this framework below to evaluate di¤erent

sets of portfolio menus available to the US investor. To evaluate the economic signi…cance of our

estimates, we then compare this minimum variance using foreign stocks with the variance using

the US market only. As we show below, the diversi…cation gains from long foreign investments are

particularly large during the early part of the sample in the 1970s, but decline over time.
  18
      For a survey, see Lewis (1999).
  19
      This point is made in Black and Litterman (1992), among others.
   20
      See for example Britten-Jones (1999). Using a Bayesian approach, Pastor (2000) evaluates the perceived estima-
tion risk by the investor needed to generate home bias.
   21
      For example, Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997), Chapter 5 gives this solution to the minimum variance
portfolio.




                                                        13
2         Break Date and Parameter Estimation Results

To examine the potential gains from international diversi…cation using cross-listed companies, we

require the parameter and residual variance estimates over time. This section reports the results

of testing for potential breaks and then summarizes the distribution of parameter estimates. In

Section 3, we will use these results to consider the impact on the minimum variance of the portfolio

and evaluate the economic bene…ts.

         Understanding the company level return estimates is complicated by the relationship between

returns at the aggregate level between the U.S. and the foreign company stock markets. In par-

ticular, the two factor model presumes a stable relationship between the U.S. and foreign markets.

Otherwise, we will …nd instability between foreign company returns and the U.S. market, even if

the company returns are stable relative to each market. To see why, recall that the framework for

foreign company returns was given by (2), repeated here for convenience:



                                       rti` =   i`
                                                     +       i` `
                                                               rt   +     iu u
                                                                            rt   + ei`
                                                                                    t




However, the joint distribution of foreign market returns and the US market returns, rt` ; rtu , may

itself be changing over time in response to greater liberalization and integration. One approach

often used to capture the joint behavior of markets is a standard world CAPM:22



                                            rt` =        `
                                                             +      ` u
                                                                     rt   + u`t :                           (8)



         Here we have substituted the U.S. market return for the world market return.23 Substituting
    22
     Examples include early papers such as Solnik (1974) and Stehle (1977) and more recently Dumas and Solnik
(1995).
  23
     This rewriting of the World CAPM requires simply writing each country’s return relative to the world market
and then substituting out the world return using the US market return.




                                                              14
the country relationship in equation (8) into the company return framework in equation (2) implies:


                                                                   h                       i
                                  rti` =            i`
                                                         +    i`       `
                                                                           +    ` u
                                                                                 rt   + u`t +    iu u
                                                                                                   rt   + ei`
                                                                                                           t


                                      = ai` + bi` rtu + "i`
                                                         t




                  i` `       iu
Where bi` =              +        , and similarly, ai` and "i`
                                                            t incorporate the combined interactions of the


international market returns and the company returns.24                                       Thus, if the relationship between the

                                                                                         `
foreign markets and the US market change over time,                                          will vary so that company returns will

                                           i`                iu
appear to be unstable even if                   and                are constant over time. For this reason, we begin this

section by estimating the relationship in the market returns given by equation (8 ) before returning

to the company level relationship in equation (2).


2.1      Foreign Markets and the US Market Estimation Results

There are at least three reasons to suspect instability between the US and foreign markets. First,

the emerging market literature has demonstrated that liberalizations may induce the market return

relationships to endogenously shift.25 Second, a number of papers have suggested that the developed

markets have become more correlated over time. Third, during crisis times, Longin and Solnik

(2001) have argued that markets can become more correlated. As such, higher correlations during

crises can undermine the ability to gain from diversi…cation.

       We therefore test for stability between the returns in foreign markets and the US allowing for

possible parameter shifts in equation (8). This modi…cation gives:



                                    rt` =       `
                                                     +       ` u
                                                              rt   + u`t; , for         = 1; :::; m + 1                         (9)
  24
   In particular, ai`  i`
                          + i` ` and "i`
                                       t
                                             i` `
                                               ut + ei`
                                                     t .
  25
   On emerging market liberalizations and the e¤ects on stock prices, see for example Bonser-Neal, et al (1990),
Bekaert and Harvey (1997,2000), Henry(2000), and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002).



                                                                           15
where       denote subperiods with stable parameters, as before. To avoid confusion, we continue to

use      as the constant parameter intervals index. However, below we will not require these intervals

to be the same for company returns.

       Bai and Perron (2003a) describe the properties of various break tests against di¤erent alter-

natives. In particular, the limiting distribution of these tests depends upon the proportion of the

minimal subinterval, measured by ". We conducted the analysis here and throughout the paper

assuming " is as small as 5%. However, as the Monte Carlo studies of Bai and Perron (2003a,b)

suggest, assuming partitions that are too small can over-estimate the number of breaks. Therefore,

to be conservative, we report the estimates based upon assuming " is 15% of the sample but will

return to the possibility that breaks occur more often in Section 3 below.26


2.1.1      Country level results: Number of breaks


Table 2 reports the results of these tests for each of the country regressions in equation (9). The

results in Panel A indeed suggest that breaks in the relationship between the US and foreign markets

are important. The …rst three columns report the proportions of the 42 country index returns that

reject the hypothesis of no breaks versus the hypothesis of m breaks using the so-called “sup F”

test. This test …nds the highest F test for m breaks by considering all the di¤erent partitions of

subsamples as given in equation (5), subject to the minimum length restriction, h. The …rst column

of Table 2A shows that the hypothesis of no break against the alternative of at least one break is

rejected for 85.7% of the country indices at a 10% marginal signi…cance level and even for 81% of

the countries at a 1% marginal signi…cance level. As the second and third columns show, these

proportions become higher when allowing for even more breaks

       While Bai and Perron (2003a,b) advocate using the supF test with given numbers of breaks, they
  26
    In Monte Carlo simulations, Bai and Perron (2003a,b) …nd that the maximal value of m for         = 0:15 is 5. Since
m is 4 or less in all the analysis in this paper, our choice of " appears relatively conservative.



                                                         16
acknowledge that there are circumstances in which the results might be deceptive. For example,

for a regime switching model in which the parameters switch back to an initial regime, the test

will underestimate the number of breaks. For this reason, they also suggest testing the hypothesis

of no breaks against an unknown number of breaks. The last two columns of Panels A report the

proportion of countries that rejected this hypothesis using two versions of the “double maximum”

test. The “WD Max”test weights the tests of individual breaks such that the marginal p-values are

equal across values of m. By contrast, the “UD Max” test weights all values of m equally. Again,

the table shows the proportion of countries that reject the hypothesis of no break is signi…cantly

higher than the MSL.

    Panel B of Table 2 provides summary evidence for the sequential “supF test”given by marginal

signi…cance levels (MSL) of 10%, 5%, and 1%. In this test, a sequential procedure estimates each

break one at a time, and estimation stops when the sup F ( + 1j ) test is no longer signi…cant at

the given marginal signi…cance level. To identify m` , we conduct sequential SupF tests for each

country, allowing up to four subperiods.27 The …rst column of Panel B reports the proportion of the

countries that rejected the hypothesis of zero breaks. The last three columns of Panel B report the

proportion of countries that show evidence of one break, two breaks and three breaks, respectively.

Countries with one break make up the majority of the cases ranging from 61% at 10% MSL to 85%

at 1% MSL. The number of countries with evidence of 3 breaks is smaller at only 3 to 14%.


2.1.2    Country level results: Break dates


                                                                                  b ` as the
We next estimate the break date equations for each country return series. De…ning m

estimated number of parameter breaks for country `, the result of our estimation is a set of break
  27
     As will be shown below, the country returns show little evidence of more than three breaks anyway, so this
assumption for the maximum number of breaks seems fairly conservative.




                                                      17
date estimates for ` = 1; :::; L given by:


                                              n                         o
                                               Tb1i ; Tb2i ; :::; Tbm
                                                                    i
                                                                    b `                             (10)



and parameter estimates for each interval                         b ` + 1 for country ` given by:
                                                        = 1; :::; m


                                                    n         `
                                                                        o
                                                        b` ; b ; u
                                                                 b`t;                               (11)



Where the residual is normally distributed with possibly di¤ering variance across intervals,


                                                                            2
                                             b`t;
                                             u             N (0;        `
                                                                                )



We thus obtain a set of parameters by subperiod along with break points and con…dence intervals

around each estimate of the breakpoint and parameters.

   Figure 1a plots the break-point estimates for each year by country along with its con…dence

intervals for the 5% marginal signi…cance case. The con…dence interval for each country excludes the

upper and lower 5% of the estimated break date distribution. The …gure shows several relationships.

First, except for a few notable exceptions, the con…dence intervals around the breaks are contained

to within two to three years. Exceptions are the breaks in the late 1970s to early 1980s of Denmark

and Ireland and the single break for Taiwan in the 2000s. For countries with additional breaks,

subsequent break dates are generally more tightly estimated. Second, most of the breaks occur

in the early 2000s. Figure 1b provides another look at this relationship by showing the frequency

of breaks over time. Whether looking at only single break countries or over all breaks, the peak

of the distribution occurs around 2004. One possibility is that the …nancial crisis of late 2000s

induces a break at the latter part of the sample that is captured around this time. We return to



                                                             18
this possibility below.

       Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002) use the Bai-Perron estimator in tandem with a vector-

autoregression of macroeconomic variables to test for liberalizations. Our focus here is on the

risk-sensitivities of cross-listed stocks and as such inclusion dates of our country market indices are

driven by the inclusion dates of local-listed companies. Nevertheless, the appendix shows that for

countries and data periods in common with Bekaert, Harvey and Lumsdaine (2002), our results are

qualitatively similar.


2.1.3      Country level results: Parameter estimates


While these …gures report the break date estimates in equation (10), Table 3 provides summary

statistics about the parameter estimates of equation (11) for the MSL of 5% .28 These statistics

are reported for di¤erent groupings of portfolios and across pseudo-periods,                                      , between breaks.

                                                          `
Countries with no breaks have parameters                  1   for the whole period, countries with one break create

                                          `
a new subperiod with estimates            2   at the same time, etc.29 This hypothetical period decomposi-

tion allows us to examine the properties of the parameter distribution within subperiods. In our

minimum variance portfolio estimates below, we will also report the e¤ects of parameters aligned

over calendar year time.

       For each portfolio in Table 3, the table reports the cross sectional mean of the beta estimates,

                                                                                                       `
their standard errors and their correlations with the US market, labeled                                   Mean, Std Err Mean, and

Corr(r` ; ru ), respectively. It also gives the cross-sectional standard deviation of the beta estimates

                                          `
given in the row referenced by                Std Dev, and the number of countries in the pseudo-sample

indicated by “No. of Obs”.
  28
   For the MSLs of 1% and 10% the estimates are virtually identical.
  29
   More precisely, the pseudo-periods are formed by allocating the estimates for each country into the maximum
number of periods. In other words, de…ning this maximum as mb = M ax m   b 1 ; :::; m
                                                                                    b L , the parameter estimates by
                                                                          `=1;:::;L
                               `       `   `        `                                 `       `
pseudo-periods are given by:       =   1 ; 2 ; :::; m+1   for ` = 1; :::; L where         =       if        b ` + 1, or
                                                                                                            m             `
                                                                                                                              =   `
                                                                                                                                  bL
                                                                                                                                  m    if   >
b ` + 1.
m


                                                                19
   Panel A shows the Market Weighted Portfolios and Equally Weighted Portfolios for all countries.

Three main features can be seen across these columns. First, the mean betas generally increase

over the periods toward one. The market weighted portfolio beta mean is only about 0.35 in Period

1, but is about 0.80 for Period 2. While there are fewer countries with two and three breaks, the

means over these later periods increase as well. A similar pattern holds for the Equally Weighted

Portfolio. Second, the correlations of these country returns with the US also increase over the

periods beginning at about 0.20 for period 1 to 0.36 in period 2 and 0.44 in period 3. Third, the

standard error means have stayed relatively low, generally not exceeding 0.06 so that the hypothesis

of beta equal to zero can typically be rejected. Taken together, these parameters are consistent

with the general view that markets have become more correlated and integrated over time.

   Panel B shows similar results for a market-weighted breakdown of developed countries versus

emerging markets. While the mean of the standard errors is higher for emerging markets, the

general tendency for mean beta and correlations with the US to rise over time can be seen in both

portfolios.

   Panel C details the breakdown of portfolios by regions. In every case, the beta means and

correlations increase between periods 1 and 2. In some cases, there is a reversion to a lower beta

in the third period but these are based upon sample sizes of two or even one country.

   Overall, these results suggest that the relationship between foreign market indices and the US

market has shifted over time. The beta of foreign markets on the US has increased towards one

and the correlations have also trended upward. We next estimate our relationships between the

cross-listed …rms and the US markets correcting for the shifts in the home markets over time.




                                                20
2.2   Foreign Companies and the US Market

As we have noted above, the joint distribution of rt` ; rtu has been unstable over the sample period

so that country level breaks will contaminate estimates about the relationship between foreign

stocks trading in the US and their relationship with the US market.

   This relationship can be seen by substituting the shifting country return process rt` from (9)

into the company return in (2). This implies:


                                                          h                             i
                              rti` =       i`
                                                +    i`       `
                                                                  +    ` u
                                                                        rt     + u`t;       +   iu u
                                                                                                  rt   + ei`
                                                                                                          t    (12)

                                   = ai`   i` u    i`
                                      t + bt rt + "t




Where



                                                    ai`
                                                     t  =             i`
                                                                           +    i` `



                                                    bi`
                                                     t  =             i` `
                                                                               +   iu



                                                    "i`
                                                     t
                                                                      i` `
                                                                        ut;     + ei`
                                                                                   t




And where, as above,          indexes the subinterval in which foreign market indices are stable against

the US market return. Thus even if the factor loadings of the foreign stocks on the local and US

          i`         iu
market,        and        ; are not time-varying, an estimate of the parameters in a regression of foreign

stocks on the US market, bi` , would be. This time-variation results from the shifting factor loadings

                                       `             `
of the local market on the US,             and            .

   At the same time, the relationship between returns on foreign stocks cross-listed in the US and

the US market return itself may change for di¤erent reasons. Using event studies, a vast literature

on international cross-listings has found that a company’s cost of capital tends to fall after cross-



                                                                      21
listing. Moreover, the betas of the foreign stock often change against the US. Others such as Baruch

and Saar (2009) have argued that the decision to list on an exchange arises from the perception that

the company is more similar to other stocks on a given exchange. If there are shifts in individual

foreign stock returns as a result of listing in the US market, it is unclear whether these changes

would occur before or after the cross-listing. Moreover, these changes in individual stock behavior

need not correspond to general features about the relationship between the US market and the

company’s home market.


2.2.1    Company level results: Explained by market-level changes?


We begin our company return analysis by asking whether there are shifts in the relationship between

cross-listed stocks and the US market beyond those induced by market level changes. To test this

hypothesis, we use the estimates for the parameters of the home country in equation (11) and then

test whether there are any additional breaks in equation (12) using the sequential sup(F) tests.30

If rejected, we consider whether the rejection arises from instability in local betas or US betas.

    Table 4 reports summary statistics of these tests. Panel A gives a summary of the number and

proportion of …rms that are domiciled in countries with One Break (m = 1), Two Breaks (m = 2),

and Three Breaks (m = 3).            The …nal column labeled "All" shows the proportion of …rms with

home markets that reject stable parameters for m                  1. Since this proportion is about 95%, only

about 5% of the …rms come from countries with no evidence of structual instability against the US.

Another 62% come from countries with one break, while only 9% of the …rms come from countries

that show evidence of two breaks. On the other hand, 24% of the …rms come from countries

with three breaks. This latter result is largely due to Canada which has the largest number of
  30
     By conditioning the estimation on the …rst stage country regression parameter estimates, this second stage may
su¤er from a generated regressions problem that will understate the true standard errors thereby potentially biasing
the Wald tests toward rejection. To try to mitigate this possibility, we allow for general conditional heteroskedasticity
in the Wald tests.




                                                           22
foreign companies in the US, but also has three breaks potentially arising from its longer history

of integration with the US.

    Panel B shows the results of the sequential sup(F) test for the …rm returns conditioning on

the stock index parameters. The column labeled “No Breaks” indicates that 277 …rms or about

49% of the …rms did not show evidence of breaks beyond the country level. The remaining three

columns show that the returns from those …rms that did reject the hypothesis of no additional

breaks appeared to have only one break. In particular, data from 231 …rms could not reject the

hypothesis of more than one break while 55 …rms appeared to have two breaks. The returns from

only 6 or about 1% of the …rms indicated three breaks beyond the country level.

    For the …rms rejecting no parameter instability beyond the country level, Panel C examines the

source of instability. Using the de…nition for the estimated parameters in equation (12), we identify

                                                                                       i`       iu
the …rm level parameters over the country subintervals as:                                  ;        ; = 1; :::; m` + 1 and then test

a series of Wald tests for each …rm. The …rst two columns report the number of rejections of the

hypotheses that each of the two betas are zero for each stock. If the beta on the local market is

              i`
zero, i.e.,        = 0, then there is no local e¤ect on the stock return during the period as can be seen

by substituting into equation (12) which gives:



                                                  rti` =     i`
                                                                  +    iu u
                                                                         rt    + ei`
                                                                                  t                                             (13)



In this case, the stock return depends only on the world CAPM. Alternatively, when the beta on

                               iu
the US market is zero,              = 0, the stock depends only on the local e¤ects. Substituting this

restriction into equation (12) implies:



                                    rti` =   i`
                                                  +   i` `
                                                             +        i` ` u
                                                                          rt   +   i` `
                                                                                     ut;         + ei`
                                                                                                    t                           (14)




                                                                  23
Thus, the return from company i depends upon the US market return only indirectly through its

                                       i` `
beta with the home market,                    , since its home stock market in turn depends upon the US stock

market.

   As the …rst two columns of Panel C show, the zero beta restriction is rejected for both the local

and US betas for most of the …rms. However, the proportion of those rejections di¤er markedly.

About 85% of the …rms reject the zero local beta e¤ect while only 58% of the …rms reject the zero

US beta e¤ect. The same pattern carries over to the next two columns that report tests for the

hypothesis that local and US e¤ects are constant over the sub-periods. Sixty-three percent of the

…rms reject the hypothesis that the local e¤ects are constant over time while 44% of the …rms reject

the test that US e¤ects are stable.


2.2.2     Company level results: Break dates


Given the evidence for additional parameter instability for about half of the foreign stocks, we next

examine the behavior of returns for these individual stocks more closely. For each of the foreign

companies, we estimate the following model:



                 rti` =   i`
                          &    +       i` `
                                       & rt   +     iu u
                                                    & rt   + ei`
                                                              &;t ,    for i = 1; :::; N ; & = 1; :::; ni + 1             (15)



where rti` is as given by equation (9), repeated here:



                      rt` =        `
                                       +      ` u
                                               rt   + u`t; , for ` = 1; :::; L;       = 1; :::; m + 1



Equation (15) now allows explicitly for the possibility of shifts in the company level returns. Note

that the number of breaks and their implied sub-periods may di¤er for the country and …rm returns.

In other words, for the returns of …rm i in country `, the estimates allow for                            6= &; ni 6= m` . As a


                                                                      24
result, the break-dates of the …rm may di¤er from the country returns.

      The time interval mapping analogous to equation (4) is then:



                                     t2     (& 1)   + 1; :::;      &     for   &   2f       1;   2 ; :::;        ng




where the estimates of           &   are:

                                                               2         0                                                         13
                                                                 ` +1
                                                                nX
                                                                                        P                h                    i2
                      fb1 ; b2 ; :::; bn` g = arg min 4                  @                                rti`        i `
                                                                                                                      & ’ft
                                                                                                                                   A5   (16)
                                              1 ; 2 ;:::; n`                t2f                      g
                                                                   &=1             (&   1) ;:::; &




And      0   = 0;   n` +1   = T .31 While the regressions in equation (16) contain both local home country

returns and US market returns, these variables are jointly unstable as documented above. Therefore,

we condition the …rm level estimation on these aggregate market breaks.

      As for the country-level estimation, we …rst estimate the break dates for the roughly 50% of

…rms that show evidence of parameter instability. These break dates estimates and their con…dence

intervals are plotted in Figure 2, where the …rms are arrayed according to the …rm with the earliest

…rst break through the …rm with the latest …rst break date. Generally, the dates are tightly

estimated within one to three years as with the country estimates. However, there are some outliers

when these intervals exceed eight years.


2.2.3        Company level results: Parameters


Tables 5 and 6 provide summary statistics on the …rm return local market beta and US market

beta, respectively. These statistics are based upon the same portfolio breakdowns as reported for

the country regressions, but with company market capitalization weights.

      The local market betas in Table 5 show little change over time. In particular, Panel A shows
 31
      While the time intervals       depend upon each …rm i, we subsume the …rm superscripts for ease of exposition.




                                                                       25
that the market weighted betas increase from subperiod one to two from 0.66 to 0.75 while the

equally weighted portfolio betas are essentially ‡at at around 0.7. Panel B demonstrates that

this pattern is robust across companies coming from emerging and developed markets. Moreover,

the correlation between the returns and the home market appears to be relatively stable over the

subperiods. Panel C further breaks the information down into geographic regions, conveying some

interesting distinctions across these areas. Generally, the companies from Asia and the Middle East

& Africa tend to have lower betas with their home markets at around 0.3, while the companies

from other areas have betas on their home markets closer to one.

   Table 6 reports the same summary statistics for the company US market betas. For these

portfolio parameters, the means increase more sharply. For the market-weighted portfolio, the US

market betas in Period 1 are only 0.455 but increases to 0.792 in Period 2. These mean betas

increase even more over the following two periods, peaking at 0.995 by Period 4, though the means

for these latter periods are based upon a much smaller number of observations. A similar but

more attenuated pattern hold for the Equally Weighted portfolio. This pattern is also robust to

decomposition between the developed and emerging market companies as reported in Panel B.

   Interestingly, the correlation between cross-listed company returns and the US market increases

over sub-periods. Across all countries, the mean correlation increases from 0.16 in period 1 to

0.32 in period 4. Moreover this pattern holds for the breakdown between developed and emerging

market companies as well.

   Panel C of Table 6 reports the US market beta statistics for portfolios decomposed into geo-

graphic area. For all of the geographic areas, the market-weighted betas of company returns against

the US increase between the …rst and last period. Furthermore, the mean correlation of these stock

returns with the US market increases as well, even for companies from developed countries. For

example, the correlation between European cross-listed stocks and the US is on-average just 0.16



                                                26
in period 1, but increases to 0.24 in period 2, 0.27 in period 3 and …nally 0.34 in period 4.

   Taken together, the parameter results in Tables 5 and 6 suggest that even after controlling for the

apparent shift toward integration of market indices, the set of cross-listed companies have become

more correlated with the US. First, the indirect relationship with the US market has increased.

That is, Table 5 shows that local market betas have increased toward one and since the local market

                                                                         i` `
indices against the US has also increased, the product of these betas           has increased. Second,

the direct relationship with the US market has increased as well. Table 6 demonstrates that US

market betas have increased toward one and the mean correlations with the US have also increased.


2.3   Cross-Listing Dates and Betas against the US Market

So far, we have shows that both the foreign cross-listed companies and their home markets tend

to co-move more closely with the US market over time. However, the summary statistics do not

necessarily say anything about how these relationships have changed before or after cross-listing.

A number of papers have conducted event study analysis at the time of cross-listing to examine

the impact on returns. For this purpose, the beta coe¢ cients are typically allowed to break at the

time of cross-listing. While the usual event study analysis treats the beta coe¢ cients as common

across all …rms, our estimation is conducted at the …rm level and as such our results are not directly

comparable with that literature. Nevertheless, we can use our estimates over time to ask whether

the parameters we observe before and after cross-listing show a similar pattern.

   The emerging market liberalization literature has also used cross-listing events. For example,

Henry (2000) uses the earliest date at which a company cross-lists in the economy as a measure

of openness. Our country-level estimates also include developed market stock returns so that the

earliest cross-listing date may not be relevant for understanding liberalization. However, in our

minimum variance portfolio analysis below, the relationship between cross-listed …rms and their



                                                 27
home markets dictate the investor’s measures of risk. Therefore, it is also useful to consider how

the betas of these foreign markets change when companies from their countries are listed on the

US exchanges.

      Table 7 reports summary statistics before, after, and during cross-listing for all three betas

estimates. Panel A gives the statistics for the country regressions in Table 3. To calculate these

statistics, we …rst array the beta coe¢ cients by year. Then, we sort the betas of the home market

               `
on the US,         , according to their estimates “Before Listing”in the …rst column, or “After Listing”

in the second column if the process shifts after listing. Since the intervals after listing can be

somewhat later than the listing date itself, we also report the averages including the listing period

under the column labeled “After and During Listing.”

      A basic pattern is clear from these estimates. For both the Market-Weighted and Equally-

Weighted portfolios, the average betas increase signi…cantly after listing. When the “during listing”

period is included in the last column, this increase is attenuated, but is still signi…cantly higher

than the “before listing”period. Moreover, the pattern in the betas is mirrored in the correlations.

The mean correlations increase from around 0.2 before listing to almost 0.4 in the later period

excluding listing and is about 0.3 if the listing period is included.

      Panel B of Table 7 shows the corresponding breakdown by company betas for the local market,

 i`                            iu
      , and the US market,          . While the local market betas show some slight tendency to increase,

the di¤erence is not pronounced and is in fact rather ‡at at around 0.7 for the Equally Weighted

portfolio. Furthermore, the correlation of the cross-listed companies with their home markets does

not show any real trend, hovering at around 0.2

      By contrast, the statistics for company returns relative to the US market show a more pro-

nounced relationship. The mean of company betas against the US increases from about 0.49 before

cross-listing to 0.97 for …rms that show evidence of parameter breaks after cross-listing. Although



                                                       28
this mean drops to 0.74 when the listing period is included, it remains considerably higher than

the mean before cross-listing. The correlation of these companies with the US follows this pattern

as well. Taken together, these parameter estimates suggest that cross-listed company betas and

correlations with the US market increase after cross-listing.


2.4   Summary of Parameter Distribution Results

So far, we have answered the …rst three questions posed in the introduction.       First, we indeed

found evidence of changes in the relationship between the US market and foreign companies that

become available on US stock exchanges by 2004. Second, the betas of these companies on the

US market appear to have increased over time both directly and indirectly through the e¤ects of

greater correlation of the US with the companies’home markets. Third, the timing of these changes

suggest that foreign company returns become more correlated with the US after cross-listing.

    Taken together, these changes would generally suggest that the gains from diversi…cation should

decline over time. However, the potential e¤ects of these changes also depend upon other time-

varying relationships such as the residual variance-covariance of the portfolios and the market-

weights Therefore, in the next section, we combine our parameter estimates with these other

features to address the economic impact of these changes on a US investor.



3     The Impact of Integration on Diversi…cation Gains

Given the panel of parameter estimates above, we are now in a position to address the remaining set

of questions described in the introduction. In particular, what are the implications of the shifts in

parameters for international diversi…cation by a typical US investor? Speci…cally, does the increased

correlation of these foreign stocks in the US signi…cantly reduce international diversi…cation gains,

particularly if investors do not invest in foreign markets directly? And do the more recently listed


                                                 29
foreign stocks provide greater diversi…cation opportunities to the US investor because they are less

correlated with the US market or do these foreign stocks merely mimic the behavior of other foreign

stocks that have been previously listed?


3.1      US Investor Framework

To address these questions, we require a framework that focuses on minimizing risk. As described

in Section I, we construct a simple minimum-variance portfolio of a small US investor’s benchmark

asset of the US market and a set of foreign equity investments.32 We consider di¤erent versions

of portfolio menus that range from the least restrictive to the most restrictive assumptions about

foreign stock availability.

       In the less restrictive set of menus, we assume that the investor has access to three di¤erent

portfolios: (a) the US market portfolio, (b) a market-weighted portfolio of foreign companies listed

on the US exchanges, and (c) a market-weighted portfolio of foreign market indices that have

companies listed on the US exchanges. Thus, the investor portfolio is comprised of holding the three

asset return process: rtp = rtF ; rtL ; rtu . This menu set may be unrealistic because the investor is

unlikely to have easy access to all the companies in the foreign market indices. Nevertheless, we

analyze this portfolio set because it allows us to compare the desirability of holding foreign stocks

listed in the US even if the investor were to have direct access to the foreign market index.

       In the second set of portfolio menus, we assume that the US investor has access to foreign

markets only through foreign stocks listed in the US so he has access only to (a) the US market

portfolio and (b) the market-weighted portfolio of foreign companies in the US. Thus, the portfolio

returns are given by the process: rtp = rtF ; rtu . This portfolio set may be too restrictive because

investors are likely to have access to other forms of international investment. Studying this menu set
  32
    We assume that the US investor’s benchmark portfolio is the US market since this is the most common benchmark
used in the international diversi…cation literature. However, other benchmarks could be incorporated. For example,
Liu (2012) uses a benchmark of the Fama-French 5 Factor Model for a representative US investor.


                                                       30
allows us to focus upon the diversi…cation potential of cross-listed companies alone if the investor

did not have access to any other foreign investments.

    Given these sets of portfolio menus, we consider how the US investor would optimally reduce

the volatility of his overall portfolio by his allocation among these returns. In general, the minimum

variance optimization gives a portfolio allocation based upon the distribution of returns from the
                PK
portfolio rtp    k=1    ! kt rtk . When the variance is constant over time, the minimum variance portfolio

weights are given by equation (7) above. However, our analysis has shown that the variances are

time-varying. If the investor believes the variances will not change in the future, the minimum

variance portfolio weights are:
                                                      Vt 1
                                              !t =    0V 1
                                                        t


where ! t is the K      1 vector of optimal portfolio shares ! kt ,       is a K dimensional vector of ones,

and Vt is the variance-covariance matrix of returns at time t.

    The minimum variance portfolio depends solely upon the variance-covariance matrix. The

minimum variance portfolio behavior therefore derives exclusively from the variation in components

of Vt . Recalling the de…nition of the portfolio of the two market-weighted portfolios above, the
                                                                                  PN
market-weighted portfolio of the foreign companies is given by rtF                        i i`
                                                                                     i=1 zt rt   where zti is the

market weight of foreign company i at time t, while the portfolios of the foreign market indices
                                                     PL
with companies listed in the US is given by rtL                ` `
                                                          `=1 xt rt   where x`t is the market weight of market

index ` at time t. For our analysis, we consider below alternatively the more restricted portfolio

menu, rtP = rtU ; rtF    and the less restricted portfolio menu, rtP = rtU ; rtF ; rtL .


3.1.1    More restrictive asset menu


We start with the variance-covariance of the more restrictive menu. In this case, the investor

considers adding a market-weighted portfolio of foreign stocks traded in the US to his benchmark


                                                     31
portfolio. In this case, Vt is simply a 2    2 matrix that can be written as:

                                                  2                 3
                                               6 Vuu;t Vuf;t 7
                                          Vt = 6
                                               4
                                                               7
                                                               5                                                             (17)
                                                 Vf u;t Vf f;t


where u and f refer to the second moments of the US return, ru , and the returns of foreign

companies listed in the US, rF . Using the foreign returns equations in (15), each component of

the variance-covariance matrix can be written in terms of the parameters of the model. First, the

US return is the benchmark for the US investor so that its variance is simply: Vuu;t =                                2     . By
                                                                                                                      U

contrast, the variance components of the foreign companies listed in the US depend upon their

factor loadings. The appendix shows that the variance of the portfolio of foreign companies in the

US is given by:
                                                               L0
                        Vf f;t   V art (rtF ) =   2 eu 2
                                                            + et        eL + Z0
                                                  U (bt )           t    t        t       t   Zt                             (18)


      e u is the vector of US market sensitivities with typical element, bi` =
Where b                                                                                                   i` `
                                                                                                                 +   iu
                                                                                                                           for all
        t                                                                 t                               &          &

                                                                                              L
time intervals    and &, with each element multiplied by company market weights. Similarly, e t

                                                                             `
is the vector of local market sensitivities with typical element,                , weighted by company market

capitalizations. Zt is the vector of these market weights. Finally,                   t   and       t   are the conditional

variance-covariance matrices of the innovations to country returns, u` ;t and company returns, ei`;t ,

respectively.

   Thus, there are three components in the variance of foreign companies in the US. First,                                   e u )2
                                                                                                                          2 (b
                                                                                                                          U    t


captures the extent to which foreign returns move with the US market. The lower are the sensi-
                                                                      L0
tivities to the US, the lower is bu and hence the variance. Second, e t                       t
                                                                                                   e L measures the e¤ect
                                                                                                     t


of lower residual variance of foreign markets on the variance of the foreign companies. Once again,

this variance will rise and fall with the magnitude of the foreign market sensitivities to the US.




                                                      32
Third, the variance depends upon Zt0         t   Zt or the variance of residuals to the market-weighted

portfolio of foreign returns.

   In light of this description, the covariance between the US and this portfolio of foreign companies

is transparent.

                                                                            2 eu
                                 Vuf;t = Vf u;t     Cov(rtU ; rtF ) =       U bt                   (19)


The covariance depends only upon the foreign company sensitivities to the US market. As can

be seen in equation (15), the factor sensitivities are orthogonalized to the residuals in the country

returns and the US return by construction.


3.1.2   Less restrictive asset menu


For the less restrictive menu of foreign assets, we augment the set to include the returns from

foreign market indices with companies listed in the US, rL . In this case, the covariance matrix V

becomes a 3       3 matrix given by:

                                             2                          3
                                             6 Vuu;t Vuf;t Vu`;t        7
                                             6                          7
                                             6                          7
                                        Vt = 6
                                             6 Vf u;t Vf f;t Vf `;t
                                                                        7
                                                                        7                          (20)
                                             6                          7
                                             4                          5
                                               V`u;t V`f;t V``;t


Although, the top left hand quadrant of the matrix remains the same, the covariance matrix now

has three additional terms. First, the variance of the foreign market index is:



                                                           2 bL 2
                                V``;t    V art (rtL ) =    U( t )   + Xt0     t Xt                 (21)


        L
Where b t is the vector of local market betas now weighted by the country market capitalizations.

Xt is the vector of country index weights. Similar to the variance of the portfolio of foreign



                                                      33
                                                          L
companies, the variance increases with the betas              and residual variances, U .

      The covariances of this foreign market return with the US and the foreign companies are:



                                                                           2 bL
                                  Vu`;t = V`u;t    Cov(rtU ; rtL ) =       U t                                  (22)



                                                                2 eu b L          L0
                          Vf `;t = V`f;t   Cov(rtF ; rtL ) =    U bt t     + bt        t Xt



Analogous to the covariance with the foreign company returns, the covariance of the US market

with the foreign market indices are given by the product of the market-weighted betas and the

US variance. The covariance of the foreign companies and the foreign market indices is comprised

of two components. The …rst component is the US variance weighted by the product of betas for

                       e u , and betas for the foreign market indices, b L . The second component is
the foreign companies, b t                                               t

                                                                               L
the country residual matrix weighted by the country betas for the companies, b t , and the country

weights, Xt .

      As these variance components show, the determinants of the minimum variance portfolio depend

                                                                                    e u and b L . The
largely upon two sets of variables. The …rst set is the market weighted parameters, b t       t


second set of variables is the residual variances for country returns,                 t,   and the company returns,

 t.   We report these estimates below for each set of portfolios considered.


3.2     Results Assuming Less Restrictive Asset Menu

We begin by considering our most general menu of assets available to the US investor: the US mar-

ket, the portfolio of foreign companies listed in the US in 2004, and the portfolio of foreign market

returns for the home markets of those countries. Clearly, the foreign companies are investable in

2004 since these stocks are traded on the two major US exchanges, NYSE and NASDAQ. However,

we are also interested in analyzing how the diversi…cation patterns of these stocks have changed



                                                     34
over time.

      Therefore, to construct our portfolio of foreign companies in the US, we need to take a stand

on when the stocks are accessible for investment by US investors. Once again, we evaluate two

extremes. At one extreme, we assume that US investors only have access to foreign companies

when they become listed on the exchange. However, these securities may be accessible to investors

well before this date. Although the stocks are not listed in the US exchanges, the listing on other

overseas markets or over-the-counter markets may make the investment readily available even to

small investors. Therefore, on the other extreme, we assume that US investors have access since

inception to the foreign companies that become listed in the US.

      Considering these extremes has two main advantages. First, it allows us to analyze the dif-

ferences in diversi…cation potential between the set of foreign companies that are listed on the

exchange and those that are not yet listed. Second, the two extremes bracket the more realistic

intermediate case.


3.2.1     Assuming foreign companies become investable upon local market listing


Figures 3 plot the parameter estimates used to determine the portfolio allocation assuming investors

have access to the foreign company investments as soon as they are listed in local markets. As

noted above, changes in the US returns a¤ect foreign companies according to their factor loadings:

         i` `       iu           iu                                                                   `
biu             +        where        is the beta of each foreign company on its local market,            is the beta

                                                                iu
of the home market return on the US market, and                      is the beta of the foreign company on the

US market. As Figure 3a shows, the beta on the local market is relatively unchanged over time

at around 0.8. However, there is a signi…cant increase over time in both the betas of the country

                                                          `          iu
returns and the foreign companies on the US,                  and         , respectively. As a result, the combined

e¤ect is a strong increase in betas against the US, a relationship that proves important for the



                                                         35
portfolio allocations below.

   Figure 3b depicts the residual variance for both the foreign country market returns rL and the

foreign company returns rF . The perceived residual variances for both portfolios increase sharply

in the wake of the 1987 crash and then decline through the late 1990s.

   The bottom panel of Figure 3 also demonstrates the trend toward inclusion of foreign markets

and foreign stocks based solely on availability of those stocks in local markets. The proportion

of foreign companies that is available in the US by 2004 become available in their local markets

rather gradually. For the 1970s and 1980s, only about 20 to 30% of these stocks are included in

the foreign company portfolio returns, rF . However, in the 1990s, the dimension of this portfolio

increases quickly so that by 2000, almost 100% of the foreign companies are included. The coun-

try representation of these stocks follows a more accelerated pace. By 1989, about 50% of the

countries are represented by companies that are accessible in the US. But this proportion increases

dramatically so that by 1995 almost 100% of the countries with listings by 2004 are included.

   Figure 4 shows the impact of these parameters and variances on the minimum variance portfolio

allocations for the less restrictive set of investment assets. Through the 1980s, investment in foreign

securities provides a useful hedge for the US market. The combined betas of the foreign market

indices are less than one and even the sharp increase in the residuals after 1987 does not diminish

the attractiveness of foreign investment. However, beginning in the 1990s, the increasing betas

of foreign market indices and foreign companies both push down the desired allocation in foreign

assets. Interestingly, the pattern of desired allocation into foreign companies in the US tends to

mirror that of foreign markets.




                                                  36
3.2.2   Assuming foreign companies become investable upon U.S. market listing


While this view of foreign company accessibility is one extreme, it is likely to overstate this accessi-

bility. Figures 5 depict the parameters for the foreign company portfolio when the portfolio is only

comprised of companies that have been listed in the US. Comparing the bottom of Figure 5 with

the bottom of Figure 3 shows that the rate of inclusion of foreign companies is much more gradual

in this case. The number of foreign companies is not 50% of its total until about 1997 and does not

get close to 100% until around 2004. Moreover the number countries represented increases more

slowly. Until 1987, less than 20% of the countries are included. The number increases rapidly until

1998 and plateaus at about 80% until shortly before 2004.

   The parameters and residuals in Figure 5a and 5b re‡ect this more restricted portfolio set.

Unlike the estimates assuming investability since inception of the foreign companies, the parameters

of this set remain relatively ‡at until 2001 and only increase thereafter. The residuals display a

di¤erent pattern as well, with a more muted increase following the 1987 stock market crash.

   Nevertheless, the general patterns of the two sets of foreign company portfolios are similar. As

such, the minimum variance portfolio allocations for the less restrictive menu of assets including

investments into foreign indices appear relatively similar (not shown). In the next section, we

examine more carefully the di¤erences between these two portfolios, but do so under the more

conservative scenario that investors cannot hold foreign market indices.


3.3     Results Assuming More Restrictive Asset Menu

We next consider the minimum variance allocations under the assumption that the US investor only

invests in foreign stocks that become cross-listed in the US. In other words, the portfolio menu is

the more restrictive rP = ru ; rF . As noted above, one of the key determinants in this simple two-

asset allocation is the covariance between these returns,    2e u
                                                             U bt   . Figure 6 plots this covariance over


                                                  37
time for both the foreign companies listed in the US compared to the foreign companies including

those not yet listed. The picture shows that the portfolio of foreign companies listed in the US

always has a higher covariance with the US market than the portfolio of those listed in the foreign

market.

    This relationship carries over to the minimum variance allocations plots in Figure 7A. Until the

two portfolios converge in 2004, the US investor would choose to put more of his wealth into the

portfolio that includes foreign companies that are not yet listed in the US, than the portfolio of

cross-listed foreign companies only. Interestingly, in response to the …nancial crises of the 2000s,

the minimum variance strategy for both portfolios is to short foreign companies. As Figures 3A

and 5A show, the betas for both portfolios on the US market increase signi…cantly after 2004. The

combined direct US beta and indirect US beta through the local market increase to almost 1.6

during this period. As a result, an investor who wants to minimize risk wants to go short this

security in order to hedge the US market risk.

    Figure 7B show the gains from diversi…cation from the two di¤erent portfolios. The portfolio

including foreign companies not yet listed in the US provides greater variance reduction throughout

the sample. When assuming only long positions in the foreign assets, the variance peaks at around

a 4.5% variance reduction in the 1970s. Allowing for short positions in the 2000s would imply an

even greater variance reduction above 5%.



4    Alternative Speci…cations

We now consider the e¤ects of allowing for alternative speci…cations along several dimensions: (1)

more frequent changes; (2) industry risk; and (3) more gradual parameter shifts.




                                                 38
4.1   More frequent parameter changes

For our analysis so far, we have allowed for breaks that partition subsamples into no less than 15%

of the sample, according to the "trimming" parameter " de…ned by Bai and Perron (2003a,b). As

described above, we took this approach because …ner partitions of the sample can potentially lead

to …nding too many breaks. Moreover, this minimum subsample was found to be most reliable in

their Monte Carlo tests.

   The recent …nancial crisis may create a problem with using a higher trimming parameter, ". If

stock returns become more correlated at the time of a crisis as argued by Longin and Solnik (2001),

then the crisis may have generated a break in parameters nearer 2007. However, if 15% of the

sample is 5 years as it would be for a series beginning in about 1980, the break would show up in

the estimates around 2002. If so, our analysis would be biased toward earlier break date estimation

and may therefore a¤ect the variance reduction gains measured earlier.

   To address this issue, we estimated all parameters and break dates assuming a …ner trimming

parameter of " = 5% of the sample. Thus, for country returns, we …rst generated the set of
                                      n       `
                                                      o
breakdates T ` and parameter estimates b ` ; b ; u
                                                 b`t;                 b`t; for each interval =
                                                        and residuals u

        b ` + 1 for country `. Second, using the country-level regressions, we then estimated the
1; :::; m

                                                               i` ;   i`    iu
company-level break-dates and the parameter estimates          &      & ;   &    and residuals ebi`
                                                                                                 t;& for each


                     bi + 1 for each company i. Consistent with our expectations, we found slightly
interval & = 1; :::; n

more breaks and the last break date moves later than 2004.

   To examine the implications of these estimates, we recalculated the portfolio analysis for the

typical US investor. In general, our results are quite similar with the exception that the shift toward

higher betas occurs later in the 2000s. As a result, the variance reduction attainable from shorting

foreign stocks occurs further into the …nancial crisis and the diversi…cation gains are attenuated.

   Figure 8 depicts a comparison between our new results for the shorter trimming parameter,


                                                  39
" = 5%, and our prior results with the longer trimming parameter, " = 15%. The …gure depicts

the portfolio menu of foreign companies in the US assuming access only to cross-listed stocks. The

result for the other portfolio menu is similar. As Figure 8A shows, the pattern of allocation into

foreign stocks are very similar over time. When the trimming parameter is 5% of the sample, the

minimum variance investor tends to hold slightly less foreign company stocks than for the 15% case.

For most of the period, the allocations do not imply much di¤erentiation in variance reduction.

However, the slight allocation di¤erence is re‡ected in bigger diversi…cation gains in the early 2000s

since the 15% " investor perceives the coming increase in correlations earlier than the 5% " investor.

   Overall, the results here suggest that our overall results are robust to allowing for more frequent

breaks. While the dating of the breaks at the end of the sample must be viewed with caution, the

overall implications for pattern of variance reduction are similar.


4.2   Industry risk factors

The analysis in this paper so far has focused upon a two factor model of world and local e¤ects.

However, our estimated residual risk may be driven by omitted variables that could a¤ect the shifts

in parameters over time. In particular, Bekaert, Hodrick and Zhang (2009) have recently found

that multiple factors are needed to explain international stock returns more generally. Also, Brooks

and Del Negro (2005) and Carrieri, Errunza, and Sarkissian (2006) have …nd that industry risks

are important in explaining in international stock returns.

   To examine the e¤ects of industry risk, we augment the foreign stock level relationship in

equation (15) to include an industry factor captured by the return on a market-weighted portfolio

of …rms within the industry. We then test this model for breaks using the industry portfolios for

each of the foreign stocks through 2004 (not shown). We …nd that the pattern for the number of

breaks is roughly the same as in the two factor model. Moreover, we …nd that while the timing



                                                 40
of breaks di¤er somewhat, the implications for diversi…cation are similar to our base model. The

residual variances di¤er between the two factor and three factor model during the early period

before 1988. However, after this point, the estimates are virtually identical for the rest of the

sample. As a result, the implied portfolio allocation in foreign stocks is essentially unchanged for

the post 1988 sample.

   Overall, therefore, the general qualitative results for our base two factor framework appear

robust to the inclusion of industry e¤ects.


4.3   Gradual parameter shifts

The analysis above has focused upon a model with discrete shifts in the parameters. The strongest

evidence in breaks occurred at the country level and these breaks were used to condition possible

foreign stock market breaks. To keep with the standard factor model approach, we have nested the

model within a framework that implied abrupt parameter shifts. On the other hand, it seems likely

that at least some of the changes are more gradual, perhaps evolving over time until the changes

are picked up by the …lter as a shift.

   Although our approach can encompass more gradual changes, the risk-reduction thought ex-

periment in this section has treated the changes as discrete within a year window. This restriction

raises the question of whether the timing of shifts will be shifted forward or later. To consider

this possibility, we examine a variation of the model proposed by Bai and Perron (2003a) in which

the parameters are …xed yet the left hand side variable is auto-correlated. We estimate this model

for the country returns through 2004 for the local market model in equation (8) and …nd that the

standard errors of the breaks are generally wider than the abrupt break model in Figure 1 (not

shown). However, most of the estimated breaks with the based model occur within the con…dence

interval of the gradual break model. The results suggest that a more gradual adjustment model



                                                41
would imply similar timing to our base model.



5    Conclusions

The potential gains from foreign diversi…cation have a long history in the …eld of …nancial economics.

The more recent integration of …nancial markets through cross-listed stocks has provided another

avenue for this diversi…cation, typically with much lower costs than investing directly in foreign

markets.

    In this paper, we examine the diversi…cation potential of these companies with an econometric

methodology that allows, but does not require, the sensitivity against the US to change over time.

We estimate the sensitivities of each foreign company on the home and foreign stock market return,

…nding that both the betas and correlations of the foreign companies on the US market increase

over time. Furthermore, these betas and correlations are higher after cross-listing than before

cross-listing.

    Using our panel of foreign company parameter estimates, we examine the economic importance

of the changes over time to a representative US investor. Consistent with Errunza, Hogan, and Hung

(1999) who found that domestically traded portfolios that include cross-listed stocks span foreign

markets, our estimates imply that the time-variation of minimum variance allocation into foreign

companies tends to mimic the allocation into foreign market returns. Thus, foreign companies in

the US provide an opportunity to invest in foreign markets without directly going to those markets.

    Strikingly, our estimates also imply that the co-movement of foreign companies to the US market

has increased over time. This relationship arises both directly through foreign company betas on

the US market and indirectly because the betas of their home markets have increased against the

US market. Correspondingly, the portfolio allocation into these companies that would minimize

the variance has declined over time. Indeed, during the recent …nancial crisis, the portfolio variance


                                                 42
would decline only if the foreign stocks could be shorted.

   To understand the diversi…cation potential of cross-listed stocks compared to non-cross-listed

stocks, we also analyze the di¤erence between …rms that are listed in the US and …rms that have

not yet listed in the US. While both portfolios of foreign stocks reduce the variability of risk to the

US investor, the set that includes foreign companies that have not yet listed in the US provide a

greater risk reduction by as much as three times that of the cross-listed stocks over some periods.

These results suggest that the diversi…cation gains attainable with foreign companies in the US

diminish after cross-listing.

   As a by-product of our investigation, we developed a framework based upon Bai and Perron

(1998) to test for and estimate shifts in the sensitivity of individual foreign companies against the

US. While this paper represents a …rst attempt to analyze …rm-level behavior using this framework,

our methodology provides a framework that could be used to address other interesting possibilities.




                                                  43
                                        REFERENCES



   Andrews, Donald W K, “Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix

Estimation,” Econometrica, 59:3, May 1991, pp. 817-58.


   Bai, Jushan; Perron, Pierre, “Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple Structural

Changes,” Econometrica, 66:1, January 1998, pp. 47-78.


   Bai, Jushan; Perron, Pierre, “Computation and Analysis of Multiple Structural Change Mod-

els,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18:1, Jan.-Feb. 2003a, pp. 1-22.


   Bai, Jushan; Perron, Pierre, “Critical Values for Multiple Structural Change Tests,”Economet-

rics Journal, 6:1, 2003b, pp. 72-78.


   Baruch, Shmuel; Saar, Gideon. “Asset Returns and the Listing Choice of Firms,” Review of

Financial Studies, 22:6, June 2009, pp. 2239-2274.


   Bartram, Sohnke; Gri¢ n, John; and Ng, David. “How Important Is Foreign Ownership in

International Stock Returns?” Cornell University Working Paper, 2012.

   Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell R; “Time-Varying World Market Integration,” Journal of

Finance, 50:2, June 1995, pp. 403-44.


   Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell R, “Emerging Equity Market Volatility,”Journal of Financial

Economics, 43:1, January 1997, pp. 29-77.


   Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell R, “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets,”

Journal of Finance, 55:2, April 2000, pp. 565-613.


   Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell R; Lumsdaine, Robin L., “Dating the Integration of World

Equity Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 65:2, August 2002, pp. 203-47.




                                               44
   Bekaert, G; Hodrick, R., and Zhang, L., “International Stock Return Comovements,” Journal

of Finance, 64:6, December 2009, pp. 2591-2626.


   Black, F. and R. Litterman, "Global Portfolio Optimization," Financial Analysts Journal

Sept./Oct. 1992, pp. 28-43.


   Bonser-Neal, Catherine; Brauer, Greggory; Neal, Robert; Wheatley, Simon; “International In-

vestment Restrictions and Closed-End Country Fund Prices,”Journal of Finance, 45:2, June 1990,

pp. 523-47.


   Britten-Jones, Mark."The Sampling Error in Estimates of Mean-Variance E¢ cient Portfolio

Weights," Journal of Finance, 54:2 Apr 1999, pp.655-671


   Brooks, Robin; Del Negro, Marco. “Country versus Region E¤ects in International Stock

Returns.” Journal of Portfolio Management, 2005, 31:4, pp. 67-72.


   Campbell, John Y; Lo, Andrew W; MacKinlay, A Craig. The econometrics of …nancial markets,

Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997.


   Carrieri, Francesca; Errunza, Vihang; Sarkissian, Sergei. "The Dynamics of Geographic versus

Sectoral Diversi…cation: Is there a Link to the Real Economy?" Weiss Center Working Paper

#06-04, March 2006.


   Doidge, Craig; Karolyi, G. Andrew; Stulz, Rene’ M. "Why Are Foreign Firms Listed In the

U.S. Worth More?" Journal of Financial Economics, 2004, 71:2, pp.205-238.


   Doidge, Craig; Karolyi, G. Andrew; Stulz, Rene’ M. “The Valuation Premium for Non-US

Stocks Listed in U.S. Markets,” NYSE Working Paper #05-01, September 2005.


   Dumas, Bernard; Solnik, Bruno, “The World Price of Foreign Exchange Risk,” Journal of

Finance, 50:2, June 1995, pp. 445-79.



                                               45
   Errunza, Vihung; K. Hogan and M.W. Hung, "Can the Gains from International Diversi…cation

be Achieved Without Trading Abroad?" Journal of Finance, 1999, 54, pp. 2075-2107.


   Foerster, Stephen; and G. Andrew Karolyi; “The E¤ects of Market Segmentation and Investor

Recognition on Asset Prices: Evidence from Foreign Stocks Listing in the U.S.,”Journal of Finance

54, 1999, pp. 981-1014.


   Henry, Peter Blair; “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market

Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, 55:2, April 2000, pp. 529-64.


   Henry, Peter Blair, “Capital-Account Liberalization, the Cost of Capital, and Economic Growth,”

American Economic Review, 93:2, May 2003, pp. 91-96.


   Karolyi, G Andrew, “The World of Cross-Listings and Cross-Listings of the World: Challenging

Conventional Wisdom,” Review of Finance, 10:1, 2006, pp. 99-152.


   Karolyi, G. Andrew; Wu, Ying. "The Role of Investability Restrictions on Size, Value, and

Momentum in International Stock Returns," Johnson School University of Cornell Working Paper,

2012


   Lewis, Karen K. “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption,” Journal of

Economic Literature, June 1999, 37:2, pp. 571-608.


   Liu, Edith "Diversifying Credit Risk with International Corporate Bonds", Cornell University

Working Paper, 2012.


   Longin, Francois; Solnik, Bruno, “Extreme Correlation of International Equity Markets,”Jour-

nal of Finance, 56: 2, April 2001, pp. 649-676.


   Pastor, Lubos, “Portfolio Selection and Asset Pricing Models,” Journal of Finance, 55:1, Feb-

ruary 2000, pp. 179-223.



                                                  46
   Sarkissian, Sergei; Schill, Michael J. "Are There Permanent Valuation Gains to Overseas List-

ing?" Review of Financial Studies, 22:1 Jan 2009, pp. 371-412


   Solnik, Bruno H., "The International Pricing of Risk: An Empirical Investigation of the World

Capital Market Structure," Journal of Finance, 29:2 May 1974, pp.365-378


   Stehle, Richard E. "An Empirical Test of the Alternative Hypotheses of National and Interna-

tional Pricing of Risky Assets," Journal of Finance, 32:2 May 1977, pp. 493-502.


   Stock, James H. “Unit Roots, Structural Breaks and Trends,” Handbook of econometrics 4,

1994, pp. 2739-2841.


   White, Halbert, “Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct Test

for Heteroskedasticity,” Econometrica, 48:4, May 1980, pp. 817-38.




                                               47
Appendices

Appendix A: Data Description

The data for the individual company stock returns were collected and cross-checked from the

websites of the NYSE and NASDAQ and three ADR custodian depositaries: JP Morgan, Citibank,

and Bank of New York. Using these sources, we selected all companies that were trading on NYSE

and NASDAQ in July 2004. We then extracted the weekly Total Return Index series for each

company from January 1970 to October 2009. Companies with less than 60 observations were

excluded. For each of these companies, we compiled the Data Stream market return index from

their home market. Table 1 in the text reports these countries. To calculate excess returns, the

weekly T-bill rate from Ken French’s data set was subtracted from each stock return.


Appendix B: Comparison on Market Index Returns to Bekaert-Harvey-Lumsdaine

In Table 2 and Figure 1, we report break-tests of country market indices against the US market

index returns. Similarly, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002) BHL estimate break tests for

market return indices. However, the purpose of the BHL study is to date endogenous liberalization

break dates in aggregate macro-level time series. As such their focus is di¤erent from our analysis

on the diversi…cation potential of individual stock returns. Nevertheless, it is interesting to consider

the relationship between the two sets of studies.

   Table A summarizes the break dates estimates from the BHL study in the …rst two columns.

BHL consider both a break in the mean in column A and a break in all the parameters in column

B. Since the question addressed by BHL concerns liberalization, they study emerging markets

exclusively. On the other hand, in this paper we examine emerging markets only to the extent that

they have stocks listed in the US. As a result, the set of countries we have in common with BHL

is a smaller set of 14 countries.

                                                    i
   Another di¤erence between our studies is that BHL has a di¤erent sample period. While Bekaert

and Harvey (2000) report that the samples di¤er by country, the maximum possible sample period

for any country is from January 1976 to December 1995. By contrast, our inclusion of countries

depends upon whether a company from the home country is represented on the US exchange. The

third column summarizes the maximum number of overlapping years in the two studies. These

range from 1.5 for Brazil to 23 years for Mexico and Venezuela.

   The break date estimates using the sup(F) tests are reported in the last six columns for the case

where the minimum subsample partition allowed is 15% and 5% of the sample, respectively. Several

interesting features arise from the comparison. First, and least surprisingly, for the countries where

there is little overlap in sample periods, the estimated breakdates with the sup(F) tests occur

later than the BHL estimates. For example, the median BHL estimates for breaks in Argentina

and Brazil occur in the mid to late 1980s, though these estimates are not signi…cant. On the

other hand, using the later sample, we …nd strong evidence of breaks in 1999 and 2002, closer to

the Argentine and Brazilian crises periods. Second, for some countries where BHL found strong

evidence of breaks before our sample, we do not …nd evidence of later breaks. For example, BHL

estimate break dates for the Philippines and Indonesia in 1987 and 1991, respectively, but with our

later samples, we …nd no evidence of further breaks. Third, to allow for the possibility that the

minimum subsample restriction is binding for some of our countries with shorter samples, we also

estimate the model allowing for a shorter restriction of 5% of the sample. For Brazil, Chile, Turkey,

and Taiwan, we do indeed …nd evidence of …ner sample partitions. Finally, for some countries when

we have a similar sample period, our estimated break dates are relatively close. For example, for

Venezuela, both BHL and our estimates suggest a break in the early 1990s.

   Overall, while our sample periods and independent variables di¤er from BHL, our qualitative

results are similar where they overlap.



                                                  ii
Appendix C: Minimum Variance Portfolio Model

The estimates of the model were used to evaluate the decision for a representative US investor

who is deciding on how much to allocate into foreign stock portfolios. Under the assumptions of

i.i.d., an investor who minimizes the variance of expected returns will choose to hold the minimum

variance portfolio given by equation (7) in the text. To examine the decision of the investor over

time, we evaluate the conditional version given as:


                                                      Vt 1
                                             !t =     0V 1
                                                                                                (A1)
                                                        t



where t subscripts refer to the information set at time t. Thus, Vt is the conditional variance-

covariance matrix of returns.

   Below we describe the moments for the two portfolio menus described in the text: (a) the

two-asset model implied by the more restrictive portfolio menu of the US and cross-listed stocks;

and (b) the three asset model implied by the least restrictive portfolio menu of the US, cross-listed

stocks, and foreign market indices.


Two Asset Model


For the two asset model, the investor chooses between a market-weighted portfolio of cross-listed

foreign company returns and the US market. In this case,



                                      rpt    rtu ; rtF = rtu ; Zt0 rit                          (A2)



Where rit is an N    1 vector of the cross-listed foreign company returns at time t, Zt is an N    1

vector of the shares of market weights of the foreign stocks as a proportion of the market weight of

all the foreign stocks in the portfolio at time t.


                                                     iii
   Note that the returns for each element in rit are given by the …rm level process in the text,

rewritten here as:


                                h                                            i
               rti` =    ( &)       i`
                                    &    +       i` `
                                                 & rt   +       iu u
                                                                & rt   + ei`
                                                                          &;t ,       for i = 1; :::; N ; & = 1; :::; ni + 1       (A3)



where     ( & ) is an indicator function for the event that time t is within a set of time.

   However, the local market returns also depend upon the US return according to:


                                         h                               i
                    rt` = I (T )             `
                                                 +      ` u
                                                         rt     + u`t;        , for ` = 1; :::; L;   = 1; :::; m + 1               (A4)



where I (T ) is an indicator function that time is within a set of time intervals T for                                   = 1; :::; m+1.

   We now rede…ne the parameter vector by mapping the set of parameter vectors in both time

subsets T and       &   into parameters at each date t. Thus,                              t   represents the mapping of parameters

for countries within their time subsets T into the time domain t and for stocks within their time

subsets   &.   For example, the country-level parameters are de…ned over time as:



                                                                         1
                                             t   =       t jt   =I           (T ); = 1; :::; m + 1                                 (A5)



Then substituting (A4) into (A3), the company returns can be rewritten:



                                                            rti` = ai`   i` u    i`
                                                                    t + bt rt + "t




                                                                              iv
where



                                                ai`
                                                 t  =       i`
                                                                 +       i` `



                                                bi`
                                                 t  =       i` `
                                                                     +         iu



                                                "i`
                                                 t
                                                            i` `
                                                              ut;    + ei`
                                                                        t




Then the variance-covariance matrix of the portfolio vector of returns, rp , is:

                     2                                                                                           3
                            2                                        2 Z0 b U
                    6       U                                        U t t                                       7
               Vt = 6
                    4
                                                                                                                 7
                                                                                                                 5         (A6)
                                                                           0
                         2 Z0 b U       2 Z0 bu bu0 Z     + Zt   eL                 t   Zt   e L + Z0   t   Zt
                         U t t          U t t t       t              t                         t    t



                                                                                                 L
Where bU
       t is the N        1 parameter vector with typical element bi`
                                                                  t and                          t   is the N        1 parameter
                                     L                                                   L
vector of country market loadings, e t , and where                 in the operation Zt e t indicates element by

element multiplication. Furthermore, the company residual variance-covariance matrix is given by:

 t   = Et (et e0t )= for et the vector of company return residuals, with typical element, ei`;t . Similarly,

the country residual variance-covariance matrix arrayed by each …rm’s home country is given by

the L     L matrix:       et        Et (ut u0t ) where ut is the L              1 vector of residuals to each company’s

home market regression on the US market.

     In estimating the parameters and variances of the model, we did not assume homoskedasticity

of the residuals. However, for the portfolio model, we assume that the agent assume variances will

be constant over the next year. Moroever, the model treats the portfolio variance as changing over

time in response to the evolution of the parameters                  and weights Z. Note that in the o¤-diagonal

terms in (A6), we have used the fact that: Et (ut rtu ) = 0 by construction in estimating equation

(3).




                                                            v
Three Asset Model


For the three asset model, the investor chooses between a market-weighted portfolio of foreign

stocks traded in the US, the portfolio of foreign market indices, and the US market. In this case,

we rede…ne the return vector to be:


                                                                 h                        i
                                        rpt     rtu ; rtF ; rtL = rtu ; Z0t rit ; X0t r`t                                 (A2’)



where r`t is an L    1 vector of foreign market returns at time t, Xt is an L                        1 vector of the market

weights of the foreign market indices as a proportion of the total set of foreign market indices with

home companies listed in the US and where the other parameters are as de…ned above.

     Then the variance of the three-asset version of the model can be written:

      2                                                                                                                            3
             2                                       2 Z0 bU                                                   2 X0 b L
     6       U                                       U t t                                                     U t t                7
     6                                                                                                                              7
     6                                                   0                                                                          7
Vt = 6                                         L                           L                                 L0           `  b
                                                                                                                         e 0 e t Xt 7
     6    2 Z0 bU
          U t t
                      2 Z0 bu bu0 Z
                      U t t t       t   + Zt e t             t        Zt e t + Z0t        t   Zt   2 Z0 b u b X + Z
                                                                                                   U t t t      t      t  t         7
     6                                                                                                                              7
     4                                                        ` b
                                                                                                                                    5
          2 X0 b L                2 Z0 bu b L0 X       + Zt e t 0 e t Xt                             2 X ’ b L b L ’X + X 0 b X
          U t t                   U t t t        t                                                   U t      t t    t    t t t



where now we have the additional terms of the L L variance-covariance matrix of country residuals

bt    Et (ut u0t ) where ut is the L          1 vector of residuals to each company’s home market regression

on the US market and the N                L covariance matrix of country residuals e t                         ut u0t )and the
                                                                                                           Et (e
                                  `
L    1 vector of country betas, e t .




                                                                 vi
            Table 1: Summary Statistics for Foreign Companies
                           Listed in US Exchanges
Panel A: Summary Information about Foreign Firms Listed by Exchange and Total
Stock Exchange       No. of          No. of         No. of       Average Firm
                      Firms        Countries       Industries    Observations
    NYSE               380             39             47             1092
   NASDAQ              196             28             40             862
Both Exchanges         576             42             47             977
Panel B: Summary Information about Foreign Firms Listed by Country
Country           Market Begin    No. of Firms-   No. of Firms   Average Firm
                       Data          NYSE          NASDAQ        Observations
Argentina          Aug 6, 1993         9               3             733
Australia          Jan 5, 1973         12              8             1324
Austria            Jan 5, 1973         2               0             466
Belgium            Jan 5, 1973         1               0             1917
Brazil              Jul 8, 1994        35              1             676
Canada             Jan 5, 1973         57             63             1009
Chile               Jul 7, 1989        17              0             457
China              Jul 30, 1993        12              5             527
Colombia           Mar 13, 1992        1               0             764
Denmark            Jan 5, 1973         2               2             1401
Finland            Mar 25, 1988        4               0             1055
France             Jan 5, 1973         22             10             921
Germany            Jan 5, 1973         15              3             869
Greece             Jan 5, 1990         3               1             760
Hong Kong          Jan 5, 1973         7               5             579
Hungary            Jun 21, 1991        1               0             620
India              Jan 5, 1990         8               3             772
           Table 1: Summary Statistics for Foreign Companies
                     Listed in US Exchanges (cont.)
Panel B: Summary Information about Foreign Firms Listed by Country (cont)
Country            Market Index   No.of Firms:   No. of Firms:   Average Firm
                    Begin Date       NYSE         NASDAQ         Observations
Indonesia           Jan 5, 1990        2              0              376
Ireland             Jan 5, 1973        3              8              1348
Israel              Jan 1, 1993        2              6              671
Italy               Jan 5, 1973        10             0              908
Japan               Jan 5, 1973        18             12             1585
Korea              Sep 11, 1987        5              3              708
Luxemburg           Jan 3, 1992        2              1              644
Malaysia           May 12, 1989        0              1              729
Mexico              Jan 5, 1973        24             2              796
Netherland          Jan 8, 1988        16             7              1182
New Zealand         Jan 4, 1980        1              0              475
Norway              Jan 7, 1994        4              3              794
Peru               Sep 11, 1987        2              0              947
Philippine          Jan 5, 1990        2              1              411
Portugal           Jun 24, 1994        3              0              841
Russia              Jan 5, 1973        3              0              641
Singapore           Mar 6, 1987        0              2              511
South Africa        Jan 5, 1973        6              5              1149
Spain              May 6, 1988         6              1              773
Sweden              Jan 8, 1988        0              7              989
Switzerland         Jan 2, 1970        10             2              948
Taiwan              Jan 5, 1990        5              2              793
Turkey              Aug 6, 1993        1              0              483
United Kingdom      Jan 5, 1973        46             29             1160
Venezuela           Jan 5, 1973        1              0              671
       Table 2 Summary Statistics on Break Tests
      Panel A reports the proportion of foreign country returns
      rejecting the hypothesis that there are less than one, two,
               three and unknown breaks in the regression:
                         ` u
       rt` =     `   +    rt   + u`t , where rt` is the excess return of
     country `’s equity return, rtu is the excess return of the US.
       Panel B gives the results of the sequential Sup(F) test.
 Panel C reports means and standard errors of the break dates.
       Panel A: Proportion of Countries Rejecting No Breaks
MSLa      Sup F test of No Break                Tests of No Break vs
          vs:                                   Unknown Number of Breaks
          m=1            m=2          m=3       UD Max          WD Max
10%       0.857          0.929       0.929       0.905            0.929
5%        0.857          0.857       0.905       0.881            0.905
1%        0.810          0.810       0.857       0.833            0.786
                Panel B: Distribution of Break Categories
MSLa      Proportion of             Proportional # of Breaksc over
          Total Countriesb
          Rejecting                 1 Break     2 Breaks         3 Breaks
          Ho: No Breaks
10%                  0.857           0.611       0.250            0.139
5%                   0.857           0.750       0.167            0.083
1%                   0.810           0.853       0.118            0.029
      a Marginal      signi…cance levels for the test of no structural
         break and the sequential sup(F) test. b Ratio of the
      number of countries that reject the test of no structural
       break over the total number of countries. c Proportion
          of countries that reject sequential test of a given
      number of breaks plus one over the number of countries
           that reject the supF test of no structural break.
           Table 3 Foreign Market Beta Summary Statistics
Estimate means, standard error means, and cross-sectional standard deviations
                                                                  ` u
for various market portfolios in the regression: rt` =    `   +    rt   + u`t where rt`
is the excess return of country `’s equity return, rtu is the excess return of the
US market. “Periods” are de…ned as the interval over which a parameter is stable
and do not correspond to the same time periods for all countries.
Portfolio        Estimate         Period 1      Period 2          Period 3       Period 4
                                   ( = 1)        ( = 2)            ( = 3)          ( = 4)
 Panel A: All Countries Market Weighted Vs. Equally Weighted
                    `
                        Mean        0.348         0.802            0.866            1.109
Market         Std Err Mean         0.047         0.049            0.039            0.038
Weighted        Corr(r` ; ru )      0.198         0.355            0.436            .471
                   `
                        St Dev      0.248         0.315            0.341            0.234
                No. of Obs            42            35                  9             2
                    `
                        Mean        0.378         0.843            0.799            0.973
Equally        Std Err Mean         0.063         0.066            0.053            0.047
Weighted        Corr(r` ; ru )      0.198         0.355            0.436            0.471
                   `
                        St Dev      0.248         0.315            0.341            0.234
                No. of Obs            42            35                  9             2
         Panel B: Market Weighted Developed Vs. Emerging
                    `
                        Mean        0.325         0.785            0.903            1.138
Market         Std Err Mean         0.041         0.044            0.035            0.037
Weighted        Corr(r` ; ru )      0.195         0.361            0.474            0.479
                   `
                        St Dev      0.171         0.272            0.167            0.000
                No. of Obs            21            21                  5             1
                    `
                        Mean        0.453         0.928            0.657            0.807
Equally        Std Err Mean         0.074         0.085            0.064            0.057
Weighted        Corr(r` ; ru )      0.208         0.309            0.223            0.384
                   `
                        St Dev      0.297         0.379            0.387            0.000
                No. of Obs            21            14                  4             1
       Table 3 Foreign Market Beta Summary Statistics (cont.)
Portfolio     Estimate             Period 1   Period 2   Period 3   Period 4
                                    ( = 1)     ( = 2)     ( = 3)     ( = 4)
                Panel C: Market Weighted by Region
                `
                    Mean             0.230      0.505      0.258      n/a
             Std Err Mean            0.063      0.045      0.055      n/a
                      `
Asia         Corr(r       ; ru )     0.104      0.285      0.127      n/a
                `
                    St Dev           0.267      0.221      0.000      n/a
              No. of Obs              11         6          1         n/a
                `
                    Mean             0.380      0.894      1.028      n/a
             Std Err Mean            0.036      0.047      0.041      n/a
                      `
Europe       Corr(r ; ru )           0.247      0.393      0.503      n/a
                `
                    St Dev           0.174      0.294      0.052      n/a
              No. of Obs              18         18         4         n/a
                `
                    Mean             0.334      0.788      1.119      n/a
Middle       Std Err Mean            0.065      0.082      0.073      n/a
                      `
East &       Corr(r       ; ru )     0.174      0.220      0.323      n/a
                `
Africa              St Dev           0.245      0.422      0.000      n/a
              No. of Obs              3          2          1         n/a
                `
                    Mean             0.607      0.975      0.693      1.138
North        Std Err Mean            0.043      0.051      0.025      0.037
                      `
America      Corr(r       ; ru )     0.239      0.323      0.424      0.479
                `
                    St Dev           0.178      0.284      0.000      0.000
              No. of Obs              2          2          1          1
                `
                    Mean             0.399      1.107      n/a        n/a
             Std Err Mean            0.032      0.058      n/a        n/a
                      `
Oceania      Corr(r       ; ru )     0.260      0.388      n/a        n/a
                `
                    St Dev           0.047      0.211      n/a        n/a
              No. of Obs              2          2         n/a        n/a
                `
                    Mean             0.578      1.166      0.377      0.807
South        Std Err Mean            0.087      0.083      0.060      0.057
                      `
America      Corr(r       ; ru )     0.203      0.404      0.176      0.384
                `
                    St Dev           0.412      0.509      0.160      0.000
              No. of Obs              6          5          2          1
                          Table 4 Summary Statistics of Foreign Market
                         Breaks and Restrictions on Foreign Firm Pricing
Panel A reports the number and proportion of foreign stocks listed in the US domiciled in home
countries with number of breaks as in Table 2. Panel B reports the number and proportion of
the …rms that reject the hypothesis that the estimates are stable in the equation system:
                                                rt` =     ` + ` r U +u`
                                                                 t    t;
                              rti` =     i` + i` ` +      iU
                                                             + i` ` rtU + i` u`t; +ei`
                                                                                    t
for ` = 1; :::; L, the total number of countries,       and = 1; :::; m` where m` is the              estimated number of
breaks for country `. The …rst equation is the same market equity excess return regression reported in
Tables 2 and 3. The second equation regresses the excess return of …rm i from home country ` on a
two factor model of the local market excess return and the US market return. Panel C reports the number
and proportion of …rms that reject the hypothesis that the parameters are equal to zero or constant.
                   Panel A: Firms Decomposed by Country Break Category
      Statistic              One Break                 Two Breaks             Three Breaks                        All
                                 m=1                       m=2                     m=3
Proportion of Firmsa             0.620                     0.089                   0.238                         0.946
No of Firms                      357                        51                      137                           545
               Panel B: Distribution of Break Categories Using Sequential Test
Tests for Breaks
Beyond country level          No Breaks                One Break               Two Breaks                   Three Breaks
Proportion of   Firmsa           0.487                     0.406                   0.097                         0.011
No of Firms                      277b                       231                     55                                6
                          Panel C: Firms Rejecting Parameter Constancy
Null Hypothesis            No Local E¤ect          No US E¤ect                 Local E¤ect                   World E¤ect
                                 0.810                                            Constant                      Constant
                                  i`                       iU                      i`       i`                   iU       iU
                          Ho :         = 0; 8    Ho :            = 0; 8    Ho :         =        ;8      Ho :         =        ;8
Proportion of Firmsa             0.849                     0.579                   0.634                         0.445
No of Firms                      248                        169                     185                           130
a Proportion   out of total number of …rm = 569         b Includes   34 companies for which there was no break
at the country level   c Proportion    out of number of …rms rejecting no breaks beyond country level = 292
                    Table 5 Foreign Company Local Beta Estimates
                              i`
Local market beta                  estimate means, standard error means, and cross-sectional
standard deviations for various market portfolios in the two equation system regressions:
                     ` u                                                     i` `       iu u
(i) rt` =   `   +     rt    + u`t ; and (ii) rti` =                i`   +      rt   +     rt   + ei`       ` u          i`
                                                                                                  t where rt ,rt , and rt
are the excess returns of the local market, US market, and …rm i from country `,
                                    `;   `        i` ;    i`        iu
respectively, and where                      ;                 ;            are parameters for country ` and …rm i.
Portfolio            Estimate                    Period            1a       Period 2       Period 3           Period 4
                                                  ( = 1)                     ( = 2)            ( = 3)          ( = 4)
    Panel A: All Countries Market Weighted Vs. Equally Weighted
                        i`
                             Mean                   0.659                     0.754             0.879           0.922
Market              Std Err Mean                    0.079                     0.094             0.095           0.082
Weighted            Corr(r` ; ru )                  0.223                     0.187             0.214           0.236
                       i`
                             St Dev                 0.523                     0.646             0.592           0.472
                     No. of Obs                          570                   435               222              52
                        i`
                             Mean                   0.698                     0.717             0.821           0.800
Equally             Std Err Mean                    0.125                     0.132             0.116           0.097
Weighted            Corr(r` ; ru )                  0.223                     0.187             0.214           0.236
                       i`
                             St Dev                 0.523                     0.646             0.592           0.472
                     No. of Obs                          570                   435               222              52
                Panel B: Market Weighted Developed Vs. Emerging
                        i`
                             Mean                   0.697                     0.781             0.892           0.934
Market              Std Err Mean                    0.123                     0.143             0.095           0.082
Weighted            Corr(r` ; ru )                  0.236                     0.191             0.214           0.238
                       i`
                             St Dev                 0.515                     0.637             0.612           0.491
                     No. of Obs                          386                   303               165              37
                        i`
                             Mean                   0.334                     0.471             0.648           0.554
Equally             Std Err Mean                    0.079                     0.091             0.087           0.076
Weighted            Corr(r` ; ru )                  0.110                     0.134             0.195           0.174
                       i`
                             St Dev                 0.533                     0.677             0.534           0.389
                     No. of Obs                          166                   119                53              15
         Table 5 Foreign Company Local Beta Estimates (cont.)
Portfolio        Estimate         Period 1    Period 2     Period 3      Period 4
                                   ( = 1)      ( = 2)       ( = 3)        ( = 4)
                        Panel C: Market Weighted by Region
                    i`
                         Mean      0.260        0.315        0.366         0.843
                Std Err Mean       0.076        0.081        0.074         0.054
Asia            Corr(r` ; ru )     0.072        0.076        0.117         0.313
                   i`
                         St Dev    0.544        0.774        0.586         0.534
                 No. of Obs          94           63           30            8
                    `
                         Mean      0.734        0.850        0.948         0.966
                Std Err Mean       0.134        0.160        0.098         0.085
Europe          Corr(r` ; ru )     0.261        0.209        0.218         0.233
                   i`
                         St Dev    0.518        0.643        0.624         0.559
                 No. of Obs         217          173           92            23
                    i`
                         Mean      0.316        0.214        0.052          n/a
Middle          Std Err Mean       0.084        0.077        0.096          n/a
East &          Corr(r` ; ru )     0.094        0.097        0.012          n/a
                   i`
Africa                   St Dev    0.499        0.599        0.435          n/a
                 No. of Obs          19           14           5            n/a
                    i`
                         Mean      0.813        0.689        1.164         0.607
North           Std Err Mean       0.142        0.146        0.128         0.110
America         Corr(r` ; ru )     0.165        0.112        0.233         0.135
                   i`
                         St Dev    0.529        0.670        0.705         0.434
                 No. of Obs         145          107           50            9
                    i`
                         Mean      0.939        0.912        0.813         0.941
                Std Err Mean       0.059        0.067        0.060         0.057
Oceania         Corr(r` ; ru )     0.347        0.287        0.306         0.260
                   i`
                         St Dev    0.333        0.503        0.270         0.066
                 No. of Obs          21           17           12            2
                    i`
                         Mean      0.970        0.937        1.062         0.788
South           Std Err Mean       0.070        0.075        0.078         0.086
America         Corr(r` ; ru )     0.375        0.309        0.329         0.232
                   i`
                         St Dev    0.412        0.406        0.290         0.262
                 No. of Obs          68           57           33            10
a "Periods"   are de…ned as intervals over which the company-speci…c parameter vector
is stable. Thus, they do not correspond to the same time periods for all companies.
                    Table 6 Foreign Company US Beta Estimates
                          iu
US market beta                  estimate means, standard error means, and cross-sectional
standard deviations for various market portfolios in the two equation system regressions:
                    ` u                                                     i` `       iu u
(i) rt` =   `   +    rt    + u`t ; and (ii) rti` =                i`   +      rt   +     rt   + ei`       ` u          i`
                                                                                                 t where rt ,rt , and rt
are the excess returns of the local market, US market, and …rm i from country `,
                                   `;   `        i` ;    i`        iu
respectively, and where                     ;                 ;            are parameters for country ` and …rm i.
Portfolio            Estimate                   Period            1a       Period 2       Period 3           Period 4
                                                 ( = 1)                     ( = 2)            ( = 3)          ( = 4)
    Panel A: All Countries Market Weighted Vs. Equally Weighted
                       iu
                               Mean                0.455                     0.792             0.858           0.995
Market              Std Err Mean                   0.127                     0.128             0.077           0.065
Weighted            Corr(ri ; ru )                 0.156                     0.224             0.257           0.315
                      iu
                            St Dev                 0.555                     0.678             0.554           0.552
                     No. of Obs                         570                   435               222              52
                       iu
                               Mean                0.624                     0.858             0.862           0.882
Equally             Std Err Mean                   0.131                     0.121             0.106           0.086
Weighted            Corr(ri ; ru )                 0.156                     0.224             0.257           0.315
                      iu
                            St Dev                 0.555                     0.678             0.554           0.552
                     No. of Obs                         570                   435               222              52
                Panel B: Market Weighted Developed Vs. Emerging
                       iu
                               Mean                0.432                     0.776             0.842           1.003
Market              Std Err Mean                   0.125                     0.128             0.075           0.064
Weighted            Corr(ri ; ru )                 0.152                     0.222             0.257           0.319
                      iu
                            St Dev                 0.527                     0.645             0.541           0.551
                     No. of Obs                         386                   303               165              37
                       iu
                               Mean                0.624                     0.979             1.133           0.752
Equally             Std Err Mean                   0.148                     0.125             0.115           0.093
Weighted            Corr(ri ; ru )                 0.181                     0.250             0.274           0.199
                      iu
                            St Dev                 0.589                     0.770             0.565           0.554
                     No. of Obs                         166                   119                53              15
         Table 6 Foreign Company US Beta Estimates (cont.)
Portfolio         Estimate        Period 1    Period 2     Period 3      Period 4
                                   ( = 1)      ( = 2)       ( = 3)        ( = 4)
                        Panel C: Market Weighted by Region
                    iu
                         Mean      0.355        0.608        0.646         0.579
                Std Err Mean       0.105        0.098        0.084         0.059
Asia             Corr(ri ; ru )    0.131        0.169        0.176         0.192
                   iu
                         St Dev    0.577        0.498        0.574         0.411
                 No. of Obs          94           63           30            8
                    iu
                         Mean      0.445        0.827        0.870         1.035
                Std Err Mean       0.137        0.141        0.074         0.063
Europe           Corr(ri ; ru )    0.163        0.242        0.270         0.343
                   iu
                         St Dev    0.539        0.601        0.573         0.587
                 No. of Obs         217          173           92            23
                    iu
                         Mean      0.732        0.452        0.866          n/a
Middle          Std Err Mean       0.182        0.118        0.131          n/a
East &           Corr(ri ; ru )    0.141        0.143        0.182          n/a
                   iu
Africa                   St Dev    0.653        0.716        0.293          n/a
                 No. of Obs          19           14           5            n/a
                    iu
                         Mean      0.717        0.898        0.986         1.157
North           Std Err Mean       0.120        0.109        0.099         0.088
America          Corr(ri ; ru )    0.190        0.207        0.269         0.258
                   iu
                         St Dev    0.536        0.810        0.555         0.580
                 No. of Obs         145          107           50            9
                    iu
                         Mean      0.316        0.682        0.793         1.048
                Std Err Mean       0.065        0.070        0.061         0.057
Oceania          Corr(ri ; ru )    0.094        0.192        0.252         0.288
                   iu
                         St Dev    0.257        0.721        0.361         0.086
                 No. of Obs          21           17           12            2
                    iu
                         Mean      0.779        0.992        1.192         0.920
South           Std Err Mean       0.132        0.112        0.090         0.093
America          Corr(ri ; ru )    0.164        0.221        0.315         0.248
                   iu
                         St Dev    0.512        0.688        0.538         0.563
                 No. of Obs          68           57           33            10
a "Periods"   are de…ned as intervals over which the company-speci…c parameter vector
is stable. Thus, they do not correspond to the same time periods for all companies.
              Table 7 Foreign Company and Market Return Estimates
                                     Before and After Cross-Listing
Parameter estimate means, standard error means, and cross-sectional standard
deviations before and after cross-listing. Panel A gives results for the market return
                                                                     ` u
regressions reported in Table 3 and Figure 1:rt` =          `   +     rt   + u`t ; Panel B gives
results for the company return regressions reported in Tables 5 and 6 and Figure 2:
                  i` `        iu u
rti` =   i`   +     rt   +      rt   + ei`
                                        t .The columns headed “Before Listing,”
“Only After Listing,” and “After and During Listing” give, respectively, statistics performed
on parameter averages across subperiods before cross-listing, across subperiods that
break after cross-listing, and across the subperiod during cross-listing and the
subperiods after cross-listing.
Portfolio            Estimate             Before Listing        Only After               After and
                                                                    Listing           During Listing
                               Panel A: Market Return Regressions
                         `
                             Mean              0.348                 0.830                  0.594
Market            Std Err Mean                 0.047                 0.047                  0.047
Weighted           Corr(r` ; ru )              0.198                 0.375                  0.289
                         `
                             St Dev            0.248                 0.260                  0.199
                    No. of Obs                   42                   35                      35
                         `
                             Mean              0.378                 0.882                  0.634
Equally           Std Err Mean                 0.063                 0.063                  0.062
Weighted           Corr(r` ; ru )              0.198                 0.375                  0.289
                         `
                             St Dev            0.248                 0.260                  0.199
                    No. of Obs                   42                   35                      35
      Table 7 Foreign Company and Market Return Estimates
                    Before and After Cross-Listing (cont.)
Portfolio     Estimate        Before Listing   Only After      After and
                                                Listing      During Listing
            Panel B: Foreign Company Return Regressions
                i`
                     Mean         0.647          0.758           0.766
            Std Err Mean          0.079          0.095           0.088
             Corr(ri ; r` )       0.220          0.179           0.220
               i`
                     St Dev       0.527          0.563           0.492
Market       No. of Obs            570            368             390
                iu
Weighted             Mean         0.486          0.970           0.740
            Std Err Mean          0.085          0.078           0.080
             Corr(ri ; ru )       0.168          0.288           0.227
               iu
                     St Dev       0.514          0.544           0.388
             No. of Obs            570            368             390
                i`
                     Mean         0.696          0.691           0.723
            Std Err Mean          0.125          0.124           0.124
             Corr(ri ; r` )       0.220          0.179           0.220
               i`
                     St Dev       0.527          0.563           0.492
Equally      No. of Obs            570            368             390
                iu
Weighted             Mean         0.639          0.967           0.800
            Std Err Mean          0.128          0.110           0.117
             Corr(ri ; ru )       0.168          0.288           0.227
               iu
                     St Dev       0.514          0.544           0.388
             No. of Obs            570            368             390
                                           Table A: Comparison of Emerging Market Break Points
Table compares the results from the text with those of Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002) for the countries in common. The reported Bekaert, Harvey, and
Lumsdaine (2002) results are from their Table 2 for A. Mean break and B. All parameter break. The sample period for BHL differs by country, but they report the
maximum sample period in Bekaert and Harvey (2000), Table II. *,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. # note that the ending date
for all countries is October 2009.

               BHL Median Estimates : Max Sample Period                                          Sup(F) Break-Point Estimates:
                          Jan-76 to Dec-95
                                                                Sample Start Date#
                                         B. All parameters
                 A. Mean break                                  Maximum Overlap            Min Subsample: ε=15%                  Min Subsample: ε=5%
                                               break
                                                                    in Years
                                                                                                                 Break
  Country            Median                   Median                                    Break 1       Break 2               Break 1      Break 2      Break 3
                                                                                                                   3
                                                                      Aug-93
 Argentina            Jun-85                   Jul-89                                  Jan-99***                            Jan-99**
                                                                        2.4
                                                                      Jul–94
   Brazil             Sep-83                   Sep-83                                  Oct-02***                           Oct-02***    Dec-08**
                                                                        1.5
                                                                      Jul-89                           Mar-       Jan-                    Mar-
   Chile             Jul-80**                Nov-79***                                 Jan-94***                           Jan-91***
                                                                        6.4                            03***      99*                     03***
                                                                      Mar-92
 Colombia             Apr-94                  Feb-92**                                 Oct-03***                           Oct-03***
                                                                        3.8
                                                                      Jan-90
   Greece            Nov-85*                  Aug-90*                                  Feb-06***                           Feb-06***
                                                                        6.0
                                                                      Jan-90
    India             Apr-92                   Jun-90                                 Apr-00***                            Apr-00***
                                                                        6.0
                                                                      Jan-90
 Indonesia          Nov-91**                 Nov-91**
                                                                        6.0
                                                                      Sep-87
   Korea              Apr-89                   Apr-89                                  Sep-97***                           Sep-97***
                                                                        8.3
                                                                      Jan-73             Nov-
  Mexico              Jan-83                 Oct-87***                                                                    Nov-04***
                                                                       23.0              04***
                                                                      Jan-90
 Philippines        Aug-87***                Aug-87***
                                                                        6.0
                                                                      Jun-94             Nov-
  Portugal          Feb-88***                Jan-88***                                                                    Nov-05***
                                                                        1.6              05***
                                                                      Jan-90                                                 May-
  Taiwan              Jun-89                   Jun-89                                  Sep-01***                                        Jun-91***    Sep-01**
                                                                        6.0                                                  90***
                                                                      Aug-93                                                                           Mar-
   Turkey             Aug-90                  Aug-90                                   Oct-00***                           Oct-00***     Feb-02**
                                                                        2.4                                                                            03**
                                                                      Jan-73            Feb-94*       Sep-98*              Dec-90***
 Venezuela            Feb-92                  Feb-92**
                                                                        23
       Figure 1a: Break Point Estimates by Country



2010


2005


2000


1995                                                 Break 1
                                                     Break 2
1990
                                                     Break 3

1985


1980


1975
       Figure 2: Break Point Estimates by Firm

2010

2005

2000

1995                                                   Break 1

1990                                                   Break 2
                                                       Break 3
1985

1980

1975
                  Firms Sorted by Initial Break Date
                                Figure 3a: Portfolio Parameters
                      Assuming Investable upon Local Market Listing
1.6


1.1


0.6


0.1    1973
               1975
                       1977
                               1979
                                       1981
                                               1983
                                                       1985
                                                               1987
                                                                       1989
                                                                              1991
                                                                                     1993
                                                                                            1995
                                                                                                   1997
                                                                                                          1999
                                                                                                                 2001
                                                                                                                        2003
                                                                                                                               2005
                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                             2009
‐0.4

                                      βi,ℓ                     βi,u                   βℓ                   βℓβiℓ+βiu



                               Figure 3b: Residual Variance
                      Assuming Investable upon Local Market Listing
3.0%
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0.0%
        1973
                1975
                        1977
                                1979
                                        1981
                                                1983
                                                        1985
                                                                1987
                                                                       1989
                                                                              1991
                                                                                     1993
                                                                                            1995
                                                                                                   1997
                                                                                                          1999
                                                                                                                 2001
                                                                                                                        2003
                                                                                                                               2005
                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                             2009
                                       Foreign Markets                               Foreign Companies
