                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FIRM/EMPLOYEE MATCHING:
                      AN INDUSTRY STUDY OF AMERICAN LAWYERS

                                               Paul Oyer
                                             Scott Schaefer

                                         Working Paper 18620
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18620


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




We thank David Autor, Scott Baker, Barry Guryan, Daniel Hamermesh, William Henderson, Matt
Jackson, Geoffrey Miller, Alan Sorensen, and Betsey Stevenson for comments and discussions. We
also thank participants at numerous seminars and conferences. We are grateful to Marko Tervio for
sharing his economist data and to Marco Beltran, Eric Forester, Christopher Jung, Nam Kim, Davis
Kingsley, Diane Lee, David Oyer, Jack Rudolph, William Vijverberg, and Kenneth Wong for research
assistance. Prior versions of this paper were circulated under the title "The Personnel-Economic Geography
of US Law Firms and Law Schools." The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Paul Oyer and Scott Schaefer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Firm/Employee Matching: An Industry Study of American Lawyers
Paul Oyer and Scott Schaefer
NBER Working Paper No. 18620
December 2012
JEL No. J44,K00,M51

                                               ABSTRACT

We study the sources of match-specific value at large American law firms by analyzing how graduates
of law schools group into law firms. We measure the degree to which lawyers from certain schools
concentrate within firms and then analyze how this agglomeration can be explained by "natural advantage"
factors (such as geographic proximity) and by productive spillovers across graduates of a given school.
We show that large law firms tend to be concentrated with regard to the law schools they hire from
and that individual offices within these firms are substantially more concentrated. The degree of concentration
is highly variable, as there is substantial variation in firms' hiring strategies. There are two main drivers
of variation in law school concentration within law offices. First, geography drives a large amount
of concentration, as most firms hire largely from local schools. Second, we show that school-based
networks (and possibly productive spillovers) are important because partners' law schools drive associates'
law school composition even controlling for firm, school, and firm/school match characteristics and
when we instrument for partners' law schools.


Paul Oyer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pauloyer@stanford.edu

Scott Schaefer
University of Utah
scott.schaefer@utah.edu
1    Introduction

Identifying the right employees is a crucial determinant of success for many (and perhaps most)
firms. While economists have been modeling the process of employee search and selection for
years, comparatively little is known about the methods and strategies that firms use to find
employees in labor markets. For example, to what extent do firms rely on local labor markets
to fill staffing needs, rather than conducting national or global searches? Do factors such as
production complementarities between employees of shared backgrounds drive hiring choices?
Can firms learn how to identify the most productive employees from a given talent pool, and
thus gain competitive advantage in hiring? What role do hiring “networks” play?
    In this paper, we use lawyer biographies posted on large US law firms’ web sites to shed
light on these questions. Legal services provide a useful and practical industry for studying
the firm/worker matching process for at least four reasons. First, law firms are human capital
intensive and hiring decisions are of the utmost importance. Second, law firms’ hiring processes
are often quite structured. Firms choose a specific set of law schools to visit, allowing us to make
inferences about hiring strategies from observing the firm’s workforce. In this way, lawyers are
very representative of a broad and growing group of professional service employees recruited
from professional schools such as MBA programs, accounting programs, and engineering schools.
Third, all lawyers go to law school, so law schools are a potentially important and uniform source
of labor market networks for virtually everyone in our sample. Finally, almost all large law firms
list detailed demographic information for all attorneys on their publicly available corporate web
pages. Thus, it is possible to gain detailed insight into the composition of the firm’s workforce.
For a sample of 285 firms and more than 105,000 attorneys, we download lawyer demographic
information including law school, year of law school graduation, rank (e.g., partner or associate),
and office location. We use this information to study across-firm variation in hiring strategies.
    Using the Ellison and Glaeser (1997) index of concentration, we show that large law firms
tend to be concentrated with regard to the law schools they hire from. That is, firms hire from
groups of law schools in a way that does not appear to be random. Conditional on having
some number of lawyers from a single school, another lawyer at that firm is more likely to have
gone to that school. Our calculations show that the probability that, for the average firm, two
attorneys selected at random attended the same law school is about six percentage points (or
four times) higher than this number for two attorneys selected at random from the sample of
all attorneys. We describe the concentration as economically meaningful, but not large.



                                                 1
   We document substantial across-firm heterogeneity in law-school concentration. Thus, our
sample firms appear to pursue markedly different hiring strategies. Some firms are unconcen-
trated; the distribution of law schools among such firms’ employees is similar to the sample
distribution of all attorneys. Other firms are quite concentrated. The most concentrated tend
to be regional firms that hire exclusively from regional law schools. Other concentrated firms
hire nationally, but only from the very top law schools. We also find that law offices are consid-
erably more concentrated than law firms, but again that there is substantial heterogeneity in
concentration. Breaking attorneys down by rank, we find that concentration measures do not
differ much from partner to associate on average.
   After establishing that law firms are concentrated with regards to the law schools their
employees attended, we then decompose the sources of concentration. Using the terminology
from Ellison and Glaeser (1999), we attempt to isolate the importance of “natural advantage”
caused by physical proximity between a law school and a law office that employs attorneys. We
run regressions that allow us to control for natural advantage in individual school/office pairs
and then we recompute our concentration measure adjusting for these controls. This simple
correction reduces concentration by about a third. We then adjust our concentration measure
for crude measures of the degree to which firms and law schools “match” in terms of quality
and prestige. This reduces our concentration estimates somewhat more.
   We then explore the importance of law school-based networks within law offices. There is a
strong relation between partner concentration (at the office level) and associate concentration
even controlling for firm, school, and firm/school match characteristics. Our point estimate of
the effect of partner concentration on associate concentration is near 0.6, and it is statistically
significant at well better than the 1% level. Also, when we instrument for partner law school
concentration using law schools of firm founders, we find a similar relationship. We believe this
analysis suggests that hiring networks and/or complementarities in working with graduates of
the same school are important in this labor market. However, further research, probably using
proprietary data to which we do not currently have access, would be required to determine the
magnitude of the value created by networks and complementarities and how this value is split
between firms and lawyers.
   Figures 1 and 2 provide a useful illustration of some of our findings and help motivate
the more detailed analysis to follow. Each figure shows a map of where lawyers at a firm
practice (hollow squares sized proportionately to the number of lawyers in that office) and
where they went to law school (solid circles, again sized proportionately). Figures 1(a) and 1(b)


                                                2
show firms that hire lawyers from a concentrated set of schools, but for very different reasons.
Figure 1(a) maps Haynsworth Sinkler’s four offices, all of which are in South Carolina cities:
Charleston, Columbia, Greenville and Florence. Almost two-thirds of the firm’s lawyers went
to the University of South Carolina, with the remainder from a smattering of other schools in
the Southeast. Munger Tolles, mapped in Figure 1(b), has offices only in San Francisco and Los
Angeles. However, while some nearby schools are highly represented in this firm, they recruit
a substantial fraction from top schools that are far away. So, whereas the University of South
Carolina is the common factor bringing lawyers together at Haynsworth Sinkler, prestigious law
schools is the common factor at Munger Tolles.
   Figure 2 shows two different firms that are not “concentrated” in terms of where they
source their lawyers. That is, the distribution of their lawyers’ schools is similar to that of
the sample as a whole. Skadden Arps, shown in Figure 2(a), is a large firm known for its
finance work (including, for example, restructuring and mergers.) The firm has nine offices
in large metropolitan areas, as well as Wilmington DE. As the distribution of circles on the
map indicates, Skadden Arps lawyers went to law school all over the country. The firm has
at least ten lawyers from each of Boston College, University of Connecticut, Vanderbilt, and
Villanova. Figure 2(b) maps DLA Piper, whose lawyers have a similar distribution of law
schools. However, unlike Skadden Arps, these lawyers work in 21 offices spread out in small
and large cities including Baltimore, Raleigh NC, and Sacramento CA. An office-level analysis of
DLA Piper would show many of their offices hire in a localized manner (similar to Haynsworth
Sinkler in Figure 1(a)), but that on a firmwide basis DLA approximates our entire sample.
Our analysis will measure the amount of concentration for our sample of 285 firms, describe
the degree of variation across firms in this concentration, and then examine the common and
heterogeneous factors that determine lawyer/firm employment matches.
   Our work is related to two strands of literature. First, there has recently been a burgeoning
literature on the importance of networks in hiring as well as other areas such as organization of
the workplace. The importance of referrals in hiring has been well known for a long time. See,
for example, Montgomery (1991) for a discussion of earlier work in economics. The work of
Mark Granovetter (for example, Granovetter, 1974) and other sociologists has influenced prior
economic studies. For more recent discussion of economic theories of networks, see Jackson
(2007). For recent empirical studies of another high-skill group (specifically, economists), see
Tervio (2011) and Goyal et al. (2006). For recent studies of how networks can affect labor market
outcomes, see Bayer et al. (2008), Laschever (2009), and Dustmann et al. (2010). See Lazear


                                               3
                   (a) Haynsworth Sinkler




                     (b) Munger Tolles



Figure 1: Economic geography for two “concentrated” firms.


                             4
                      (a) Skadden Arps




                       (b) DLA Piper



Figure 2: Economic geography for two “unconcentrated” firms.


                             5
and Oyer (2012) for a discussion of the broader economic literature on personnel practices and
Oyer and Schaefer (2011) for a review more focused on economic studies of hiring and matching.
      Second, our sample firms are all “up-or-out” partnerships, and there is a large body of work
analyzing this organizational form. We will not attempt to explain why these firms are organized
the way that they are. Numerous theoretical explanations exist, including Kahn and Huberman
(1988) who emphasize the importance of inducing investments in firm-specific human capital,
Levin and Tadelis (2005) who focus on the importance of partners protecting the value of
the firm’s reputation, and Rebitzer and Taylor (2007) who consider how law firm organization
may relate to the notion of property rights. Galanter and Palay (1991), among others, cite
the Lazear and Rosen (1981) tournament model as a justification for legal partnerships.                   1

There have also been empirical studies of the labor market for lawyers. Sauer (1998) does a
structural empirical analysis of University of Michigan law graduates, showing how they move
optimally between sectors of the lawyer labor market. Garicano and Hubbard (2009) study
the relationship between market size, the organization of law firms, and the specialization of
lawyers. They find that firms and lawyers are more specialized in larger markets. In related
work, Garicano and Hubbard (2007) analyze the relationship between market size and the
decision of lawyers to work alone or together. They argue that the patterns in their data
indicate that lawyers become more specialized and take greater advantage of organizational
hierarchies as market size increases. Garicano and Hubbard (2005) show that lawyers tend
to work in firms with lawyers from schools of similar quality, both within and across levels
of the firm hierarchy. We measure this and other sources of law school concentration within
firms. Landers et al. (1996) study the work habits of lawyers and argue that the standard
partner-track organization of firms such as those in our analysis induces young lawyers to work
inefficiently hard in order to earn promotion. For historical perspectives on the evolution of
large law firms and their demand for lawyers, see Hobson (1986), Galanter and Palay (1991),
Baker and Parkin (2006), and Galanter and Henderson (2008).
      Parkin (2006) also touches on both the network and law firm literatures in her study of how
school connections affect careers of lawyers. She also finds that law firms are concentrated in
terms of the law schools they hire from. Her analysis focuses on the effects of the school/firm
connections on individual lawyers’ success within the firm while we focus on the roots of the
school/firm connection and attempt to decompose the sources of law school concentration within

  1
   Kordana (1995), however, argues that tournament theory is not relevant to law firms. That paper is one of
many in the legal literature looking at the market for lawyers and the structure of law firms.


                                                     6
firms.


2     Theoretical Background

2.1      Basic Model of Matching

We are interested in how matching between firms and employees is driven by such factors
as proximity between people and potential employers, observable characteristics (especially
education), personal contacts and social networks, and other factors. We use the matching
of lawyers to law firms because this setting has several attractive features for studying the
matching of workers to firms. One pragmatic reason to study law firms is that most major
law firms post reasonably detailed biographies of all their lawyers on a web site. In addition,
because all lawyers go to law school, we can study the connection between law schools and law
offices using a large and comparable sample of lawyers. Given that the law school/law firm
relationship is affected by geography, educational characteristics, and the networks lawyers
develop in school, we can draw inferences regarding many of the relevant issues in firm/worker
matching. Finally, though law firm hiring practices may not be particularly generalizable to
firm/worker matching in the economy as a whole, law is a human-capital-intensive industry
where recruiting is of paramount importance.
    To motivate the empirical analysis that follows, we begin by describing a stylized model of
law firms making hiring decisions. The model, which is an adapted version of a model derived
by Ellison and Glaeser (1997) to examine geographic concentration of US manufacturing by
state, will generate a measure of the relationship between law schools and law firms and will
be useful in interpreting our empirical results.
    Consider a law firm that employs an exogenously determined N lawyers from a given set of
law schools. The firm hires these lawyers sequentially. So, it begins by hiring the single lawyer
that it thinks will be the most profitable, then hires another that will be the most profitable
given the first lawyer it chose, then hires the most profitable lawyer given the two it already
employs, and so on until it has N lawyers.
    There are at least two reasons why a firm may be inclined to hire more lawyers from a given
law school than others. First, a school may have what Ellison and Glaeser (1997) refer to as
a “natural advantage” for a given firm because lawyers from that school may be particularly
profitable for that firm. We will focus on two sources of natural advantage in our empirical
analysis — geographic proximity and the match between firm and school prestige. Geography


                                                   7
is likely to matter for several reasons. Effective hiring is likely to rely on “soft” information
— that is, information that cannot be revealed on a resumè — and firms may find it easier
to gather information about prospective hires when those individuals are close by. Recruiting
locally means the firm can more easily engage in multiple rounds of interviews and gather
information about individuals indirectly by networking with law faculty and placement offices.
Geography may also be an important source of natural advantage if prospective employees
have locational preferences that influence both the decision over where to attend law school
and where to take a job. The match between firm and school prestige may lead to natural
advantage if lawyers from prestigious law schools would have higher innate ability, and would
therefore have a comparative advantage in working on more complex cases of the type typically
handled by the most prestigious firms.
         The second reason a firm might focus its hiring more on graduates of some schools than
others is because a pair of lawyers generate some form of spillover. One potential spillover
source is that graduates of a given law school may be more effective at hiring lawyers from the
school they attended. This could be due to a transcript being more informative to an alumnus
than to other lawyers, lawyers having relationships with professors or others at their alma
mater that can provide information about individual students, or even a simple preference for
hiring lawyers that went to the same school (though this last rationale would only increase firm
profits if lawyers are willing to accept a compensating wage differential in order to work with
people from their law school.) Another reason lawyers from the same school would be more
productive when working together is if law schools teach things in different ways and it is easiest
to communicate with others who learned relevant material in a similar manner. Alternatively,
law schools may have certain cultures or attributes that attract certain types of people who work
well together. That is, differences in law schools may help to screen lawyers into productive
teams.2 In our discussion and analysis, we will refer to these potential advantages of lawyer
concentration that are not related to natural advantage of an individual school interchangeably
as lawyer complementarities, lawyer spillovers, and lawyer social networks.
         When hiring lawyer k, where 1 ≤ k ≤ N , the firm considers the most profitable potential
hire from each of the law schools. The expected log profit of hiring a lawyer from law school i
is
                                    log Πki = log Πi + gi (v1 , v2 , ..., vk−1 ) + εki


     2
         For a more formal discussion and analysis of co-worker complementarity, see Hayes et al., 2006.



                                                            8
where log Πi captures the average profitability of a lawyer from school i, gi (v1 , v2 , ..., vk−1 )
captures the additional profit expected from lawyer k given the law schools attended by the
firm’s previously hired lawyers, and ε captures factors idiosyncratic to lawyer k. The first term
on the right hand side of the equation captures the natural advantage of school i for the firm
independent of the mix of law schools from which the firm has hired previously. The g function,
on the other hand, captures the complementarities or network effects that come from hiring
lawyers that went to the same school. That is, it captures the profit (or loss) from adding
more lawyers from the same school while holding constant the average match value between
the lawyer and firm. Note that the natural advantage function is constant across potential
lawyer hires for a given firm while the network or complementarity effect (g) varies with the
composition of the other lawyers already at the firm.
       If g(.) were always zero and if log Πi were constant across law schools for the firm, then the
firm would hire lawyers at random (at least in terms of which law school they attended.) If,
on the other hand, the natural advantage function varied substantially from school to school,
we would expect the firm to hire more lawyers from a select set of schools. In addition, if the
g function was generally increasing with the stock of lawyers from school i, we would again
expect concentration of lawyers from certain schools within the firm. In the first case, the
concentration would relate to some factor connecting the school and firm, while in the second
case the concentration would relate to the stock of lawyers at a firm affecting the source of new
lawyers that the firm adds.3


2.2      Measuring Concentration of Lawyers

Following Ellison and Glaeser (1997), we assume that the parameter γ na captures the vari-
ation across law schools in natural advantage at firm j and that γ s reflects potential lawyer
complementarity. Both these parameters can vary from zero (if no law school has a natural
advantage for firm j and if a newly hired lawyer’s expected profit is independent of where the
other lawyers went to school) to one (if a school has such strong natural advantage that firm
j will hire all its lawyers from there and if hiring one lawyer from a school would lead firm j
to hire all subsequent lawyers from that same school.) At any given firm, we will not be able
to directly measure γ s or γ na , but we can construct a measure of concentration of lawyers at


   3
    We would ideally like to measure the degree to which agglomeration of lawyers by school creates value and
how that value is split between firms and lawyers. This is not feasible, however, without detailed data on wages
and productivity, which we do not have in this sample.


                                                       9
the firm, γj . We now explain how we generate this measure of concentration, how it relates to
γ s or γ na , and how we will attempt to connect firm concentration to natural advantage and
complementarity.
   To define the index, which is based on the methodology in Ellison and Glaeser (1997), we
first introduce some notation. Define sji as the “law-school i share” for firm j; that is, it is the
fraction of firm j’s attorneys who earned their first US law degree at law school i. Let xi be
the overall share of attorneys in the population of US lawyers who received their first US law
degree at law school i. Let Nj be the number of attorneys working at firm j. Our index of firm
j’s law school concentration is

                                                          − xi )2
                                                 P
                                      1     Nj     i (sjiP
                             γj = −       +                       .                             (1)
                                    Nj − 1 Nj − 1 1 − i x2i

   This index has several useful properties. First, the measure explicitly accounts for the fact
that under random selection of attorneys by firms, we would still observe some concentration
in realized law-school shares. The Ellison-Glaeser index is calibrated so that γj = 0 if firm j
is as concentrated as one would expect if the firm selected at random from the set of available
attorneys. Second, the scale of the index can be given an economic interpretation. A value of
γj = 0.0650 (as we show below, this is the average for firms in our sample) means two lawyers
randomly selected from a firm have 6.5 percentage points higher probability of having attended
the same school than two lawyers randomly selected from the sample. Finally, we can think of
the firm index as an increasing function of the importance of natural advantage and spillovers
at any given firm because Ellison and Glaeser (1997) show that, under certain conditions,


                                    E(γj ) = γ na + γ s − γ na γ s .                            (2)


   In the next section, we will measure concentration at the firms in our sample and various
subsamples of firms. We will also measure concentration at other levels of aggregation such as
individual offices and all partners or associates at a firm or office (that is, we will measure γj
where j indexes these other units). We will then look at factors that affect these concentration
measures. That is, we will decompose our measures of γj into parts due to natural advantage
and parts due to lawyer complementarity or networking. One approach to this is to regress
firm’s γj ’s on measures of natural advantage and complementarity. However, this does not allow
us to use measures that vary for firm/school pairs such as distance from a lawyer’s school to
her office or how many other lawyers at that firm went to the same school. Therefore, we focus


                                                  10
on decompositions of firm (or office) concentration where we regress sji − xi — that is, the
deviation of firm or office j’s law-school i share from the population law-school i share — on a
set of explanatory variables that reflect potential sources of natural advantage or within-school
lawyer complementarity.4


3        Empirical Analysis

3.1        Data

Our data primarily come from the web pages of law firms.                      5   We began with a list of the
300 largest US law firms, as listed on www.lawperiscope.com as of August 2007. Our sample
subsumes two well-known ranked lists of law firms: the American Lawyer 200 and the Vault 100.
The American Lawyer rankings are based on gross revenues (including international revenue),
while the Vault rankings are based on a survey of associates at leading law firms who are asked
to rank firms based on how prestigious it would be to work there.
        We then wrote programs to access the lawyer bios listed on each firm’s web site. The
information in an online lawyer bio is fairly consistent across firms.6 Typically, a bio lists the
lawyer’s name, which law school and undergraduate institution the lawyer graduated from, the
date of graduation, the lawyer’s rank at the law firm, law office where the lawyer practices,
and the lawyer’s specialties.7 A few firms listed too little information on their lawyer bio pages
to be useful, while others had web pages that were difficult for us to access using automated
means. All lawyer bio data was collected during the first two weeks of July, 2008. We dropped
all lawyers who work in foreign offices. Among those who work in US offices, we drop anyone
who is not an associate, a partner, or “of counsel.” We also drop lawyers for whom we do not
know the law school attended, and lawyers who received their law degrees outside the United
States. Many lawyers have multiple law degrees, adding an LLM or LLB after obtaining a JD.

   4
     Ellison and Glaeser (1999) derive a non-linear relation between share and natural advantage, which they
estimate with non-linear least squares. We use a reduced form version of this approach that makes empirical
implementation and interpretation more straightforward.
   5
     Throughout the paper, we refer to most firms by the first two names unless they have another commonly
used shorter name. For example, we refer to Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer, and Feld LLP as “Akin Gump.” We
refer to Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft LLP by its common nickname of “Cadwalader”.
    6
        See Mukherjee (2006) for an analysis of firms’ decisions to disclose information regarding employees.
    7
    We do not report details of any of the analysis we did using specialties, gender (which we inferred using
names and pictures), or undergraduate school, because the results did affect our conclusions. We discuss these
analyses briefly in Sections 3.4 and 4.


                                                          11
We use the law school of the lawyer’s US-based JD, or, if the lawyer does not have a US-based
JD, his or her first US law degree. Because rank is important for much of our analysis, we
dropped seven firms for which more than 30% of lawyers’ ranks were unavailable. Our final
sample consists of 285 firms and 105,317 attorneys.
   We used information provided on law firm web pages and elsewhere to gather as compre-
hensive a list as possible of where the founders of each firm in our sample attended law school.
Our primary sources for this were historical descriptions of the firm on various websites, alumni
magazines that had been put online, and obituaries. We define founders as the first people
recorded to have worked at the organization that was the main component of the firm as it
stands today. If there were mergers of equals along the way, we use founders of each part. We
found no information regarding the founders of 83 of the 285 firms in our sample. All of the
founders of 38 other firms learned law by apprenticing for other lawyers rather than attending
law school. We identified law schools for founders at 164 firms with a total of 247 firm/founder
school matches.
   We supplement this data on individual lawyers with information about law firms and law
schools. We assigned each lawyer to a metropolitan area based on their office location (for
example, New York City, Salt Lake City, or Silicon Valley.) Using the zip code of the largest
law office in each metropolitan area, the zip code of each law school, and internet mapping
programs, we calculated the driving distance between where each lawyer works and her law
school. We used US News and World Report’s 2006 rankings of law schools to divide schools
into “quality” quartiles and we used American Lawyer ’s profit per partner estimates to divide
firms into prestige quartiles. We also performed some analyses where we categorized firms based
on American Lawyer ’s compensation per partner estimates and Vault’s prestige rankings and
where we categorized schools based on average LSAT scores of entering students. This did not
change any of our conclusions, so we do not report results of these analyses.
   Table 1 shows some basic information for a selection of the firms in our sample. Firms vary
widely in the number of offices, their revenues per lawyer, and the fraction of their lawyers
that are partners. For example, “leverage” is quite high at Cravath where 24% of lawyers are
partners while more than half of Foley & Lardner’s lawyers are partners. Some of the leverage
differences are due to differences in organizational structure. Some firms have “income” partners
that do not own part of the firm and still face an up-or-out promotion to “equity” partner. At
Foley & Lardner, about half of the partners are income partners (based on comparing our count
of partners to American Lawyer ’s count of their equity partners) while Cravath makes no such


                                               12
distinction. Unfortunately, we cannot distinguish equity partners from income partners, and
treat the two categories as one. Revenue per Attorney is taken from the American Lawyer 200,
and Vault ranks only the top 100 firms by prestige. As a result, we have this information only
for a subset of our sample. US News Average is the average rank of the law schools of the firm’s
attorneys. US News ranks only the top 99 law schools; we assigned attorneys who attended
schools outside this set a rank of 100. Figure 3 provides a geographic perspective on our overall
set of lawyers. In Figure 3(a), each square is a geographic area (again, this could be New York,
Salt Lake City, Silicon Valley, etc.) The size of the box is proportional to the number of lawyers
in our data who work in that area and at any firm. In several areas, including Fargo, Little
Rock, and Spokane, only one firm has an office. At the other extreme 168 of the 285 firms have
a Washington DC office and 165 have an office in the New York City area. Huntsville TN, the
Inland Empire area of California, Oklahoma City, Oxford MS, and Edwardsville IL have the
fewest lawyers (that is, are the smallest boxes on the map) with a single lawyer. New York
has 20,625 (19.6% of the sample), Washington has 13,158, and Chicago has 7,507. Naturally,
our sample of lawyers primarily works in large metropolitan areas. Also, state capitals are
over-represented with several firms having reasonably large offices in, for example, Austin TX,
Tallahassee FL, and Columbus OH.
   In Figure 3(b), each circle is a single law school and circle size is proportional to the number
of lawyers in our sample that graduated from that school. The map shows that law schools are
also concentrated in or near metropolitan areas and that the overall geographic distributions
between the two maps looks quite similar. Law school representation in our sample varies from
one each from Appalachian Law School, California College of Law, Concord Law School (an
online school), Glendale University College of Law, Liberty University, Northrop University
School of Law, National University School of Law, San Joaquin College of Law, and Southern
New England School of Law to 5,808 from Harvard and 4,202 from Georgetown.


3.2   Firm- and Office-Level Concentration

There would be no reason to think that natural advantage or lawyer networks are relevant in
law firm hiring if there is no evidence of concentration by law school within firms. So we begin
by asking whether there is any evidence of concentration and, if so, how much. We start by
looking at firms as a whole. Analytically, we first generate law school shares (sji ) for each
firm/school combination, including those where sji = 0
   We also compute the law school share of all US attorneys (xi ). To do this, we compiled a list


                                               13
                                   Table 1: Data on Selected Law Firms
Firm Name             Offices   Attorneys   Partners   Profit per Partner   Vault Ranking   US News Median
Cadwalader                  3         440        100                2900               36               22
Cahill Gordon               2         269         70                2575               56               13
Calfee                      2         167         83                    .               .               51
Carlton Fields              5         250        148                  470               .               41
Chadbourne & Parke          4         215         88                1085               72               14
Chapman Cutler              3         211        128                  615               .               22
Choate                      1         173         88                1100               96               14
Clausen Miller              3         158         84                    .               .               70
Cleary Gottlieb             2         506        107                2120                8                4
Cooley Godward              6         596        220                1000               52               14
Coughlin Stoia              8         161         76                    .               .               58
Covington & Burling         3         540        172                1085               10                8
Cozen O’Connor             15         480        349                  520               .               60
Cravath                     1         367         87                3015                2                4
Crowell Moring              3         350        144                  815              78               19
Cummings Lockwood           3          78         49                    .               .               32
Curtis                      3         139         68                    .               .               14
DLA Piper                  21        1451        694                1120               65               27
Davis Polk                  3         527        138                1820                5                4
Davis Wright                7         430        273                  365               .               27
Day Pitney                  5         313        139                  570               .               50
Debevoise Plimpton          2         476        115                1805               13                4
Dechert                    11         760        213                1985               55               16
Dewey Leboeuf              13         807        265                1450               30               15
Dickinson Wright            1         227        151                    .               .               34
Dickstein Shapiro           3         352        155                1080                .               19
Dilworth Paxson             4          98         54                    .               .               60
Dinsmore & Shohl            8         232        122                  420               .               56
Dorsey & Whitney           13         586        262                  505              81               19
Dow Lohnes                  2         145         75                  950               .               14
Drinker Biddle             10         626        269                  585               .               39
Duane Morris               18         575        363                  730               .               42
Dykema                      7         544        336                  370               .               43
Eckert Seamans              8         253        170                    .               .               60
Edwards Angell              8         492        237                  740               .               27
Epstein Becker              8         371        168                  595               .               42
Faegre Benson               4         445        230                  435               .               19
Farella Braun               1         113         63                    .               .                8
Fennemore Craig             4         177        105                    .               .               43
Fenwick & West              4         254         91                  945              88               14
Finnegan                    4         324        144                1060               85               22
Fish Richardson            10         443        173                  920              62               19
Fitzpatrick Cella           3         124         54                  745               .               50
Foley Hoag                  2         198         86                  665               .               14
Foley & Lardner            17         951        499                  890              66               22
Fowler White                6         170        109                    .               .               41
Fox Rothschild             12         346        210                  515               .               60
Fragomen                   15         199         46                1805                .               65
Fredrikson Byron            2         222        131                    .               .               19




                                                       14
                       (a) Law Offices




                      (b) Law Schools



Figure 3: Economic geography for law offices and law firms.


                             15
of how many people graduated from each law school in 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2005. We
assumed that the number of graduates in a given year was the same as the number in the closest
year for which we had the exact count and then we summed across our annual estimates to get
a count for the entire period. This sample, on average, went to less prestigious schools than
the lawyers in our sample, which is what we would expect given that our sample includes the
largest, most prestigious, and most expensive firms in the US. For example, while we estimate
that 1.6%, 0.5%, and 0.5% of all US lawyers went to Harvard, Stanford, and Yale, respectively,
these figures are 5.5%, 1.3%, and 1.6% for our 285 firm sample.8
       Then we compute γj for each sample firm, using Equation 1. The first column of Table 2
provides information about the distribution of γ among the 285 firms. γ varies from basically
zero to 0.3831. The mean is 0.0650 and the median is 0.0490. This means that, at a typical
(that is, the median) law firm, a pair of randomly selected lawyers are 4.9 percentage points
more likely to have gone to the same law school than a pair of lawyers randomly selected from
our sample as a whole. The probability that a random pair of lawyers from the US population
went to the same law school is approximately 0.7% and the probability that a random pair from
our whole sample went to the same school is 1.6%. Our figures indicate that a random lawyer
pair from the median firm in our sample went to the same law school with probability 5.6%.
       For comparison purposes, the law school distribution within these 285 firms is somewhat
more concentrated than the geographic concentration of four-digit industries. Ellison and
Glaeser (1997) report a mean γ of 0.051 and a median of 0.026. We draw two conclusions
that are quite similar to those they draw about manufacturing industries. First, there is sig-
nificant concentration within law firms in terms of which law schools they recruit from because
γ is greater than zero by a meaningful amount for most firms. Second, we might characterize
the degree of concentration as meaningful but not large. Our estimates of γ generally indicate
that, while firms are more likely to hire a new lawyer from schools from which they already
have lawyers, the effect of the current school distribution is marginal. Our maps of two highly
concentrated firms in Figure 1 indicate that this effect is quite large at some firms, but these
are the exceptions. So, while schools may have some natural advantage in getting lawyers into
firms and/or there may be networks from schools that affect firms’ hiring, these factors do not


   8
     We also did our analysis using our sample as the relevant population, so that xi is the fraction of lawyers from
a given school in our sample. This leads to slightly lower concentration because our sample is, itself, concentrated
relative to the total lawyer population. Using this alternative population does not affect any of our conclusions,
however, and we believe using the population of all US lawyers is more appropriate.



                                                         16
                 Table 2: Law School Concentration at the Firm and Office Levels
                                Firm-Level Concentration                             Office-Level Concentration
 Mean γ                                 0.0650                                                 0.0974
 Standard Deviation                     0.0536                                                 0.0887
 First Quartile                         0.0287                                                 0.0435
 Second Quartile                        0.0490                                                 0.0685
 Third Quartile                         0.0852                                                 0.1193

 Highest γ                             0.3831                                                 0.6610
                                  Haynsworth Sinkler                                Phelps Dunbar, Baton Rouge
                            62% from Univ of South Carolina                                81% from LSU

 Lowest γ                                  0.0042                                             0.0055
                                       Jackson Lewis                                  Thompson Hine, Atlanta
                                        3% from BU                                       3 schools at 9%

 N                                          285                                                   1025
 See text for definition of concentration (γ) and description of sample. Offices are restricted to those with at
 least 20 attorneys.

appear to dominate the firm/lawyer matching process.
       Another comparison that helps put the results in Table 2 in some context is to look at
law firm concentration relative to the concentration of where economists within universities’
economics departments went to graduate school. Using the data from Tervio (2011), we cal-
culated γ for 102 economics departments that have at least 15 faculty members. That is, we
perform calculations analogous to our law firm concentration calculations, but treat economics
departments similar to law firms and institutions that grant PhDs to economists the same as
law schools. We found that educational backgrounds are somewhat more concentrated in law
firms than in economics departments. Average (median) γ in the economics sample is 0.0243
(0.0176), which is less than half the analogous 0.0650 (0.0490) in Table 2.9
       We now consider law offices as the unit of analysis and we again plot maps to illustrate
sample hiring patterns. Figure 4 illustrates that Michigan-based Plunkett Cooney’s Detroit
office has a large number of attorneys from the University of Detroit. Further, the remainder of
this office’s attorneys come from other law schools within Metro Detroit. This one firm’s hiring
in this one area appears to be driven largely by geographic proximity. At the other extreme,
Arnold & Porter’s Washington DC office has sizable contingents of lawyers from many eastern


   9
    Part of the reason economics department concentration is lower than law firm concentration is that our
population of economists is limited to those economists working on the faculty of the schools in Tervio’s sample.
If we had the entire population of PhD economists, the measured concentration in economics departments would
almost surely be higher.


                                                       17
and midwestern states.
   The second column of Table 2 looks at the 1025 offices of our 285 firms which have at least
twenty lawyers who graduated from US law schools. Defining sji as the law-school i share
for office j, we now define γj as the Ellison-Glaeser index of concentration for office j. The
geographic advantage of a law school will be greater for a single office than for a multi-office
firm and lawyer networks may be somewhat localized, so it is not surprising to find that office
γ’s are about half again as large as those for whole firms. The most concentrated offices have
γ’s far higher than the highest firm-level concentration and it appears that, at least in these
examples, geography and/or law school networks are a dominant part of the hiring process.
   Note that, while we limit the formal statistical inference to the regressions in later tables,
the gammas we show throughout the paper are not random disturbances. To show this, we
generate baseline random gammas by redistributing the lawyers in our sample across the same
firm/offices as in the current data so that there are as many people from each school and
each firm/office as before, but now they are randomly combined. Then we recalculate the
gammas for lawyers in the 1,025 offices that we use in Table 2. The mean and median are
always around 0.0045. This is slightly greater than zero because the lawyers in our sample
are concentrated relative to the larger population of lawyers that we use as the baseline. The
standard deviation of these “random” office gammas is always near 0.0068 (when using firm,
firm/office, or firm/office/rank combinations), indicating that any individual gamma greater
than about 0.018 is statistically greater than the random gamma we might expect. In a typical
simulation, we get one office gamma greater than 0.04, indicating a gamma greater than what
would be a one-in-a-thousand event if the lawyers in our sample were distributed randomly
across firms and offices.
   We again evaluate the magnitude of these γ’s by comparing them to concentration in other
contexts. First note that the average office-level law-firm γ is close to double the average γ
of four-digit industries measured by Ellison and Glaeser (1997). The highest levels of office
concentration are similar to the highest levels of four-digit industry geographic concentration
or, in other words, graduates of LSU law school are even more dominant within the Baton
Rouge office of Phelps Dunbar than Wisconsin and Utah are in the fur production industry
and than California is in the wine industry. Second, as the figures from Tervio (2011) that
we discussed above indicate, law offices are substantially more concentrated (in terms of where
employees went to graduate school) than the typical economics department faculty.
   We can identify a few patterns by looking at the most and least concentrated offices in


                                              18
                         (a) Plunkett Cooney, Detroit Office




                           (b) Arnold & Porter, DC Office



Figure 4: Economic geography for one concentrated and one unconcentrated office.


                                         19
                  Table 3: Office-Level Law School Concentration by Firm Tier
                            Tier I Firms             Tier II Firms              Tier III Firms
 Mean γ                        0.0709                   0.1035                      0.1469
 Standard Deviation            0.0604                   0.0849                      0.1199
 First Quartile                0.0383                   0.0462                      0.0711
 Second Quartile               0.0536                   0.0775                      0.1119
 Third Quartile                0.0819                   0.1376                      0.1755

 Highest γ                    0.6546                    0.5716                     0.6610
        Firm                DLA Piper               Nelson Mullins             Phelps Dunbar
        Office                Austin                Columbia, SC                Baton Rouge
                          82% from Texas          76% from So. Car.            81% from LSU

 Lowest γ                     0.0059                     0.0055                    0.0084
        Firm            Winston & Strawn            Thompson Hine           Shipman & Goodwin
        Office              Charlotte                   Atlanta                     NYC
                         3 schools at 9%            3 schools at 9%           4 schools at 9%

 N                              468                       348                        209

 See text for definition of concentration (γ) and Tier. Restricted to offices with at least 20
 attorneys.

Table 2. Clearly, offices are highly concentrated near a large law school and where the lawyer
population of a city is small relative to the size of the law school. Idiosyncrasy in state law
seems to play a role as well; Louisiana is unique among states in that its legal code is based
in part on civil law, and Baton Rouge law offices appear to have a disproportionate number
of Louisiana State graduates. Offices in New York tend to have low concentration, but this
outcome stems from two effects. Some New York offices have low concentration because they
hire nationally; Sutherland’s five leading schools, for example, are American, Emory, Florida,
Georgetown, and Harvard. Other New York offices’ hiring strategies are more regional-based,
but there are quite a number of law schools near New York.
     Table 3 provides a more detailed look at office-level concentration by dividing the 285 firms
into three sub-samples. We define “Tier I” firms as those that are in the Vault 100 prestige
rankings (these firms are generally quite prestigious and reasonably large), “Tier II” firms as
those that are in the American Lawyer 200 rankings (these firms are all large but not as
prestigious as the Vault firms), and then “Tier III” firms are not in either ranking. Columns
1-3 of the table show that concentration increases substantially as we move from Tier I to Tier
III. Tier I firms tend to hire from the national market (though there are offices such as the
DLA Piper Austin office that are about as concentrated as any others in the sample). A few
firms have some degree of concentration because they focus on prestigious schools (recall the
Monger Tolles map in Figure 1). However, even these firms hire from a sufficiently large set of


                                                   20
              Table 4: Determinants of Law School Concentration at the Office Level
 City Fixed Effects                              yes             no              yes               no                no
 Firm Fixed Effects                              no              yes             yes               no                yes
 Law School in Same City                                                                        -0.0185           0.0226
                                                                                               (0.0101)          (0.0110)
 Top 25 Law School in Same City                                                                 -0.0455           -0.0275
                                                                                               (0.0056)          (0.0059)
 Flagship State School in Same City                                                              0.0674           0.0650
                                                                                               (0.0085)          (0.0087)
 State Capital                                                                                   0.0200           0.0206
                                                                                               (0.0063)          (0.0066)
 Largest City in State                                                                           0.0019           -0.0030
                                                                                               (0.0052)          (0.0052)
 Top 10 Law Market                                                                              -0.0285           -0.0199
                                                                                               (0.0068)          (0.0073)
 N                                              1025            1025            1025              1025              1025
 R2                                            0.7928          0.4649          0.8725            0.2797            0.5837
 Dependent variable is office-level γ for offices with at least 20 attorneys. Standard errors in parentheses.



prestigious schools that their γ’s are generally not more than 0.1. Some of the examples we
have mentioned and the patterns in columns 1-3 of Table 3 suggest that geography becomes
a much more important determinant of recruiting as firm prestige drops. We will address this
hypothesis more formally below.10
    Table 4 is our first step to understand what factors contribute to office-level concentration
of lawyers from certain schools. We regress office level γ’s (that is, the 1,025 γ’s that make
up the distribution described in the right column of Table 2) on characteristics of firms and
markets. Column 1 shows that fully 80% of the variation in γ’s across these 1,025 offices can
be explained by fixed effects for the locations of those offices. Column 2 shows that firm effects
are also a useful predictor of concentration, with about half of the variation explained by firm
effects. Column 3 shows that combining these two sets of fixed effects increased the R2 of
the regression to near 90%. Though far from conclusive, these three regressions indicate that
geographic differences are a very strong contributor to patterns in lawyer agglomeration and
that differences in firm hiring strategies also play a role in determining the level of lawyer
concentration.

  10
     Note that, if we use our sample of lawyers as the relevant population of lawyers when computing concen-
tration, the γ’s at Tier I law offices decrease somewhat, as these firms are the ones that focus the most on the
over-represented top law schools. But the change does not have a large effect on the γ’s for any of the tiers, does
not change the relative concentration of firms in the different tiers, and does not materially affect any conclusions
we would draw.



                                                         21
    The regression in Column 4 replaces all these fixed effects with variables related to the
legal environment and the law school recruiting environment in an office’s city. Three of these
variables stand out in the regression (and remain important when adding firm fixed effects
in column 5). Law offices that share a city with the flagship campus of the state law school
have γ’s 0.07 higher than otherwise similar offices. This is almost as high as the office-level
sample mean and higher than the median, indicating offices in these cities are roughly twice as
concentrated as other offices. Offices in a city with a Top 25 law school (according to US News
and World Report) have γ’s 0.05 lower than otherwise similar offices. One might think this is
less a reflection on the schools than it is on the types of cities that have top law schools (New
York, Washington, Los Angeles, etc.). These are the markets where the most prestigious and
expensive work is done, so they attract lawyers from all over. However, the negative effect of a
top law school is both much larger than the effect of the office being in a Top 10 legal market
and is large even though this other measure of the market is also in the regression. While these
regressions are suggestive, they are limited by the fact that regressions of γ’s do not allow us to
take advantage of the variation in how well individual school characteristics match individual
firms and offices.11
    Overall, from Tables 2, 3, and 4, as well as the related maps, we see quite a bit of suggestive
evidence that geography is an important determinant of hiring by law firms and that geography
becomes more and more important as firm prestige goes down. Given the more prestigious
firms tend to be more expensive and more profitable, lawyers appear to be willing to relocate
further distances, and firms to recruit from further away, when the economic advantages are
significant enough. We will study the relationship between lawyer concentration, geography,
and prestige more formally below.


3.3    Concentration by Rank

Before analyzing how natural advantage and spillovers drive law office concentration, we con-
sider whether the patterns in lawyer concentration from the last section differ by rank. We


   11
      Though not as large and significant, the coefficients on the “Law School in Same City” variable are also
interesting. Given the other controls, this variable picks up the effect of having a law school that is outside
the top 25 and is not the flagship state law school which essentially means the city has a law school but not a
particularly good one. This would include cities such as Denver, San Diego, and Cleveland. As column 5 shows,
concentration is marginally significantly lower in those cities. But, controlling for the firms that are in the city,
concentration is higher by about a third of the median concentration. This likely indicates that the firms in these
cities are more localized and hire from the local schools.




                                                         22
might expect that firms focus their new lawyer hiring on a small set of local schools and that
they hire more senior lawyers from a variety of sources based on those lawyers’ professional
accomplishments.12 More specifically, firms may have an informational advantage in choosing
among potential lawyers at a particular school either based on local knowledge or their own
school-specific knowledge. This informational advantage is likely to be less valuable in picking
partners. Recent on-the-job performance is likely to be more important when hiring partners
or moving them from one office to another within a firm. Therefore, we might expect law school
concentration ratios to be lower for partners than for associates.
       The first two columns of Table 5 show that school concentrations, when measured at the
firm level, are slightly greater for partners than for associates. The mean (median) γ is 0.0707
(0.0520) for partners and 0.0667 (0.0500) for associates. There is considerable overlap in the
list of firms with highest and lowest γ’s for each rank and for the sample as whole. Also, while
concentration is slightly higher within rank than for firms as a whole, the general magnitude is
similar. This suggests that, at a broad firm level, the networks based on law school are at least
as strong for partners as for associates.
       Turning to law offices rather than firms, Figure 5 presents two examples of extreme con-
centration. As these figures show, when looking only at associates in the firm’s biggest office,
Skadden Arps continues to be quite diffuse in the law schools from which it hires while Nelson
Mullins is extremely concentrated. This office features thirty-five graduates of the University
of South Carolina law school, and one graduate each from ten other schools. The last two
columns of Table 5 show the broader patterns for all office/rank combinations with at least
twenty lawyers. This includes 662 offices for partners and 639 for associates. These tables and
figures do not support the notion that concentration is greater at the associate level. The mean
office-level γ is higher for partners, but the median is higher for associates. The differences
between ranks are generally quite small, however, so there is no reason to think concentra-
tion, networks, or natural advantage affect associate hiring any differently than they affect the
composition of partners.
       Table 6 examines office/rank γ’s in more detail by separating firms into the three tiers
used in the prior section. As with the office-level analysis, office/rank γ’s get decidedly smaller


  12
     Naturally, if law firms were up-or-out systems in the strictest sense, where lawyers only entered the firm
as new graduates, then partner and associate concentration would be similar. However, as Galanter and Palay
(1991) and Galanter and Henderson (2008) document, there is now considerable movement of lawyers from firm
to firm, from office to office within a firm, or into law partnerships from other areas altogether.



                                                      23
           Table 5: Law School Concentration at the Firm and Office Levels by Rank
                                Firm-Level Concentration                       Office-Level Concentration
                              Partners           Associates                  Partners           Associates
 Mean γ                        0.0707              0.0667                     0.0976              0.0922
 Standard Deviation            0.0568              0.0569                     0.0930              0.0694
 First Quartile                0.0328              0.0276                     0.0436              0.0467
 Second Quartile               0.0520              0.0500                     0.0695              0.0724
 Third Quartile                0.0971              0.0880                     0.1171              0.1144

 Highest γ                   0.4003                 0.3712                    0.8159              0.5993
        Firm            Haynsworth Sinkler     Haynsworth Sinkler         Phelps Dunbar       Nelson Mullins
        Office                                                             Baton Rouge         Columbia SC
                        63% from So. Car.       61% from So. Car.         90% from LSU       78% from So. Car

 Lowest γ                      0.0055                0.0027                   0.0073               0.0026
        Firm               Jackson Lewis          Milberg Weiss           Mayer Brown          Milberg Weiss
        Office                                                                  LA                  NYC
                           4% from NYU           5 schools at 7%         5 schools at 8%      4 schools at 8%
 N                              284                    283                      662                  639
 See text for definition of concentration (γ). Offices are restricted to those with at least 20 attorneys at that
 rank.

as firm prestige increases. However, these differences vary based on the rank of the lawyers.
Comparing columns 1 and 4 shows that top tier law offices are quite a bit more concentrated in
their associate composition than in their partner composition. Associate γ’s are still low at Tier
I firms relative to the other tiers, but they are somewhat larger than partner concentration for
Tier I firms. The opposite is true for Tier III firms, where associate concentration is noticeably
smaller than partner concentration.
     We can only speculate as to why this difference exists at this point, but it may be indicative
of differences in hiring and promotion strategies. For example, it may be the case that many
lawyers from prestigious schools start their careers as associates of prestigious firms, fail to make
partner at that firm, become partners in less prestigious firms, and displace associates at those
less prestigious firms that went to less prestigious schools and do not make partner. There is
some evidence in our data consistent with this. The distribution of US News and World Report
rankings of associates and partners at Tier I firms in our sample are very similar, though the
partners went to a slightly higher quality set of firms. In both Tier II and Tier III, however, the
distribution of the partners’ law school rankings is decidedly higher than that of the associates.
The median (mean) ranking of Tier II associates’ law schools is 43 (50.8) compared to 37 (44.3)
for the partners at these firms. 1.7% of Tier II associates went to Harvard Law School and
0.5% went to Yale while 4.3% of Tier II partners went to Harvard and 1.1% went to Yale.


                                                    24
                                      Table 6: Office-Level Law School Concentration by Firm Tier and Rank
                                             Panel A: Partners                                                  Panel A: Associates
                            Tier I Firms       Tier II Firms       Tier III Firms             Tier I Firms              Tier II Firms    Tier III Firms
     Mean γ                    0.0670             0.1040               0.1549                    0.0730                    0.1025            0.1396
     Standard Deviation        0.0490             0.0955               0.1277                    0.0510                    0.0737            0.0878
     First Quartile            0.0379             0.0431               0.0751                    0.0309                    0.0526            0.0810
     Second Quartile           0.0534             0.0782               0.1203                    0.0604                    0.0821            0.1194
     Third Quartile            0.0783             0.1332               0.1898                    0.0847                    0.1307            0.1803

     Highest γ                 0.4071              0.7192             0.8159                    0.3881                     0.5993            0.5213
            Firm          Foley & Lardner      Nelson Mullins     Phelps Dunbar              Vinson Elkins             Nelson Mullins    Phelps Dunbar




25
            Office          Jacksonville        Charleston         Baton Rouge                  Austin                 Columbia, SC       Baton Rouge
                           65% from FL       85% from So. Car.    90% from LSU               63% from TX             78% from So. Car.   72% from LSU

     Lowest γ                   0.0073            0.0131              0.0085                    0.0125                     0.0109             0.0026
            Firm            Mayer Brown        Lewis Brisbois      Wiggin Dana             Foley & Lardner             Brown Rudnick      Milberg Weiss
            Office                LA          Orange County            NYC                    San Diego                     NYC                NYC
                           5 schools at 8%   12% from U of SD    4 schools at 10%      13% from Harvard, Seattle      14% Georgetown     4 schools at 8%

     N                          308                 213                 141                       355                        180              104

     See text for definition of concentration (γ) and Tier. Restricted to offices with at least 20 attorneys.
                        (a) Skadden Arps, New York Office, Associates Only




                       (b) Nelson Mullins Columbia SC Office, Associates Only



Figure 5: Economic geography for associates at one concentrated and one unconcentrated office.


                                                26
3.4      What Drives Concentration?

Next, we expand on the analysis of what factors lead to lawyer concentration that we began
in Table 4 by running regressions with variables that vary at the firm/school level. As we ex-
plained in Section 2.2, our office level concentration (γj ) measure is an increasing function of the
importance of natural advantage and spillovers. We now decompose office-level concentration
into parts due to natural advantage (γ na ) and parts due to lawyer complementarity (γ s ). In
order to focus on the most recent recruits and so that we can relate associate law schools with
partner law schools, we focus on office-level concentration for associates only.13
       In order to take advantage of measures such as geographic proximity between an office and
a school, we run regressions where the dependent variable is a key determinant of concentration
rather than concentration itself. Recall that sji , in this context, is the share of office j’s associate
that went to law school i and that xi is the fraction of associates in the population that went to
school i. Our dependent variable is the deviation of office j’s associate share from the sample
average, or sji − xi . We then use the residuals from these regressions — which, by construction,
is the deviation of associate office share from sample share that is orthogonal to the explanatory
variables — in place of sji − xi in our calculation of γj so that we can determine approximately
what share of associate office concentration can be explained by various measures.
       These regressions are a simplified version of the analysis in Ellison and Glaeser (1999). They
study manufacturing industries and allow state-industry employment shares to be related to
state-level variation in natural resource, labor, and transportation costs. As an example of how
such costs may affect industry agglomeration, they point out that the aluminum industry, which
uses electricity intensively, is quite concentrated in the Pacific Northwest, where electricity prices
have historically been low. Thus, firm-to-firm“spillovers” of the type commonly discussed with
regard to Silicon Valley likely do not explain geographic concentration in aluminum production.
Ellison and Glaeser (1999) show that at least one-fifth of observed industry-level concentration
of firms is attributable to natural advantage.
       As an example of natural advantage in our context, note that the cost to a firm of identifying
a promising job candidate is likely related to the distance of that candidate’s law school from
the firm’s office. We would expect that, all else constant, law schools located near a given
law office will be over-represented among that office’s attorneys. Further, firms with better

  13
    We did all of our analysis where we included all lawyers in an office, as well. In the case of any variables that
were available for both analyses, the results of the office analysis are similar to the results below for associates
only.


                                                         27
reputations are more likely to hire from more prestigious schools (see Garicano and Hubbard,
2005.) Specifically, if the highest-ranked law firms place the highest value on attorney ability
— due, perhaps, to matching of the most challenging cases with the highest-skilled firms —
then these firms will hire disproportionately from the top-ranked law schools.
       We measure geographic proximity using categories that roughly correspond to quartiles
in distance between a lawyer’s school and his office by including dummy variables for an of-
fice/school distance of fewer than ten miles, one for 10 or more and under 150 miles, one for
150 or more and under 500, and one for 500 miles or more. The distances were generated by
entering the zip codes of the law school and the largest law office in any geographic area into
a mapping website. For example, Akerman Senterfitt has the most lawyers in the Miami area
of any firm in our data. To assess distance for Akerman Senterfitt attorneys who attended the
University of Florida Law School, we entered the University of Florida Law School zip code
(32611) and the Akerman Senterfitt Miami office zip code (33131) into a mapping program,
and recorded the driving distance between the two.14
       We also include city fixed effects related to the office location and interact these fixed effects
with the distance from the school to the office. These interactions are meant to allow the distance
variable to vary with a wide variety of potential natural advantage factors, including those in
the regressions in Table 4. So, if the office is in the same city as the state university’s flagship
campus, that may make the firm/school tie even stronger than the firm/school tie would be if
the school were a private law school located nearby. These distance/city interactions also appear
to soak up the effects of firm/school prestige match. In unreported regressions, we found that
interacting measures of firm prestige and school prestige add significant explanatory power to
the regressions with school-to-office distance. However, the effect of firm/school prestige match
goes away when controlling for distance/city interactions. This is likely because the effect of
distance varies with the value of the work being done. So, for example, New York offices are more
likely to hire lawyers from far away prestigious schools than, for example, Jacksonville offices.
This effect shows up in the regression by the distance effects being much bigger in Jacksonville
than they are in New York. As a result, we do not present the results with firm/school prestige
match variables leaving the distance category variables and interactions between these variables
and office location fixed effects as our main measures of natural advantage.
       Note that, while we use metropolitan areas as our primary geographic unit of analysis, we

  14
    For University of Hawaii graduates, driving distances are not available but all those working on the mainland
are coded as working more than 500 miles from their law school.


                                                       28
could also have done our analysis at the state level. Bar exams are generally done at the state
level and virtually every law school lists its own state as the most common bar exam taken by its
graduates. This indicates that lawyers may choose their law school based on which state they
want to practice in hoping that schools will prepare them for the local bar exam.15 However,
while choosing a school based on state certainly may contribute to the geographic effects we
will show, it is, at most, a small part of these effects. We found that the distance relationships
we show below are virtually unchanged when looking only at school/office pairs in the same
state or offices in a single state (such as Texas, New York, California, or Missouri, each of which
has multiple schools and metropolitan areas). A few simple statistics show the importance of
geography within states. For example, half the lawyers in St. Louis went to one of the two law
schools in St. Louis and 1.4% of St. Louis lawyers went to the law school in Kansas City while
17.4% of Kansas City lawyers went to law school in Kansas City and 3.5% went to law school
in St. Louis. Also, 13.7% of San Francisco lawyers went to Berkeley and 7.9% went to UCLA
while 2.4% of Los Angeles lawyers went to Berkeley and 13.8% went to UCLA.
       Our primary proxy for lawyer complementarity is the share of partners from an office that
went to a given law school.16 Our ideal would be to study the hiring decisions of two identical
law offices with respect to a single law school, where the offices’ current number of attorneys
from that school varies exogenously. If a high current concentration of attorneys from a given
school predicts a high rate of hiring from that school, then this would be evidence in favor of
hiring networks or co-worker complementarity.
       We approximate this ideal experiment in two ways. First, we examine the relationship
between partner share from a given law school — which was likely determined largely before
the current group of associates were hired — and associate share, controlling for sources of
natural advantage. Second, we instrument for partner share from a given school with a dummy
for whether one of the firm’s founders went to that school. The exclusion restriction for this
instrument to be valid requires that the founders’ law schools affect the law school composition
of partners but only affect the composition of associates through its effect on partners. This
restriction could be invalid if, for example, the founder of a firm put in place a corporate culture
that fits graduates of one school particularly well or if the founder set the firm on a path of
specializing in a particular type of law and graduates of his school are still particularly good in

  15
     Also, see Pagliero (2008) for evidence that bar exams are more difficult in states where more lawyers want
to work.
  16
       More specifically, we use the deviation of partner share from the share for all lawyers in the population.


                                                          29
this area. These potential problems seem plausible, but we feel confident they do not present
a large concern because the IV results we present below are essentially identical to those we
get when we restrict our sample to firms that were founded in 1920 or earlier. The practice
of law and the specialty of law schools have changed so dramatically in the intervening ninety
years, that we do not think specialties or cultures instituted by the founders could drive current
associate hiring directly.
       Table 7 contains the results of these regressions.17 The sample is smaller than in prior
analyses because we only use offices with at least twenty associates and twenty partners. Panel
A, which uses any office in our sample that meets these size criteria, shows that proximity is
related to office-level law-school shares. Column 2 shows that a law school 10-150 miles from
a law office is predicted to have an excess share that is more than six percentage points lower
than a law school that is under ten miles from an office. Within-ten-miles schools are predicted
to have shares that are roughly seven percentage points higher compared to schools that are
over 150 miles away. Taking residuals from this regression, we compute new γj ’s and report
the mean and median in Column 2. For comparison purposes, we also list the unadjusted γj
in Column 1. These unadjusted figures are analogous to those in the last column of Table 5,
but differ slightly because the sample in Table 7 is limited to offices with at least 20 associates
AND at least 20 partners. The mean value for γj falls from about 0.9 to about 0.6, or a drop
of almost a third. The median γj falls by a similar magnitude. Thus, it appears that over
one-third of observed office-level law-school concentration for associates is explained by simple
geographic proximity between offices and law schools.
       The regression in Column 3 shows that distance matters differently depending on where
the office is located. Adding distance/city interactions increases the explanatory power of the
regression substantially and explains another large portion of office-level concentration. The
effect of distance varies quite a bit. For example, the effect of being from a school that is 10-150
miles from the office is 0.4 more in Austin than in Boston, Chicago, or Washington DC. That
is, other things equal, suppose a law office in Austin or any of these other cities had a share of
lawyers from some school that was 100 miles away of 0.02. We would expect that, in Boston,




  17
    We adjust the standard errors using the methods in Cameron et al. (2011) to allow for correlation in the
errors both by law school and by office.


                                                    30
                                                Table 7: Determinants of Office-Level School Shares.
     Panel A: Full Sample (553 offices)
     Regression Type                                       OLS        OLS       OLS         IV            OLS         IV      OLS         IV
     City Fixed Effects/Distance Interactions                no       yes        no         no             no         no      yes         yes
     Office/School Dist < 10                             excluded                                      excluded   excluded
     Office/School Dist ∈ [10, 150)                       -0.0675                                       -0.0283    -0.0342
                                                         (0.0088)                                      (0.0042)   (0.0058)
     Office/School Dist ∈ [150, 500)                      -0.0837                                       -0.0351    -0.0424
                                                         (0.0085)                                      (0.0042)   (0.0065)
     Office/School Dist ≥ 500                             -0.0887                                       -0.0362    -0.0441
                                                         (0.0086)                                      (0.0043)   (0.0069)
     Partner Share                                                              0.7846     0.7000        0.6816     0.5790    0.5846     0.5129
                                                                               (0.0328)   (0.0718)     (0.0340)   (0.0792)   (0.0345)   (0.0608)
     N                                                   100,093    100,093    100,093    100,093       100,093    100,093   100,093    100,093
     R2                                                  0.2758      0.4695     0.5803     0.5735        0.6154    0.6077     0.6588     0.6559
     Mean γ                                     0.0929   0.0612      0.0389     0.0262     0.0269       0.0221     0.0220     0.0171     0.0174
     Median γ                                   0.0728   0.0469      0.0305     0.0193     0.0202       0.0155     0.0158     0.0114     0.0123

     Panel B: Tier I Firms (294 offices)
     Regression Type                                       OLS        OLS       OLS         IV           OLS          IV      OLS         IV
31




     City Fixed Effects/Distance Interactions                no       yes        no         no             no         no      yes         yes
     Office/School Dist < 10                             excluded                                      excluded   excluded
     Office/School Dist ∈ [10, 150)                       -0.0521                                       -0.0248    -0.0287
                                                         (0.0089)                                      (0.0047)   (0.0058)
     Office/School Dist ∈ [150, 500)                      -0.0644                                       -0.0309    -0.0357
                                                         (0.0080)                                      (0.0044)   (0.0061)
     Office/School Dist ≥ 500                             -0.0693                                       -0.0323    -0.0375
                                                         (0.0086)                                      (0.0045)   (0.0064)
     Partner Share                                                              0.7282     0.6316       0.6250      0.5364    0.5589     0.5125
                                                                               (0.0422)   (0.0883)     (0.0418)   (0.0784)   (0.0424)   (0.0643)
     N                                                    53,214     53,214     53,214     53,214       53,214     53,214     53,214     53,214
     R2                                                   0.2556     0.3861     0.5204     0.5112       0.5643     0.5584     0.5982     0.5968
     Mean γ                                     0.0703    0.0474     0.0357     0.0238     0.0246       0.0198     0.0204     0.0168     0.0169
     Median γ                                   0.0591    0.0395     0.0286     0.0177     0.0184       0.0142     0.0146     0.0116     0.0122
     Panel C: Tier II Firms (163 offices)
     Regression Type                                         OLS         OLS        OLS          IV        OLS           IV      OLS         IV
     City Fixed Effects/Distance Interactions                  no        yes         no          no          no          no      yes         yes
     Office/School Dist < 10                               excluded                                      excluded    excluded
     Office/School Dist ∈ [10, 150)                         -0.0833                                       -0.0383     -0.0432
                                                           (0.0105)                                      (0.0062)    (0.0044)
     Office/School Dist ∈ [150, 500)                        -0.1039                                       -0.0474     -0.0536
                                                           (0.0107)                                      (0.0063)    (0.0107)
     Office/School Dist ≥ 500                               -0.1086                                       -0.0484     -0.0548
                                                           (0.0108)                                      (0.0064)    (0.0112)
     Partner Share                                                                 0.7859      0.7531     0.6538       0.5820    0.5397     0.5245
                                                                                  (0.0337)    (0.0705)   (0.0356)    (0.1010)   (0.0360)   (0.0970)
     N                                                      29,503      29,503     29,503      29,503     29,503      29,503     29,503     29,503
     R2                                                     0.3254      0.5500     0.5692      0.5682     0.6155      0.6120     0.6880     0.6879
     Mean γ                                       0.1036    0.0617      0.0328     0.0304      0.0305     0.0244      0.0249     0.0156     0.0151
     Median γ                                     0.0825    0.0458      0.0288     0.0229      0.0245     0.0168      0.0168     0.0101     0.0104

     Panel D: Tier III Firms (96 offices)
     Regression Type                                         OLS         OLS        OLS          IV        OLS           IV      OLS         IV
32




     City Fixed Effects/Distance Interactions                  no        yes         no          no          no          no      yes         yes
     Office/School Dist < 10                               excluded                                      excluded    excluded
     Office/School Dist ∈ [10, 150)                         -0.1310                                       -0.0351     -0.0627
                                                           (0.0161)                                      (0.0075)    (0.0155)
     Office/School Dist ∈ [150, 500)                        -0.1529                                       -0.0415     -0.0736
                                                           (0.0165)                                      (0.0077)    (0.0172)
     Office/School Dist ≥ 500                               -0.1589                                       -0.0429     -0.0763
                                                           (0.0164)                                      (0.0077)    (0.0176)
     Partner Share                                                                 0.8815      0.7452     0.7823       0.5570    0.7124     0.4839
                                                                                  (0.0326)    (0.0638)   (0.0373)    (0.1043)   (0.0384)   (0.1166)
     N                                                      17,376      17,376     17,376      17,376     17,376      17,376     17,376     17,376
     R2                                                     0.3569      0.5442     0.7050      0.6881     0.7222      0.6919     0.7580     0.7360
     Mean γ                                       0.1440    0.0832      0.0514     0.0239      0.0267     0.0210      0.0261     0.0148     0.0186
     Median γ                                     0.1227    0.0649      0.0291     0.0178      0.0211     0.0146      0.0203     0.0092     0.0101
     Unit of analysis is an office/school pair. Dependent variable is the office-level associate share from that law school.
     Sample is limited to offices with at least 20 associates. Standard errors (clustered by office and by law school) in
     parentheses.
Chicago, or DC, the office’s share from a school in the same city would be about 0.08. But, in
Austin, we would expect the share of a school in that city to be 0.48. For this regression, the
adjusted γj ’s now average 0.0389 and have a median of 0.0303, which means that distance from
the school to the office, when allowed to vary by city, can explain well over half the office-level
variation of our sample. This makes it clear that the geographical aspects of natural advantage
are very important in sorting lawyers into law firms.
   Columns 4 and 5 show specifications where the only explanatory variable is partner school
share in the office and shows that partner share is closely related to the office’s associate school
share. In column 5, we use an indicator variable for whether any of the firm’s founders went to
the relevant law school as an instrument for partner share from the school. Roughly 70-80% of
any difference across offices in partner share is reflected in associate share as well. The adjusted
γj ’s at the bottom of the table show that this one variable can explain over two-thirds of asso-
ciate office concentration which is much more than the distance and distance/city interactions
can explain. In the final four columns, we combine the geography and partner share measures
(with and without the instrument for partner share.) Though this mutes the partner/associate
share relationship somewhat, even controlling for distance effects and distance effects by city,
our OLS and IV point estimates of the marginal effect of partner share on associate share are
between 0.5 and 0.6 (implying strong economic significance) and are statistically significant at
much better than the 1% level. The office-level associate γj ’s are lowered somewhat when com-
bining all the variables, but partner share alone can explain almost as much as the whole set
of variables. The unconditional median associate-level γ is 0.0728, but the associate-level γ is
only about 0.012 after conditioning on distance and partner share. Thus, over 80% of associate
level concentration can be explained by these variables. To the extent that one accepts founder
law school as a valid instrument for partner law school share, we can interpret this as a causal
effect of partner law school share on the law schools from which associates are hired.
   Overall, the results in Panel A of Table 7 make it clear that geography matters a great
deal in placing lawyers at law firms, but that the effect of geography differs substantially
from city to city. We found that geographic “natural advantage” can explain a little over
half of the concentration of graduates of law schools into law firms and that a combination of
“natural advantage” and our only direct measure of lawyer complementarity (partner share)
can explain over 80% of concentration. We also showed that there is a very close relationship
between partner and associate school shares within law offices. While some of this relationship
could reflect the geographic proximity we measured separately, the partner/associate share


                                                33
relationship continues to be quite strong even when controlling for school-to-office distance
quite flexibly. Given the strength of our results when using a plausible instrument for partner
school share, we believe this is compelling (or, at the very least, strongly suggestive) evidence
of school-based hiring networks within law offices.18
    Panels B, C, and D of Table 7 repeat the analysis in panel A, limiting the sample to Tier
I, Tier II, and Tier III offices, respectively. Column 2 of these three panels confirms that
geography matters more at less prestigious firms. Specifically, at Tier III firms, an office/school
pair that is more than ten miles from one another is expected to have more than a 13% lower
share at that office than an office/school pair within ten miles from each other. This is much
larger than the 5% difference we would expect in similar office/school pairs at a Tier I firm.
Just adjusting for distance category lowers the γ’s for Tier III firms by about the size of the
unconditional γ’s of Tier I firms. Including the city/distance interactions has an additional
large effect — these natural advantage variables can explain about two-thirds of the associate
office-level concentration at Tier II and Tier III firms.
    Columns 4 and 5 of Panels B-D show that the general conclusions about the relationship
between partner share and associate share are the same for each of these subgroups as they are
for the sample as a whole. That is, partner share is strongly associated with associate share
when controlling for distance and city/distance interactions and whether or not we instrument
for partner share. For firms in all three tiers, we would expect that at offices of firm A and
firm B in the same city where firm A has 10% of its partners from some law school and firm
B has no partners from that school, firm A’s associate share would be 6-9% higher than firm
B’s. However, we also find some evidence that the strength of this relationship is decreasing
in prestige. In nearly all OLS specifications, the coefficient on partner share is monotonically
decreasing in prestige and the Tier III partner share coefficient is statistically significantly
larger than the other two. The differences are less statistically distinct in the IV regressions,
both because the standard errors are higher and because the IV regression with all controls
using Tier III firms (see the right-most column of Panel D) shows a drop in the partner effect
for this one specification. Finally, note that the overall importance of natural advantage and


  18
     We redid the analysis in Panel A of Table 7 separately by gender and by specialties within an office (for
example, litigators only or corporate attorneys only.) The overall concentration levels were not noticeably larger
for these subgroups and the effects of distance were similar to those in the table. Most importantly, the effects of
partner share on associate share were no larger within these groups than for the office as a whole (for example,
the effect of female partner share on female associate shares or the effect of litigator partner share on litigator
associate share) and the effects across these groups was no smaller (for example, the effect of male partner share
on female associate shares or the effect of litigator partner share on corporate associate share.)


                                                        34
lawyer complementarity is clearly decreasing in prestige given that the unadjusted concentration
is lower at high prestige firms (column 1) but the concentration measures are similar for all
three tiers after adjusting for distance from office to school, office location, and partner share
(column 6.)
         These differences suggest that the lawyer labor market is much less geographically localized
at high prestige firms, suggesting a willingness on the part of firms to search widely (and, on
the part of lawyers, to move widely) in order to match the best lawyers to the most important
work. They also suggest that lawyers at higher prestige firms are more willing to go outside
the law school network they know in order to find new members of the firm.19


4         Conclusion

We measured the level of law school concentration within law firms and decomposed this con-
centration into a part driven by geography and part driven by lawyer networks. We have shown
that, even at the largest law firms in the US, hiring is largely driven by geography. We also
showed, that, even controlling for geographic proximity quite flexibly and using an instrument
for partners’ law schools, partners hire associates that went to the same law schools they went
to much more than would be expected by chance. This suggests that there is some source of
spillover or complementarity between lawyers from the same law school that attracts them to
the same workplace (though we do not know the magnitude of spillover or complementarity or
how any value created is split between firms and lawyers).
         While geography and lawyer complementarity are important for most of our sample of large
law firms, they appear to be much more important outside of the most prestigious firms. The
labor market for large firm lawyers is quite geographically concentrated, but this is noticeably
less true at the most prestigious and profitable firms. This is consistent with there being a
high return to getting the very top legal talent for certain types of legal work, while thick local
markets can satisfy demand for lawyers who do more basic legal work.
         A natural question for future research is to ask whether the firm/worker match for lawyers is
driven by demand for lawyers or supply of lawyers. Is geographic “natural advantage” important


    19
     Dustmann et al. (2010) find strikingly similar patterns in the hiring networks of a very different population —
ethnic minorities in Germany. Similar to our findings for associates and partners, they find that the probability
of a new hire coming from a given ethnic group is strongly increasing in the fraction of the firm’s current workers
from that ethnic group. Also, just as we find that school-based networks are less important at lower prestige
firms, they find that ethnic-based networks are less important for higher skill workers.



                                                        35
because firms value hiring from local schools or do lawyers go to school and then live in areas
they like? One possible way to address this would be to use the undergraduate institution of a
lawyer as an indication of geographic taste that is not directly related to law school or where the
lawyer practices. Though a formal analysis along these lines would require different methods
than we have used so far, we have looked at the relative distances from lawyers’ undergraduate
institutions to their law school and to their office. The median lawyer travels almost twice
as far from his undergraduate school to his law school as from his law school to his office.
Similarly, the median undergraduate school to office distance is almost twice the law school to
office distance. We think this provides suggestive, but far from conclusive, evidence consistent
with firms finding it economical to recruit locally. In future work, we hope to more explicitly
model and estimate lawyer location decisions.




                                                36
References

Baker, G. P. and Parkin, R.: 2006, The changing structure of the legal services industry and
  the careers of lawyers, North Carolina Law Review 84, 1635–1682.

Bayer, P., Topa, G. and Ross, S.: 2008, Place of work and place of residence: Informal hiring
  networks and labor market outcomes, Journal of Political Economy 116, 1150–1196.

Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B. and Miller, D. L.: 2011, Robust inference with multi-way
  clustering, Journal of Business and Economics Statistics 29, 238–249.

Dustmann, C., Glitz, A. and Schoenberg, U.: 2010, Referral-based job search networks. Uni-
  versity College London.

Ellison, G. and Glaeser, E. L.: 1997, Geographic concentration in manufacturing industries: A
  dartboard approach, Journal of Political Economy 102, 889–927.

Ellison, G. and Glaeser, E. L.: 1999, The geographic concentration of industry: Does natural
  advantage explain agglomeration?, American Economic Review 89, 311–316.

Galanter, M. and Palay, T.: 1991, Tournament of Lawyers: The Transformation of the Big Law
  Firms, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Galanter, M. S. and Henderson, W. D.: 2008, The elastic tournament: The second transforma-
  tion of the big law firm, Stanford Law Review 60, 1867–1929.

Garicano, L. and Hubbard, T. N.: 2005, Hierarchical sorting and learning costs: Theory and
  evidence from the law, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 58, 349–369.

Garicano, L. and Hubbard, T. N.: 2007, Managerial leverage is limited by the extent of the
  market: Hierarchies, specialization, and the utilization of lawyers’ human capital, Journal of
  Law and Economics 50, 1–43.

Garicano, L. and Hubbard, T. N.: 2009, Specialization, firms, and markets: The division of
  labor within and between law firms, Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 25, 339–
  371.

Goyal, S., van der Leij, M. and Gonzalez, J. L. M.: 2006, Economics: An emerging small world,
  Journal of Political Economy 114, 403–412.


                                              37
Granovetter, M. S.: 1974, Getting a Job: A Study of Contracts and Careers, Harvard University
  Press, Cambridge, MA.

Hayes, R. M., Oyer, P. and Schaefer, S.: 2006, Co-worker complementarity and the stability of
  top management teams, Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 14, 182–212.

Hobson, W. K.: 1986, The American Legal Profession and Organizational Society, 1890-1930,
  Garland, New York.

Jackson, M. O.: 2007, The economics of social networks, in R. Blundell, W. Newey and T. Pers-
  son (eds), Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Theory and Applications: Ninth World
  Congress of the Econometric Society, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.

Kahn, C. and Huberman, G.: 1988, Two-sided uncertainty and up-or-out contracts, Journal of
  Labor Economics 6, 423–444.

Kordana, K. A.: 1995, Law firms and associate careers: Tournament theory versus the
  production-imperative model, Yale Law Journal 104, 1907–1934.

Landers, R., Rebitzer, J. and Taylor, L.: 1996, Rat race redux: Adverse selection in the
  determination of work hours in law firms, American Economic Review 86, 328–348.

Laschever, R.: 2009, The doughboys network: Social interactions and the employment of World
  War I veterans. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

Lazear, E. P. and Oyer, P.: 2012, Personnel economics, in R. Gibbons and D. J. Roberts (eds),
  Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Lazear, E. P. and Rosen, S.: 1981, Rank-order tournaments as optimum labor contracts, Journal
  of Political Economy 89, 841–864.

Levin, J. and Tadelis, S.: 2005, Profit sharing and the role of professional partnerships, Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 120, 131–171.

Montgomery, J. D.: 1991, Social networks and labor-market outcomes: Toward an economic
  analysis, American Economic Review 81, 1408–1418.

Mukherjee, A.: 2006, Career concerns and optimal disclosure policy. Ph.D. Dissertation, Chap-
  ter 2, Northwestern University Department of Economics.



                                              38
Oyer, P. and Schaefer, S.: 2011, Personnel economics: Hiring and incentives, in O. Ashenfelter
  and D. Card (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B, North-Holland, New York.

Pagliero, M.: 2008, The impact of potential labor supply on licensing exam difficulty in the us
  market for lawyers. University of Turin.

Parkin, R.: 2006, Legal careers and school concentrations. Harvard University.

Rebitzer, J. and Taylor, L.: 2007, When knowledge is and asset: Explaining the organizational
  structure of large law firms, Journal of Labor Economics 25, 201–229.

Sauer, R.: 1998, Job mobility and the market for lawyers, Journal of Political Economy
  106, 147–171.

Tervio, M.: 2011, Divisions within academia: Evidence from faculty hiring and placement,
  Review of Economics and Statistics 93, 1053–1062.




                                              39
