                                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE IMPACT OF MINIMUM AGE OF EMPLOYMENT REGULATION ON CHILD LABOR AND SCHOOLING:
                       EVIDENCE FROM UNICEF MICS COUNTRIES

                                                Eric V. Edmonds
                                               Maheshwor Shrestha

                                               Working Paper 18623
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w18623


                             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           December 2012




       Funding for this project provided by Dartmouth College. Edmonds and Shrestha have both served
       as compensated consultants for international and government agencies involved in promoting minimum
       age of employment regulation during the period of writing this paper although their consulting did
       not directly relate to minimum age of employment regulation. The views expressed herein are those
       of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

       NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
       reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
       NBER publications.

       © 2012 by Eric V. Edmonds and Maheshwor Shrestha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
       to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
       © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Minimum Age of Employment Regulation on Child Labor and Schooling: Evidence
from UNICEF MICS Countries
Eric V. Edmonds and Maheshwor Shrestha
NBER Working Paper No. 18623
December 2012
JEL No. J08,J22,J24,J80

                                              ABSTRACT

Promoting minimum age of employment regulation has been a centerpiece in child labor policy for the
last 15 years. If enforced, minimum age regulation would change the age profile of paid child employment.
Using micro-data from 59 mostly low-income countries, we observe that age can explain less than
1 percent of the variation in child participation in paid employment. In contrast, child-invariant household
attributes account for 63 percent of the variation in participation in paid employment. While age may
explain little of the variation in paid employment, minimum age of employment regulation could simultaneously
impact time allocation. We do not observe evidence consistent with enforcement of minimum age
regulation in any country examined, although light work regulation appears to have been enforced
in one country.


Eric V. Edmonds
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
Eric.V.Edmonds@Dartmouth.edu

Maheshwor Shrestha
50 Memorial Drive
E52-391
Cambridge, MA 02142
mahesh68@mit.edu
    The Impact of Minimum Age of Employment Regulation on Child Labor and Schooling:
                        Evidence from UNICEF MICS Countries ∗

                 Eric V. Edmonds                                         Maheshwor Shrestha
       Dartmouth College, IZA, and NBER                                           MIT


                                               December 2012



Promoting minimum age of employment regulation has been a centerpiece in child labor policy
for the last 15 years. If enforced, minimum age regulation would change the age profile of paid
child employment. Using micro-data from 59 mostly low-income countries, we observe that age
can explain less than 1 percent of the variation in child participation in paid employment. In
contrast, child-invariant household attributes account for 63 percent of the variation in
participation in paid employment. While age may explain little of the variation in paid
employment, minimum age of employment regulation could simultaneously impact time
allocation. We do not observe evidence consistent with enforcement of minimum age regulation
in any country examined, although light work regulation appears to have been enforced in one
country.

Labor laws and regulation are the primary instruments used by many countries to combat child
labor. The last 15 years has seen an enormous surge in these laws as international pressure has
encouraged low income countries to sign international conventions related to the prohibition of
child labor and to pass labor laws consistent with the principals of those conventions. Most
countries now have laws in place that prohibit the economic activity of children below age 12
and regulate employment through age 17.
         This paper considers the impact of laws that restrict the minimum age of employment on
child labor and schooling. Such laws are principally directed at paid employment outside of the
family. When enforced, they alter the age distribution and location of child employment. An
upper bound on the importance of these laws in influence the prevalence of child labor would


∗
 We are grateful to Doug Miller, Doug Staiger, and seminar participants at Harvard and the University of
Connecticut for extremely helpful comments and to Zakariah Lakel, Meagan Morrow, Yang Wei Neo, Dana Niu,
Mary Peng, Greg O’Sullivan, Niral Shah, Connie Shang, and Amy Zhang for research assistance. Edmonds and
Shrestha have both served as compensated consultants for international and government agencies involved in
promoting minimum age of employment regulation during the period of writing this paper although their consulting
did not relate to minimum age of employment regulation directly. Correspondence to Edmonds:
eedmonds@dartmouth.edu.
attribute all of the age variation in work outside of the household to these laws. Of course, there
are many reasons other than regulation that would lead time allocation to vary with age. Even so,
using data from 59 countries included in rounds 2 and 3 of UNICEF's Multiple Indicator Cluster
Survey, we observe that age accounts for little of the variation in paid employment outside of the
home, schooling, or idleness.1 For example, age explains less than 0.5 percent of the variation in
paid employment in the 29 African countries examined herein. The largest share of the variation
in paid employment explained by age in Africa is 1.6 percent in Madagascar, where compulsory
schooling and minimum age of employment regulations relax at the same age. In contrast,
household characteristics such as income and parental background account for 67 percent of the
variation in paid employment in our African data and 63 percent across all countries. These
findings are consistent with the literature from high income countries that document an impact of
minimum age of employment regulation and compulsory schooling laws on education but find
the impact of these law changes to be modest compared to the secular trends (Moehling 1999,
Lleras-Muney 2001, Goldin and Katz 2003).
        Age may account for little of the variation in paid employment, but there is still scope for
minimum age of employment regulation to influence time allocation. To examine this, we look
for changes in time allocation at the minimum age of employment in each of the 59 countries
separately and pooled. Our econometric approach is to compare the observed prevalence of paid
employment at the minimum age of employment to what would be predicted based on an age
trend estimated on the regulated (younger) ages. Our estimates of the impact of minimum age
regulation are, in effect, estimates of the impact on paid employment of extending current
minimum age regulations by one additional year, holding all prices fixed. Of course, this design
does not inform the counterfactual of what employment would be in the absence of minimum
age laws altogether.
        In the pooled and weighted data from all 59 countries representing 158 million children,
we find that paid employment increases by a statistically insignificant 0.7 percentage points, or
11 percent, at the minimum age of employment. When we look at each country separately as
well as at all the different measures of time allocation available in our data, we are plagued by

1
  Idleness is defined as not attending school while not working or participating in household based activities,
including chores. All analysis of variance is based on a model regressing paid employment, household fixed effects,
age effects, and gender for households with more than 1 child 8-14 present. Thus, all discussion of the explanatory
power of age is based on the partial R2 attributable to age in the model.

                                                                                                                  2
the multiple hypothesis problem and type I errors. We rely on economic theory to assess whether
statistically significant changes stem from minimum age regulation. In the presence of
competitive labor markets and working capital within the household, we show that binding
minimum age of employment regulations shift child work to the family farm or business but
have no effect on schooling. Our argument is based on three assumptions. First, child and adult
labor are perfect substitutes subject to a productivity shifter (“the substitution axiom” in Basu
and Van 1998). Second, the child’s household can freely substitute adult and child labor between
productive tasks inside the household, i.e. “non-saturation.” Third, adult labor can move freely
between the household and the labor market, i.e. “competitive adult labor markets”.
       According to this theory, the data will be consistent with binding minimum age of
employment regulation when we observe increases in paid employment, decreases in work inside
the household, and no change in schooling or idleness at the minimum age of employment. In the
data, we observe increases in paid employment at the minimum age only in 4 of the 59 countries.
We do not observe a significant or substantive decline in work inside the family at the minimum
age in any of the countries. Hence, we do not observe evidence consistent with binding minimum
age of employment regulation in a single country. The data are consistent with increases in
household based activities when paid employment increases in general. Some countries have
labor laws that allow light work before the minimum age of employment, and there is one
country, Trinidad and Tobago, where the data are consistent with binding light work regulations.
       Compulsory schooling regulation, which co-exists with minimum age regulation in many
countries, presents both an econometric and interpretive problem in our results. When both
regulations relax at the same time, we will not be able to attribute the changes in child time
allocation to one particular regulation. On the other hand, if compulsory schooling law relaxes at
a younger age than the minimum age of employment, then it creates a distortion in the age
profile of child time allocation. This is problematic as we use age trends in child time allocation
to estimate the counterfactual allocation at the minimum age of employment. We find evidence
consistent with binding compulsory schooling regulations in one country, Burundi, where the
law may interfere with our ability to infer whether minimum age regulations bind.
       There are 17 countries in our data where the minimum age of employment is the same as
the age at which schooling is no longer compulsory. In 4 of these countries we observe increases
in paid employment at the minimum age but also observe increases in household based


                                                                                                      3
employment (inconsistent with binding minimum age of employment regulation). It is possible
that these findings are driven by a combination of minimum age of employment regulation and
compulsory schooling laws (although the change in schooling is not significant in any of the
four). In fact, we find that the changes in paid employment are 9 times larger in magnitude in the
pooled data in the selected group of countries where minimum age of employment and
compulsory schooling regulations coincide compared to countries where schooling is not
compulsory at the minimum age of employment. Hence, while overall, we find little empirical
evidence to suggest an impact of minimum age of employment regulation, as enforced, on child
labor, there may be some benefit to coordinating employment and schooling regulation. That
said, given the importance of household-level, child-invariant characteristics in child labor, it is
not obvious why age-based regulation, as currently implemented and enforced, has its current
place at the center of anti-child labor policy.
           In the next section of the paper, we present an overview of minimum age of employment
regulation in our data. Section II considers how binding minimum age of employment regulation
influences time allocation. Section III describes our empirical approach to measure the impact of
minimum age regulation and the data we use. Section IV presents our findings. Section V
concludes.

                      I. Background on Minimum Age of Employment Regulation
Minimum age of employment regulations have existed in many high income countries since the
late nineteenth century, and a series of international, industry specific minimum age of
employment conventions were passed in the 1920s and 30s. The minimum age regulations
studied herein have been influenced by two more recent international conventions.
           ILO Convention 138 on the Minimum Age for Admission to Employment was passed on
June 26, 1973 and has been ratified by 161 countries at the time of writing. A majority of
ratifying countries have done so subsequent to 1996. While there is considerable nuance in C138,
three broad ideas in C138 are especially important in our discussion.2 First, C138 emphasizes
that countries should raise the minimum age of admission to employment to no less than 15.
Countries that are “insufficiently developed” may specify a transitional minimum age of
employment of 14. Second, it distinguishes between employment and light work, defining


2
    C138 can be read at http://www.ilo.org/ilolex/cgi-lex/convde.pl?C138.

                                                                                                       4
neither. Light work is codified on a national basis, but in principal it is work that does not
conflict with school attendance and is not harmful to child health. Light work may be permissible
from age 13. Third, it explicitly excludes “family and small-scale holdings producing for local
consumption and not regularly employing hired workers” (article 5 section 3) from the
provisions of the convention.
          ILO Convention 182 on the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the
Worst Forms of Child Labor on was passed on June 17, 1999 and has been ratified by 174
countries at the time of writing.3 C182 defines a child as a person under 18 and proposes
restrictions on certain categories of employment until age 18. It differentiates between
unconditional worst forms of child labor from which children should be prohibited regardless of
circumstance (includes all forms of modern slavery, prostitution and pornography, illicit
activities and drug trade, and armed conflict) and hazardous child labor that national laws must
define.
          This paper examines the impact of minimum age of employment laws in all 59 countries
with publicly available time allocation data from the second and third rounds of UNICEF’s
Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS). 4 Data collection instructions and survey questions
are nearly uniform across each MICS country allowing for cross-country comparisons. Round 2
of MICS occurred in 2000/01. Round 3 occurred 05/06. In the public use data, there are 28
African countries, 14 from Europe and Central Asia, 7 from East Asia and the Pacific, 6 from
Latin American and the Caribbean, 3 from Middle East and North Africa, and 1 from South
Asia. Nineteen countries have data in both MICS 2 and 3. The remaining 40 countries only have
surveys in 1 of the 2 rounds.
          In reviewing the minimum age of employment regulation in these MICS2 and MICS3
countries, their legislation generally looked like a combination of these principles from the two
conventions. Most countries have some form of light work allowable at some age under 14, a
general easing of restrictions on most forms of employment around 14 of 15, and continued
regulation on certain types of work until age 18. We define the minimum age of employment as
the youngest age at which it is legal to pay a child to work full time outside the home (during the


3
 C182 is available from http://www.ilo.org/ilolex/cgi-lex/convde.pl?C182.
4
 The data are available from http://www.childinfo.org/. A few countries in the publicly available data have been
excluded from our study, because they did not execute the child labor module.

                                                                                                                   5
day, limited hours). We define the light work age as the youngest age at which a child may work
for limited hours during the day in traditional (a common word) or family based activities.
       Table 1 summarizes the regulation for light work and non-hazardous work for the
countries considered in this study. When countries appear in both MICS2 and MICS3, they are
listed once if minimum age regulations did not change substantively between rounds, and they
are listed twice if their regulations changed. We report the minimum age of employment
regulations in place at the time of the survey. Of the countries surveyed in both MICS2 and
MICS3, only Gambia and Trinidad and Tobago have changed the basic minimum age of
employment for non-hazardous work.
       Fourteen is the modal minimum age of employment. Only Somalia does not appear to
have any non-hazardous work regulation in place at the time of MICS3. Nineteen countries
distinguish between light work and non-hazardous work, so the two ages are the same for a
majority of the countries. Appendix 1 contains full country-by-country detail on how minimum
ages were coded with detailed information for each country. Many countries contain exceptions
from regulations for apprentices and work done in school, and we have coded the minimum ages
in the table excluding apprenticeship regulation and allowances of work done in school.
       An important issue that will arise in assessing the impact of the minimum age of
employment regulation is whether the laws co-move with compulsory schooling regulation or
natural school transition points. C138 stipulates that compulsory schooling laws should define
the lower bound on minimum age of employment regulation if such laws require schooling
beyond age 14. The last column of Table 1 contains the age at which schooling is no longer
compulsory (or NA if schooling is not compulsory). Compulsory schooling regulations are
sometimes based on grade completion, in which case we have translated that grade to an age
using the rates of school completion reported by UNESCO (see the appendix). These imputed
compulsory schooling ages are marked with an asterisk. Four countries do not have any
compulsory schooling regulation. Sixteen of the 59 countries have aligned their compulsory
schooling laws with their minimum age of employment laws. The next section considers how
these minimum age of employment regulations and compulsory schooling laws impact time
allocation.




                                                                                                 6
     II. Theory – The Impact of Binding Constraints on Employment Outside the Home
C138 explicitly excludes work inside the family from minimum age of employment regulation.
Many countries have regulations that cover work inside the home, but even when it is law, few
countries (high or low income) discuss enforcement of labor regulation inside the family. Hence,
we treat enforced minimum age of employment regulation as affecting the availability of
employment outside of the household. We begin with an unconstrained (separable) farm
household model as a benchmark. We add binding constraints on employment outside of the
home in section B. A challenge in our empirical work below is disentangling the effects of
minimum age of employment regulation from compulsory schooling laws. We consider how the
two-child time allocation related laws differ in their effects in section C.

                                          A. Unconstrained Model
We begin with a standard separable farm household model (e.g. Benjamin 1992) and add
children and child labor.5 We adopt two modeling simplifications standard in the child labor
literature (e.g. Basu and Van 1998). A family consists of one child and one adult. Adults and
children are perfect substitutes in production subject to a productivity shifter. A child is
equivalent to a adults, where a<1. This is known as the substitution axiom. We begin with the
unrestricted case of perfectly competitive labor markets where adults and children can freely sell
their labor in the open labor market. Adult labor receives a wage w. Children then receive the
wage aw.
        Preferences are defined over the family's standard of living s, the child's education e, and

                                                         {      }
the adult’s and the child's leisure consumption, l A , l C respectively, with the utility

representation:

        (1)       U ( s, e, l A , l C )

Returns to education are understood to be part of the agent’s utility from education. Education
costs p per unit. Total expenditures on education and the standard of living (price=1) come from
net income from the family business and labor income:

        (2)       s + pe = F ( LOH + LAH + aLCH ) − wLOH + wLAM + awLCM

5
  Most working children do so inside their household. In our data, children are 9 times more likely to work in the
family farm or business than in paid employment. We think it is reasonable to suppose that the typical household in
our data has some sort of farm or home enterprise in which children may participate.

                                                                                                                      7
        {             }
where LOH , LAH , LCH respectively are the use of outside adult equivalent, adult, and child labor in

the family business. F(-) is the household’s production function (expressed in the same units as s)
and exhibits a positive, diminishing marginal product. For economy, we have suppressed other
inputs in the production function. Adult and child employment in the labor market are defined as

{LA
  M   , LCM } . Without constraints on the allocation of child time, the child and adult time

endowments are:

         (3)     LCM + LCH + l C = E C − e

         and

         (4)     LAM + LAH + l A = E A .

Substituting (3) and (4) into (2), we have the full income constraint of the unrestricted model:
         (5)     s + wl A + awl C + ( p + aw ) e = Π ( w ) + wE A + awE C

         with

         (6)     Π ( w ) = F ( LOH + LAH + aLCH ) − wLOH − wLAH − awLCH .

         The family allocates child time between types of employment so that the value of the
child's marginal product in the home enterprise is equal to its price in the local labor market.
Child leisure consumption and thus schooling is chosen so that the marginal rate of substitution
between leisure and standard of living depends on the child's wage (aw):
                 ∂u
         (7)        ∂l C = aw
                  ∂u
                     ∂s
and the allocation of child time between leisure and schooling depends on the relative cost of
schooling, which is:
                 ∂u
         (8)        ∂l C = aw
                  ∂u      p + aw
                     ∂e
Household demand functions for education and leisure then depend on child wages, the price of
schooling and endowment incomes:

         (9)     k = D k ( p + aw, aw, Π * ( w ) + wE A + awE C ) , k ∈ {e, l c } .

         where Π * ( w ) = Omax
                             A  C
                                  F ( LOH + LAH + aLCH ) − wLOH − wLAH − awLCH .
                            LH , LH , LH




                                                                                                        8
                                B. Binding Minimum Age of Employment
We assume minimum age of employment laws regulate child employment outside of the
household. Consider a country with binding minimum age of employment laws that reduce child
employment outside the household. Binding minimum age regulation does not affect the total
amount the child works or the child's leisure consumption and schooling under the assumption of
non-saturation. That is, so long as families have productive opportunities for labor inside the
household, binding minimum age regulations change the location of work but not the amount of
work.
         To see that binding minimum age regulation induces substitution between activities,
suppose that the binding constraint on work outside of the household adds the restriction of
LCM = 0 (3). This has no effect on the opportunity cost of child leisure in the household so long
as there is some adult (hired in or own) labor in the family enterprise.6 The key reason why
minimum age restrictions do not impact schooling or work probabilities (only type of work) is
that households are free to buy and sell other forms of labor. Faced with additional child labor in
the family business, the household reduces its use of hired in and adult labor until the value of
adult equivalent labor's marginal product equals the market wage. The value of adult equivalent
labor in the family business will still be equal to the market wage. Hence, the value of the child's
marginal product of labor is still aw. This produces the same marginal rate of substitution
between leisure and standard of living as in equation (7).
         It is possible that constraining all child labor to the family business reduces productivity
in the family business to below the market wage and no adults would participate. We call this the
“saturation” case. It is unclear how schooling and leisure consumption should change when
binding constraints on paid employment induce saturation. Child productivity in the family
enterprise is below what it was in the unconstrained case ( aF ' < aw ). Household income
declines. The opportunity cost of time in leisure is the agent’s value of the child’s productivity in

the farm ∂u(    ∂s   ) aF ' , and whether it is above or below the opportunity cost of time in leisure in
the unconstrained case depends on the curvature in preferences for s. However, we should see a



6
  If there is no adult labor market and no child labor market, then there is no labor market in which to regulate the
child’s participation. Hence, the premise of minimum age regulation on employment outside of the child’s home is
that there is some functioning labor market present.

                                                                                                                        9
rise in household-based economic activity and specialization of adult employment towards work
outside the home with saturation.
          We are skeptical about the relevance of saturation for our analysis. What keeps the
household from starting multiple businesses if the marginal product of labor in one is below
market? Banerjee and Duflo (2007) document the prevalence of multiple enterprises within non-
farm households, and the diversity of activities within farm households is broadly understood.
We interpret this lack of specialization as being consistent with our hypothesis that even poor
households can create multiple enterprises rather than face saturation in within-household labor
supply.
                              C. Binding Compulsory Schooling Laws
Binding compulsory schooling laws may be de facto or de jure. De facto compulsory schooling
laws occur when strong norms exist within a society requiring students to attend school through
a certain level (completing primary for example). De jure compulsory schooling laws are
legislation that require students to complete a certain level of school or continue in school
through a certain age.
          Binding compulsory schooling laws work differently than minimum age of employment
laws. Minimum age of employment regulation restricts one type of job, inducing substitution to
other types of work. Binding compulsory schooling laws put a lower bound on time in education
and hence induce a decline in time to be allocated among other activities.
          To model this binding constraint, we fix e at some level k. The assumption that k is
binding implies that education increases. Absent binding constraints on employment outside the
home, this binding compulsory schooling law reduces endowment income by (p+aw)*k. The
coerced additional expenditure on schooling is (p+aw)*(k-e*) where e* is the solution to the
unconstrained problem from section A. The reduction in endowment income should reduce
leisure and induce a substitution towards more work. It is possible that the decline in endowment

time is sufficiently large such that there is less time available to work: LM + LH > E − k where
                                                                            C*   C*   C



LCt * is the optimal time devoted to labor type t ∈ {M , H } in the unconstrained problem of Section

A. In this case, work also declines with compulsory schooling. Because of the substitutability of
different types of labor (child, adult, outside), there is no clear prediction about the incidence of
this decline in work across different locations.


                                                                                                    10
        In sum, binding constraints on the minimum age of employment decrease paid
employment outside the home. They have no effect on schooling or labor force participation
rates except under saturation. Binding compulsory schooling laws increase education yet have an
ambiguous effect on work. They reduce income that can be consumed as living standards by
forcing school expenditures and decreasing the time available for work. The reduced income
increases demand for children to work, but they may bind such that the desired amount of work
absent the constraint is not feasible under the compulsory schooling law.

                                               III. Empirical Approach
                                                     A. Design
We assume that absent regulation, age trends in time allocation tend to be smooth.7 Minimum
age regulations relax at certain ages. Hence, a natural empirical design is to test for breaks in age
trends in time allocation at the ages where such regulations are relaxed. Perfectly enforced laws
imply no paid employment outside of the home until laws are relaxed and some age trend in
participation after employment is permitted. Perfect enforcement does not appear to exist, and
we focus our test on the weaker case of whether there appears to be measurable changes in time
allocation when minimum age of employment regulation is relaxed.
        Our empirical approach is to fit a polynomial to model the age trends when restrictions
are in place. We use that polynomial to predict the level of various time allocation measures if
the age trend had continued. We then compare this predicted level of the dependent variable
under the constrained age trend to the actual level observed in the first year that the restriction is
eased. This approach is different than a more standard two-sided design, because we do not
observe time allocation above age 14 for most countries in the MICS data. Appendix 2 compares
our one-sided results to a more standard two-sided design for countries where this is feasible.
        Specifically, let yic represent the outcome of interest for child i in country c. Define the
cut age as the age where a minimum age of employment law relaxes. Below the cut age, the
parametric assumption on the relationship between yic and age Ai under the constraint is simply:

        (10)      yic = β 0c + π c ( Ai ) + ε ic



7
 This assumption may be inaccurate owing to school transition points or compulsory schooling laws, a subject we
will return to later.

                                                                                                              11
where π c ( Ai ) is a polynomial in age. Age is transformed as a deviation from the cut age so that

the interpretation of the constant is the estimate of the value of outcome y at the cut age absent
the easing of the restriction on minimum age of employment. (10) is only estimated on the

sample below the cut age, and the estimate of β0c is compared with the sample estimate of y at the

cut age, ya =cut . That is, the change in outcome y associated with the easing of restrictions on
employment is:

       (11)      yac=cut − β 0c ≡ Dcut
                                   c
                                       .

       Estimates of Dcut and its standard error can be obtained collapsing the data to country-
                     c



age cells and regressing outcome y on a polynomial in age (transformed so that age 0 is the cut
age) and an indicator for the cut age using weighted least squares where the weight is the country

population in that age cell. Dcut is the coefficient on the cut age indicator. A similar empirical
                              c



approach (albeit two-sided) is used by Oreopoulos (2006).
       There is, of course, the issue of what order polynomial to fit to the pre-cut age trends in
(10). Black et al (2007) emphasize that parametric RD approaches such as the one employed here
are sensitive to the choice of specification. We opt for a data driven approach for the choice of
the functional form of the polynomial using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) employed in
Black et al (2007) and discussed in Lee and Lemiuex (2009). Specifically for each country c and
each outcome variable y separately we pick the order of the polynomial to minimize: 𝐴𝐼𝐶!! =
         !                                 !
𝑁 ! 𝑙𝑛 𝜎 ! ! + 2 𝑝 + 1 . Here, 𝜎 ! ! is the mean squared error of the regression of outcome y on a
polynomial of order p for country c estimated on the country-level age-cell data from below the
cut age. 𝑁 ! is the number of observations in the weighted dataset. Given that we only observe
ages in years, and we work on the age-cell level, our approach is intrinsically parametric.
       One substantive issue in this approach is that we are estimating the impact of extending
regulation by one additional year under the assumption that there is a smooth trend in the age
pattern of time allocation before regulation is relaxed. Transition points in schooling naturally
complicate this assumption. As a robustness check, we have estimated the impact of relaxing
minimum age of employment regulations using only data from after the age primary school is
usually completed. This restriction to the data limits the number of countries we can consider,
but in those countries, we found in our basic results that age explains little variation in time


                                                                                                     12
allocation and that there is no statistically significant evidence consistent with binding minimum
age of employment (although estimates are extremely imprecise when the data is restricted). The
smooth age trends assumption is also complicated by other regulations. For example, if
compulsory schooling relaxes before the minimum age and compulsory schooling regulation is
binding, then the assumption of smooth age trends in estimating the impact of easing minimum
age regulation would be incorrect. Likewise, if minimum age regulations bind and relax before
compulsory schooling regulations are relaxed, then the assumption of smooth age trends in
estimating the impact of easing compulsory schooling would be incorrect. We discuss the
salience of these potential econometric problems caused by off-setting regulations in specific
country contexts below.
                                         B. MICS Data
One important advantage of the MICS data for this type of work is that the time allocation
module is nearly uniform across countries and between rounds. Thus, while the laws that we are
evaluating differ from country to country, the basic measures of time allocation do not. Of
course, even though the original questionnaires were largely identical, local understanding of the
questions can differ.
       The standard MICS questionnaire used in almost all countries contains 7 questions in the
child labor module. The reference period is defined as “the last week” for all questions.
Questions are directed towards the mother or caretaker of all children age 5 through 14 although
several countries extend the age range to 17. We choose not to use the data for children 5-7 in
our analysis. Participation in paid employment is rare in children below 8, and heterogeneity in
school starting ages creates conceptual difficulties with the younger children. Pooled together,
the data represent 158 million children 8-14.
       The questionnaire measures two types of non-household employment. We define paid
employment as a positive answer to the question of whether the child did any kind of work for
someone who is not a member of the surveyed household for pay. While “work” is not defined,
the questionnaire stipulates that pay may be for cash or in kind. Unpaid, non-household
employment is defined as working in any kind of work over the past week for someone who is
not a member of the household without pay. The questionnaire does not allow the respondent to
work in both paid and unpaid non-household employment. It asks for total hours in the last week




                                                                                                   13
in the two types of non-household employment, and it explicitly instructs respondents to
combine hours across all non-household jobs.
          The questionnaire collects information about household based activities as well. It
includes questions about participation and hours in unpaid household services in the last week. It
lists “household chores such as shopping, collecting firewood, cleaning, fetching water, or caring
for children” as examples of these unpaid household services. The questionnaire also asks about
participation and hours in the last week in “other family work,” giving work in “the farm or in a
business or selling goods in the street” as examples. We label this category “household based
economic activity.”
          Several aggregates will be considered in this discussion. Unpaid economic activity
includes household based economic activity and unpaid, non-household employment. Economic
activity combines unpaid economic activity with paid employment. Work combines economic
activity with unpaid household services. Household based economic activity and services
combines household based economic activity with unpaid household services.
          Schooling data is also collected in a consistent manner across countries in each round, but
the questionnaire changes slightly but substantively between round 2 and round 3. Both rounds
ask whether the child attends school during a reference year and both collect information on
number of days attended in the last week. Unlike the time allocation questions where the last
week is poorly defined, the school attendance question asks explicitly references “last (day of the
week).” This should be how the enumerators implement “last week” in the child labor module as
well, but the questionnaire for schooling is more explicit in this regard. There are two other
important differences between rounds. First, the age range for school attendance data changes.
Schooling attendance is collected for all children age 5-17 in MICS2 and 5-24 in MICS3.
Second, MICS 3 is more specific about the reference school year for the attendance question.
Round 2 asks about the current school year. Round 3 explicitly identifies the reference year. This
could be substantive during interim periods when it is unclear whether the current year would
reference the year about to start or the year recently completed (enumerators should have made
this clear). Idle children are children that neither work (in economic activity or unpaid household
services) nor attend school. We suspect measurement error is an important component of idle
status.




                                                                                                  14
       Table 2 contains time allocation summary statistics for the data used in this study.
Column 1 pools all the data available in the MICS data. Column 2 contains summary statistics
for the pooled MICS2 data. Column 3 contains summary statistics for the pooled MICS3 data.
Column 4 bifurcates the pooled MICS rounds into Sub-Saharan Africa and other geographic
regions.
       The data represent 156 million children, 72 million of whom are in Sub-Saharan Africa
(SSA). Nearly 3 percent of children work in paid employment. Three percent of children work in
paid employment. Twenty-six percent are engaged in unpaid economic activity. Twenty-eight
percent are economically active. Seventy-five percent are engaged in unpaid household services.
Seventy-eight percent are in household based activities (combining unpaid household services
with household based unpaid economic activity). Eighty percent are engaged in some kind of
work. Eighty-two percent attend school, and 4 percent are idle, neither working nor attending
school. All work measures are lower and schooling is higher between MICS2 and MICS3.
Working children are more prevalent in the SSA countries with unpaid economic activity
standing out as a substantive difference. The prevalence of unpaid economic activity is more
than double in SSA compared to non-SSA countries.
       Summary statistics for time allocation by country for children 8-14 are in Tables 2A and
2B. Table 2A contains the SSA countries and Table 2B is the non-SSA countries. In Africa, the
measured prevalence of paid employment varies from 0.5 percent of children 8-14 in Djibouti to
16.6 percent in Togo in 2000. The next highest prevalence of paid employment in our African
data is from Cameroon in 2000 and Togo in 2006 with 6.7 percent of children 8-14 in paid
employment. No attempt was made to have the recall periods for paid employment to be
comparable across MICS rounds, so the Togo number differences could owe to the timing of the
surveys. Outside of Africa, the greatest prevalence of paid employment in the data is in the
Dominican Republic in 2000 where 5 percent of children 8-14 are in paid employment. Figure 1
pools the data from each country (combining MICS data when applicable) and plots participation
rates by country.
       Participation in economic activity and unpaid household services is more widespread
than just paid employment. In Africa, 5 countries have economic activity rates above 70 percent
for children 8-14, all observed in 2000: Central African Republic, Chad, Niger, Sierra Leone,
and Togo. Outside of Africa, Laos and Albania in 2000 have the highest prevalence of paid


                                                                                                15
employment at approximately 40 percent. Participation rates in unpaid household services are
above 90 percent in many African countries, with a median participation rate of 86 percent. For
non-African countries, participation in unpaid household services is less pervasive. The median
participation rate is 73 percent.
       School attendance rates and idle status vary substantially across countries. In the African
countries, attendance ranges from a low of 43 percent in Niger to a high of 93 percent in
Equatorial Guinea. In the non-African countries, many countries report school attendance rates
above 98 percent. The median prevalence of idle children in the African countries is 3 percent
and 1 percent in non-African countries. Idle status is most frequently observed in Gambia (13
percent), Albania (12 percent), Djibouti (11 percent), and Comoros (10 percent).
       Most countries only collect data on economic activities through age 14 and schooling
through 17. The last two columns of Tables 2A & 2B indicate the highest age for time allocation
and schooling questions respectively although the prevalence rates in Table 2 are restricted to
ages 8-14 regardless of whether data is available for older ages. When data on economic
activities are only available through 14, we are only able to use the one-sided design to estimate
the impact of relaxing the restriction minimum age of employment (equation 11). Appendix 2
contrasts the one-sided design with a two-sided design in the countries where it is feasible to
implement a two-sided empirical design: Gambia, Equatorial Guinea, Kenya, Lesotho,
Mongolia, Nigeria, Philippines, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Trinidad & Tobago, Venezuela, and
DR Congo.

                                         IV. Main Findings
                                    A.     Analysis of Variance
Enforced minimum age and compulsory school laws change the age distribution of activities. We
begin with the question: how important is age in time allocation? Time allocation varies with age
for reasons other than regulation. Physical, mental, and emotional capacities for different types
of work vary with human development. While there is ample scope for age to be an important
determinant of time allocation even when minimum age regulations are completely unenforced,
age appears to have a minor, often negligible, influence on time allocation. On average, age can
account for 0.7 percent of the variation paid employment. The lack of explanatory power for age
contrasts sharply with other influences that vary at the household, not child level. In African



                                                                                                    16
MICS countries, age accounts for 0.5 percent of the variation in participation in paid
employment (1.1 percent in non-African MICS countries). In contrast, household-level
characteristics can account for 67 percent of the variation in participation in paid employment in
the African-MICS countries (58 percent in non-African).
       To examine the importance of age-specific attributes, we begin by examining how much
of the variation in participation in paid employment can be attributed to age. Figure 2 is a
histogram of the fraction of the variation in paid employment that can be explained by age for
each of the countries in our data. This is the R2 of a regression of paid employment on a vector
of age dummies without controlling for household attributes run separately for each country. The
average R2 in the data in Figure 2 is 0.7 percent.
       The low explanatory power of age contrasts with the ability of household characteristics
to account for variation in paid employment. To compare the explanatory power of age with
other child and household attributes, we regress outcomes (we choose paid employment, school
attendance, and idle) on dummy variables for age, gender, and household. We then compute
what fraction of the total variation in the outcome can be explained by each component of the
model as well as the model as a whole. This decomposition exercise is obviously only identified
for households with more than 1 child present of school age. We limit our sample accordingly.
       Table 3 is this analysis of variance for the pooled data. All individuals are weighted by
their inverse sampling probability. The analysis of variance in the pooled data is thus
representative of 158 million children 8-14. Each cell contains the fraction of the total sum of
squares that can be attributed to the row variable for all countries pooled (column 1), all African
MICS countries (column 2), and all Non-African MICS countries (column 3). The first four
rows present our findings for paid employment, the next four contain school attendance, and the
bottom four examine idle status. Age can explain 0.71 percent of the variation in paid
employment in all countries combined, 0.48 percent in Africa, and 1.09 percent in other
countries. Household characteristics account for 63.29 percent of the variation in paid
employment in all countries, 67.77 percent in Africa.




                                                                                                   17
         Table 3A contains the analysis of variance results for Africa.8 Table 3B is non-Africa. A
country is on the row, and the columns correspond to the rows from Table 3. The first four
columns look at paid employment as the outcome. The “model” column reports the fraction of
the total sum of squares the model can explain (the R2). Each column is the fraction of the total
sum of squares explained by the column variables in the model. This is computed by calculating
how the explained sum of squares changes when the column’s vector of controls is omitted. 0.48
means that age dummies can explain 48 hundredths of 1 percent of the variation in paid
employment in Africa when we condition on gender and household fixed effects.
         Figure 3 presents the partial R2s for age and household (child invariant) characteristics
from Model 1 in Tables 3A and 3B. Figure 3A is a histogram of the partial R2s for age. It is a
histogram of the results from the “Age” column of the “paid employment model” of Tables 3A
and B. The partial R2s are close to the unconditional R2 in Figure 2 although they are often
smaller in magnitude. Age differences are most substantive in Syria, Vietnam, and Bangladesh.
Age can never explain more than 2.16 percent of the variation in participation in paid
employment. In Africa, Madagascar has the most substantive age differences. In general, age has
more explanatory power outside of Africa although there is considerable overlap in the
distributions.
         Age explains more of the variation in paid employment than schooling.9 The African
countries drive this observation, because age explains more than double the variation in
schooling compared to paid employment in the non-African MICS countries. In fact, within
Africa, Nigeria with 19.6 million children aged 8-14 and 68 percent school enrollment is
especially important to this result as age explains less than four hundredths of a percent of the
variation in schooling for these age ranges. Age accounts for more than 7 times the variation in
paid employment in Nigeria compared to schooling. Excluding Nigeria from the analysis, we
would find that age explains more of the variation in schooling than paid employment in Africa,
like the non-African countries.




8
  We believe the unique household identifiers in the Comoros and Cote d’Ivoire data from MICS2 are incorrect,
because they are associated with implausible household sizes. We choose to leave them into the table, because we
will use their data in our later analysis (which does not depend on having the correct household identifier).
9
  Schooling data is generally available through age 17. We limit the data to age 14 to match the age range of the paid
employment data. The explanatory power of age for the variation in schooling increases dramatically at older ages.

                                                                                                                   18
       As with paid employment and schooling, age explains little of the variation in idle status.
Overall, age can account for half a percent of the variation in idle status. Idle status is more
prevalent in African than non-African countries, and age can account for a greater share of the
variation in idle status in African MICS countries compared to the non-African countries. DR
Congo especially stands out with age accounting for 9 percent of the variation in idle status for
its 7.6 million children 8-14.
       We focus on age, because binding minimum age of employment regulation impacts the
distribution of activities across ages. It is useful to compare the explanatory power of age to
gender and household attributes. In African countries, gender accounts for less than a tenth of a
percent of the variation in paid employment. Lesotho stands out with gender accounting for 0.68
percent of the variation in paid employment. Gender appears more important outside of Africa
and for schooling compared to paid employment. Overall, gender accounts for little of the
variation paid employment.
       Figure 3B is constructed identically to Figure 3A except the figure is a plot of the partial
R2 for the household fixed effects. The contrast between Figure 3A (partial R2 for age) and
Figure 3B (partial R2 for household fixed effects) is striking. Household attributes can account
for 63 percent of the variation in the prevalence of paid employment, 70 percent of the variation
in school enrollment, and 62 percent of the variation idle status. We do not specify household
attributes. The importance of child-invariant household attributes may be driven by low family
income, parental characteristics and attitudes, or community level attributes such as the
prevalence of certain types of employment or schools. Outside of Comoros and Cote d’Ivoire
where we believe the household identifiers are incorrect (the far left tail of figure 3B), household
attributes account for a majority of the variation in paid employment in 50 of the 57 countries.
                           B.      The Impact of Light Work Restrictions
The fact that the variation in paid employment with age is small does not have any implication
for whether minimum age regulations influence time allocation. For example, suppose paid
employment was flat with respect to age, but the relaxation of constraints lead to a small, one-
time jump in the prevalence of paid employment. Age would still explain little of the total
variation in paid employment even though there was an effect of regulation.
       In this section, we report estimates of (11) for each activity category at the age at which
light work is permitted (or light work regulation is no longer binding). The next section contains


                                                                                                    19
estimates for minimum age of employment regulation, and the final section focuses on
compulsory schooling regulation. Obviously, our findings in each section are limited to countries
that relax regulation within the age ranges covered in the data. This constraint means that
different countries will be included in the results for each section of the paper. Unlike the
previous section, where we only used data for children age 8-14, in this section, we use data
between ages 8 and the cutoff for the regulation in estimating (11) when the older data is present
and relevant.
       Table 4 contains results aggregating all countries together and separating out the African
countries. For paid employment, the “base” amount is the projected prevalence of paid
employment if the time trend in paid employment under regulated ages was extended to the year
where the regulation is not longer in place. The “change” is the difference between the actual
incidence of paid employment at the age the law relaxes compared to the base level. Thus the
“base” level of paid employment is the counterfactual of what paid employment would be at the
age where regulation is relaxed absent the relaxation of the regulation on the minimum age of
employment. Dividing the change by the base gives the percentage change in paid employment
associated with the relaxation of the regulation. All other columns of the table report the
“change” column for the dependent variable listed as the column header. We omit the base level
for economy for all other outcomes.
       We focus on the light work results in this section. When light work is allowed, minimum
age regulations are still binding. However, light work regulation would prevent any child
employment. Hence, the age at which light work is permitted is the youngest age for which we
might see paid employment if the regulations were binding and enforced. We expect the easing
of the prohibition on light work to have the same comparative statics as discussed for the
relaxation of minimum age of employment regulation earlier in the paper. We should see an
increase in paid employment and a decline in household based activity without changes in school
attendance.
       Our findings for the pooled data are in Table 4. There is no evidence of a change in
participation in paid employment with the easing of light work regulation in the pooled data or in
the African countries. While the changes in paid employment are especially small, we do not
observe t-statistics greater in magnitude than 1 for any of the time allocation measures in Table 4




                                                                                                 20
in Africa. In the combined data, the only t-statistic greater than 1 is in magnitude is for school
attendance, but the estimated percentage change is still less than 10 percent and not significant.
         The lack of an impact of easing light work regulation in the aggregate data is clear in
Figure 4. For Figure 4, we have transformed every child’s age to a measure that is years since the
relaxation of light work regulation in the country (for countries with light work regulation only).
Hence -1 implies 1 year before the youngest age that light work regulation is no longer binding,
and 0 is the first age a child may work in light work. It is clear that the incidence of paid
employment when light work is allowed does not deviate from the trend when restrictions are in
place.
         Table 5 contains results by outcome and country. The outcome is given by the column
heading and each row contains results from different countries. With so many regressions, we
will observe many statistically significant changes, so it is important that we focus our discussion
on both the significance of changes and whether the patterns in those changes accord to what
theory predicts. To see this clearly, we have plotted changes in paid employment and household
based work together in Figure 5. Figure 5 contains coefficients and confidence intervals for the
change in paid employment at the age of light work from the “change” column of Table 5. In
general, countries are identified by their country code (see Table 1), but when multiple MICS are
available for the country we have added a 2 or 3 to the country code to make it clear whether the
results come from MICS2 or MICS3 for the country. In addition to the change in paid
employment confidence intervals and point estimate (diamond), Figure 5 contains the estimated
change in household based activity and marks that with a circle. A solid circle indicates that we
reject the null of no change in household based activity with 95 percent confidence. A hollow
circle indicates 0 is within the 95 percent confidence interval for the parameter.
         We observe increases in paid employment with the easing of light work restrictions in 8
countries. We can reject the null that these changes are 0 at a p-value of 0.10 in Mauritania and
0.05 in Trinidad and Tobago. In Mauritania, we observe an increase in household based activities
with at the age of easement of regulation that is similar in magnitude to the increase in paid
employment we find. Hence, we do not find evidence consistent with binding light work
regulation in Mauritania.
         Interestingly and nicely illustrating the importance of examining whether we observe
changes that match the prediction of theory, in one round of MICS for Trinidad and Tobago, we


                                                                                                     21
observe a decline in paid employment with the easing of regulation. We observe an increase in
the other. Focusing on the 2006 data where we observe the increase in paid employment, we also
observe a decline in household based activities and no change in schooling. Hence, the pattern
observed in 2006 in Trinidad and Tobago is consistent with binding light work regulation.
Between 2000 and 2006, Trinidad increased its regulation so the light work age in 2006 is the
minimum age of employment in 2000. This evidence from Trinidad and Tobago, which may
reflect the impact of the easing of light work regulation or lagged minimum age of employment
regulation, is the only evidence of enforced employment regulation in this study. It is worth
noting that compulsory schooling was lifted before light work was allowed in Trinidad and
Tobago, so this is one country where our econometric assumption of smooth age trends before
light work is permitted may be problematic. However, there is no evidence in Trinidad and
Tobago of binding compulsory schooling regulation in the discussion below.
                C.     The Impact of Minimum Age (Non-Hazardous Restrictions)
Minimum age regulations are more prevalent and more restrictive than light work regulation.
Hence, we expect a larger impact of their relaxation if they are binding. One rarely hears
accounts of the enforcement of light work regulation, but attention is more often brought to
minimum age of employment regulation. In our discussion, we do not discuss the impact of
removing the restrictions on hazardous work and worst forms of child labor that persist until
older ages, because we do not have data on time allocation at older ages and generally those
restrictions are on less prevalent work. The minimum age regulations are the relevant regulation
for the most common types of paid employment in which children may work.
       In the pooled data, there is little to suggest an impact of the relaxation of minimum age of
employment restrictions. These estimates are in Table 4 above. Figure 6 presents the pooled
findings for paid employment graphically. The construction of the figures is identical to Figure 4,
so that 0 is the minimum age at which work is permitted outside of worst forms of child labor.
Paid employment is higher than would be predicted by the trend from the ages when
employment was restricted. The magnitudes are such that the easing of minimum age of
employment regulation increases paid employment by slightly more than 10 percent, although
this change is not statistically significant. In Africa (Table 4), we also observe an increase in
work inside the household too. We observe a decrease outside of Africa, but both these changes
in household based activity are not statistically significant or large in magnitude.


                                                                                                    22
       By country and activity, findings are in Tables 6A for Africa and 6B for other parts of the
world. Figure 7 mimics the format of Figure 5 and presents the changes in paid employment and
household based activity graphically. We observe statistically significant increases in paid
employment with the relaxation of minimum age regulation in one African country, Nigeria. The
magnitude of the estimated increase in paid employment is large in Nigeria, over 50 percent.
Bolivia, Bangladesh, and Trinidad and Tobago are the two other countries in the world where we
observe statistically significant increases in paid employment at the minimum age for
employment.
       With a large number of regressions, we expect to see statistical significance by
happenstance. In fact, in Figure 7, we observe more statistically significant decreases in paid
employment at minimum age of employment than increases. We cannot rely solely on tests of
statistical significance in evaluating whether we are observing effects of easing labor regulation.
Hence, we examine the countries where we observe significant increases in paid employment for
evidence of shifts in work from inside to outside the household. In Nigeria, there is some decline
in participation in household based activity, although the change is roughly a third of the
magnitude of the increase in paid employment. We also observe large decreases in schooling in
Nigeria at the minimum age of employment. In Table 1, it is noted that schooling is no longer
compulsory at the minimum age of employment, and the patterns observed in Table 6A are more
consistent with the effects of the relaxation of compulsory schooling laws.
       In Bangladesh, the observed pattern of responses even more clearly follows the
compulsory schooling law predictions although compulsory schooling laws are believed to relax
a year before minimum age regulation. Paid employment increases by 1 percentage point (25
percent) at the minimum age of employment; the prevalence of any work increases by 3
percentage points; and school attendance declines by 9 percentage points. We observe this
pattern that appears consistent with relaxed schooling laws, although in the next section we find
no change in schooling at the ages where compulsory schooling is de jure relaxed. This may be a
case where de facto schooling norms and de jure schooling regulations differ.
       In Bolivia, we observe changes in time allocation that suggest that the statistically
significant finding of an increase in paid employment may be spurious. We observe a statistically
insignificant increase in household based activity that is similar in magnitude to the increase in




                                                                                                     23
paid employment. Hence, we do not observe the pattern of changes in time allocation suggested
by the theory.
        For Trinidad and Tobago, we observe increases in paid employment and increases in
household based activities that, together, are nearly double the statistically significant decrease in
schooling we observe. If, in fact, light work regulations bound in Trinidad and Tobago, the
assumption of smooth age trends under binding minimum age regulation would not be correct.
Overall, these Trinidad and Tobago findings for minimum age regulation are difficult to
interpret. Like Bangladesh, they are consistent with relaxing compulsory schooling laws. Like
Bangladesh, we find no evidence of binding compulsory schooling laws below, so we could be
capturing de facto schooling transition points. We have an additional problem here that our light
work findings imply substantive concerns about our econometric approach to estimating the
impact of relaxing minimum age regulation.
        While these are the statistically significant findings, there are many changes in paid
employment that are not statistically significant. We observe the general pattern suggested by
binding minimum age regulation: increases in paid employment matched by declines in work in
the household. To assess this, we plot the estimated changes in paid employment at the minimum
age of employment against the estimated changes in household based activity in Figure 8. The
figure includes the linear regression line (solid, bold) and the 45-degree line (light, dashed).
While binding minimum age regulation implies that changes in paid employment and household
based activity should be negatively correlated, we observe that the association is positive in the
data. In fact the quadrant of increasing paid employment and decreasing household based activity
has the fewest observations of any of the combinations.
                        D.      The Impact of Compulsory Schooling Laws
For the present study, compulsory schooling regulation may present an econometric problem that
prevents us from estimating a counterfactual prevalence of paid employment or a confounder
that makes it difficult to use theory to identify type I errors. In this section, we use the same
empirical approach as the preceding sections to examine the impact of compulsory schooling
laws.
        We have schooling data for more countries than employment data. In most countries,
schooling data is collected for older populations than employment data. Hence, we have
estimates of the impact of compulsory schooling laws for a larger set of countries. For these


                                                                                                    24
additional countries, we cannot assess whether time allocation in activities other than schooling
change. Hence, we are more vulnerable to type I errors.
        In the pooled data (Table 4), we observe a decline in schooling when schooling is no
longer compulsory. The decline in schooling is not matched by an increase in work, inside or
outside of the home. The decline in schooling in the pooled data is concentrated in non-African
countries. When we focus on Africa alone, the changes in schooling are neither substantive nor
significant.
        Tables 7A and B contain the individual country- and activity-level estimates of the
impact of relaxing compulsory schooling regulation, estimated using (11). We find statistically
significant declines in schooling in Burundi, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, South Sudan, Albania,
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Guyana, Iraq, Kyrgyzstan, Macedonia, Moldova, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Tajikistan, and Vietnam. Theory predicts that relaxation of binding compulsory schooling
restrictions lead to increases in work. Because of missing employment data, we cannot examine
the data for this pattern in Ghana, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Guyana, Macedonia, Moldova,
Montenegro, Tajikistan, and Vietnam. Among the other countries where we observe declines in
schooling when schooling is no longer compulsory, Burundi and Kyrgyzstan are the two
countries there are changes in time allocation consistent with theory. Work increases as
schooling declines, although we do not find statistically significant or economically meaningful
changes in paid employment in either country when schooling is no longer compulsory. Burundi
is potentially the most important of these two for our analysis of the impact of minimum age of
employment, because schooling is no longer compulsory at an age below the minimum age of
employment, and this may bias our ability to estimate a counterfactual prevalence of child time
in various activities.
        There are 4 countries where we observed increases in paid employment at the minimum
age. We identified these as potential type I errors, because we did not see a corresponding
decline in household based activity. In fact, we observed a statistically significant increase in
unpaid activities as well. All 4 countries have compulsory schooling regulations that relax at the
minimum age of employment. Hence, it is possible that we are capturing the effect of
compulsory schooling laws on paid employment. However, we do not observe declines in
schooling in any of the four countries.




                                                                                                    25
       Nonetheless, we are hesitant to rule out the hypothesis that regulations are most effective
when they are coordinated and that we are capturing some effect of coordinated regulation on
time allocation. Even though these changes in time allocation do not conform to our prediction
for binding minimum age regulation or compulsory schooling separately, the observed changes
in time allocation may follow from the combination (although the lack of a change in schooling
is not consistent with binding compulsory schooling regulation).
       To explore this further, we consider how the impact of the minimum age of employment
differs with whether compulsory schooling laws relax at the same age. Our findings in the pooled
data are in Table 8. In the first row, we consider the impact of relaxing the minimum age of
employment when compulsory schooling laws are not binding. We find no significant changes in
time allocation for that group. In the second row, we find that relaxing the minimum age
restriction at the same age as compulsory schooling is associated with an increase in paid
employment. There is also a decline is school attendance which is large in magnitude, but
imprecisely estimated such that we cannot reject the null of no change in school attendance at the
age where both regulations relax.
       Taken together, the evidence in this section suggests that the minimum age of
employment is most apt to be associated with increases in paid employment when the laws are
coordinated with compulsory schooling laws. We cannot separate whether this observation owes
to selection in who has coordinated laws or an impact of both laws changing at the same time.
Given that we do not generally observe statistically significant declines in school in these
countries with coordinated laws, we suspect that selection is more important. Nonetheless, it is
important to keep these cases in mind in contrast to all other countries where we do not find
evidence of binding minimum age of employment regulation.

                                          V. Conclusion
Minimum age of employment regulation is a centerpiece in anti-child labor policy, and
considerable political attention has been invested in promoting these laws around the world.
Minimum age regulations are designed to deter child involvement in paid employment as well as
specific types of jobs, and work to change the distribution of job types by age.
       In this study, we examine data from 59 countries included in the 2000 and 2005 UNICEF
MICS project. We first consider how much of the variation in child engagement can be explained



                                                                                                   26
by age: less than one percent across the countries studied here. This observation does not
inform us whether minimum age regulations influence time allocation. However, the finding
that less than one percent of the variation in paid employment among children can be explained
by age implies that age based regulation will have limited importance in explaining time
allocation. In contrast, child invariant household characteristics account for 63 percent of the
variation in child participation in paid employment.
       Not only is little of the variation in paid employment associated with age, but we also do
not find evidence consistent with binding minimum age of employment regulation for any
country. Binding minimum age of employment regulation shifts child labor from outside to
inside the household without changing schooling. We do not see evidence consistent with this
labor substitution in any country at the minimum age of employment. In fact, there is generally a
positive association between changes in paid employment and work inside the household in the
data. There are 4 countries where compulsory schooling laws relax at the same as the minimum
age of employment and where we find evidence that could be driven by a combination of the two
laws. Some countries allow light work at ages below the minimum age of employment, and in 1
one country (Trinidad and Tobago), we observe changes in time allocation that are consistent
with changes in time allocation from light work regulation.
       Taken together, the evidence in this paper does not suggest an influence of minimum age
of employment regulation on child time allocation that is commensurate with the level of policy
attention to promoting the regulation. Hence, political economy concerns about the impact of
such regulations on constituencies for child labor reform are probably not of first order
importance (Deopke and Zilibotti 2005). This raises the question of whether a case can be made
for promoting the regulation nonetheless. First, it is important to recall that our findings are only
answering the question of what would happen if minimum age of employment regulation were
extended an additional year. Hence, we miss any effects of regulations that are gradual. It could
be that these regulations signal to uncertain families that they cannot consider work for the child
at younger ages. Relaxing the regulation has no immediate effect, but it sets the reference point
for families that would otherwise be much earlier. Our design does not capture gradual effects of
the regulation. It is useful to recall how little of the variation in paid employment is associated
with age.




                                                                                                      27
       Second, our design does not capture general equilibrium effects of the regulation on the
structure of employment or prices, including wages, in the overall economy. For example, if
minimum age regulation raised wages (as in the Basu and Van 1998 framework), then it would
eliminate motives for work compared to the counterfactual of no regulation at all. The regulation
would then reduce the incidence of child labor overall, and we might not observe any discreet
change in time allocation at the minimum age because the law reduces the supply of child labor.
Our design cannot capture any effect of the law beyond the age where the laws are relaxed.
Edmonds has argued elsewhere (Edmonds 2008) that such types of general equilibrium
responses to child labor regulation are unlikely, but we cannot rule them out with our design.
       Third, it may be the case that these laws provide benefits that have nothing to do with
changing the time allocation of children at the minimum age. Perhaps they help establish norms
over very long time horizons. Perhaps they provide tools for the legal system to go after gross
violators. Perhaps they provide organizing principles for other government anti-child labor laws.
It is clear from the evidence herein, that minimum age regulations, as currently implemented, do
not generally alter child engagement in paid employment at the minimum age itself compared to
a counterfactual where the minimum age was set one year later and that child invariant,
household characteristics exert a much larger influence on child time allocation in general and
child engagement in paid employment in particular.

                                           References
BANERJEE, A.V. AND DUFLO, E. (2007). “THE ECONOMIC LIVES OF THE POOR” THE JOURNAL OF
      ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVES. 21(1):141–167
BASU, KAUSHIK, AND PHAM H. VAN. 1998. “THE ECONOMICS OF CHILD LABOR." AMERICAN
      ECONOMIC REVIEW 88 (3): 412-427.
BLACK, DAN, JOSE GALDO, AND JEFFREY SMITH, 2007, “EVALUATING THE BIAS OF THE
      REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY DESIGN USING EXPERIMENTAL DATA,” UNIVERSITY OF
      MICHIGAN WORKING PAPER.
DAYIOGLU, M., 2005, “PATTERNS OF CHANGE IN CHILD LABOUR AND SCHOOLING IN TURKEY:
      THE IMPACT OF COMPULSORY SCHOOLING,” OXFORD DEVELOPMENT STUDIES 33(2), 195-
      210.
DEOPKE, M. AND ZILIBOTTI, F., 2005, “THE MACROECONOMICS OF CHILD LABOR REGULATION,”
      AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 95(5), 1492-1524.
EDMONDS, E. 2008. CHILD LABOR, IN T P SHULTZ AND J STRAUSS, (EDS.) HANDBOOK OF
      DEVELOPMENT ECONOMICS, VOL. 4, CH. 57, 3608-3709.
GOLDIN, C., AND KATZ, L., 2003. “MASS SECONDARY SCHOOLING AND THE STATE: THE ROLE OF
      STATE COMPULSION IN THE HIGH SCHOOL MOVEMENT,” NBER WORKING PAPER 10075



                                                                                                  28
LEE, D. AND LEMIEUX, T., 2009, “REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY DESIGN IN ECONOMICS,” NBER
       WORKING PAPER 14723.
LLERAS-MUNEY, A., 2001. “WERE COMPULSORY ATTENDANCE AND CHILD LABOR LAWS
       EFFECTIVE? AN ANALYSIS FROM 1915 TO 1939,” NBER WORKING PAPER 8563.
MANACORDA, M., 2003. “CHILD LABOR AND THE LABOR SUPPLY OF OTHER HOUSEHOLD
       MEMBERS: EVIDENCE FROM 1920 AMERICA,” CENTER FOR ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE,
       LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE, 1-64.
MOEHLING, C., 1999. “STATE CHILD LABOR LAWS AND THE DECLINE OF CHILD LABOR,”
       EXPLORATIONS IN ECONOMIC HISTORY 36, 72-106
OREOPOULOS, PHILLIP, 2006, “ESTIMATING AVERAGE AND LOCAL AVERAGE TREATMENT
       EFFECTS OF EDUCATION WHEN COMPULSORY SCHOOLING LAWS REALLY MATTER,”
       AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 96(1), 152-175.

       Appendix One: Review of African Laws on Minimum Age of Employment and
                                Compulsory Schooling

        This appendix provides detail and rational for the coding of minimum age of employment
and compulsory schooling laws for the African countries in MICS2 and MICS3. We describe the
laws in place at the time of the survey. For countries that fall into both MICS2 and MICS3, we
provide detail on changes in law were appropriate. We focus on the describing the actual laws in
place (de jure) rather than the behavioral norms that may be appropriate for the country (de facto
laws).
        We take advantage of the strong global efforts to promote minimum age of employment
laws in assembling this appendix. One way advocates, governments, and international
organizations hope to affect changes in laws is to raise awareness about the actual laws in place.
This provides a natural source of information for us. We will reference the same sources
throughout all country descriptions. Hence, we reference them as follows:
   •   RTE: Right to Education Project. RTE is an effort by ActionAid International to provide
       detailed description of education laws and child rights laws for every in the world.
       http://www.right-to-education.org/node/272.
   •   DOL: United States Department of Labor: Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor
       (From 2001 or 2007). The Trade and Development Act of 2000 required USDOL to
       provide an annual report on each country eligible for tariff reductions on the Generalized
       System of Preferences (GSP) concerning whether they are making progress towards the
       elimination of the worst forms of child labor. These annual reports contain information
       on the minimum age of employment regulations as well as schooling detail. We use
       information from the year of the survey, http://www.dol.gov/ilab/programs/ocft/tda.htm
   •   DOS: U.S. Department of State Country Report on Human Rights Practices. The Foreign
       Assistance Act of 1961 requires the U.S Department of State to report to the U.S.
       Congress about the status of each country’s compliance with internationally recognized
       rights, which State interprets as those governed by the Universal Declaration of Human
       Rights. We use information from the year of the survey,
       http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/



                                                                                               29
   •   Infodev: Survey of ICT and Education in Africa: Country Reports. infoDev is a World
       Bank project that contains detail on education laws and practices by country. Country
       reports are available at http://www.infodev.org/en/Publication.354.html
   •   UNESCO: UNESCO: Beyond 20/20 WDS. This UNESCO database contains information
       on education by country and is the source of all of the ages at which primary school is
       completed. http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/ReportFolders/ReportFolders.aspx
        Our primary purpose here is to describe the laws in place at the time of the survey. One
concern about measuring the impact of minimum age of employment laws is that there may be
other changes, such as the end of primary school, that complicate our econometric approach.
Within each country there is variation in when kids start primary school and how long they take
to complete. We report the "scheduled progression" age in which children complete primary.
Scheduled progression is computed by taking the legislated school starting age and adding the
number of grades in primary to that. UNESCO reports the age the student finishes primary if
they were to follow this scheduled progression, which of course many do not.
        AFRICA
        Angola: The minimum age of employment is set at 14 (RTE, DOL). However, children
ages 14-16 require written authorization from a father, guardian, or legal representative (RTE).
Children under 16 are not allowed to work in factories, and children under 18 are not allowed to
work at night or in “dangerous conditions” (DOL). Schooling is compulsory for 8 years starting
at age 6, implying that schooling is compulsory through age 13 (DOL). Primary school is 4
years, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 9 and
will have completed primary school at age 10 (UNESCO). Angola signed C138 and C182 in
2001.
        Burkina Faso: The Labor Code sets 15 as the minimum age of employment (DOL).
Children under age 18 are restricted from certain businesses and may not work at night. People
under age 20 may not perform work that could harm their reproductive abilities. Schooling is
compulsory through age 15 (RTE, UNESCO). At the time of the survey, primary school was 6
years starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression would end primary
school at age 11 and would have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Burkina Faso
signed C138 in 1999 and C182 in 2001.
        Burundi: The Labor Code of 1993 sets 16 as the minimum age of employment (RTE,
DOL). Starting at age 12, children may engage in “light work” or apprenticeships so long as they
do not jeopardize the child’s health, development, or schooling. Children 12-15 may work at
most 6 hours per day and may not work at night (DOL). Schooling is compulsory for 6 years
starting at age 7, or through primary school, implying that schooling is compulsory through age
12 (RTE, UNESCO). Burundi signed C138 in 2000 and C182 in 2002. Laws did not change
between MICS2 and MICS3.
        Cameroon: The Labor Code and the Ministerial Order on Labor sets 14 as the minimum
age of employment (DOL). Until age 18, there are restrictions on the type of labor permitted:
children may not lift heavy weights, work in “dangerous or unhealthy tasks,” or work in tasks
that could harm their “morality.” Work is also limited to 8 hours per day and must occur during
the day (DOS). The Constitution stipulates that education is compulsory through age 14 (DOL,
DOS). Primary school is 6 years in Cameroon, implying that children with uninterrupted
progression will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12



                                                                                               30
(UNESCO). Cameroon signed C138 in 2001 and C182 in 2002. Relevant laws did not change
between MICS2 and MICS3.
         Central African Republic: Article 125 of the Labor Code sets 14 as the minimum age of
employment (RTE, DOL). However, children may perform light work in traditional agricultural
activities or domestic work at age 12 (DOL). Children under 18 may not perform “hazardous
work” or work at night (RTE, DOL). Education is compulsory through age 15 (UNESCO).
Primary school is 6 years starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression
will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12. CAR signed
C138 and C182 in 2000. Relevant laws did not change between MICS2 and MICS3.
         Chad: The Labor Code sets 14 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
However, children may perform “light and non-hazardous work” at age 12. Jobs deemed
hazardous by the government are prohibited until age 18. Schooling is compulsory for 6 years
starting at age 6, or through primary school, implying that schooling is compulsory through age
11 (UNESCO). Chad signed C138 in 2005 and C182 in 2000.
         Comoros: The Labor Code sets 15 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
Under the law, children are prohibited from “hazardous activities” (RTE). Schooling is
compulsory through age 13 (UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years starting at age 6, implying that
children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11 and will have
completed primary school at age 12. Comoros signed C138 and C182 in 2004.
         Cote d’Ivoire: The Labor Code of 1995 sets 14 as the minimum age of employment and
the minimum age of apprenticeship (RTE, DOL). Children under age 18 may not work at night
or more than 12 consecutive hours, and children under 16 require parent or legal guardian
permission (DOL). There is no compulsory schooling in Cote d’Ivoire (RTE, DOS). Primary
school is 6 years starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end
primary school at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Cote
d’Ivoire signed C138 and C182 in 2003. Relevant laws did not change between MICS2 and
MICS3.
         Democratic Republic of Congo: At the time of the survey, the Labor Law set 14 as the
minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL). However, children ages 14-15 were only allowed to
perform “light, healthy work” (DOL). Children under 18 required the consent of a parent or
guardian and were not allowed to work at night, children under 16 were allowed to work at most
4 hours per day, and children 16-17 were allowed to work at most 8 hours per day (RTE).
Schooling is compulsory for 8 years starting at age 6, implying that schooling is compulsory
through age 13 (UNESCO). Sources contradict, but this seems to be the modal age reported.
Primary school is 6 years starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression
will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO).
DR Congo signed C138 and C182 in 2001.
         Equatorial Guinea: The minimum age of employment is set at 14 (RTE). We found
other characterizations of the relevant labor law, but this codification seemed to have the most
support. At age 13, children may work in “light” jobs that do not affect their “health, growth, or
school attendance;” and at age 12, children may work in agriculture or craft making. Children
under 16 are restricted from work that might harm their “health, safety or morals.” Schooling is
compulsory through primary school, which is 5 years starting at age 7, implying that children
with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed
primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Equatorial Guinea signed C138 in 1985 and C182 in 2001.



                                                                                                31
        Gambia: The labor code in effect for 2001 set 18 as the minimum age of employment
(DOL). In 2005, the Children’s Act reduced the minimum age of employment to 16 years
(DOL). However, children ages 16-17 are only permitted to perform “light work” and are
prohibited from working at night or in “hazardous” jobs. Apprenticeships are allowed at age 12.
Primary school is compulsory for 5 years starting at age 7 (UNESCO). Several sources report
that primary school is compulsory through age 8, but 12 seems to be the modal age reported and
is consistent with the legal school entry age of 7 (e.g. UNESCO).10 Gambia signed C138 in 2000
and C182 in 2001.
         Ghana: Ghanaian law sets 15 as the minimum age for employment and 13 as the
minimum age for light work (RTE, DOL). Light work is defined as that which is not harmful to
health, development, or schooling. Children under 18 may not work at night or in “hazardous”
activities (DOL). Under a 1987 law, schooling is compulsory for 9 years starting at age 6,
implying that schooling is compulsory through age 14 (RTE). Primary school is 6 years,
implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11 and will
have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Ghana has not signed C138 and signed
C182 in 2000.
         Guinea Bissau: The General Labor Law of 1986 sets 14 as the minimum age of
employment for factor work and 18 as the minimum age for “heavy or dangerous labor” (DOL).
Schooling is compulsory through age 12 (RTE, Infodev, UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years
starting at age 7, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school
at age 12 and will have completed primary school at age 13 (UNESCO). Guinea Bissau signed
C138 in 2009 and C182 in 2008. Relevant laws did not change between MICS2 and MICS3.
         Kenya: The minimum age of employment is set at 16 (RTE). However, children as
young as 13 may engage in light work (undefined). The Employment Act of 1976 prohibits
children under 16 from industrial undertakings (RTE, DOL). Schooling is compulsory for 8
years starting at age 6, implying that schooling is compulsory through age 13 (RTE, UNESCO).
Primary school is 6 years, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary
school at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Kenya signed
C138 in 1979 and C182 in 2001.
         Lesotho: The Labor Code of 1992 sets 15 the minimum age of employment for industrial
work or private undertakings involving family (DOL). However, at age 13, children may work in
“light work” if it is done in a technical school approved by the Department of Education.
Children under 16 may work at most 8 hours per day and may not work at night. Children under
18 may not perform “hazardous” work. Schooling is not compulsory in Lesotho (RTE, DOS,
UNESCO). Primary school is 7 years starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted
progression will end primary school at age 12 and will have completed primary school at age 13
(UNESCO). Lesotho signed C182 and C138 in 2001.
         Madagascar: The Labor Code sets 15 as the minimum age of employment (DOL, DOS).
Children under 18 may not perform night work or work that could endanger their “health, safety,
or morals.” Schooling is compulsory through age 14 (DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 5
years starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary
school at age 10 and will have completed primary school at age 11 (UNESCO). Madagascar
signed C138 in 2000 and C182 in 2001.


        10
          A number of reports (DOS, DOL) list age 8 at the end of compulsory school. This used to be the start of
compulsory schooling in the 1980s. Hence, we are confident that this is inaccurate.

                                                                                                               32
        Malawi: The Employment Act of 2000 sets 14 as the minimum age of employment
(RTE, DOL). Exceptions are made for certain types of work in training institutions or homes
(DOL). Children under 18 may not be employed in work that could harm their “health, safety,
development, education, or morals.” Education is not compulsory in Malawi (RTE, DOL).
Primary school is 6 years starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression
will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO).
Malawi signed C182 and C138 in 1999.
        Mauritania: The Labor Code of 2004 sets 14 as the minimum age of employment unless
the child has not completed the 9 years of compulsory education (DOL). At age 12, family-based
light work is permitted provided it is approved by the Minister of Labor, is not more than 2 hours
per day, and is not on Fridays. Children under 16 are prohibited from night work and children
under 18 are prohibited from work that “is likely to harm their safety, health, or morals.” At the
time of the survey, schooling was compulsory for 9 years starting at age 6, implying that
schooling was compulsory through age 14 (RTE, DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years,
implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11 and will
have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Mauritania signed C138 and C182 in
2001.
        Niger: The 1996 Labor Code sets 14 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
However, children under 14 may work with special authorization (DOL). Children under 18 may
not work more than 4.5 hours per day, at night, or in industrial jobs. Schooling is compulsory for
6 years starting at age 7, or through primary school, implying that schooling is compulsory
through age 12 (DOS, DOL, UNESCO). Niger signed C138 in 1978 and C182 in 2000.
        Nigeria: The Nigerian Labor Act of 1990 sets 15 as the minimum age of employment
(DOL). It excludes family-based light work (RTE, DOL). Children under 16 may not work at
night, more than 8 hours per day, or in “dangerous or immoral” employment. Schooling is
compulsory for 9 years starting at age 6, implying that schooling is compulsory through age 14
(Infodev, UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years, implying that children with uninterrupted
progression will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12
(UNESCO). Nigeria signed C138 and C182 in 2002.
        Rwanda: At the time of the survey, the Labor Code prohibited the employment of
anyone under age 18 without parental permission (RTE, DOS). Apprenticeships were allowed at
age 14 provided the child had completed primary school (DOS). Children under 18 were
prohibited from working at night. The temporary employment of children under 14 could be
authorized in exceptional circumstances (RTE). We code 18 as the minimum age of
employment, although it is not clear that this is consistent with how we have interpreted other
laws. Schooling is compulsory through primary school, which is 6 years starting at age 7,
implying that schooling is compulsory through age 12 (RTE, DOL, UNESCO). Rwanda signed
C138 in 1981 and C182 in 2000.
        Sao Tome: The minimum age of employment is set at 14 (RTE, DOS). However,
children under 18 may work at most 7 hours per day and 45 hours per week and may not perform
“dangerous” jobs or heavy manual labor (DOS). At the time of the survey, schooling was
compulsory through primary school, which was 6 years starting at age 7, implying that schooling
was compulsory through age 12 (RTE, UNESCO). C138 and C182 were both signed in 2005.
        Senegal: The minimum age of employment for all forms of work is 18 expect for
apprenticeships, which are allowable at age 16 (DOL, DOS). Secular schooling is compulsory
through age 16 after a 2004 law (RTE). Primary school is 6 years starting at age 7, implying that


                                                                                               33
children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 12 and will have
completed primary school at age 13 (UNESCO). Senegal signed C138 in 1999 and C182 in
2000.
        Sierra Leone: The Employers and Employed Act of 1960 is the main regulation
governing child labor at the time of writing and for the period of both MICS surveys (RTE). At
age 12, children may enter into “light” labor in a family endeavor (DOS). At age 15, they may
work away from home so long as it is during the day, above ground, and in a “non-hazardous”
occupation (RTE, DOL). Schooling is compulsory through primary school, which is 6 years
starting at age 6, implying that schooling is compulsory through age 11 (DOS, UNESCO). Sierra
Leone has not signed C138 or C182 at the time of writing. Relevant laws did not change between
MICS2 and MICS3.
        Somalia: Somalia has been without a functioning government since 1991 (DOL). In
1998, schooling was compulsory through age 13 (DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years
starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school
at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Somalia has not signed
C138 or C182.
        Sudan (North and South): The Labor Act of 1997 defines a young person as a person
under age 16 (RTE). Young people are not permitted to work in jobs that are hazardous or
harmful, at night, or for more than 7 consecutive hours. Children under 18 are not allowed to
work outside of apprenticeships, training sessions, and family enterprises. We were unable to
identify any age restrictions regarding light work that conforms to the restrictions above.
Effective in 2000, schooling is compulsory for 8 years beginning at age 6, implying that
schooling is compulsory though age 13 (RTE, DOS, UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years
starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school
at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Sudan signed C138 in
2002 and C182 in 2003.
        Swaziland: The Employment Act of 1980 sets 15 as the minimum age of employment in
non-hazardous industrial work (DOL). Children under 15 may be hired in enterprises that
employ only family members and may not work at night or for more than 6 hours per day.
Children under 18 may not perform “underground, dangerous or unhealthy work” (RTE).
Schooling is not compulsory in Swaziland (RTE, DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 7 years
starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school
at age 12 and will have completed primary school at age 13 (UNESCO). Swaziland signed C138
and C182 in 2002.
        Togo: At the time of MICS2, the minimum age of employment was regulated by a 1958
law that set 14 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL). Even apprenticeships were
prohibited below age 14, and certain industrial and technical jobs were restricted until age 18
(DOL). During the fielding of MICS3, a new labor code raised the minimum employment age in
any enterprise to 15. However, MICS3 fieldwork was largely completed, so we treat the 1958
law as the relevant minimum age of employment regulation (DOL). A 1995 education reform
made schooling compulsory through age 15 (DOS, RTE). Primary school is 6 years starting at
age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11
and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Togo signed C138 in 1984 and
C182 in 2000. Laws regarding the minimum age of employment changed between MICS2 and
MICS3.



                                                                                             34
        Zambia: The Employment of Young Persons and Children Act sets 14 as the minimum
age of employment (RTE, DOL). However, children under 14 are permitted to work in
enterprises where only family members are employed (RTE). Schooling is not compulsory in
Zambia (RTE, DOL). Primary school is 7 years starting at age 7, implying that children with
uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 13 and will have completed primary
school at age 14 (UNESCO). Togo signed C138 in 1976 and C182 in 2001.


        EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
        Albania: The Labor Code sets 16 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
Children ages 14-18 may perform “light work,” as defined by the Council of Ministers, during
school vacations. Children under 18 may work at most 6 hours per day and may not work at
night (DOL). Schooling is compulsory for 8 years starting at age 6, implying that schooling is
compulsory through age 13 (RTE, UNESCO). Primary school is 4 years, implying that children
with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 9 and will have completed primary
school at age 10 (UNESCO). Albania signed C138 in 1998 and C182 in 2001. Relevant laws did
not change between MICS2 and MICS3.
        Azerbaijan: The minimum age of employment is set at 16 (DOS). However, children
ages 14-15 may enter employment if they have the consent of their parents. Children ages 14-16
are limited to working at most 24 hours per week. Schooling is compulsory through age 16
(DOS, UNESCO). Primary school is 4 years starting at age 6, implying that children with
uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 9 and will have completed primary
school at age 10 (UNESCO). Azerbaijan signed C138 in 1992 and C182 in 2004.
        Belarus: The Labor Code sets 16 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOS).
However, children as young as 14 may enter employment if they have the written consent of a
parent or legal guardian. Children under 18 may not work overtime or on weekends and may not
perform work that jeopardizes their health or education (DOS). Schooling is compulsory for 9
years starting at age 6, implying that schooling is compulsory through age 14 (DOS, UNESCO).
Primary school is 4 years, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary
school at age 9 and will have completed primary school at age 10 (UNESCO). Belarus signed
C138 in 1979 and C182 in 2000.
        Bosnia and Herzegovina: The Labor Law sets 15 as the minimum age of employment
(RTE, DOL). Children under 18 may not work in “hazardous” occupations. Schooling is
compulsory through age 14 (DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 4 years starting at age 6,
implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 9 and will
have completed primary school at age 10 (UNESCO). Bosnia and Herzegovina signed C138 in
1993 and C182 in 2001. Relevant laws did not change between MICS2 and MICS3.
        Georgia: The Labor Code of 2006 sets 16 as the minimum age of employment (RTE,
DOL). However, children as young as 14 may enter employment if they have parental consent,
so long as the work does not jeopardize the child’s health or schooling (DOL). Children ages 16-
17 may work at most 36 hours per week, children ages 14-15 may work at most 24 hours per
week, and children under 18 may not work in “heavy, harmful, or dangerous work” (DOL).
Schooling is compulsory for 9 years starting at age 6, implying that schooling is compulsory
through age 14 (UNESCO). Primary school is 4 years, implying that children with uninterrupted
progression will end primary school at age 9 and will have completed primary school at age 10.
Georgia signed C138 in 2000 and C182 in 2002.


                                                                                              35
        Kazakhstan: The Labor Act sets 16 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
However, children may work with parental consent at age 15 if they have completed their
compulsory education. Children at age 14 may perform “light work,” so long as the work does
not jeopardize health or schooling (DOL). Children ages 14-15 may work at most 24 hours per
week, children 16-17 may work at most 36 hours per week, and children under 18 may not work
in “dangerous” conditions, overtime, or at night. Schooling is compulsory for 11 years starting at
age 7, implying that schooling is compulsory through age 17 (UNESCO). Primary school is 4
years, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 10
and will have completed primary school at age 11. Kazakhstan signed C138 in 2001 and C182 in
2003.
        Kyrgyzstan: The minimum age of employment is set at 16 (RTE, DOL). However,
children as young as 14 may enter employment if they have written consent from a parent or
legal representative (RTE). “Light work” is also permitted at age 14 (DOL). Children ages 14-15
may work at most 5 hours per day, children ages 16-17 may work at most 7 hours per day, and
children under 18 are banned from certain industries such as oil and mining. Schooling is
compulsory for 9 years starting at age 7, implying that schooling is compulsory through age 15
(RTE, UNESCO). Primary school is 4 years, implying that children with uninterrupted
progression will end primary school at age 10 and will have completed primary school at age 11
(UNESCO). Kyrgyzstan signed C138 in 1992 and C182 in 2004.
        Macedonia: The Constitution sets 15 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
Children under 18 may not work overtime, at night, or in jobs that are “detrimental to their health
or morality” (DOL). Children under 15 may work as an apprentice or in official vocational
programs. Schooling is compulsory for 8 years beginning at age 7, implying that schooling is
compulsory through age 14 (RTE, DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 4 years, implying that
children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 10 and will have
completed primary school at age 11 (UNESCO). Macedonia signed C138 in 1991 and C182 in
2002.
        Moldova: The Labor Code sets 16 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
However, the Law on Children’s Rights allows children to work in “easy activities” for purposes
of training at age 14 with parental consent, if the work does not interfere with school. Children
under 18 are not allowed to perform hazardous work, such as work underground (DOL).
Schooling is compulsory for 9 years starting at age 7, implying that schooling is compulsory
through age 15 (RTE, DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 4 years, implying that children with
uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 10 and will have completed primary
school at age 11 (UNESCO). Moldova signed C138 in 1999 and C182 in 2000.
        Montenegro: The minimum age of employment is 15 (DOS, DOL). Children under 18
are not allowed to work overtime, at night, underground, or in jobs that “may have a harmful
effect on or involve increased risk for their health and lives” (DOL). At the time of MICS3,
schooling was compulsory for 8 years starting at age 7, implying that schooling was compulsory
through age 14 (DOS, UNESCO). Primary school was 4 years, implying that children with
uninterrupted progression would end primary school at age 10 and would have completed
primary school at age 11 (UNESCO). Montenegro signed C138 in 2006 and C182 in 2006.
        Serbia: The Labor Law sets 15 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
Children under 18 require written consent from a parent or guardian; may not work overtime, at
night, or under conditions that “jeopardize their health, morals and education;” and are limited to
a maximum of 35 hours per week (DOL). Schooling is compulsory for 8 years starting at age 7,


                                                                                                36
implying that schooling is compulsory through age 14 (RTE, UNESCO). Primary school is 4
years, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 10
and will have completed primary school at age 11 (UNESCO). Serbia signed C138 in 2000 and
C182 in 2003.
        Tajikistan: The minimum age of employment is 16 (DOS). However, children as young
as 7 may perform “family assistance,”—domestic and agricultural labor. Children under 18 may
not work more than 6 hours per day and 36 hours per week. Schooling is compulsory through
age 15 (DOS, UNESCO). Primary school is 4 years starting at age 7, implying that children with
uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 10 and will have completed primary
school at age 11 (UNESCO). Tajikistan signed C138 in 1993 and C182 in 2005. Relevant laws
did not change between MICS2 and MICS3.
        Ukraine: The minimum age of employment is set at 16 (RTE, DOL). However, children
with parental consent may work at 15. At age 14, children may perform “light work” for
purposes of training if the work does not jeopardize their health or schooling (RTE). At the time
of MICS2, schooling was compulsory for 11 years starting at age 7, implying that schooling was
compulsory through age 17 (UNESCO). Primary school was 3 years, implying that children with
uninterrupted progression would end primary school at age 9 and would have completed primary
school at age 10. At the time of MICS3, schooling was compulsory for 12 years starting at age 6,
implying that schooling was still compulsory through age 17. Primary school was 4 years,
implying that children with uninterrupted progression would end primary school at age 9 and
would still have completed primary school at age 10. Ukraine signed C138 in 1979 and C182 in
2000.
        Uzbekistan: The Labor Code sets 16 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
However, children at age 14 may perform “light work” in preparation for employment that does
not jeopardize their schooling or health (RTE). Children under 18 have limited work hours and
may not work in “unfavorable labor conditions” (DOL). At the time of MICS2, schooling was
compulsory for 11 years starting at age 7, implying that schooling was compulsory through age
17 (UNESCO). At the time of MICS3, schooling was compulsory for 12 years starting at age 7,
implying that schooling was compulsory through age 18. At the time of both surveys, primary
school was 4 years, implying that children with uninterrupted progression would end primary
school at age 10 and would have completed primary school at age 11. Uzbekistan signed C138 in
2009 and C182 in 2008.


        EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
        Indonesia: The minimum age of employment is set at 15 (RTE, DOL). Children under
18 may not perform “hazardous work.” Schooling is compulsory for 9 years starting at age 7,
implying that schooling is compulsory through age 15 (RTE, UNESCO). Primary school is 6
years, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 12
and will have completed primary school at age 13 (UNESCO). Indonesia signed C138 in 1999
and C182 in 2000.
        Laos: The Labor Code sets 15 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
Children under 18 may not work for more than 6 hours per day or 36 hours per week and may
not work in sectors involving “heavy work or health hazards” (RTE). Children under 15 may
work for their families. Schooling is compulsory through primary school, which is 5 years
starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school


                                                                                               37
at age 10 and will have completed primary school at age 11 (RTE, UNESCO). Burundi signed
C138 and C182 in 2005. Relevant laws did not change between MICS2 and MICS3.
        Mongolia: The Labor Law sets 16 as the minimum age of employment (DOL). However,
children may enter employment at age 14 if they have parental consent. Children ages 14-15 may
work at most 30 hours per week, children 16-17 may work at most 36 hours per week, and
children under 18 may not work overtime or in certain hazardous activities specified by the
government (RTE, DOL). At the time of MICS2, schooling was compulsory for 8 years starting
at age 8, implying that schooling was compulsory through age 15 (DOL, UNESCO). At the time
of MICS3, schooling was compulsory for 9 years starting at age 8, implying that schooling was
compulsory through age 16 (UNESCO). At the time of both surveys, primary school was 4 years,
implying that children with uninterrupted progression would end primary school at age 11 and
would have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Mongolia signed C138 in 2002 and
C182 in 2001. Relevant laws did not change between MICS2 and MICS3.
        Myanmar: The Factories Act of 1951 sets 13 as the minimum age of employment
(RTE). Children under 16 may work at most 4 hours per day and may not work at night or on
Sunday. Children under 18 may not perform work that is harmful to their life, health, or “moral
character.” Schooling is compulsory through primary school, which is 5 years starting at age 5,
implying children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 9 and will have
completed primary school at age 10 (UNESCO). Myanmar has not signed C138 or C182.
        Philippines: The Labor Code of 1993 and Republic Act No. 7658 of 1993 set 15 as the
minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL). However, children under 15 may work for their
parents if it does not jeopardize their health, schooling, or “morals” (RTE). At age 14, children
may enter into apprenticeships (DOL). Children under 18 are prohibited from “hazardous” work.
Schooling is compulsory through primary school, which is 6 years starting at age 6, implying
that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11 and will have
completed primary school at age 12 (RTE, DOL). The Philippines signed C138 in 1998 and
C182 in 2000.
        Thailand: The Labor Protection Act of 1998 sets 15 as the minimum age of employment
(RTE, DOL). However, children under 18 require written permission from the Director-General
of Labor, may only work between 4 p.m. and 10 p.m., and may not be employed in hazardous
work, such as metalworking (DOL). These provisions do not apply to the agricultural or informal
sectors. Schooling is compulsory for 9 years starting at age 6, implying that schooling is
compulsory through age 14 (UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years, implying that children with
uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed primary
school at age 12. Thailand signed C138 in 2004 and C182 in 2001.
        Vanuatu: Under the Labor Code, children under age 14 may only be employed in light
work of agricultural or domestic nature (RTE). At age 15, children may perform industrial work.
Children under 18 are subject to restrictions involving working at night or in the shipping
industry (DOL). Schooling is not compulsory in Vanuatu (RTE). Primary school is 6 years
starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school
at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Vanuatu has not signed
C138 but signed C182 in 2006.
        Vietnam: The Labor Code of 1994 sets 15 as the minimum age of employment (RTE).
Children under 18 may work at most 7 hours per day and 42 hours per week and may not
undertake hazardous work as specified by the Labor Law (DOL). Schooling is compulsory
through the age of 14 (RTE, DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 5 years starting at age 6,


                                                                                              38
implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 10 and will
have completed primary school at age 11 (UNESCO). Vietnam signed C138 in 2003 and C182 in
2000. Relevant laws did not change between MICS2 and MICS3.


        MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
        Djibouti: Article 5 of the Labor Code of 2000 sets 16 as the minimum age for
employment (RTE, DOL). Children ages 16-17 may not work as domestic servants or in hotels
or bars (DOL). Schooling is compulsory for 9 years starting at age 6, implying that schooling is
compulsory through age 14 (RTE, UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years, implying that children
with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed
primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Djibouti signed C138 and C182 in 2005.
        Iraq: The Labor Act of 1987 sets 15 as the minimum age of employment (RTE, DOL).
Children under 18 are subject to laws limiting work hours and type of occupation. Schooling is
compulsory through primary school, which is 6 years beginning at age 6, implying that children
with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed
primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Iraq signed C138 in 1985 and C182 in 2001. Relevant laws
did not change between MICS2 and MICS3.
        Syria: The private sector minimum age of employment is set at 15 for most
nonagricultural labor (DOS). Children under 18 may not work at night, on weekends, or on
“heavy work.” Those who are not technically paid a salary do not fall under the law. Schooling is
compulsory for 9 years beginning at age 6, implying that schooling is compulsory through age 14
(UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years, implying that children with uninterrupted progression
will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12. Syria
signed C138 in 2001 and C182 in 2003.
        Yemen: The minimum age of employment is set at 15 for the private sector and 18 for
the public sector (DOL). Children ages 12-14 may work by special permit. Children under 18
may not work in “hazardous or socially damaging working conditions.” Schooling is compulsory
through age 14 (DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years starting at age 6, implying that
children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11 and will have
completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Yemen signed C138 and C182 in 2000.


        SOUTH ASIA
        Bangladesh: The minimum age of employment varies by sector (RTE, DOL). Children
may work in shops and workshops at age 12; factories at age 14; mines, railways, ports, and tea
gardens at age 15; and brothels at age 16. The law does not apply to informal sectors such as
agriculture and domestic work. Schooling is compulsory through age 10 (RTE, DOL, UNESCO).
Primary school is 5 years starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression
will end primary school at age 10 and will have completed primary school at age 11 (UNESCO).
Bangladesh has not signed C138 and signed C182 in 2001.


       LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN



                                                                                               39
        Belize: The Labor Act sets 14 as the minimum age of employment (RTE). However, at
age 12, children may perform “light work” after school hours (DOL). Schooling is compulsory
through age 14 (RTE, DOL). Primary school is 6 years beginning at age 5, implying that children
with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 10 and will have completed
primary school at age 11 (UNESCO). Belize signed C138 and C182 in 2000.
        Bolivia: The Child and Adolescent Code sets 14 as the minimum age of employment
(RTE, DOL). The General Labor Law specifies that children under 14 may work as apprentices.
At the time of MICS2, schooling was compulsory for 8 years starting at age 6, implying that
schooling was compulsory through age 13 (DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years,
implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11 and will
have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Bolivia signed C138 in 1997 and C182 in
2003.
        Cuba: The minimum age of employment is set at 17 (RTE, DOL). However, children
ages 15-16 may work to obtain training or fill labor shortages (DOL). At 14, children may enter
into apprenticeships (RTE). Teenagers may not work more than 7 hrs per day or 40 hours per
week and are forbidden from certain hazardous occupations (DOL). Schooling is compulsory for
9 years starting at age 6, implying that schooling was compulsory through age 14 (UNESCO).
Primary school is 6 years, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary
school at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12. Cuba signed C138 in 1975
and has not signed C182.
        Dominican Republic: The Labor Code sets 14 as the minimum age of employment
(RTE, DOL). Children under age 16 may not work more than 6 hours per day, may not work at
night, and are restricted from certain types of work (DOL). Schooling is compulsory for 8 years
starting at age 6, implying that schooling is compulsory through age 13 (RTE). Primary school is
6 years, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11
and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). The Dominican Republic signed
C138 in 1999 and C182 in 2000.
        Guyana: The Employment of Young Persons and Children Act of 1999 sets 15 as the
minimum age of employment (DOL). Children under age 18 may not perform work that could
jeopardize their “health, safety or morals.” Schooling is compulsory through age 14 (RTE,
UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years starting at age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted
progression will end primary school at age 11 and will have completed primary school at age 12
(UNESCO). Guyana signed C138 in 1998 and C182 in 2001. Relevant laws did not change
between MICS2 and MICS3.
        Jamaica: The Juveniles Act of 1951 sets 12 as the minimum age of employment (RTE,
DOL). However, children under 12 may work in family domestic, agricultural, or horticultural
work (DOL). Children under 15 may not be employed on a ship or in industrial work (RTE,
DOL). Children under 16 may not be employed in night work or “hazardous” work (RTE).
Schooling is compulsory through age 11 (DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years starting at
age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11
and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Jamaica signed C138 and C182 in
2003. Relevant laws did not change between MICS2 and MICS3.
        Suriname: The Labor Act sets 14 as the minimum age of employment (DOL). At age 12,
children may enter into employment if it is “specifically designed for children, does not require
much physical or mental exertion, and is not dangerous.” We code 12 in the light work category,
although it is not clear that this is consistent with how we have interpreted other laws. Schooling


                                                                                                40
is compulsory through age 11 (RTE, DOL, UNESCO). Primary school is 6 years beginning at
age 6, implying that children with uninterrupted progression will end primary school at age 11
and will have completed primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Suriname has not signed C138
and signed C182 in 2006. Relevant laws did not change between MICS2 and MICS3.
        Trinidad and Tobago: At the time of MICS 2, the minimum age of employment was set
at 12, but children under 14 could not work unless only members of the same family were
employed (RTE, DOL). We code 14 as the minimum age of employment and 12 in the light
work category, although it is not clear that this is consistent with how we have interpreted other
laws. Children under 18 could not work at night, with the exception of children over 16 in sugar
factories. In 2006, the minimum age of employment was set at 16 for private and public
industries (DOL). However, children ages 14-15 could work if only members of the same family
were employed or if the work was approved as vocational or technical training by the Ministry of
Education. At the time of the surveys, schooling was compulsory through age 11 (RTE,
UNESCO). Primary school was 7 years starting at age 5, implying that children with
uninterrupted progression would end primary school at age 11 and would have completed
primary school at age 12 (UNESCO). Trinidad and Tobago signed C138 in 2004 and C182 in
2003.

     Appendix Two: Comparison of One-Sided and Two-Sided Discontinuity Estimates

        For most countries, child labor related data is only collected in our data up to the
minimum age of employment. Hence, in general, we cannot exploit age trends in time allocation
after the age minimum age of employment laws are relaxed. Thus, we rely on the one-sided
design in equation (10) and (11).
        However, there are a few countries where we have information on child labor related
time allocation for several years past the minimum age of employment. Those countries are
Gambia, Equatorial Guinea, Kenya, Lesotho, Mongolia, Nigeria, Philippines, Sudan, Swaziland,
Togo, Trinidad & Tobago, Venezuela, and DR Congo. In this appendix, we contrast the findings
from the one-sided design in the text with a more common two-sided design.
        For the two-sided design, we modify (10) to allow age trends above and below the
minimum age of employment.
        (12)                      (        )
                yic = β 0c + Δ ccut *1 Ai ≥ Acut
                                             c
                                                 (            )     (
                                                 + π c0 Ai ; Ai < Acut
                                                                   c
                                                                                 )
                                                                       + π c1 Ai ; Ai ≥ Acut
                                                                                         c
                                                                                             + ε ic
 (
1 Ai ≥ Acut
        c
           )is an indicator function that is 1 if age i is at or above the age of relaxation of the
                              (
minimum age regulation. π c0 Ai ; Ai < Acut
                                        c
                                           )is a polynomial in age for ages below the minimum
       (            )
age. π c1 Ai ; Ai ≥ Acut
                     c
                         is a polynomial in age for ages at and above the minimum age. With age
defined relative to the minimum age as in (10), is the counterfactual of what yic would be if
minimum age laws were extended an additional year. Δ cut is the change in yic at the minimum
                                                     c


age of employment. The difference between estimated in equation (12) and Dcut computed from
                                                                               c


equation (11) is that in equation (12) is smoothed using the polynomial estimated on ages where
the minimum age regulation is relaxed. As with the one-sided RD design in (11), we estimate
(12) on the age-cell data. We also follow the same AIC approach as the one-sided design to
choose the order of the polynomials used to estimate both sides of the age trends in (12).


                                                                                                      41
        Appendix Table 1 contains the results of estimating equation (12) and equation (10) for
the five countries with light work regulation and paid employment data for ages that allow us to
estimate (12). Column two of the table clarifies whether the two-sided estimate of equation (12)
is used, marked “2”. The one-sided estimates of equation (10) in the appendix table are marked
with a “1” and are reproductions of our findings in Table 5. Differences in estimates of the
impact of permitting light work on paid employment between the two approaches are minor. In
general, most differences are less than half a percentage point and never statistically significant.
Differences between estimation approaches can be larger in other time allocation measures, but
they do not change the flavor our results. In general, the data are not consistent with effects of
light age regulation on time allocation except in Trinidad & Tobago, regardless of the two
empirical approaches used.
        Appendix Table 2 mimics Appendix Table 1, but for estimates of the impact of
permitting non-hazardous work. The results using the one-sided approach of equation (10) are
identical to table 6A and 6B. As we saw with light work, the two different approaches have
negligible effects on our estimates of the impact of allowing non-hazardous work on the
prevalence of paid employment. Where the one-sided approach in the text suggested an impact
on paid employment, the two-sided estimates do not differ more than one tenth of a percentage
point (Nigeria, Swaziland, Trinidad & Tobago). We see larger differences between estimation
approaches in estimates of the impact of allowing non-hazardous work for other outcomes, but
none are statistically significant. None of the differences in estimates alter our conclusion that
there does not appear to be evidence in any country consistent with an impact of relaxing
minimum age regulation on child time allocation.




                                                                                                   42
Figure 1: The Prevalence of Paid Employment for Children 8 – 14 in the Week Before
Survey by Country

   KAZ         0.2
   KGZ         0.2
    AZE         0.3
     DJI         0.5
   MKD            0.5
    SER            0.6
    BIH             0.7
   MNE              0.8
   UZB               0.8
   MNG                0.9
   ALB                0.9
   SOM                      1.3
    TTO                     1.3
    BLR                      1.4
   UKR                        1.5
   SWZ                        1.5
    LSO                       1.5
   GMB                        1.5
   COM                          1.7
    IRQ                         1.7
   LAO                          1.7
   JAM                          1.8
   GEO                           1.8
    STP                          1.8
   VNM                           1.8
   MRT                            1.9
    SJK                           1.9
   YEM                             2.0
    SYR                             2.1
    SEN                             2.1
   RWA                                2.3
    SUR                                 2.6
   MDA                                  2.6
   THA                                   2.7
   KEN                                    2.8
   NGA                                     2.9
   ZAR                                      3.0
   MDG                                       3.1
    CIV                                      3.1
    SLE                                       3.2
   BOL                                         3.3
   GUY                                         3.3
   VEN                                         3.3
   NER                                          3.4
   SDN                                          3.5
   AGO                                           3.5
    BDI                                            3.7
   BGD                                              3.8
    PHL                                              3.9
   GNQ                                                4.0
    SSD                                               4.0
    CAF                                                4.1
   TCD                                                       4.6
   DOM                                                          5.0
    GIN                                                           5.2
   CMR                                                               5.5
   MWI                                                                 5.7
   GHA                                                                       6.4
   TGO                                                                                   11.5

           0        1           2     3      4     5     6    7     8      9   10   11    12
                                 Participation in Paid Employment in Last 7 Days




                                                                                                43
Figure 2: Fraction of Variation in Paid Employment Explained by Age
              6
              4
  Frequency
              2
              0




                  0   .25   .5   .75    1    1.25   1.5   1.75   2     2.25   2.5    2.75    3
                                       R2 of Age*100, Unconditional

Histogram of R2 from regression of paid employment in last 7 days on age separately by country for all
MICS countries with paid employment data listed in table 1. Limited to ages 8-14. Bin width is 0.1 (one
tenth of one percent). Data range from 0.04 to 2.78 with a mean of 0.73. An R2 of 1 in the picture means
that 1 percent of the variation in paid employment can be explained by age.




                                                                                                      44
Figure 3: Fraction of Variation in Paid Employment Explained by Age and Household
Characteristics

       A. Age

                        20
                        15
            Frequency
                        10
                        5
                        0




                                 0            .25         .5        .75           1        1.25         1.5             1.75        2       2.25
                                                                          Partial R2 of Age (*100)



       B. Household Attributes
                        8
                        6
            Frequency
                        4
                        2
                        0




                             0       5   10     15   20   25   30   35      40   45   50   55     60   65     70   75     80   85   90   95 100
                                                           Partial R2 of Household Characteristics (*100)

Histograms of percent of variation in paid employment for children 8-14 explained by age (panel
A) and household fixed effects (panel B) in a regression of paid employment on age effects,
gender, and household fixed effects. Bin width is 0.1 (one tenth of one percent) in panel A and
2.5 in panel B. A partial R2 of 1 is one percent.




                                                                                                                                                   45
Figure 4: Change in Paid Employment with Relaxation of Light Work Restrictions




                                                                             46
Figure 5: Change in Paid Employment and Household Based Employment at Minimum
Age for Light Work by Country

         TTO3
         SLE3
          MRT
          KEN
         CAF2
          KGZ
         MDA
         UZB3
         ALB3
         ALB2
          KAZ
         GNQ
         UZB2
         BDI3
          LSO
          SUR
         CAF3
          UKR
         BDI2
          ZAR
         SLE2
         GHA
         TTO2
          TCD
                  -25 -22.5 -20 -17.5 -15 -12.5 -10 -7.5 -5 -2.5       0   2.5    5   7.5 10
                    Change in Paid Employment (or Hh Based Activity)
Change in paid employment at age light work is allowed (diamonds with 95 percent confidence
intervals pictures) and change in household based activity at age light work is allowed (circles /
filled = reject null of no change with 95 percent confidence).




                                                                                                 47
Figure 6: Change in Paid Employment with Relaxation of Minimum Age for Non-
Hazardous Work Restrictions




                                                                              48
Figure 7: Change in Paid Employment and Household Based Activity at Minimum Age of
Employment by Country

          TTO3
           BOL
          NGA
           KEN
          GIN2
         VNM2
          DOM
           LSO
           BGD
           SUR
          CAF2
           MRT
         MNG3
           AZE
           KGZ
          CAF3
           PHL
           JAM
         CMR3
          MWI
         MNG2
          CIV2
           BLR
          AGO
           ZAR
          TTO2
          GNQ
         CMR2
           GEO
         TGO2
           TCD
            STP
          GIN3
           SWZ
           VEN
           NER
         TGO3

                   -15 -12.5 -10 -7.5 -5 -2.5 0 2.5 5 7.5 10 12.5
                  Change in Paid Employment (or Hh Based Activity)
Change in paid employment at minimum age of employment (diamonds with 95 percent
confidence intervals pictures) and change in household based activity at minimum age of
employment (circles / filled = reject null of no change at 95 percent).

                                                                                          49
Figure 8: Relationship between Changes in Household Based Work and Paid Employment




                                     15
         Change in Paid Employment
                                     10
                                     5




                                                                                   TTO3
                                                               BOL
                                                       NGA
                                          DOM          KEN GIN2
                                                             VNM2
                                                 LSO           BGD
                                                     MRT CAF2MNG3            SUR
                                           AZE    CAF3
                                                   JAM    PHL   KGZ
                                                     MWI    CIV2 CMR3
                                     0




                                             BLR       AGO CMR2      MNG2            ZAR
                                              GEO
                                              STP     GNQTCD TTO2
                                                              TGO2
                                                   NER    SWZ VEN GIN3
                                     -5




                                          -5          0          5          10            15
                                                  Change in HH Based Activity



Figure plots estimated change (from trend) in household based work participation at the
minimum age of employment for non-hazardous work against the estimated change in paid
employment participation at the same age. “Household Based Work” combines work in the
family farm or business with work in unpaid household services. Fitted regression line also
pictured. One outlier in change in paid employment omitted. All countries.




                                                                                               50
Figure 9: Change in Paid Employment with Relaxation of Min. Age for Non-Hazardous
Work Restrictions by Association with Compulsory Schooling Regulation
A. Regulation Relaxes when Schooling is Not Compulsory




B. Regulation Relaxes at Same Time as Compulsory Schooling




                                                                                    51
Table 1: Minimum Age of Employment & Compulsory Schooling Laws by Country
                                                Min Age for       Age at which
                                              Employment in:     schooling is no
                                  Country   MICS    Non-Haz   Light     longer
   Country                        Code      Round    Work     Work    compulsory
Africa
   Angola                         AGO        2        14      NA         14*
   Burundi                        BDI       2&3       16      12         13*
   Cameroon                       CMR       2&3       14      NA          15
   Central African Republic       CAF       2&3       14      12          16
   Chad                           TCD        2        14      12         12*
   Comoros                        COM        2        15      NA          14
   Cote d'Ivoire                  CIV       2&3       14      NA         NA
   Democratic Republic of Congo   ZAR        2        16      14         14*
   Djibouti                       DJI        3        16      NA         15*
   Equatorial Guinea              GNQ        2        14      12          14
   Gambia                         GMB2       2        18      NA          13
   Gambia                         GMB3       3        18      16          13
   Ghana                          GHA        3        15      13         15*
   Guinea Bissau                  GIN       2&3       14      NA          13
   Kenya                          KEN        2        16      13         14*
   Lesotho                        LSO        2        15      13         NA
   Madagascar                     MDG        2        15      NA          15
   Malawi                         MWI        3        14      NA         NA
   Mauritania                     MRT        3        14      12         15*
   Niger                          NER        2        14      NA         13*
   Nigeria                        NGA        3        15      NA         15*
   Rwanda                         RWA        2        18      NA         13*
   Sao Tome and Principe          STP        2        14      NA         13*
   Senegal                        SEN        2        16      NA          17
   Sierra Leone                   SLE       2&3       15      12         12*
   Somalia                        SOM        3        NA      NA          14
   Sudan (North)                  SDN        2        18      NA         14*
   Sudan (South)                  SSD        2        18      NA         14*
   Swaziland                      SWZ        2        15      NA         NA
   Togo                           TGO        2        14      NA          16
Europe and Central Asia
   Albania                        ALB       2&3       16      14         14*
   Azerbaijan                     AZE        2        14      NA          17
   Belarus                        BLR        3        14      NA         15*
   Bosnia and Herzegovina         BIH       2&3       15      NA          15
   Georgia                        GEO        3        14      NA         15*
   Kazakhstan                     KAZ        3        15      14         18*
   Kyrgyzstan                     KGZ        3        14      14         16*
   Macedonia                      MKD        3        15      NA         15*
   Moldova                        MDA        2        16      14         16*
   Montenegro                     MNE        3        15      NA         15*
   Serbia                         SER        3        15      NA         15*
Table 1: Minimum Age of Employment & Compulsory Schooling Laws by Country
                                                Min Age for       Age at which
                                              Employment in:     schooling is no
                                       Country     MICS      Non-Haz       Light          longer
  Country                              Code        Round      Work         Work         compulsory
  Tajikistan                           SJK         2&3         16            7              16
  Ukraine                              UKR           3         15           14             18*
  Uzbekistan                           UZB2          2         16           14             18*
  Uzbekistan                           UZB3          3         16           14             19*
East Asia and the Pacific
  Laos                                 LAO         2&3           15         NA               11*
  Mongolia                             MNG2         2            14         NA               16*
  Mongolia                             MNG3         3            14         NA               17*
  Philippines                          PHL          2            15         NA               12*
  Thailand                             THA          3            15         NA               15*
  Vietnam                              VNM         2&3           15         NA                15
Middle East and North Africa
  Iraq                                 IRQ         2&3           15         NA               12*
  Syria                                SYR          3            15         NA               15*
  Yemen                                YEM          3            15         NA                15
South Asia
  Bangladesh                           BGD            3          12         NA               11
Latin America & the Carribean
  Bolivia                              BOL          2            14         NA               14*
  Dominican Republic                   DOM          2            14         NA               14*
  Guyana                               GUY         2&3           15         NA                15
  Jamaica                              JAM         2&3           12         NA                12
  Suriname                             SUR         2&3           14         12                12
  Trinidad and Tobago                  TTO2         2            14         12                12
  Trinidad and Tobago                  TTO3         3            16         14                12
  Venezuela                            VEN          2            14         NA                17
NA = No applicable law. The non-hazardous column is the minimum age of employment in the
country, defined as the youngest age at which it is legal to pay a child to work full time outside the
home (during the day, limited hours). The light work age is the youngest age at which a child may
work for limited hours, during the day in traditional or family activities. Age at which child has
completed compulsory schooling is the age at which the child is no longer required to go to school.
When compulsory schooling is stipulated by grade, we impute the age based on the scheduled
progression through grades. *=restriction is based on grade completion (ages are imputed based on
scheduled school progression). See Appendix 1 for country level detail. In general, information on
minimum age of employment comes from USDOL Trade and Development Act reports. Age at the end
of compulsory schooling information is from the Right to Education project. Note: All ages are when
restrictions are no longer in place. Thus, if schooling is compulsory through age 12, age 13 is when the
child has completed compulsory schooling. That is, if schooling is compulsory through age 12, the
column will read age 13, the age at which schooling is no longer compulsory.
Table 2: Participation in the Last 7 Days in Various Activities
Restricted to Ages 8-14
                                                   Survey Round                          Region
                                                                                Sub-Saharan
                                     Full Sample      MICS2         MICS3         Africa    Rest of World

Population in Millions                   156            72             84             72              85

Paid Employment                          2.95          3.08           2.85           3.60            2.42

Unpaid Economic Activity                26.23          26.78         25.76          37.20           17.05

Economically Active                     27.98          28.61         27.45          38.82           18.91

Unpaid Househld Services                74.91          76.78         73.35          78.60           71.84

Househld Based Activity                 78.38          80.23         76.84          82.06           75.31

Any Type of Work                        79.54          80.81         78.48          83.46           76.27

Attends School in Last Year             81.49          80.83         82.05          71.66           89.69

No School nor Any Type of Work            3.58            3.16            3.93         5.44           2.05
Author's calculations from publically available MICS 2 & 3 data. See Table 1 for list of countries. Data
weighted to be nationally representative and to reflect size of country's population.
Table 2A: Participation in the Last 7 Days in Various Activities by Country, Africa
Restricted to Ages 8-14

                                                                                                                                 No School Max Age Max Age
                               Sample Size   Pop. in 000s             Unpaid               Unpaid Househld            Attends     nor Any    for        for
                         MICS      (for          (for        Paid      Econ.     Econ.    Househld  Based   Any Type School in    Type of Activities Schooling
Country                  Round activities)    activities)   Employ.   Activity   Active   Services Activity of Work Last Year      Work     Data       Data
Angola                     2      5,879       2,113,540       3.5      29.9       31.9      87.6     88.4     88.8     78.6         3.4      14         17
Burundi                    2      4,434       1,021,441       3.4      38.6       40.2      91.8     94.1     94.7     87.8         0.7      14         17
Burundi                    3      8,571       1,073,840       3.9       9.1       12.4      92.9     93.3     93.8     74.7         1.7      14         17
Cameroon                   2      4,548       2,352,511       6.7      62.7       65.4      86.7     90.9     91.6     82.7         1.3      14         17
Cameroon                   3      8,084       2,479,599       4.3      37.8       40.3      91.1     93.0     93.5     84.8         1.4      14         17
Central African Republic   2     20,837        532,845        4.3      68.7       70.1      91.1     93.7     94.8     53.3         1.9      14         17
Central African Republic   3      9,160        553,614        3.9      58.4       59.3      85.3    89.1      90.9     65.4         3.2      14         17
Chad                       2      5,771       1,208,280       4.6      73.1       73.6      87.8    93.9      94.3     59.5         1.8      14         17
Comoros                    2      4,742         75,075        1.7      42.5       43.2      68.1    74.7      74.4     59.6        10.4      14         17
Cote d'Ivoire              2     10,965       2,396,356       2.7      42.2       43.1      77.3    85.6      85.7     66.4         3.2      14         17
Cote d'Ivoire              3     10,543       2,493,458       3.6      46.7       47.9      62.7    72.8      73.7     64.2         6.3      14         17
DR Congo                   2     10,704       7,616,897       3.0      26.9       28.5      74.8    77.0      77.8     65.7         8.4      17         17
Djibouti                   3      4,754        109,892        0.5      13.3       13.6      32.5    34.5      40.5     81.3        11.2      14         17
Equatorial Guinea          2      3,943         76,294       4.0       37.9       40.2      91.6    92.9      92.8     92.9         0.8      17         17
Gambia                     2      5,683        198,637       1.9       24.0       25.6      49.0    56.2      57.7     68.4        12.9      17         17
Gambia                     3      9,003        222,774       1.2       46.4       46.7      74.9    78.0      78.4     74.4         5.0      14         17
Ghana                      3      5,052       2,941,884      6.4       48.5       51.5      86.3    88.9      89.6     86.2         1.3      14         17
Guinea Bissau              2      6,305        172,365       6.4       68.8       69.4      82.1    91.9      92.0     47.9         4.1      14         17
Guinea Bissau              3      7,549        192,889       4.0       50.1       52.1      83.1    89.2      89.8     69.9         3.2      14         17
Kenya                      2      7,892       4,980,410      2.8        1.2        3.6      74.2    74.5      75.1     91.4         2.4      17         17
Lesotho                    2      6,077        303,250       1.5       23.0       23.9      78.5    80.6      81.4     89.2         2.8      17         17
Madagascar                 2      5,506       2,245,225      3.1       27.9       29.6      84.4    90.3      90.8     68.0         3.0      14         17
Malawi                     3     27,140       2,037,906      5.7       40.8       43.6      88.6    90.3      90.8     89.5         2.0      14         17
Mauritania                 3     11,307        413,410       1.9       21.6       22.9      56.8    60.8      61.8     77.4         6.9      14         17
Niger                      2      4,765       1,619,285      3.4       73.8       75.1      92.2    96.6      97.1     43.2         1.0      14         17
Nigeria                    3     25,042      19,600,000      2.9       41.5       42.4      76.5    79.7      83.1     67.5         8.8      17         17
Rwanda                     2      4,161       1,232,019      2.3       35.2       36.3      91.6    92.9      94.1     76.0         1.7      15         17
Sao Tome and Principe      2     2,741         20,886        1.8       17.2       18.3      89.2    90.2      90.6     86.4         1.3      14         17
Senegal                    2     11,627       1,446,208      2.1       36.2       37.8      89.5     94.0     94.5     55.7         2.0      14         17
Sierra Leone               2      4,169        538,618        1.8      77.5       77.9      91.2     94.4     94.7     49.4         3.3      14         17
Sierra Leone               3      7,991        709,831        4.1      63.1       63.8      89.4     94.4     95.1     75.2         1.4      14         17
Somalia                    3      6,434       1,165,278       1.3      44.6       44.9      74.2     82.3     82.5     58.3         5.9      14         17
Sudan, Northern            2     28,069       4,535,440       3.5      19.4       21.0      60.9     65.3     65.9     70.2         9.1      17         17
Sudan, Southern            2      1,020       1,247,529       4.0      15.1       17.1      43.9     49.3     50.1     81.0         7.9      17         17
Swaziland                  2      4,803        178,812        1.5      10.4       11.7      90.7     91.5     88.9     88.4         1.5      17         17
Togo                       2      5,203        736,168       16.6      71.7       77.5      92.5    95.8      96.4     74.0         1.1      17         17
Togo                       3      6,683        784,670        6.7      41.3       45.1      85.7    89.4      90.4     80.3         2.3      14         17
Table 2B: Participation in the Last 7 Days in Various Activities by Country, Non-Africa
Restricted to Ages 8-14

                                                                                                                                 No School Max Age Max Age
                               Sample Size   Pop. in 000s             Unpaid               Unpaid Househld            Attends     nor Any    for        for
                         MICS      (for          (for        Paid      Econ.     Econ.    Househld  Based   Any Type School in    Type of Activities Schooling
Country                  Round activities)    activities)   Employ.   Activity   Active   Services Activity of Work Last Year      Work     Data       Data
Albania                    2      3,018        336,538        1.2      38.8       39.3      68.3     75.5     76.2     54.3         11.8     14         17
Albania                    3      2,726        307,224        0.6      23.2       23.5      54.3     60.9     61.4     96.8         0.9      14         18
Azerbaijan                 2      4,398        967,220        0.3      10.0       10.2      70.4     71.7     72.3     96.6         1.5      14         17
Bangladesh                 3     49,692      15,800,000       3.8      14.8       18.0      67.9     73.7     76.3     81.8         2.7      14         18
Belarus                    3      1,684        512,552        1.4      11.5       12.6      80.2     81.3     81.6     99.7         0.3      14         18
Bolivia                    2      3,476       1,093,181       3.3      26.4       29.0      87.5     90.1     91.0     95.5         0.0      14         17
Bosnia and Herzegovina     2      3,782        262,062        1.0      20.8       21.2      66.4    69.8      70.1     98.8         0.7      14         18
Bosnia and Herzegovina     3      1,806        228,314        0.3      10.6       10.7      68.8    69.4      69.7     99.2         0.5      13         18
Dominican Republic         2      2,909       1,004,082       5.0       9.3       13.8      69.1    71.5      74.1     96.1         0.9      14         17
Georgia                    3      4,347        293,456        1.8      31.8       33.2      75.9    77.7      80.1     98.8         0.5      14         18
Guyana                     2      3,207         86,386        2.6      29.5       31.4      81.6    82.9      83.8     96.4         0.3      14         17
Guyana                     3      4,121         98,018        3.9      22.7       25.8      78.5    79.7      80.0     96.0         1.0      14         18
Iraq                       2     19,380       3,251,205       1.8      13.6       14.8      46.9    53.9      55.0     74.2         6.4      14         17
Iraq                       3     21,089       3,624,990      1.6       14.6       15.7      52.6    54.8      56.1     79.4         6.2      14         18
Jamaica                    3      2,453        307,354       1.8        8.7       10.4      85.0    85.7      85.9     99.2         0.1      14         18
Kazakhstan                 3      6,947       1,257,362      0.2        3.7        3.9      92.1    92.8      92.9     99.4         0.3      14         18
Kyrgyzstan                 3      3,776        549,445       0.2        5.3        5.5      76.8    77.1      77.6     97.7         0.6      14         18
Lao PDR                    2      7,636        760,832       1.9       39.9       40.7      83.6    85.2      85.6     76.5         4.2      14         17
Lao PDR                    3      6,705        801,700       1.5       19.0       20.1      74.5    75.5      75.8     80.5         5.5      14         18
Macedonia                  3      2,184        141,599       0.5       11.3       11.8      55.5    56.2      56.7     95.0         2.2      14         18
Moldova                    2      4,048        372,421       2.6       34.1       35.1      91.9    92.4      93.7     97.9         0.6      15         17
Mongolia                   2      4,636        318,715       1.0       22.0       22.6      95.2    95.5      95.9     86.4         0.9      17         18
Mongolia                   3      4,177        257,138       0.6       12.3       12.8      89.0    89.5      89.7     96.4         0.7      17         18
Montenegro                 3      1,011         41,595       0.8       15.3       15.6      62.0    62.2      62.4     97.9         0.9      14         18
Philippines                2      6,028       9,720,255      3.9       16.6       19.6      88.5    89.4      89.5     92.0         0.5      17         17
Serbia                     3      2,977        612,002       0.6        6.9        7.3      64.7    65.5      65.3     99.2         0.3      14         18
Suriname                   3      3,047         48,033       2.6        7.8        9.7      71.1    71.8      72.2     95.8         1.1      14         18
Syria                      3     20,463       2,410,695      2.1        5.6        7.2      42.1    43.3      44.4     90.4         3.7      14         18
Tajikistan                 2     5,055         899,610       1.3       15.3       16.3      86.4     88.8     89.1     94.0         1.1      14         17
Tajikistan                 3      7,239        854,172        2.6       7.4        9.8      81.1     81.8     82.5     95.6         1.2      14         18
Thailand                   3     17,315       5,218,705       2.7      13.9       16.1      83.5     84.4     84.8     98.2         0.4      14         18
Trinidad and Tobago        2      2,163        124,307        1.5       3.0        4.2      63.1     64.0     63.5     98.2         0.4      14         17
Trinidad and Tobago        3      2,007         97,494        1.1       2.1        3.2      67.0     67.3     67.5     98.8         0.6      17         18
Ukraine                    3      1,482       2,198,831       1.5      17.7       18.3      86.1     87.3     87.9     99.7         0.1      14         18
Uzbekistan                 2      5,426       3,311,001       1.3      18.2       19.4      90.7    92.7      92.7     96.0         0.5      15         17
Uzbekistan                 3      8,193       3,069,926       0.2       5.2        5.4      79.7    80.6      80.7     99.7         0.0      14         18
Venezuela                  2      3,083       2,828,678       3.3       6.9       10.1      70.7    71.6      73.2     95.0         1.6      17         17
Vietnam                    2      6,504       9,547,768       1.9      31.1       32.1      64.4    71.6      72.0     90.9         1.7      15         17
Vietnam                    3      5,465       7,998,166       1.8      21.7       23.1      66.8    71.0      71.8     94.2         1.3      14         18
Yemen                      3      5,173       2,991,682       2.0      18.6       19.8      62.8    68.7      69.1     75.8         6.4      14         18
Table 3: Analysis of Variance in Key Outcomes
Children 8-14, Pooled Results
Dependent       Explanatory
Variable        Variable       All Countries       Africa    Non-Africa
Paid Employment
                Age                  0.71           0.48        1.09
                Gender               0.09           0.06       0.14
                Household           63.29          67.14       57.70
                Model               64.22          67.77       59.17
Attends School
                Age                  0.56           0.16        2.28
                Gender               0.18           0.33       0.05
                Household           70.36          72.77       61.06
                Model               71.30          73.68       63.68
Idle (No School nor Any Type of Work)
                Age                  0.54           0.85        0.27
                Gender               0.04           0.07       0.02
                Household           62.16          66.48       51.20
                Model               63.00          67.85       51.53
For each dependent variable, we regress the dependent variable on
dummies for age, gender, and household. Each cell is the fraction of
the total sum of squares in the dependent variable that can be
explained by the row variable in the model (the partial sum of squares
divided by the total sum of squares). The model row contains the
explained sum of squares as a fraction of the total sum of squares.
Pooled results are estimated by combining all survey data and
weighting by the inverse sampling probability for each individual.
Africa restricts the sample to countries listed in Table 2A. Non-Africa
restricts sample to countries listed in Table 2B.
Table 3A: Analysis of Variance in Paid Employment, Schooling, and Idle Status for Children 8-14, Africa
                                     Model 1: Paid Employment           Model 2: Attends School                 Model 3: Idle
                         MICS                        Hh                                Hh                                Hh
Country                  Round    Age    Gender Effects Model       Age     Gender Effects Model        Age    Gender Effects   Model
Angola                     2       0.73    0.04     69.29  70.03    0.43     0.13     71.69   72.39     0.74    0.04   51.06    51.94
Burundi                    2       0.99    0.01     62.66  63.91    2.08     0.14     64.14   68.17     0.49    0.02   59.61    60.28
Burundi                    3       1.13    0.00     65.86  67.33    1.60     0.17     58.04   59.90     0.26    0.02   54.58    54.81
Cameroon                   2       0.33    0.34     69.03  70.11    0.45     0.61     69.37   70.57     0.23    0.02   43.05    43.49
Cameroon                   3       0.39    0.11     74.69  75.61    0.41     0.65     68.60   69.99     0.95    0.03   46.19    47.45
Central African Republic   2       0.31    0.10     71.38  71.92    0.37     1.19     67.66   69.76     0.46    0.05   46.59    47.12
Central African Republic   3       0.24    0.04     79.18  79.51    0.35     1.36     66.31   68.48     0.11    0.03   64.70    65.49
Chad                       2       1.06    0.14     65.96  67.37    0.48     2.25     62.17   67.31     0.48    0.08   52.61    53.35
Comoros                    2       0.21    0.36      4.18   4.75    0.83     0.09      4.43    5.34     1.60    0.49    3.66     5.86
Cote d'Ivoire              2       0.26    0.13      4.10   4.45    0.64     2.19      4.72    7.73     0.40    0.01    4.89     5.36
Cote d'Ivoire              3       0.81    0.03     59.26  60.33    0.75     1.23     61.22   63.85     0.26    0.03   53.84    54.53
DR Congo                   2       1.04    0.06     58.63  60.05    1.08     0.92     68.98   71.24     9.08    1.75   41.22    55.34
Djibouti                   3       0.25    0.17     52.17  52.60    0.42     0.25     67.35   68.51     0.10    0.00   63.47    63.80
Equatorial Guinea          2       0.63    0.64     61.01  62.12    0.74     0.02     56.21   57.25     0.45    0.11   48.41    49.02
Gambia                     2       0.08    0.07     38.08  38.25    0.56     0.60     63.46   65.53     0.37    0.14   48.06    48.74
Gambia                     3       0.21    0.06     60.75  61.17    0.25     0.05     61.76   62.57     1.43    0.18   46.99    49.14
Ghana                      3       0.29    0.00     82.43  83.07    0.19     0.01     72.49   72.82     0.77    0.00   45.92    47.15
Guinea Bissau              2       0.48    0.01     58.03  58.39    0.98     0.77     60.45   63.24     0.67    0.14   42.09    43.21
Guinea Bissau              3       0.28    0.02     82.02  82.62    1.10     0.04     64.26   66.52     0.65    0.01   54.11    54.99
Kenya                      2       0.85    0.08     61.38  62.37    0.17     0.03     69.03   69.22     0.30    0.09   60.10    60.54
Lesotho                    2       0.44    0.68     56.73  57.67    0.44     1.44     57.38   59.29     0.37    0.44   51.95    52.69
Madagascar                 2       1.62    0.08     61.09  63.11    1.49     0.02     72.93   75.42     1.38    0.41   49.62    51.44
Malawi                     3       0.68    0.00     71.60  72.26    0.34     -0.02    62.76   63.23     1.02    0.07   50.71    52.00
Mauritania                 3       0.57    0.04     54.15  54.95    0.67     0.03     66.51   67.48     0.93    0.08   55.80    57.06
Niger                      2       0.22    0.04     70.92  71.46    0.41     1.52     68.48   71.97     0.41    0.05   47.79    48.24
Nigeria                    3       0.31    0.14     73.02  73.63    0.04     0.10     86.81   87.66     0.28    0.00   83.68    84.29
Rwanda                     2       1.27    0.00     62.01  63.26    2.94     0.06     56.02   59.44     0.77    0.00   45.24    45.98
Sao Tome and Principe      2       0.77    0.15     61.86  63.10    3.52      0.11    59.89   65.37     0.47    0.06   54.44    55.19
Senegal                    2       0.38    0.01     54.80  55.28    1.11     0.56     63.83   66.50     0.22    0.05   45.57    45.94
Sierra Leone               2       0.16    0.01     68.99  69.92    0.13     0.36     74.69   75.21     0.28    0.00   67.58    68.46
Sierra Leone               3       0.02    0.01     93.96  94.03    0.61      0.11    64.75   66.14     0.24    0.02   59.29    59.81
Somalia                    3       0.45    0.00     54.02  54.90    0.37     1.78     70.64   74.17     1.69    0.00   57.34    59.20
Sudan, Northern            2       1.10    0.28     61.66  63.36    0.34     0.08     80.46   81.91     1.52    0.05   66.55    69.18
Sudan, Southern            2       0.67    0.10     63.94  66.13    0.67     0.28     74.54   75.73     1.28    0.01   59.78    61.95
Table 3A: Analysis of Variance in Paid Employment, Schooling, and Idle Status for Children 8-14, Africa
                                       Model 1: Paid Employment                 Model 2: Attends School                    Model 3: Idle
                           MICS                           Hh                                   Hh                                     Hh
Country                    Round     Age     Gender Effects Model           Age    Gender Effects Model           Age     Gender Effects Model
Swaziland                    2       0.37      0.02     51.37     51.75     0.35    0.10      61.17    61.58      0.35      0.03    52.78     53.17
Togo                         2       0.77      0.01     77.08     78.18     0.48    1.37      59.45    61.91      0.83      0.00    45.96     46.77
Togo                         3       0.26      0.04     76.64     77.69     0.55    0.75      63.37    65.36      0.46      0.04    55.39     55.98
Each model is a regression of the dependent variable (listed as "model") on dummies for age, gender, and household. Each cell is the fraction of the
total sum of squares in the dependent variable that can be explained by the column variables in the model (the partial sum of squares divided by the
total sum of squares). The model column contains the explained sum of squares as a fraction of the total sum of squares.
Table 3B: Analysis of Variance in Paid Employment, Schooling, and Idle Status for Children 8-14, Non-Africa
                                      Model 1: Paid Employment            Model 2: Attends School                Model 3: Idle
                          MICS                        Hh                                Hh                                Hh
Country                  Round     Age    Gender Effects Model       Age     Gender Effects Model        Age    Gender Effects   Model
Albania                     2       0.23    0.01     78.61  78.87     0.03     0.00    97.05     97.34   1.82    0.12   72.68    76.47
Albania                     3       1.38    0.63     48.45  49.50     9.71     0.07    41.44     55.28   1.39    0.00   41.01    42.51
Azerbaijan                  2       0.03    0.00     79.38  79.51     0.59     0.12    61.95     62.73   0.50    0.00   51.82    52.52
Bangladesh                  3       1.91    0.61     54.16  57.28     6.17     0.50    54.39     62.35   0.19    0.54   48.58    49.65
Belarus                     3       1.07    0.27     79.54  80.55
Bosnia and Herzegovina      2       0.15    0.15     74.67  75.34     0.63     0.02    62.04     63.08   0.52    0.02   57.87    58.69
Bosnia and Herzegovina      3       0.25    0.01     61.18  61.33     0.19     0.52    59.84     60.36   0.17    0.60   52.16    52.88
Dominican Republic          2       0.80    0.60     49.50  52.01     0.22     0.00    62.55     62.97   0.84    0.19   42.65    43.51
Georgia                     3       0.08    0.03     84.86  85.18     0.22     0.01    67.39     68.14   0.09    0.01   64.05    64.49
Guyana                      2       0.88    0.34     67.06  67.59     1.78     0.02    44.25     45.94   0.23    0.00   44.67    45.29
Guyana                      3       0.17    0.12     77.85  78.45     1.83     0.06    59.48     62.00   0.09    0.05   59.83    60.21
Iraq                        2       1.34    0.96     45.28  48.39     4.25     2.62    56.50     65.88   0.58    0.05   51.55    52.25
Iraq                        3       0.65    0.52     53.45  55.37     5.03     2.53    54.30     65.21   0.20    0.23   51.87    52.64
Jamaica                     3       0.27    0.24     73.03  74.09     0.91     0.01    43.52     44.78   0.56    0.05   39.79    40.11
Kazakhstan                  3       0.14    0.06     59.14  59.37     0.11     0.06    49.29     49.44   0.25    0.01   48.98    49.18
Kyrgyzstan                  3       0.14    0.02     69.64  69.75     0.91     0.22    75.53     76.43   0.74    0.00   40.50    41.28
Lao PDR                     2       0.53    0.00     68.69  69.13     1.37     0.87    62.83     65.65   3.23    0.00   48.23    52.52
Lao PDR                     3       0.84    0.03     58.63  59.67     2.57     0.80    57.85     62.56   3.10    0.01   48.13    51.56
Macedonia                   3       0.03    0.01     81.69  81.85     1.30     0.15    73.50     74.47   0.20    0.01   70.72    71.97
Moldova                     2       0.29    0.08     77.54  78.24     0.49     0.28    60.75     61.90   0.50    0.00   56.31    56.92
Mongolia                    2       0.09    0.00     84.75  85.11     5.66     0.64    50.68     60.02   0.80    0.08   40.59    41.31
Mongolia                    3       0.08    0.08     65.45  65.72     0.23     0.23    54.90     55.64   0.57    0.05   44.16    44.46
Montenegro                  3                                         0.23     0.02    80.19     80.59   0.11    0.01   84.60    85.20
Philippines                 2       1.36    0.10     63.28  64.77     1.85     0.09    60.07     62.57   0.54    0.01   44.37    44.99
Serbia                      3       0.26    0.02     73.55  73.81     0.08     0.01    74.18     74.38   0.02    0.03   61.16    61.26
Suriname                    3       0.36    0.22     79.28  80.24     0.17     0.04    70.63     71.15   0.22    0.03   59.22    59.53
Syria                       3       2.16    0.52     47.30  51.01     8.09     0.05    44.39     55.71   1.50    0.01   43.94    46.14
Tajikistan                  2       0.29    0.00     69.14  69.62     0.70     0.22    62.66     63.95   0.64    0.08   40.60    41.57
Tajikistan                  3       0.76    0.00     67.94  68.89     1.48     0.58    52.57     55.30   0.90    0.04   43.59    44.69
Table 3B: Analysis of Variance in Paid Employment, Schooling, and Idle Status for Children 8-14, Non-Africa
                                        Model 1: Paid Employment                 Model 2: Attends School                    Model 3: Idle
                            MICS                           Hh                                    Hh                                    Hh
Country                     Round     Age     Gender Effects Model           Age    Gender Effects Model           Age     Gender Effects Model
Thailand                       3      0.85      0.00      65.48    66.54     1.75    0.02      59.48     61.64     0.22      0.01     50.06    50.27
Trinidad and Tobago            2      0.28      0.20      57.85    59.14     2.25    0.00      35.92     39.00     0.63      0.15     42.51    43.61
Trinidad and Tobago            3      1.01      0.01      65.99    68.27     0.49    0.08      57.01     58.02     0.27      0.03     44.74    45.23
Ukraine                        3      1.07      0.21      44.57    45.68
Uzbekistan                     2      0.25      0.04      78.07    78.33     0.16    0.00      80.81     81.14     0.42      0.01     38.77    39.09
Uzbekistan                     3      0.04      0.05      65.32    65.39     0.11    0.00      51.45     51.74     0.03      0.00     69.27    69.39
Venezuela                      2      1.24      0.24      54.11    57.78     0.38    0.70      63.46     64.19     0.90      0.34     57.46    58.13
Vietnam                        2      2.02      0.00      47.88    50.25     3.57    0.15      57.23     62.32     0.52      0.00     50.71    51.33
Vietnam                        3      1.36      0.11      57.05    59.44     3.29    0.05      52.39     55.93     0.13      0.03     51.89    52.19
Yemen                          3      1.00      0.29      57.60    59.21     1.61    2.03      60.80     66.19     2.53      0.00     48.93    51.54
Each model is a regression of the dependent variable (listed as "model") on dummies for age, gender, and household. Each cell is the fraction of the
total sum of squares in the dependent variable that can be explained by the column variables in the model (the partial sum of squares divided by the
total sum of squares). The model column contains the explained sum of squares as a fraction of the total sum of squares.
Table 4: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Regulation, Pooled Findings


                                                         Unpaid                     Unpaid      Hh. Based
                                  Paid Employment       Economic      Economic        Hh.         EA &         Any        Attend
Region
    Regulation                     Base Change           Activity      Activity     Services     Services      Work       School         Idle
All Countries
    Light Work                     0.037     -0.001       0.069          0.070        -0.060      -0.053       -0.052      -0.051        0.027
                                  (0.003)   (0.006)      (0.159)        (0.160)      (0.081)     (0.090)      (0.092)     (0.039)       (0.033)
    Minimum Non-Hazardous          0.061     0.007        -0.013         0.001        -0.016      -0.019       -0.012      -0.001        -0.007
                                  (0.003)   (0.004)      (0.040)        (0.041)      (0.032)     (0.034)      (0.032)     (0.021)       (0.011)
    Compulsory Schooling           0.056     0.003        0.017          0.024        0.010       0.010        0.015       -0.105   *    0.027
                                  (0.003)   (0.004)      (0.028)        (0.030)      (0.076)     (0.075)      (0.072)     (0.046)       (0.023)
Africa
    Light Work                     0.050     0.000        0.042          0.043        -0.055      -0.048       -0.046      -0.040        0.026
                                  (0.005)   (0.009)      (0.199)        (0.202)      (0.162)     (0.177)      (0.179)     (0.100)       (0.097)
    Minimum Non-Hazardous          0.065     0.007        -0.087         -0.086       0.065       0.069        0.070       -0.020        0.014
                                  (0.005)   (0.006)      (0.074)        (0.074)      (0.051)     (0.059)      (0.062)     (0.045)       (0.026)
    Compulsory Schooling           0.049     0.010        0.008          0.012        0.016       0.022        0.010       -0.006        -0.008
                                  (0.008)   (0.015)      (0.099)        (0.105)      (0.107)     (0.113)      (0.115)     (0.025)       (0.051)
Change in column variable at age of relaxation of regulation listed in row. All countries in region pooled. Age cell level regressions. Each cell
weighted by population.
Table 5: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws (Light Work)


                                       Paid                Unpaid                           Unpaid          Hh. Based
                            MICS   Employment             Economic         Economic           Hh.             EA &           Any            Attend
 Country                    Rnd    Base Change             Activity         Activity        Services         Services        Work           School          Idle
Africa
 Burundi                       2 0.054     -0.014           0.006            0.005           0.002            0.008          -0.001         -0.017         -0.022
                                 (0.009)   (0.011)         (0.003)          (0.012)         (0.017)          (0.024)         (0.015)        (0.016)        (0.015)
 Burundi                       2 0.050     -0.007           0.012           -0.005           0.018     *      0.022           0.030    *    -0.074    **    0.004
                                 (0.002)   (0.002)         (0.006)          (0.007)         (0.002)          (0.009)         (0.004)        (0.015)        (0.004)
 Central African Republic      2 0.033      0.017           0.045            0.047          -0.012           -0.012           0.017         -0.068          0.011
                                 (0.006)   (0.006)         (0.025)          (0.028)         (0.014)          (0.016)         (0.018)        (0.027)        (0.009)
 Central African Republic      3 0.056     -0.012          -0.062     **    -0.069           0.065            0.037           0.014         -0.084          0.015
                                 (0.004)   (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.018)         (0.019)          (0.011)         (0.007)        (0.044)        (0.013)
 Chad                          2 0.137     -0.077    *     -0.040     *     -0.043     **   -0.102           -0.025          -0.021         -0.081          0.013    *
                                 (0.011)   (0.012)         (0.010)          (0.001)         (0.035)          (0.009)         (0.012)        (0.048)        (0.003)
 D.R. Congo                    2 0.066     -0.014          -0.161           -0.171          -0.231           -0.230          -0.232          0.032         -0.041
                                 (0.007)   (0.010)         (0.118)          (0.126)         (0.183)          (0.195)         (0.199)        (0.024)        (0.068)
 Equatorial Guinea             2 0.051     -0.006           0.034            0.031          -0.003           -0.003           0.029         -0.017         -0.004
                                 (0.011)   (0.015)         (0.053)          (0.040)         (0.023)          (0.018)         (0.016)        (0.026)        (0.007)
 Gambia                        3                                                                                                             0.032
                                                                                                                                            (0.040)
 Ghana                         3 0.083     -0.025           0.009           -0.045          -0.064           -0.050           0.023         -0.053    *     0.007
                                 (0.011)   (0.015)         (0.024)          (0.026)         (0.062)          (0.028)         (0.017)        (0.020)        (0.005)
 Kenya                         2 0.035      0.017           0.013            0.016           0.009            0.009           0.011         -0.015          0.012
                                 (0.007)   (0.010)         (0.002)          (0.008)         (0.033)          (0.033)         (0.037)        (0.008)        (0.010)
 Lesotho                       2 0.021     -0.009          -0.089           -0.029          -0.073     **    -0.076     **   -0.081    **   -0.106          0.025    **
                                 (0.004)   (0.006)         (0.044)          (0.019)         (0.011)          (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.019)        (0.006)
 Mauritania                    3 0.012      0.019    **     0.005            0.018          -0.009            0.023     *     0.041    **   -0.106         -0.013    *
                                 (0.001)   (0.002)         (0.037)          (0.035)         (0.010)          (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.042)        (0.002)
 Sierra Leone                  2 0.052     -0.020           0.012            0.020           0.077            0.032           0.035    *    -0.013         -0.006
                                 (0.009)   (0.010)         (0.037)          (0.038)         (0.018)          (0.009)         (0.004)        (0.065)        (0.016)
 Sierra Leone                  3 0.025      0.019          -0.026           -0.024          -0.009           -0.012           -0.011   **   -0.041          0.005
                                 (0.011)   (0.012)         (0.047)          (0.040)         (0.005)          (0.006)         (0.001)        (0.047)        (0.002)
Non-Africa
 Albania                       2 0.025 -0.005               0.109            0.098           0.019            0.034           0.026          0.118    *    -0.024
                                 (0.007) (0.008)           (0.059)          (0.052)         (0.055)          (0.024)         (0.021)        (0.040)        (0.032)
 Albania                       3 0.010 -0.001              -0.060     *     -0.061     *    -0.139     *     -0.153     **   -0.149    **   -0.149    **    0.031    **
Table 5: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws (Light Work)

                                           Paid              Unpaid                       Unpaid        Hh. Based
                            MICS      Employment           Economic         Economic        Hh.           EA &             Any          Attend
 Country                    Rnd       Base Change           Activity         Activity    Services        Services         Work          School           Idle
                                    (0.005) (0.007)          (0.025)         (0.026)      (0.053)        (0.044)         (0.043)        (0.012)        (0.006)
 Kazakhstan                      3 0.009 -0.005 *             0.002           -0.013 *     0.021 **       0.021     **    0.017    **   -0.003          0.002
                                    (0.001) (0.002)          (0.005)         (0.005)      (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.002)
 Kyrgyzstan                      3 0.003 0.002                0.011            0.011       0.022          0.027           0.033          0.015         -0.017    *
                                    (0.001) (0.002)          (0.019)         (0.021)      (0.065)        (0.068)         (0.072)        (0.015)        (0.007)
 Moldova                         2 0.041 0.000                0.043 *         0.074        -0.059         -0.042         -0.025         -0.017          0.002
                                    (0.007) (0.010)          (0.017)         (0.029)      (0.033)        (0.034)         (0.017)        (0.013)        (0.007)
 Suriname                        3 0.035 -0.012              -0.029           -0.017 *     -0.034         -0.035         -0.039          0.021         -0.010    *
                                    (0.006) (0.008)          (0.009)         (0.005)      (0.032)        (0.028)         (0.030)        (0.018)        (0.003)
 Trinidad and Tobago             2 0.061 -0.040 **           -0.022 *         -0.031 *     -0.071         -0.073         -0.082         -0.007
                                    (0.003) (0.003)          (0.006)         (0.010)      (0.118)        (0.109)         (0.109)        (0.004)
 Trinidad and Tobago             3 0.012 0.024 **             0.002           0.028 *      -0.098 **      -0.099    **   -0.092    **    -0.011         0.014    **
                                    (0.001) (0.002)          (0.012)         (0.012)      (0.016)        (0.020)         (0.021)        (0.008)        (0.004)
 Ukraine                         3 0.026 -0.014               -0.011          0.001        0.098          0.106           0.081          0.015    *    -0.024    **
                                    (0.007) (0.010)          (0.037)         (0.044)      (0.059)        (0.061)         (0.063)        (0.005)        (0.004)
 Uzbekistan                      2 0.025 -0.007              -0.008           -0.006       -0.049         -0.060         -0.049         -0.044    **    0.017    **
                                    (0.003) (0.004)          (0.018)         (0.017)      (0.041)        (0.027)         (0.025)        (0.004)        (0.003)
 Uzbekistan                      3 0.005 0.000                0.001           -0.001       0.052 *        0.048     *     0.051          0.012    **   -0.001
                                    (0.002) (0.002)          (0.009)         (0.010)      (0.017)        (0.015)         (0.020)        (0.002)        (0.001)
Age cell level regressions. Standard errors in parenthesis. * significant at 10%. ** Significant at 5%.
Table 6A: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws (Non-Hazardous Work), Africa


                                                       Unpaid                           Unpaid    Hh. Based
                          MICS Paid Employment        Economic         Economic           Hh.       EA &            Any          Attend
  Country                 Rnd    Base Change           Activity         Activity        Service    Services        Work          School           Idle
  Angola                      2 0.056   -0.005         -0.049     **    -0.058     **   -0.002      -0.008        -0.010          0.030          0.001
                                (0.007) (0.011)        (0.015)          (0.016)         (0.019)    (0.019)        (0.017)        (0.037)        (0.011)
  Burundi                     2                                                                                                   0.008
                                                                                                                                 (0.022)
  Burundi                     3                                                                                                   0.047    **
                                                                                                                                 (0.018)
  Cameroon                    2    0.089    -0.008     -0.037           -0.050          -0.002      0.011     *   -0.037          0.033          0.021
                                  (0.010)   (0.016)    (0.032)          (0.029)         (0.022)    (0.003)        (0.023)        (0.042)        (0.018)
  Cameroon                    3    0.060    -0.001     -0.067           -0.062           0.027      0.037          0.012          0.010          0.000
                                  (0.009)   (0.013)    (0.037)          (0.039)         (0.029)    (0.021)        (0.023)        (0.040)        (0.008)
  Central Afr. Republic       2    0.053     0.006      0.024            0.036           0.015      0.011          0.017         -0.058         -0.008
                                  (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.021)          (0.022)         (0.013)    (0.012)        (0.010)        (0.049)        (0.007)
  Central Afr. Republic       3    0.054     0.001     -0.022           -0.027          -0.032     -0.030     *   -0.090    **   -0.074          0.027    *
                                  (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.015)          (0.017)         (0.015)    (0.011)        (0.008)        (0.049)        (0.012)
  Chad                        2    0.080    -0.009     -0.036           -0.032           0.011     -0.002         -0.001         -0.088          0.009
                                  (0.012)   (0.019)    (0.020)          (0.016)         (0.027)    (0.014)        (0.014)        (0.070)        (0.007)
  Comoros                     2                                                                                                   -0.011
                                                                                                                                 (0.028)
  Cote d'Ivoire               2    0.045    -0.004     -0.004            0.000           0.005      0.013          0.016         -0.075          0.022    **
                                  (0.005)   (0.006)    (0.025)          (0.024)         (0.025)    (0.023)        (0.020)        (0.041)        (0.004)
  Cote d'Ivoire               3                                                                                                  -0.050
                                                                                                                                 (0.044)
  DR Congo                    2    0.085    -0.006      0.086            0.082           0.116      0.126          0.125         -0.002         -0.053
                                  (0.007)   (0.011)    (0.120)          (0.130)         (0.170)    (0.180)        (0.184)        (0.021)        (0.057)
  Djibouti                    3                                                                                                   0.039
                                                                                                                                 (0.025)
  Equatorial Guinea           2    0.062    -0.007      0.070            0.044          -0.004      -0.011         0.017         -0.051    *    -0.002
                                  (0.006)   (0.009)    (0.052)          (0.032)         (0.018)    (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.021)        (0.005)
  Ghana                       3                                                                                                  -0.075    **
                                                                                                                                 (0.028)
Table 6A: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws (Non-Hazardous Work), Africa


                                                            Unpaid                           Unpaid        Hh. Based
                          MICS Paid Employment             Economic         Economic           Hh.           EA &             Any          Attend
  Country                 Rnd    Base Change                Activity         Activity        Service        Services         Work          School           Idle
  Guinea Bissau               2 0.072    0.019              -0.050           -0.046          -0.031    *     0.010           0.013         -0.078          0.000
                                (0.010) (0.015)             (0.029)          (0.028)         (0.013)        (0.011)         (0.017)        (0.058)        (0.003)
  Guinea Bissau               3 0.067   -0.016        *     -0.010           -0.008          -0.002          0.041           0.054         -0.044          0.017
                                (0.005) (0.007)             (0.029)          (0.030)         (0.024)        (0.021)         (0.024)        (0.052)        (0.018)
  Kenya                       2 0.071    0.020               0.018     **     0.015          -0.069          -0.010         -0.056          0.012          0.002
                                (0.006) (0.011)             (0.004)          (0.008)         (0.037)        (0.041)         (0.032)        (0.036)        (0.010)
  Lesotho                     2 0.029    0.013               0.039            0.047     *    -0.079    *     -0.033         -0.077    *    -0.012          0.011
                                (0.006) (0.009)             (0.020)          (0.019)         (0.034)        (0.036)         (0.036)        (0.022)        (0.012)
  Madagascar                  2                                                                                                             0.047
                                                                                                                                           (0.052)
  Malawi                      3    0.087    -0.002           0.029            0.026     *    -0.002         -0.016          -0.026         -0.019          0.013    **
                                  (0.003)   (0.005)         (0.014)          (0.010)         (0.013)        (0.014)         (0.014)        (0.023)        (0.000)
  Mauritania                  3    0.030     0.006          -0.019           -0.009          -0.018         -0.015          -0.010          0.066          0.035    *
                                  (0.006)   (0.009)         (0.024)          (0.025)         (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.016)        (0.036)        (0.009)
  Niger                       2    0.054    -0.018          -0.088     **    -0.083     **    0.015         -0.027     **   -0.025    **    0.000          0.004
                                  (0.007)   (0.012)         (0.020)          (0.019)         (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.006)        (0.070)        (0.006)
  Nigeria                     3    0.045     0.023    **    -0.001            0.005          -0.015         -0.009           0.008         -0.064          0.013
                                  (0.004)   (0.006)         (0.018)          (0.018)         (0.011)        (0.014)         (0.013)        (0.049)        (0.015)
  Sao Tome and Principe       2    0.046    -0.010    *     -0.003            0.000          -0.041         -0.045          -0.037         -0.061         -0.003
                                  (0.003)   (0.003)         (0.024)          (0.023)         (0.027)        (0.026)         (0.027)        (0.027)        (0.003)
  Senegal                     2                                                                                                             0.032
                                                                                                                                           (0.055)
  Sierra Leone                2                                                                                                            -0.204    **
                                                                                                                                           (0.043)
  Sierra Leone                3                                                                                                            -0.048
                                                                                                                                           (0.058)
  Swaziland                   2  0.048      -0.017    *     -0.012           -0.008           0.000          0.003          -0.005          0.025          -0.011
                                (0.006)     (0.006)         (0.031)          (0.031)         (0.018)        (0.014)         (0.009)        (0.034)        (0.008)
  Togo                        2 0.218       -0.009           0.092     **     0.066           0.024          0.022     *     0.028          0.003         -0.008
                                (0.023)     (0.035)         (0.027)          (0.045)         (0.011)        (0.008)         (0.015)        (0.013)        (0.012)
Table 6A: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws (Non-Hazardous Work), Africa


                                                               Unpaid                      Unpaid       Hh. Based
                             MICS Paid Employment            Economic         Economic       Hh.          EA &        Any     Attend
  Country                     Rnd     Base Change             Activity         Activity    Service       Services    Work     School      Idle
  Togo                            3 0.180       -0.094 *       -0.005           0.029       -0.057 **     -0.013    -0.017    -0.072     0.003
                                     (0.029) (0.031)           (0.035)         (0.026)     (0.018)       (0.020)    (0.015)   (0.041)   (0.002)
Age cell level regressions. Standard errors in parenthesis. * significant at 10%. ** Significant at 5%.
Table 6b: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws (Non-Hazardous Work), Non-Africa


                                                              Unpaid                     Unpaid         Hh. Based
                              MICS Paid Employment           Economic        Economic      Hh.            EA &          Any       Attend
  Country                     Rnd   Base Change               Activity        Activity   Services        Services       Work      School          Idle
  Albania                         2                                                                                                0.041
                                                                                                                                  (0.058)
  Albania                         3                                                                                                0.158    **
                                                                                                                                  (0.056)
  Azerbaijan                      2 0.003      0.004          -0.001           0.001     -0.061     *    -0.059         -0.056    -0.007          0.007
                                    (0.002)   (0.003)         (0.019)         (0.017)    (0.027)         (0.029)        (0.027)   (0.016)        (0.011)
  Bangladesh                      3 0.041      0.010    **     0.026           0.007      0.003           0.024     *    0.027    -0.089    **    0.005
                                    (0.003)   (0.004)         (0.015)         (0.013)    (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.014)   (0.018)        (0.008)
  Belarus                         3 0.012     -0.004          -0.018          -0.021     -0.050          -0.048          0.015    -0.006          0.006
                                    (0.010)   (0.015)         (0.039)         (0.045)    (0.034)         (0.033)        (0.034)   (0.005)        (0.005)
  Bolivia                         2 0.057      0.030    **    -0.022           0.011      0.035           0.026          0.041    -0.003          0.002
                                    (0.006)   (0.009)         (0.024)         (0.023)    (0.041)         (0.030)        (0.024)   (0.023)        (0.001)
  Bosnia and Herzegovina          2                                                                                                0.007
                                                                                                                                  (0.007)
  Bosnia and Herzegovina          3                                                                                                0.016
                                                                                                                                  (0.014)
  Dominican Republic              2 0.084      0.018           0.013           0.033     -0.128          -0.062          0.025     0.023          0.005
                                    (0.008)   (0.012)         (0.037)         (0.042)    (0.056)         (0.070)        (0.029)   (0.022)        (0.009)
  Georgia                         3 0.025     -0.009          -0.047     *    -0.076     -0.047          -0.044         -0.046    -0.004          0.002
                                    (0.004)   (0.006)         (0.018)         (0.028)    (0.043)         (0.042)        (0.046)   (0.006)        (0.003)
  Guyana                          2                                                                                               -0.074    **
                                                                                                                                  (0.012)
  Guyana                          3                                                                                               -0.031
                                                                                                                                  (0.015)
  Iraq                            2                                                                                                0.033
                                                                                                                                  (0.018)
  Iraq                            3                                                                                                0.013
                                                                                                                                  (0.018)
  Jamaica                         3 0.016      0.001          -0.062          -0.069     -0.021          -0.027         -0.018    -0.005          0.002
                                    (0.005)   (0.006)         (0.013)         (0.024)    (0.013)         (0.011)        (0.011)   (0.005)        (0.003)
Table 6b: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws (Non-Hazardous Work), Non-Africa


                                                          Unpaid                          Unpaid         Hh. Based
                              MICS Paid Employment       Economic        Economic           Hh.            EA &          Any            Attend
  Country                     Rnd   Base Change           Activity        Activity        Services        Services       Work           School          Idle
  Kazakhstan                      3                                                                                                     -0.007    *
                                                                                                                                        (0.003)
  Kyrgyzstan                      3 0.003      0.002       0.011           0.011           0.022           0.027          0.033          0.015         -0.017    *
                                    (0.001)   (0.002)     (0.019)         (0.021)         (0.065)         (0.068)        (0.072)        (0.015)        (0.007)
  Lao PDR                         2                                                                                                     -0.086
                                                                                                                                        (0.063)
  Lao PDR                         3                                                                                                      0.026
                                                                                                                                        (0.035)
  Macedonia                       3                                                                                                     -0.191    **
                                                                                                                                        (0.024)
  Moldova                         2                                                                                                     -0.123    **
                                                                                                                                        (0.012)
  Mongolia                        2 0.019     -0.003       0.013           0.010          -0.008           0.053          0.055         -0.097         -0.002
                                    (0.003)   (0.005)     (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.015)         (0.023)        (0.023)        (0.045)        (0.006)
  Mongolia                        3 0.004      0.004      -0.016          -0.030     **    0.036           0.030     *    0.029         -0.012          0.016
                                    (0.004)   (0.006)     (0.010)         (0.007)         (0.017)         (0.012)        (0.020)        (0.016)        (0.007)
  Montenegro                      3                                                                                                     -0.028    **
                                                                                                                                        (0.008)
  Philippines                     2 0.080      0.001       0.081          -0.008           0.007           0.004          0.001          0.095    **    0.015    **
                                    (0.007)   (0.012)     (0.037)         (0.018)         (0.023)         (0.023)        (0.022)        (0.027)        (0.003)
  Serbia                          3                                                                                                     -0.004
                                                                                                                                        (0.006)
  Suriname                        3 0.037      0.009       0.065     *     0.023           0.098     *     0.096     *    0.108    **   -0.003         -0.004
                                    (0.005)   (0.007)     (0.019)         (0.011)         (0.033)         (0.032)        (0.030)        (0.015)        (0.005)
  Syria                           3                                                                                                      0.126    **
                                                                                                                                        (0.027)
  Tajikistan                      2                                                                                                     -0.038
                                                                                                                                        (0.023)
  Tajikistan                      3                                                                                                     -0.080    **
                                                                                                                                        (0.023)
Table 6b: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws (Non-Hazardous Work), Non-Africa

                                                                    Unpaid                           Unpaid     Hh. Based
                                  MICS Paid Employment             Economic         Economic           Hh.        EA &          Any           Attend
   Country                        Rnd   Base Change                 Activity         Activity        Services    Services       Work          School          Idle
   Thailand                           3                                                                                                        0.013
                                                                                                                                              (0.008)
   Trinidad and Tobago                  2 0.026     -0.006           0.030     *      0.038           0.017       0.020          0.022        -0.034    **   -0.005    *
                                          (0.008)   (0.011)         (0.010)          (0.019)         (0.071)     (0.066)        (0.068)       (0.003)        (0.001)
   Trinidad and Tobago                  3 0.026      0.035    **     0.002            0.030     *     0.100       0.114     *    0.122    *   -0.067    **   -0.020    *
                                          (0.007)   (0.011)         (0.009)          (0.015)         (0.052)     (0.054)        (0.049)       (0.008)        (0.008)
   Ukraine                              3                                                                                                      0.003
                                                                                                                                              (0.004)
   Uzbekistan                           2                                                                                                     -0.092    **
                                                                                                                                              (0.024)
   Uzbekistan                           3                                                                                                     -0.083    **
                                                                                                                                              (0.011)
   Venezuela                            2 0.097     -0.018           0.061     *      0.071     **    0.004       0.025          0.041        -0.018    *     0.010
                                          (0.013)   (0.015)         (0.023)          (0.025)         (0.013)     (0.019)        (0.022)       (0.007)        (0.010)
   Vietnam                              2 0.071      0.018          -0.087     **    -0.055     **   -0.038       0.019         -0.021         0.036         -0.005
                                          (0.010)   (0.012)         (0.019)          (0.018)         (0.029)     (0.044)        (0.031)       (0.028)        (0.009)
   Vietnam                              3                                                                                                     -0.077    **
                                                                                                                                              (0.006)
   Yemen                                3                                                                                                      0.024
                                                                                                                                              (0.036)
Age cell level regressions. Standard errors in parenthesis. * significant at 10%. ** Significant at 5%.
Table 7A: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Compulsory Schooling Laws, Africa


                                                               Unpaid                           Unpaid          Hh. Based
                               MICS Paid Employment           Economic         Economic           Hh.             EA &            Any         Attend
   Country                     Rnd    Base Change              Activity         Activity        Services         Services        Work         School           Idle
   Angola                          2 0.056   -0.005            -0.049     **    -0.058     **    -0.002           -0.008        -0.010         0.030          0.001
                                     (0.007) (0.011)           (0.015)          (0.016)         (0.019)          (0.019)        (0.017)       (0.037)        (0.011)
   Burundi                         2 0.055   -0.008            -0.021     **    -0.022     *     0.040     **     0.032          0.027    *   -0.059    **    0.038
                                     (0.008) (0.011)           (0.003)          (0.010)         (0.009)          (0.014)        (0.008)       (0.015)        (0.009)
   Burundi                         3 0.042    0.011      *      0.018            0.007           -0.031           -0.042    0   -0.049        -0.009          0.001
                                     (0.002) (0.002)           (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.008)          (0.001)        (0.023)       (0.027)        (0.006)
   Cameroon                        2                                                                                                          -0.054
                                                                                                                                              (0.037)
   Cameroon                        3                                                                                                          -0.026
                                                                                                                                              (0.033)
   Central African Republic        2                                                                                                          -0.064
                                                                                                                                              (0.036)
   Central African Republic        3                                                                                                          -0.002
                                                                                                                                              (0.046)
   Chad                            2 0.137     -0.077    *     -0.040     *     -0.043     **   -0.102           -0.025         -0.021        -0.081          0.013    *
                                     (0.011)   (0.012)         (0.010)          (0.001)         (0.035)          (0.009)        (0.012)       (0.048)        (0.003)
   Comoros                         2 0.026     -0.005          -0.054           -0.057          -0.015           -0.028          -0.011        0.026          0.025
                                     (0.005)   (0.007)         (0.042)          (0.038)         (0.018)          (0.014)        (0.019)       (0.034)        (0.022)
   Democratic Republic of Congo    2 0.066     -0.014          -0.161           -0.171          -0.231           -0.230         -0.232         0.032         -0.041
                                     (0.007)   (0.010)         (0.118)          (0.126)         (0.183)          (0.195)        (0.199)       (0.024)        (0.068)
   Djibouti                        3                                                                                                          -0.074
                                                                                                                                              (0.038)
   Equatorial Guinea               2 0.062     -0.007           0.070            0.044          -0.004            -0.011         0.017        -0.051    *    -0.002
                                     (0.006)   (0.009)         (0.052)          (0.032)         (0.018)          (0.015)        (0.015)       (0.021)        (0.005)
   Gambia                          2 0.020     -0.008          -0.146           -0.169     *    -0.015           -0.006         -0.031        -0.075          0.058    *
                                     (0.006)   (0.008)         (0.061)          (0.027)         (0.032)          (0.009)        (0.026)       (0.043)        (0.018)
   Gambia                          3 0.019     -0.005    **     0.003            0.007          -0.029           -0.029         -0.027        -0.046         -0.019
                                     (0.001)   (0.001)         (0.031)          (0.032)         (0.026)          (0.028)        (0.031)       (0.045)        (0.024)
   Ghana                           3                                                                                                          -0.075    **
                                                                                                                                              (0.028)
Table 7A: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Compulsory Schooling Laws, Africa


                                                               Unpaid                           Unpaid          Hh. Based
                               MICS Paid Employment           Economic         Economic           Hh.             EA &            Any          Attend
   Country                     Rnd    Base Change              Activity         Activity        Services         Services        Work          School           Idle
   Guinea Bissau                   2 0.080   -0.023            -0.035           -0.034           0.071     **     0.013          0.018         -0.080          -0.011
                                     (0.008) (0.012)           (0.027)          (0.026)         (0.001)          (0.011)        (0.019)        (0.052)        (0.003)
   Guinea Bissau                   3 0.064   -0.009            -0.031           -0.041           0.029     *      -0.031        -0.035          0.053          0.033    *
                                     (0.005) (0.007)           (0.030)          (0.028)         (0.007)          (0.024)        (0.027)        (0.038)        (0.005)
   Kenya                           2 0.051   -0.002            -0.004           -0.005           -0.007           -0.007        -0.098          0.036    *     0.007
                                     (0.008) (0.011)           (0.002)          (0.010)         (0.027)          (0.027)        (0.054)        (0.011)        (0.009)
   Madagascar                      2                                                                                                            0.047
                                                                                                                                               (0.052)
   Mauritania                      3                                                                                                            -0.111
                                                                                                                                               (0.050)
   Niger                           2 0.042      0.014          -0.029           -0.020          -0.047     **     0.001          0.001         -0.085          0.003
                                     (0.007)   (0.010)         (0.014)          (0.017)         (0.002)          (0.010)        (0.007)        (0.059)        (0.006)
   Nigeria                         3 0.045      0.023    **    -0.001            0.005          -0.015           -0.009          0.008         -0.064          0.013
                                     (0.004)   (0.006)         (0.018)          (0.018)         (0.011)          (0.014)        (0.013)        (0.049)        (0.015)
   Rwanda                          2 -0.004     0.045    *     -0.032           -0.023           0.011            0.023          0.030    *     0.018         -0.015
                                     (0.004)   (0.004)         (0.031)          (0.030)         (0.004)          (0.011)        (0.007)        (0.013)        (0.010)
   Sao Tome and Principe           2 0.032      0.002           0.000           -0.002          -0.020           -0.020         -0.021         -0.049          0.007
                                     (0.004)   (0.005)         (0.029)          (0.028)         (0.030)          (0.029)        (0.031)        (0.027)        (0.004)
   Senegal                         2                                                                                                            0.076
                                                                                                                                               (0.050)
   Sierra Leone                    2 0.052     -0.020           0.012            0.020           0.077            0.032          0.035    *    -0.013         -0.006
                                     (0.009)   (0.010)         (0.037)          (0.038)         (0.018)          (0.009)        (0.004)        (0.065)        (0.016)
   Sierra Leone                    3 0.025      0.019          -0.026           -0.024          -0.009           -0.012          -0.011   **   -0.041          0.005
                                     (0.011)   (0.012)         (0.047)          (0.040)         (0.005)          (0.006)        (0.001)        (0.047)        (0.002)
   Somalia                         3 0.039     -0.013    **    -0.028           -0.024          -0.044            0.001          0.002         -0.109         -0.036
                                     (0.003)   (0.003)         (0.024)          (0.023)         (0.029)          (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.053)        (0.022)
   Sudan, Northern                 2 0.063      0.008          -0.003           -0.004           0.032     **     0.054     *    0.024         -0.058         -0.026
                                     (0.006)   (0.009)         (0.032)          (0.034)         (0.002)          (0.014)        (0.016)        (0.076)        (0.034)
   Sudan, Southern                 2 0.087     -0.041    *      0.219     **     0.200     **    0.035           -0.002          0.008         -0.041    **    0.058
                                     (0.012)   (0.018)         (0.007)          (0.034)         (0.099)          (0.095)        (0.098)        (0.007)        (0.029)
Table 7A: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Compulsory Schooling Laws, Africa


                                                                   Unpaid                        Unpaid          Hh. Based
                                  MICS Paid Employment            Economic       Economic          Hh.             EA &            Any     Attend
   Country                        Rnd    Base Change               Activity       Activity       Services         Services        Work     School      Idle
   Togo                               2 0.250    0.017             -0.010          0.010          -0.054    **     -0.034    *   -0.037    -0.042     0.022
                                        (0.017) (0.031)            (0.043)        (0.043)        (0.015)          (0.015)        (0.024)   (0.033)   (0.014)
   Togo                               3                                                                                                     0.067
                                                                                                                                           (0.042)
Age cell level regressions. Standard errors in parenthesis. * significant at 10%. ** Significant at 5%.
Table 7B: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Compulsory Schooling Laws, Non-Africa


                                                               Unpaid                          Unpaid         Hh. Based
                              MICS Paid Employment            Economic         Economic          Hh.            EA &             Any          Attend
   Country                    Rnd    Base Change               Activity         Activity       Services        Services         Work          School           Idle
   Albania                        2 0.025   -0.005              0.109            0.098          0.019           0.034           0.026          0.118    *    -0.024
                                    (0.007) (0.008)            (0.059)          (0.052)        (0.055)         (0.024)         (0.021)        (0.040)        (0.032)
   Albania                        3 0.010   -0.001             -0.060     *     -0.061     *    -0.139    *     -0.153    **   -0.149    **   -0.149    **    0.031    **
                                    (0.005) (0.007)            (0.025)          (0.026)        (0.053)         (0.044)         (0.043)        (0.012)        (0.006)
   Azerbaijan                     2                                                                                                           -0.066    **
                                                                                                                                              (0.010)
   Bangladesh                      3 0.034     -0.003          -0.018     **    -0.020         -0.027          -0.037          -0.038          0.000          0.006
                                     (0.004)   (0.005)         (0.001)          (0.005)        (0.015)         (0.014)         (0.009)        (0.029)        (0.008)
   Belarus                         3                                                                                                          -0.009
                                                                                                                                              (0.005)
   Bolivia                         2 0.057      0.030    **    -0.022            0.011          0.035           0.026           0.041         -0.003          0.002
                                     (0.006)   (0.009)         (0.024)          (0.023)        (0.041)         (0.030)         (0.024)        (0.023)        (0.001)
   Bosnia and Herzegovina          2                                                                                                           0.007
                                                                                                                                              (0.007)
   Bosnia and Herzegovina          3                                                                                                           0.016
                                                                                                                                              (0.014)
   Dominican Republic              2 0.084      0.018           0.013            0.033         -0.128          -0.062           0.025          0.023          0.005
                                     (0.008)   (0.012)         (0.037)          (0.042)        (0.056)         (0.070)         (0.029)        (0.022)        (0.009)
   Georgia                         3                                                                                                          -0.029    **
                                                                                                                                              (0.005)
   Guyana                          2                                                                                                          -0.074    **
                                                                                                                                              (0.012)
   Guyana                          3                                                                                                          -0.031
                                                                                                                                              (0.015)
   Iraq                            2 0.024     -0.006          -0.005           -0.016         -0.030          -0.027          -0.033         -0.015          0.002
                                     (0.005)   (0.005)         (0.007)          (0.012)        (0.026)         (0.025)         (0.028)        (0.009)        (0.003)
   Iraq                            3 0.016      0.006    *      0.001            0.007         -0.010          -0.008           0.000         -0.017    *     0.017    *
                                     (0.002)   (0.002)         (0.017)          (0.020)        (0.025)         (0.028)         (0.030)        (0.002)        (0.005)
   Jamaica                         3 0.016      0.001          -0.062           -0.069         -0.021          -0.027          -0.018         -0.005          0.002
                                     (0.005)   (0.006)         (0.013)          (0.024)        (0.013)         (0.011)         (0.011)        (0.005)        (0.003)
Table 7B: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Compulsory Schooling Laws, Non-Africa


                                                               Unpaid                           Unpaid          Hh. Based
                              MICS Paid Employment            Economic         Economic           Hh.             EA &             Any          Attend
   Country                    Rnd    Base Change               Activity         Activity        Services         Services         Work          School           Idle
   Kyrgyzstan                     3 0.003   -0.003              0.039     *      0.038     *     1.886     **     1.888     **    1.881    **   -0.087    **    0.017    *
                                    (0.001) (0.002)            (0.016)          (0.019)         (0.330)          (0.331)         (0.337)        (0.020)        (0.008)
   Lao PDR                        2 0.017   -0.001             -0.010           -0.020           -0.045    **     -0.052    **   -0.055    *    -0.046          0.035
                                    (0.002) (0.003)            (0.022)          (0.018)         (0.003)          (0.000)         (0.003)        (0.080)        (0.042)
   Lao PDR                        3 0.014    0.001             -0.008           -0.004           -0.003           0.000           0.002         -0.029          0.011
                                    (0.009) (0.011)            (0.042)          (0.051)         (0.024)          (0.020)         (0.016)        (0.085)        (0.017)
   Macedonia                      3                                                                                                             -0.191    **
                                                                                                                                                (0.024)
   Moldova                         2                                                                                                            -0.123    **
                                                                                                                                                (0.012)
   Mongolia                        2 -0.003     0.027    **    -0.058     **    -0.049     **   -0.001            0.008           0.005         -0.171    *    -0.001
                                     (0.006)   (0.006)         (0.015)          (0.014)         (0.015)          (0.014)         (0.016)        (0.080)        (0.008)
   Mongolia                        3 0.010      0.016    **     0.011            0.018          -0.068     **    -0.062     **   -0.055    **   -0.020          0.010    **
                                     (0.003)   (0.005)         (0.016)          (0.014)         (0.014)          (0.012)         (0.013)        (0.035)        (0.004)
   Montenegro                      3                                                                                                            -0.028    **
                                                                                                                                                (0.008)
   Philippines                     2 0.052     -0.005           0.009           -0.002           0.055            0.063          -0.008          0.023          0.002
                                     (0.005)   (0.007)         (0.017)          (0.024)         (0.037)          (0.032)         (0.031)        (0.014)        (0.004)
   Serbia                          3                                                                                                            -0.004
                                                                                                                                                (0.006)
   Suriname                        3 0.035     -0.012          -0.029           -0.017     *    -0.034           -0.035          -0.039          0.021         -0.010    *
                                     (0.006)   (0.008)         (0.009)          (0.005)         (0.032)          (0.028)         (0.030)        (0.018)        (0.003)
   Syria                           3                                                                                                             0.126    **
                                                                                                                                                (0.027)
   Tajikistan                      2                                                                                                            -0.038
                                                                                                                                                (0.023)
   Tajikistan                      3                                                                                                            -0.080    **
                                                                                                                                                (0.023)
   Thailand                        3                                                                                                             0.013
                                                                                                                                                (0.008)
Table 7B: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Compulsory Schooling Laws, Non-Africa


                                                                   Unpaid                           Unpaid     Hh. Based
                                  MICS Paid Employment            Economic         Economic            Hh.       EA &        Any     Attend
   Country                        Rnd    Base Change               Activity         Activity        Services    Services    Work     School          Idle
   Trinidad and Tobago                2 0.061   -0.040       **    -0.022     *     -0.031     *     -0.071      -0.073    -0.082    -0.007
                                        (0.003) (0.003)            (0.006)          (0.010)         (0.118)     (0.109)    (0.109)   (0.004)
   Trinidad and Tobago                3 0.009    0.001              0.027     *      0.028     *      0.011      0.020      0.023    -0.002         -0.005
                                        (0.001) (0.002)            (0.009)          (0.008)         (0.023)     (0.025)    (0.025)   (0.007)        (0.004)
   Venezuela                          2 0.168    0.097       **     0.039            0.141     **    0.015       -0.008     0.026     0.036         -0.006
                                        (0.011) (0.014)            (0.027)          (0.033)         (0.018)     (0.021)    (0.028)   (0.033)        (0.009)
   Vietnam                            2 0.071    0.018             -0.087     **    -0.055     **    -0.038      0.019     -0.021     0.036         -0.005
                                        (0.010) (0.012)            (0.019)          (0.018)         (0.029)     (0.044)    (0.031)   (0.028)        (0.009)
   Vietnam                            3                                                                                              -0.077    **
                                                                                                                                     (0.006)
   Yemen                                3                                                                                             0.024
                                                                                                                                     (0.036)
Age cell level regressions. Standard errors in parenthesis. * significant at 10%. ** Significant at 5%.
Table 8: Changes in Time Allocation with Relaxation of Minimum Age Restrictions by Compulsory Schooling Status, All Countries Pooled


                                                        Unpaid                    Unpaid     Hh. Based
                                  Paid Employment      Economic      Economic       Hh.        EA &        Any        Attend
Compulsory Schooling Status        Base Change          Activity      Activity    Services    Services     Work       School       Idle
Schooling is not Compulsory at
                                   0.068     -0.002      -0.040        -0.026       0.018      -0.050       -0.042     0.000       -0.010
Minimum Age of Employment
                                  (0.005)   (0.007)     (0.057)       (0.059)      (0.059)    (0.057)      (0.056)    (0.039)     (0.029)

Schooling Stops Being
Compulsory at Minimum Age of        0.056    0.018 **    0.011        0.022       0.084       0.088         0.082      -0.073      0.028
Employment                         (0.004) (0.004)      (0.048)      (0.047)     (0.073)     (0.063)       (0.059)    (0.061)     (0.019)
Change in column variable at age of relaxation of minimum age of employment regulation. Age cell level regressions. Each cell weighted by
All countries pooled.
Appendix Table 1: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws (Light Work), Methods Comparison


                                       Paid             Unpaid                       Unpaid       Hh. Based
                           RD      Employment          Economic       Economic         Hh.          EA &          Any         Attend
Country                   Meth.    Base Change          Activity       Activity      Services      Services       Work        School        Idle

Equatorial Guinea           2       0.051 -0.005             0.139         0.091          0.001     0.001         0.000        -0.009      -0.006
                                   (0.019) (0.022)          (0.088)       (0.117)        (0.018)   (0.014)       (0.013)      (0.037)      (0.006)
                             1      0.051 -0.006             0.034         0.031         -0.003    -0.003         0.029        -0.017      -0.004
                                   (0.011) (0.015)          (0.053)       (0.040)        (0.023)   (0.018)       (0.016)      (0.026)      (0.007)
Kenya                        2      0.039 0.013              0.000         0.010          0.018     0.019         -0.028       -0.009       0.007
                                   (0.014) (0.015)          (0.003)       (0.011)        (0.025)   (0.025)       (0.076)      (0.026)      (0.008)
                             1      0.035 0.017              0.013         0.016          0.009     0.009          0.011       -0.015       0.012
                                   (0.007) (0.010)          (0.002)       (0.008)        (0.033)   (0.033)       (0.037)      (0.008)      (0.010)
Lesotho                      2      0.021 -0.006            -0.022        -0.026         -0.109    -0.072         -0.063       -0.047 *     0.017
                                   (0.005) (0.006)          (0.020)       (0.019)        (0.046)   (0.051)       (0.046)      (0.021)      (0.009)
                             1      0.021 -0.009            -0.089        -0.029         -0.073 ** -0.076 ** -0.081 ** -0.106               0.025 **
                                   (0.004) (0.006)          (0.044)       (0.019)        (0.011)   (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.019)      (0.006)
Trinidad & Tobago            2      0.007 0.029 **           0.004         0.053         -0.098 ** -0.101 ** -0.099 ** 0.018                0.001
(MICS 3)                           (0.006) (0.006)          (0.010)       (0.029)        (0.012)   (0.015)       (0.017)      (0.024)      (0.011)
                             1      0.012 0.024 **           0.002         0.028 *       -0.098 ** -0.099 ** -0.092 ** -0.011               0.014 **
                                   (0.001) (0.002)          (0.012)       (0.012)        (0.016)   (0.020)       (0.021)      (0.008)      (0.004)
DR Congo                     2      0.066 -0.005            -0.147        -0.152         -0.215    -0.223         -0.222       0.030       -0.042
                                   (0.009) (0.012)          (0.091)       (0.098)        (0.138)   (0.147)       (0.150)      (0.023)      (0.059)
                             1      0.066 -0.014            -0.161        -0.171         -0.231    -0.230         -0.232       0.032       -0.041
                                   (0.007) (0.010)          (0.118)       (0.126)        (0.183)   (0.195)       (0.199)      (0.024)      (0.068)
RD. Method indicates whether a two-sided (equation 12) or one-sided (equation 10) approach was used to calculate impact of relaxing the law. Age cell
level regressions. Standard errors in parenthesis. * significant at 10%. ** Significant at 5%.
Appendix Table 2: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws Non-Hazardous Work), Methods Comparison


                                   Paid                 Unpaid                           Unpaid          Hh. Based
                       RD      Employment              Economic         Economic           Hh.             EA &          Any           Attend
Country               Meth.    Base Change              Activity         Activity        Services         Services       Work          School          Idle

Equatorial Guinea       2      0.085    -0.029           0.070            0.044          -0.008            -0.011         0.015        -0.019          0.000
                              (0.023)   (0.023)         (0.052)          (0.032)         (0.015)          (0.012)        (0.017)       (0.023)        (0.004)
                        1      0.062    -0.007           0.070            0.044          -0.004            -0.011         0.017        -0.051    *    -0.002
                              (0.006)   (0.009)         (0.052)          (0.032)         (0.018)          (0.015)        (0.015)       (0.021)        (0.005)
Kenya                   2      0.071     0.020           0.018     **     0.015           -0.011          -0.010         -0.056         0.012          0.002
                              (0.006)   (0.011)         (0.004)          (0.008)         (0.041)          (0.041)        (0.032)       (0.036)        (0.010)
                        1      0.071     0.020           0.018     **     0.015          -0.069           -0.010         -0.056         0.012          0.002
                              (0.006)   (0.011)         (0.004)          (0.008)         (0.037)          (0.041)        (0.032)       (0.036)        (0.010)
Lesotho                 2      0.029     0.011           0.019            0.024          -0.076     **    -0.033         -0.024        -0.012          0.011
                              (0.006)   (0.009)         (0.035)          (0.031)         (0.029)          (0.036)        (0.039)       (0.022)        (0.012)
                        1      0.029     0.013           0.039            0.047     *    -0.079     *     -0.033         -0.077    *   -0.012          0.011
                              (0.006)   (0.009)         (0.020)          (0.019)         (0.034)          (0.036)        (0.036)       (0.022)        (0.012)
Mongolia (MICS2)        2      0.016     0.000           0.022            0.014          -0.008            0.053          0.055        -0.099         -0.002
                              (0.012)   (0.012)         (0.016)          (0.015)         (0.012)          (0.023)        (0.023)       (0.047)        (0.006)
                        1      0.019    -0.003           0.013            0.010          -0.008            0.053          0.055        -0.097         -0.002
                              (0.003)   (0.005)         (0.014)          (0.014)         (0.015)          (0.023)        (0.023)       (0.045)        (0.006)
Mongolia (MICS3)        2      0.004     0.001          -0.052           -0.038           0.014            0.017          0.034        -0.034         -0.004
                              (0.004)   (0.006)         (0.026)          (0.015)         (0.035)          (0.026)        (0.045)       (0.075)        (0.004)
                        1      0.004     0.004          -0.016           -0.030     **    0.036            0.030     *    0.029        -0.012          0.016
                              (0.004)   (0.006)         (0.010)          (0.007)         (0.017)          (0.012)        (0.020)       (0.016)        (0.007)
Nigeria                 2      0.045     0.022    **    -0.001            0.005          -0.003            0.013          0.008        -0.051          0.034    *
                              (0.004)   (0.006)         (0.018)          (0.018)         (0.019)          (0.022)        (0.013)       (0.047)        (0.015)
                        1      0.045     0.023    **    -0.001            0.005          -0.015           -0.009          0.008        -0.064          0.013
                              (0.004)   (0.006)         (0.018)          (0.018)         (0.011)          (0.014)        (0.013)       (0.049)        (0.015)
Philippines             2      0.080     0.002           0.081            0.000           0.007            0.004          0.001         0.095    **    0.014    **
                              (0.007)   (0.010)         (0.037)          (0.018)         (0.023)          (0.023)        (0.022)       (0.027)        (0.003)
                        1      0.080     0.001           0.081           -0.008           0.007            0.004          0.001         0.095    **    0.015    **
                              (0.007)   (0.012)         (0.037)          (0.018)         (0.023)          (0.023)        (0.022)       (0.027)        (0.003)
Swaziland               2      0.048    -0.017    *     -0.017           -0.015          -0.028           -0.012         -0.005         0.025          -0.011
                              (0.006)   (0.006)         (0.027)          (0.028)         (0.027)          (0.025)        (0.009)       (0.034)        (0.008)
                        1      0.048    -0.017    *     -0.012           -0.008           0.000            0.003         -0.005         0.025          -0.011
                              (0.006)   (0.006)         (0.031)          (0.031)         (0.018)          (0.014)        (0.009)       (0.034)        (0.008)
Appendix Table 2: Changes in Time Allocation at the Age of Relaxation of Minimum Age Laws Non-Hazardous Work), Methods Comparison


                                         Paid              Unpaid                        Unpaid  Hh. Based
                           RD        Employment           Economic       Economic          Hh.     EA &            Any        Attend
Country                   Meth.     Base Change            Activity       Activity      Services  Services        Work        School         Idle
Togo (MICS2)                2       0.218 0.004              0.093 **      0.065          0.028    0.024          0.030        0.007       -0.010
                                   (0.023) (0.032)          (0.024)       (0.039)        (0.022)  (0.012)        (0.017)      (0.021)      (0.013)
                             1      0.218 -0.009             0.092 **      0.066          0.024    0.022 *        0.028        0.003       -0.008
                                   (0.023) (0.035)          (0.027)       (0.045)        (0.011)  (0.008)        (0.015)      (0.013)      (0.012)
Trinidad & Tobago (MICS 3)2         0.026 0.035 **           0.002         0.030 *        0.100    0.114 *        0.122 *      -0.055 ** -0.020 *
                                   (0.007) (0.011)          (0.009)       (0.015)        (0.052)  (0.054)        (0.049)      (0.012)      (0.008)
                             1      0.026 0.035 **           0.002         0.030 *        0.100    0.114 *        0.122 *      -0.067 ** -0.020 *
                                   (0.007) (0.011)          (0.009)       (0.015)        (0.052)  (0.054)        (0.049)      (0.008)      (0.008)
Venezuela                    2      0.124 -0.044             0.097 **      0.031          0.006    0.028          0.068        -0.007       0.012
                                   (0.024) (0.025)          (0.029)       (0.086)        (0.015)  (0.020)        (0.043)      (0.136)      (0.008)
                             1      0.097 -0.018             0.061 *       0.071 ** 0.004          0.025          0.041        -0.018 *     0.010
                                   (0.013) (0.015)          (0.023)       (0.025)        (0.013)  (0.019)        (0.022)      (0.007)      (0.010)
DR Congo                     2      0.085 -0.006             0.086         0.082          0.116    0.126          0.125        -0.002      -0.053
                                   (0.007) (0.011)          (0.120)       (0.130)        (0.170)  (0.180)        (0.184)      (0.021)      (0.057)
                             1      0.085 -0.006             0.086         0.082          0.116    0.126          0.125        -0.002      -0.053
                                   (0.007) (0.011)          (0.120)       (0.130)        (0.170)  (0.180)        (0.184)      (0.021)      (0.057)
RD. Method indicates whether a two-sided (equation 12) or one-sided (equation 10) approach was used to calculate impact of relaxing the law. Age cell
level regressions. Standard errors in parenthesis. * significant at 10%. ** Significant at 5%.
