                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SMART MACHINES AND LONG-TERM MISERY

                                            Jeffrey D. Sachs
                                          Laurence J. Kotlikoff

                                         Working Paper 18629
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18629


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2012




Laurence J. Kotlikoff's sole source of funding for this research is research support from Boston University.
We thank Richard Freeman and Larry Katz for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jeffrey D. Sachs and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Smart Machines and Long-Term Misery
Jeffrey D. Sachs and Laurence J. Kotlikoff
NBER Working Paper No. 18629
December 2012, January 2013
JEL No. D30,D60,D9,F60,H10,H21

                                              ABSTRACT

Are smarter machines our children’s friends? Or can they bring about a transfer from our relatively
unskilled children to ourselves that leaves our children and, indeed, all our descendants – worse off?

This, indeed, is the dire message of the model presented here in which smart machines substitute directly
for young unskilled labor, but complement older skilled labor. The depression in the wages of the
young then limits their ability to save and invest in their own skill acquisition and physical capital.
 This, in turn, means the next generation of young, initially unskilled workers, encounter an economy
with less human and physical capital, which further drives down their wages. This process stabilizes
through time, but potentially entails each newborn generation being worse off than its predecessor.

We illustrate the potential for smart machines to engender long-term misery in a highly stylized two-period
model. We also show that appropriate generational policy can be used to transform win-lose into win-win
for all generations.


Jeffrey D. Sachs
The Earth Institute at Columbia University
314 Low Library
535 West 116th Street, MC 4327
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
sachs@columbia.edu

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kotlikoff@gmail.com
Introduction

       Can mechanization lead to misery for workers? The idea is an old one, dating at

least to the Luddites. The fear is that machines substitute for workers and drive down

their wages. The retort is that machines make workers more productive and drive up

their wages. Economists have long ridiculed the Luddites based on a stubborn fact –

average real wages grow in line with average labor productivity.

       But what if the Luddites are now getting it right -- not for labor as a whole, but

for unskilled labor whose wages are no longer keeping up with the average? Indeed,

what if machines are getting so smart, thanks to their microprocessor brains, that they

no longer need unskilled labor to operate?

       Evidence of this is everywhere. Smart machines now collect our highway tolls,

check us out at stores, take our blood pressure, massage our backs, give us directions,

answer our phones, print our documents, transmit our messages, rock our babies, read

our books, turn on our lights, shine our shoes, guard our homes, fly our planes, write

our wills, teach our children, kill our enemies, and the list goes on.

       Yes, technology has always been changing. But today’s change is substituting

for, not complementing unskilled labor.           Yesterday’s horse-drawn coaches were

replaced by motorized taxis. But both required a human being with relatively little

human-capital investment – a cabbie -- to drive them.           Tomorrow’s cars will drive

themselves, picking us up, dropping us off, and returning home all based on a few

keystrokes. This will make cabbies yet another profession of the past.




                                              2
        Although smart machines substitute for unskilled workers, they are designed and

run by skilled workers. So it’s no surprise that the incomes of skilled workers have risen

relative to those of unskilled workers. One indicator is the U.S. college-wage premium,

which has increased from around 40 percent in 1999 to more than 80 percent today.1

Another is the dramatic growth in recent years in income inequality, documented by

Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez (2011), most of which they trace to “an unprecedented

surge in top wage incomes.” The top 10 percent of U.S. households now receive 50

percent of all income – up from 35 percent four decades ago.2

        Gordon (2009) also presents evidence documenting recent increases in wage

inequality, including an increase in the share of wage income earned by the top 10

percent higher earners – from roughly 26 percent in 1970 to 36 percent by 2006.3 He

also reports a close-to 10 percentage-point fall in labor’s share of national income since

the early 1980s. This decline in labor’s overall share may also reflect accelerating

growth in machine brainpower.            Machines, after all, are a form of capital, and the

higher income they earn based on better machine brains may show up as a return to

capital, not labor income.




1 http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/commentary/2012/2012-10.cfm
2 Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez (2011). Much of this inequality has occurred at the very top of the
income distribution. Since the early 70s, incomes of the top 1 percent have grown seven times faster
han the remaining 99 percent. As a result, the top 1 percent have captured three fifths of all income
growth, with their income sharing rising from 10 to 25 percent.

3Gordon (2009) argues that wage inequality is overstated because the prices of goods and services
consumed by high-wage earners, particularly housing prices in neighborhoods catering to the rich,
have risen more rapidly than those consumed by low-wage workers. But the fact that the high-wage
workers choose to purchase more expensive goods and services doesn’t bear on our paper’s concern
and our model’s implication, namely that the marginal products of low- and high-skilled workers are
diverging.


                                                  3
          Brainier machines pose not just an economic threat to the welfare of today’s

unskilled workers. They also pose a threat to tomorrow’s workers, whether skilled or

unskilled. Obtaining skills takes time studying in school and learning on the job. Thus

skilled workers are disproportionately older workers.          Hence, when machines get

smarter, older workers get richer.         And since older workers as well as retirees

disproportionately own the machines as well as the inventions that enhance the

machines, machine-biased productivity improvements effects a redistribution from

younger, relatively unskilled workers to older relatively skilled workers as well as

retirees.

          This too is evident in the data, though the trends in income by age have not been

analyzed in as much detail as income by education level. The Census Bureau publishes

median income by age for the years 1947 to 2011.4 If we compare the median incomes

of men aged 45-54 with men aged 25-34, we find that the ratio of relative income of the

older cohort has risen significantly. In 1950, the income of older men was 4 percent

more than their younger counterparts. In 1970, the gap was 11 percent. By 2011, the

income of older men was 41 percent above the income of the younger men. For

women, the trend is less apparent, with the ratio of income rising from 0.92 in 1950 to

1.15 in 1970 but then declining slightly to 1.11 in 2011. This difference may reflect that

fact that men were more exposed to the downsizing of employment in manufacturing as

machines replaced less-skilled workers.




4   http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/people/, Table P8


                                               4
        As shown below, in an admittedly highly stylized life-cycle model, the general

equilibrium effects of this generational redistribution can transform enhancements in

machines into very bad news not just for contemporaneous young generations, but for

all future generations. The model treats all young workers as unskilled agents who

invest their savings in the acquisition of both skills and machines.                 When today’s

machines get smarter, today’s young workers get poorer and save less. This, in turn,

limits their own investment in themselves and in machines. The knock-on effect here is

that the economy ends up in all future periods with less human and physical capital,

which further depresses the first-period wages of subsequent young generations.

Although the skilled wage premium and the return to capital rises, the net impact of

smartening up today’s machines is a reduction in the lifetime wellbeing of today’s and

tomorrow’s new generations. In short, better machines can spell universal and

permanent misery for our progeny unless the government uses generational policy to

transform win-lose into win-win.

        In focusing on the men vs. machine fight, we don’t claim that this is the only or

even necessarily the primary factor underlying the relative decline in low-skilled U.S.

wages. Clearly, increased competition with low-skilled workers in China, India, and

other emerging economies is also a part of the story.5 The more these workers produce,

the more they reduce the global prices of low-skilled-intensive traded products, which

5 Michael Spence (2011) argues that globalization has raised job prospects for U.S. skilled workers
and lowered them for unskilled workers. Fehr, Jokisch, Kotlikoff (2008) show that catch-up
productivity growth in China, India, and other developing countries could exacerbate wage
inequality. Catch-up productivity growth refers to uniform growth in the productivity of workers at
all skill levels. But since developing countries are relatively abundant in low-skilled workers, this
catch up process brings about an increase in the worldwide endowment of unskilled relative to
skilled workers.


                                                  5
translates into lower wages for low-skilled workers across the globe.         This is the

standard factor-price equalization mechanism.           But improved communication

technologies have permitted U.S. companies to directly substitute foreign for domestic

workers via offshoring – hiring workers abroad at lower wages to produce what their

American workforces would otherwise make.

       This spatial disaggregation of the value chain has been particularly significant in

manufacturing, which employed around 30 percent of the U.S. workforce in 1950, but

less than 10 percent today. This said, the fight with foreign workers and machines for

domestic jobs, particularly low-skilled jobs, are not necessarily separate battles. If

machines and low-skilled workers are very close substitutes in production, the Chinese

“worker” taking an American’s job could well be a smart machine installed on the floor

of a Chinese factory.

       Modern economics’ reluctance to embrace the Luddite view reflects a long

record in industrial countries of real wage growth even among the least skilled. It also

reflects the profession’s reliance on the mathematically convenient Cobb-Douglas

production function in which different inputs enter the function symmetrically. With

this functional form, technical change makes all inputs more productive.

       But economists’ mathematical formulations of production are just that –

formulations. No mathematical description fully captures the means of production for

any single firm let alone an entire economy consisting of millions of firms. Nor can we

rely on technology changing in a uniform manner through time. In the model we now

present, machines and unskilled workers produce an intermediate product that is then



                                            6
combined with skilled labor to produce a final output. As long as machines and unskilled

workers are relatively substitutable compared with the intermediate product and skilled

workers, a rise in machine productivity can substitute for unskilled labor, thereby

reducing its wage. As a result, the improvement in machine productivity in turn creates

consequences for the contemporaneous and future young that are remarkably bad for

the chosen parameters.



Previous Literature

       Our simple model, which places the potential dynamic knock-on effects of

machine competition in stark relief, complements the ground-breaking work of Zeira

(1988) in which labor and capital are used in fixed proportions to produce

intermediate inputs needed for final production. Technical change in Zeira’s model

entails adopting more capital-intensive technologies for these inputs. Countries

with higher wages adopt such technologies over time. Those with lower wages do

not. Zeira’s model represents a very deep contribution to understanding differential

growth across countries. But it doesn’t distinguish between low- and high-skilled

workers or consider the intergenerational redistribution that arises from the

smartening of machines.

       Zuleta (2004, 2008, and 2012) endogenizes technical change in a series of

rich and very interesting papers in which bequests play a major role.        Under the

right assumptions, his OLG model also produces long-run output declines as a result

of technological progress that adversely affects capital accumulation.




                                           7
       Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2012), in their acclaimed book Race Against Machines,

also emphasize that smart machines can wreck havoc on the wellbeing of workers,

although they stress that white collar as well as blue collar jobs and wages are

threatened.



The Model

       The model is a variant of the standard two-period overlapping generation (OLG)

model. The production function depends on three inputs: machines M, unskilled labor

L, and skilled labor S. Specifically, gross output Q is a constant elasticity of substitution

(CES) production function of the economy-wide stocks of M, L, and S:


(1)    Q = Q[N(uM,L), S]

M and L combine in a CES production function with elasticity εML to produce an

intermediate product N, and N and S combine in a CES production function with

elasticity εSN to produce the final output Q. The parameter u is a parameter measuring

the technical efficiency of machinery. We examine whether a rise in u, a pure technical

advance, can reduce economic wellbeing, an outcome we refer to as “immiserizing

productivity.”

       In any period, M, L, and S are determined by past investments and are fully

employed. Competitive firms hire M, L, and S to the point where their marginal

products (denoted as Qi for i = M, L, and S) equal their market wages:


(2)    Qi = Wi



                                             8
          Consider the effect of a rise on u on the wage of unskilled workers, QL = WL.

Specifically, let us determine dln(QL)/dln(u). A bit of algebra reveals that:


(3)       dln(QL)/dln(u) = [εSN – θεML]/εML,


where θ is the share of skilled labor in the economy, equal to (QS * S)/Q. We see that a

rise in machine productivity reduces the unskilled wage if εML > εSN /θ. Immiserizing

productivity is more likely if:

         Substitutability of machines and unskilled labor is high (εML large)
         Substitutability of intermediate goods and skilled labor is low (εSN small)
         The share of skilled labor in final output is high (θ high)

      Note that immiserizing productivity is not possible for a Cobb-Douglas production

function or indeed for any aggregate CES production function in which εML = εSN. In

those cases, a rise in machine productivity necessarily raises the wage of unskilled labor.

          We also note that:


(4)       dln(QS)/dln(u) = (1-θ) (1- α)/εSN > 0,


where α is the share of unskilled labor in the production of N. We see from (4) that

skilled workers always benefit from a rise in machine productivity, under the

separability assumptions in (1).

          Now let us put this production framework into a standard two-period

overlapping-generations (OLG) model. We assume that the labor force is fixed across

generations at the constant level L. Each individual lives for two generations, young (Y)

and old (O). When young, each individual supplies one unit of unskilled labor, and earns



                                               9
wage income WL = QL. This wage income is divided between saving Σ and consumption

CY:


(5)      WL = Σ + CY


Saving, in turn, is divided between investments in next-period machinery M and skills S:


(6)      Σt = Mt+1 + St+1


         We assume that both Mt and St last for exactly one period. The return on

investing in M and S is QM and QS respectively. The old generation in period t+1 fully

consumes its income:


(7)      COt+1 = WL - CYt + (QM)t+1 Mt+1 + (QS)t+1 St+1


         If young savers in period t have perfect foresight regarding the marginal

products of M and S in period t+1, they will invest in Mt+1 and St+1 so as to equalize the

marginal products of M and S:


(8)      (QM)t+1 = (QS)t+1 = Rt+1 ,


where Rt+1 is the gross rate of return to saving in period t. Equation (7) can then be re-

written as a familiar inter-temporal budget constraint, in which the present discounted

value of lifetime consumption is equal to the income of the (unskilled) worker when

young:


(9)      WL = CYt + COt+1 / Rt+1


                                              10
A member of generation t maximizes a two-period utility function Ut = U(CYt , COt+1)

subject to the budget constraint. For simplicity, we use the log-utility function:


(10)   Ut = β ln (CYt + (1- β) ln(COt+1)


       This utility function results in the familiar result that consumption when young is

a fixed multiple of WL:

(11)   CYt = β WL and COt+1 = (1- β)Rt+1WLt


       Since saving is given by Σ = WL – CY = (1- β)WL = (1- β)QL we can plug (11)

back into (9) to yield the following expression for the utility of generation t:


(11)   Ut = constant + ln(QL) + (1-β) ln Rt+1


       We now show that a rise in machine productivity can reduce generational

welfare for the young. The rise in u leads to a fall in QL and a rise in Rt+1. The wellbeing

of the young is affected in two offsetting ways: by a fall in labor income and by a rise in

the return on saving. In principle, Ut can either rise or fall when productivity increases.

The larger is β (the more impatient is the household) the more likely is immiserizing

productivity.

       Suppose that QL declines as the result of the rise in machine productivity. This is

not the end of the story. Since saving is a fixed share of the wage, saving will also

decline, causing a decline in M+S. This in turn will further lower next period’s output.




                                             11
The economy will reach a new equilibrium, at a lower level of M, S, and unskilled wage

WL.

       When we examine the dynamic effects of a rise in u we must distinguish

between anticipated and unanticipated increases in u. Suppose that u is constant until

period t, and then rises permanently to u+Δ for all i ≥ t. If the rise in u is anticipated as

of period t-1, savers in period t-1 will shift their savings of M and S to keep QM = QS in

period t. If savers in period t-1 do not anticipate the rise in u in period t then QM will

exceed QS in period t.



An illustration

       Consider the specific production function Q = π Na S(1-a) , N = L + uM, and 0 < a <

1. The term π is total factor productivity in the production of Q. L and M are perfect

substitutes in the production of N, that is εML = ∞ and immiserizing productivity is

guaranteed. For given M and S, a rise u necessarily lowers QL. Specifically, dlnQL/du = (a-

1)M/(L+uM) < 0.

       As an illustration, we select L= 1, a = 0.5, β = 0.5, π = 10, and u = 1, which implies

a share of income going to all labor (unskilled plus skilled) of 68 percent. Since the

technology is constant, there is no long-term growth in the economy. The baseline

equilibrium values of key variables are shown as Periods 1 and 2 in Table 1. We suppose

that u unexpectedly and permanently increases from the baseline value 1 to a new

permanent value of 10 beginning in period 3.




                                             12
       We see in Table 1 the effects of the rise in u. In the top third of the table we

consider the case of an unanticipated rise in u. This means that investors in period 2 do

not realize that u will rise as of period 3. The action therefore begins only in period 3.

       In the third period, M and N are unchanged as a result of the productivity shock,

as they were determined by the saving decisions of the young in the first period. The

current wage of unskilled workers (i.e. the earnings of the young of generation 3)

declines from 5.10 to 2.53 as the result of the rise in u. The returns on M and S both rise,

and the old generation (that owns both M and S) experiences a boom in income while

the young generation experiences a bust.           Consumption of the old rises while

consumption and saving of the young declines. This pushes down the future capital

stocks of M and S. By period 5 the economy reaches a new equilibrium characterized by

lower wages, lower skills, lower M, and higher total output than in the baseline. The

ratio of earnings of skilled workers relative to unskilled workers, WS/WL, is permanently

raised from 1 to 10.

       Let us look at the implications for lifetime utility across generations. The lifetime

utility of generation 2 (which reaches old age in period 3 as productivity rises) soars.

This generation benefits from high returns to both M and S. The utility of generation 3

is slightly below that of generation 1, as wages have declined while the returns on

saving have increased. Yet the utility of generations 4 and later are considerably lower

than the baseline utility. All generations other than generation 2 lose from the rise in

productivity!




                                             13
       If the rise in productivity in period 3 is already anticipated in period 2, the

dynamics are slightly different. In essence, the trajectory to the new equilibrium is

accelerated. Savers in period 2 allocate more saving to machines and less to skills. This

means that the wage of unskilled workers in period 3 is even lower than in the

unanticipated case because there are more machines to substitute for unskilled labor

when the rise in u is anticipated. The utility of generation 3 falls harder and faster.

Once again, only generation 3 (the generation that is old when u rises) wins, while all of

the succeeding generations are worse off.


Intergenerational Policy to the Rescue

       There is something paradoxical about a pure rise in productivity that leaves all

generations but one worse off. After all, machines can now do more on behalf of

humanity than they could before the rise in u. It should be possible, in principle, to

make all generations better off as a result of the pure increase in machine productivity.

       Indeed it is. The key is to tap some of the windfall of the older generation in

period 3, and share it with the young generation and with succeeding generations.

Intergenerational fiscal policy can do the trick. Here’s how.

       Let us return to the case of an unanticipated rise in u. In period 3, when

productivity unexpectedly rises, the government also unexpectedly imposes a wealth

tax on the old. Specifically, the government takes an amount MG < M of the machinery

via a wealth levy, while the balance of machinery, MP = M - MG, is left in the hands of

the old of generation 2. The government chooses MG so that all generations have




                                            14
higher utility than in the baseline. In the illustration in Table 1, the government taxes

away approximately 18 percent of MP (MG is 0.25 of the total stock M = 1.42).

         The government’s income in period 3 is equal to QM3*MG. The government

transfers the amount (QM3 - 1)*MG to the young of generation 3, whose income is now

WL + T, where T is the transfer payment made by the government. The government also

saves and reinvests the sum MG for the next period. The generation-3 youth make their

saving and investment decisions in the knowledge that the government will also be

investing in the machinery sector. Total machinery in each period will then be the sum

of privately held machinery, MP, and the government-owned machinery, MG. In each

subsequent period, the government transfers an amount (QM – 1)*MG to the current

young generation out of the income that it receives on the income from the

government-owned machinery, and it reinvests the sum MG to maintain a constant level

of MG.

         It is easy to illustrate that this kind of tax-ownership-and-transfer system makes

it possible to improve the utility of all generations as a result of the rise in u. In the

example in Table 1, the utility of generation 1 is 5.76, and this rises to 10.48 for

generation 2, leaving generation 2 better off than the baseline despite the capital levy.

Future generations are even better off then generation 2 as a result of the government’s

transfer program.




                                            15
Conclusion

       Even if economists have been reluctant to view machines, be they drones or

microprocessors, as dangerous competitors, those whose jobs have been lost to

machines are facing a terrible time finding employment that pays a decent wage.      In

contrast, those who own the machines or have the skills to design and run the machines

are having no trouble capitalizing on the mechanized misery of the masses.

       Our point can be simply summarized. Suppose that an innovation in machine

technology (e.g. improved software) raises machine productivity in a manner that

indeed reduces the marginal productivity of low-skilled workers while raising the

marginal productivity of high-skilled workers. This not only increases the income gap

between skilled and unskilled workers, but also has a generational effect, raising the

incomes of the older generation while lowering the income of the young. This effect

occurs because the old have accumulated physical and human capital, while the young

are endowed with unskilled labor. The generational redistribution has a knock-on effect

on national saving.    Income shifts from young savers to older dis-savers, thereby

depressing the national saving rate and the future stock of capital.

       The effect can be strong enough, if the parameter values are within a certain

range, to reduce the incomes not only of today’s young workers but also of future

generations. The fall in today’s saving rate means that the next generation will have

even lower wages than today. The economy will reach a new equilibrium in which the

technological advance has raised the wellbeing of today’s older generation while

lowering the wellbeing of today’s young generation and of all future generations!



                                            16
           The Luddites may, therefore, have had a point after all. Advances in machine

productivity can indeed immiserize today’s young and future generations. But does this

mean that we should smash the machines? Here we can benefit from a bit more

insight.     Instead of smashing the machines (or more prosaically, preventing their

deployment), we can instead use inter-generational tax-and-transfer policy. When the

older generation enjoys a windfall from the advance of technology, the government can

tax some of that windfall, and then use the proceeds to improve the wellbeing of

today’s youth and of future generations. With the right choice of tax-and-transfer

policies, all generations can benefit from the advance in technology, while under laissez

faire, only today’s older generation benefits, and at the expense of all other

generations.




                                            17
References

Atkinson, Anthony, Thomas Piketty, and Emanuel Saez. March 2011. “Top Incomes in
the Long Run of History,” Journal of Economic Literature, IVIX, 3-69.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee. 2012. Race Against the Machine.
http://raceagainstthemachine.com/

Fehr, Hans, Sabine Jokisch, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 2008. “Dynamic Globalization and
Its Potentially Alarming Prospects for Low-Wage Workers.” Mimeo, Boston University.
http://kotlikoff.net/sites/default/files/Globalization.pdf.

Gordon, Robert J., 2009. “Misperceptions About the Magnitude and Timing of Changes
in American Income Inequality.” NBER working paper 15351.

Spence, Michael (2011). July-August 2011. “Globalization and Unemployment,” Foreign
Affairs.

Zeira, Joseph. November 1998. “Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 113 no. 4. 1091-1117.

 Zuleta, Hernando. September 2004. “Factor Saving Innovations and Capital Income
Share in OLG Models.” PhD Thesis. Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Departamentoo de
Economía, Barcelona-España.

 Zuleta, Hernando. October 2008. "Factor Saving Innovations and Factor Income
Shares." Review of Economic Dynamics. Elsevier for the Society for Economic Dynamics,
v. 11 (4). 836-851.

Zuleta, Hernando. January 2012. “Variable Factor Shares, Measurement and Growth
Accounting.” Economics Letters. Vol. 114 (1). 91-93.




                                          18
                 Table 1. Dynamics of a Rise of Machine Productivity
                        (Unanticipated and anticipated cases)

Period              1         2         3          4         5         6

Unanticipated
U                   1         1         10         10        10        10
M                   1.13      1.13      1.13       0.72      0.57      0.57
S                   1.42      1.42      1.42       0.55      0.44      0.44
WL                  5.10      5.10      2.53       2.03      2.03      2.03
Q                   18.11     18.11     51.88      27.72     22.66     22.66
U generation t      5.76      11.22     5.70       4.58      4.58      4.58

Anticipated
U                   1         1         10         10        10        10
M                   1.13      1.13      1.49       0.57      0.57      0.57
S                   1.42      1.42      1.06       0.45      0.45      0.45
WL                  5.10      5.10      2.03       2.03      2.03      2.03
Q                   18.11     18.11     53.84      22.66     22.66     22.66
U generation t      5.76      11.50     4.58       4.58      4.58      4.58

Unanticipated
With       Fiscal
Transfers
U                   1         1         10         10        10        10
M                   1.13      1.13      1.13       2.54      2.13      2.15
MP                  1.13      1.13      0.88       1.88      1.90      1.90
MG                  0         0         0.25       0.25      0.25      0.25
S                   1.42      1.42      1.42       2.01      1.74      1.75
WL                  5.10      5.10      2.53       2.03      2.03      2.03
Transfer Pay        0         0         6.07       5.10      5.15      5.15
Q                   18.11     18.11     51.88      27.72     22.66     22.66
U generation t      5.76      10.48     19.32      16.25     16.40     16.40




                                         19
