                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ENDOWMENT MANAGEMENT BASED ON A POSITIVE MODEL OF THE UNIVERSITY

                                          Caroline M. Hoxby

                                         Working Paper 18626
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18626


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




I am grateful to many people with whom I have had discussions that helped me refine ideas on this
topic. I am similarly grateful to people who have written previously on this and related topics. These
include William Bowen, Jeffrey Brown, Henry Hansmann, and Robert Merton. Eric Bettinger, Keith
Brown, David Chambers, Stephen Dimmock, Elroy Dimson, William Goestmann, Bridget Long, Sharon
Oster, Christian Tiu, Sarah Turner, and Scott Weisbenner gave me extremely helpful comments on
an early outline of this paper. This paper draws very substantially on my 2011 Clarendon Lecture
in Economics entitled "The Complex and Increasingly Global Market for Elite Higher Education"
which is rewritten in the form of two chapters in the Clarendon Lectures monograph The Role of Markets
in Education, Oxford University Press (OUP), forthcoming. I am grateful for the support of the OUP,
especially Adam Swallow. I am solely responsible for the content of this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Caroline M. Hoxby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Endowment Management Based on a Positive Model of the University
Caroline M. Hoxby
NBER Working Paper No. 18626
December 2012
JEL No. G11,I22,I23

                                              ABSTRACT

I propose a positive model of the university that generates many apparently peculiar features of universities
such as endowments and tuition subsidies. The model proposes a specific objective function: a university
maximizes its contribution to the intellectual capital of society, valued at social returns. The objective
function is enforced within the model–that is, it leads to actions that reinforce the initial selection of
the objective function. Endowments also arise naturally within the model: they are a necessary feature
of certain universities, not an accident. The model has important implications for the decisions that
universities should make on many fronts, but I focus on the implications for financial decisions, especially
universities' endowment spending rules and portfolio allocations. The model is designed to explain
America's great private research universities and very selective liberal arts colleges and–with modest
adaptations–institutions like America's and Britain's great public research universities. Indeed, a ancillary
benefit of the model is that it provides a justification for existence of the aforementioned institutions
by assigning them a unique role in the creation of the world's intellectual capital.


Caroline M. Hoxby
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Building, 579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
choxby@stanford.edu
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                      2

                                          I. INTRODUCTION

        In this paper, I propose a positive model of the university in which many apparently

peculiar features of universities--such as endowments and tuition subsidies--are generated by the

internal logic of the model. The model proposes a specific objective function for universities and

demonstrates how it is enforced. That is, the objective function leads to actions that reinforce the

initial selection of the objective function. The model has important implications for the decisions

that universities should make on many fronts. In this paper, I focus on the implications for

financial decisions, especially universities' endowment spending rules and portfolio allocation.

The model is designed to explain America's great private research universities and very selective

liberal arts colleges and--with modest adaptations--institutions that are partly controlled by the

state such as America's and Britain's great public research universities. The model is designed to

explain them precisely because many people find them hardest to explain, even enigmatic.

Indeed, an ancillary benefit of the model is that it provides a justification for the existence of all

of the aforesaid institutions by assigning them a unique role in the creation of intellectual capital.

A simpler version of the model could explain most other colleges and universities, and this is a

topic to which I return briefly.

        A very brief intuition into the model, laid out in Section III, is as follows. Each university

maximizes its contribution to society's intellectual capital by making two types of investments:

(i) investments in advanced human capital embodied in people and (ii) investments in new

knowledge embodied in research. These investments have peculiar properties that make them

unlikely to be financed by conventional means. In making these investments, universities play a

role that closely parallels that of a venture capitalist. They invest not only money, but also
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                    3

expertise and infrastructure. The university gets what is essentially an equity stake in its

intellectual capital investments. Collecting these (equity-type) returns is a key difficulty for

universities, and it is in overcoming this difficulty that universities (i) generate an endowment,

not merely gifts and grants for current use and (ii) reinforce the initial choice of their objective

function so that the model is, as a logical matter, closed.

        This paper draws heavily upon Hoxby (forthcoming) in that the model of the university is

the same. However, those chapters present empirical evidence that justifies how the model

characterizes universities. They also explain how universities evolved over decades into the

institutions that they are modeled as being. In this paper, I present the model without much

empirical justification and without history. Hoxby (forthcoming) also examines the implications

of the model for universities' policies on tuition, admissions, and a variety of other outcomes. In

this paper, I touch on these policies glancingly at most and focus on the implications for

endowment management.

        The papers to which this study is most closely related are Hansmann (1990) and Merton

(1993). The Hansmann paper is a masterful review of many explanations of why universities

have endowments and what each justification implies for endowment management. He carefully

analyzes and rejects both the intergenerational equity model of Tobin (1974) and extensions of

the intergenerational equity model that presume that there will be an increasing cost of education

for succeeding generations. The latter type of model produces spending rules along the lines of

the Stanford Rule (Merhling, Goldman, and Sedlacek 2005). Hansmann also analyzes several

partial explanations for endowments and their management rules--for instance, programming

models--such as Grinold, Hopkins, and Massy (1978)--which do not maximize an objective
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                4

function that values education and research but merely assess whether a rule can attain a metric

such as maintaining a certain ratio of expenses to endowment. Hansmann even carefully assesses

casual explanations for endowments such as the character and incentives of people who serve as

university trustees.

        Following his review--which I do not imitate in this paper, partly because his review is so

masterful and partly for reasons of length--Hansmann concludes:

        The argument that has been offered most frequently in recent years to explain the

        accumulation of endowments-that they are a means to intergenerational equity-is

        unpersuasive. More compelling reasons to accumulate endowments are that they

        serve as a financial buffer against periods of financial adversity, that they help to

        insure the long-run survival of the institution's reputational capital, that they

        protect the institution's intellectual freedom, and that they assist in passing on

        values prized by the present generation. It is not clear, however, that these are

        today the reasons why endowments are accumulated. Nor is it clear that the sizes

        of existing endowments, and the ways in which they are managed, are well chosen

        to serve these goals. In particular, prevailing endowment spending rules seem

        inconsistent with most of these objectives. We cannot say, from the arguments

        and evidence surveyed here, that the endowments of the major private universities

        today are either too big or too small. It does appear, however, that surprisingly

        little thought has been devoted to the purposes for which endowments are

        maintained and that, as a consequence, their rate of accumulation and the pattern

        of spending from their income have been managed without much attention to the
HOXBY                                     FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                              5

         ultimate objectives of the institutions that hold them.

In other words, Hansmann concludes that there is not a satisfying, positive model of universities

in which endowments play a logical and necessary role. He does not himself propose one.

         In many ways, Merton takes off where Hansmann ends. Indeed, his paper begins with

part of the above quotation from Hansmann. Merton's key contributions are (i) to focus attention

on the non-endowment sources of cash flow for universities (tuition, gifts, and so on), and (ii) to

solve the problem of how to manage an endowment given these non-endowment sources of cash

flow and flows of expenses. Merton treats the cash flow and expenses as exogenous because

"that abstraction does not significantly alter the optimal portfolio allocations." Merton's article is

a great contribution that is not only useful to the broad scholarly community but that is

specifically helpful to this study because it allows me to focus on questions that he leaves

unresolved.1

         I focus on: what the university's objective is; why that objective generates sources of cash

flow like gifts, tuition, and grants; why endowments exist; and how the endowment and cash

flows are interdependent. Essentially, my model sets up the structural version of the university's

investment problem. For each such problem, there exists a reduced-form version that can be

written strictly in terms of cash flows. This reduced-form problem is solved in Merton's paper--

except for some issues that I take up later.

         In addition to the closely related papers by Hansmann and Merton, there is a rich but less

related literature on the management of endowment portfolios (the types of securities in which

         1
             I believe that this is a fair characterization of Merton's paper because he writes: The course taken here is
to address this question in the middle range: it does not attempt to specify... the objective function for the university,
but it does derive optimal investment and expenditure for [the] endowment in a context which takes account of
overall university objectives and the availability of other sources of revenue besides endowment.
HOXBY                                   FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                      6

they should invest) and on spending rules (the amount of the annual return on the endowment

that should be spent rather than saved in the endowment).2 Many of these papers provide

important estimates of elasticities or other parameters--for instance, the sacrifice in average

returns and decrease in risk that universities experience when they invest more of their portfolio

in bonds. Or, to take another example, Brown, Dimmock, and Weisbenner (2012) estimate the

response of donations to the rate of return on the endowment. However, as noted by both

Hansmann and Merton, this rich array of papers tend to take no stand on why endowments exist

or the purpose they serve and instead rely--explicitly or implicitly--on a rule of thumb such as

needing to maintain a perpetual level flow of expected real income. Thus, the body of papers

referenced in this paragraph, although terribly useful given an objective function and reduced-

form rules based on it, are logically posterior to this paper.

        This paper contrasts with the small existing literature that does propose objective

functions for universities--most notably prestige.3 These papers strike me as unsatisfactory in

that prestige is a fundamentally incomplete explanation. The authors never demonstrate why

institutions should compete on the particular metrics of prestige--endowments and admissions

thresholds--that the authors choose. They never explain why endowments or admissions

thresholds exist in the first place so that they could be grounds for prestige competitions. Indeed,



        2
           See, for example, Advisory Committee on Endowment Management (1969), Black (1976), Donaldson,
Lufkin and Jenrette (1969), Ennis and Williamson (1976), Eisner (1974), Grinold, Hopkins, and Massy (1978),
Litvack, Malkiel, and Quandt (1974); Malkiel and Firstenberg (1976); Tobin (1974); Williamson (1975). More
recent papers include Blume (2009), Brown, Dimmock, Kang, and Weisbenner (2010); Brown, Dimmock, and
Weisbenner (2012), Brown, Garlappi, and Tiu (2010), Dimmock (2012), Lerner, Schoar, and Wang (2008),
Campbell (2012).
        3
          This literature is best exemplified by Ehrenberg (2000). A related but different and incomplete
explanation is ever-increasing demand for elite higher education--see Clotfelter (1996).
HOXBY                                  FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                          7

saying that universities compete for prestige seems merely to be conceding that there is no

positive model of universities, with the result that universities must necessarily be said to pursue

essentially superficial goals that happen to have predictive power.

        The structure of the remainder of the paper is as follows. In section II, I review the

venture capital problem because it clarifies important features of the university's investment

problem. In section III, I lay out a positive model of the university. Section IV presents a less

abstract, more down-to-earth portrait of a university that is described by the model. In section V,

I describe the implications of the model for endowment spending and portfolio allocation. This

is where Merton (1993) plays an important role. Finally, in section VI, I conclude by explaining

what the model has to say about some questions that commonly arise.



                                   II. THE VENTURE CAPITAL PROBLEM

        It may appear to be a digression to review the venture capital problem and how it is

solved before moving to universities. However, it is efficient to conduct this review because it is

easier to see the structure of the problem when it is presented in its more abstract form, without

all of the details that often confound analysis of universities. Although economists who work on

the venture capital problem usually lay it out in a fairly different way from the presentation here,

the fundamental problem and aspects of the solution I present draw heavily upon this literature.4




        4
          I rely particularly on Repullo and Suarez's (2004) elegant exposition. Other helpful papers include:
Bergemann and Hege (1998), Berglof (1994), Casamatta (2003), Gompers (1995), Gorman and Sahlman (1989),
Kaplan and Strömberg (2001, 2003), Sahlman (1990), and Trester (1998).
HOXBY                                     FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                                   8

II.A. Problematic investment projects

         There exists a set of investment projects with the following characteristics:

• They are brought forward by a person (or persons) whose unique capacities are necessary for

the success of the project. For instance, this person could be someone who has the idea for an

invention. Hereafter, I call this person the "agent."5

• To be successful, the project requires assets--usually described as expertise and infrastructure--

whose building or adjustment costs are convex in the per-period increase in their amount or

diversity. This is just to say that it is expensive to build the relevant assets very quickly,

especially if one does not already a foundation of closely related assets. For instance, the project

may require expertise in finance, marketing, the law, certain engineering, or some other body of

knowledge. The infrastructure required may be the plant and equipment necessary to construct

and test a prototype of the invention. What is important is that the project requires assets that

have costs that are convex in the way described. Hereafter, I use the phrase "convex adjustment

costs" to refer to such costs.

• Unless an assessor has expertise in areas related to the agent's unique capacity, his estimates of

the potential profitability of the project will be extremely imprecise.

• The project is risky. This almost goes without saying since (i) it depends on the existence of

the agent who could, say, be killed in an accident and (ii) something about the project must be

advanced if only an expert can assess its potential profitability.

         These conditions generate a problem. The agent cannot get financing for the project from



         5
            He is typically called the entrepreneur in the venture capital literature, but this conveys a false sense that
the project is routinely a start-up business.
HOXBY                                 FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                 9

a bank or raise money in some other conventional way because (i) the bank or other conventional

financier has insufficient expertise to assess the project and cannot build this expertise without

incurring prohibitive costs and (ii) the agent's costs of building the expertise and infrastructure

himself are prohibitive. Even if the agent were able to get financing from a bank, he might

substantially under-finance the project because he is risk-averse and his investment would entail

a great deal of undiversified risk.

II.B. The potential for a venture capital solution

        Venture capitalists are a potential solution to this problem. They are modeled as people

who have a pool of financial capital to invest and who have already built expertise and

infrastructure in areas relevant to certain types of projects. A venture capitalist invests not only

money but also expertise and infrastructure. Using his expertise, he selects projects whose

expected rate of return exceeds a threshold based the opportunity costs for his financial capital,

expertise, and infrastructure. In return for making an investment, the venture capitalist gets what

is essentially an equity position in the project (more on this below).

        The venture capital problem exists precisely because the costs of building expertise and

infrastructure are convex as described. This has a few implications. First, a venture capitalist's

portfolio is necessarily limited in its breadth and size by the cost of building diverse expertise

and infrastructure. His portfolio may contain many projects and be much more diversified than

any one of these projects, but it will be far less diverse than, say, a market index fund. Second,

the venture capitalist will want to finance a stream of projects over a number of years--not

finance a single generation of projects and then get out of the business. This is because the costs

of building expertise and infrastructure are convex in the speed of doing it. Thus, the venture
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                    10

capitalist's investments in expertise and infrastructure are more likely to pay off if he builds them

gradually and employs them for several generations of projects. Third, the venture capitalist has

strong incentives to maintain his expertise and infrastructure, as opposed to letting them

depreciate. He will fear situations in which his returns from projects are insufficient to support

maintenance-type investments in his expertise and infrastructure. For instance, a venture

capitalist who was short on current income might lose his experts to other employers. If much of

this were to occur, his ability to continue his venture capital business would be in doubt. Thus,

venture capitalists may wish to have a smoother stream of investments than an investor in

financial markets. Fourth, the cost structure implies that projects will crowd one another out at

the margin. That is, two projects may have similar potential profitability and might each pass the

venture capitalist's threshold if each could use his existing stock of expertise and infrastructure.

However, neither project might justify the venture capitalist's quickly building enough new

expertise and infrastructure to accommodate it. The potential for crowding out means that

venture capitalists will acquire a good deal of information about an agent before making an offer

to him.

          The venture capital solution to the investment problem contains two-sided moral hazard:

the agent must make effort and contribute his unique capacity but the venture capitalist must also

contribute his expertise and infrastructure. This moral hazard has two important implications.

First, the problems caused by moral hazard decrease as the project's potential profitability rises:

Both parties will be glad to make effort when they realize that they are in a situation with vast

potential profits. Thus, the optimal contract concentrates the returns to the venture capitalist in

the best states of the world. For instance, a contract might specify that the venture capitalist
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                   11

receives no share of the returns if the profits are below some threshold, a certain share if the

profits are in some intermediate range, and a higher share if profits are in a high range. Second,

owing to moral hazard, the optimal contract will make the agent fund some share of the project if

he can. This is because the agent's moral hazard shrinks as he himself invests more: he will lose

his own stake if he makes no effort. Thus, within a relevant range, the venture capitalist is

willing to invest more when the agent invests more, and the entire project can be more optimally

financed and managed.

        A final thing worth mentioning is that venture capitalists can bring "outside money" to

projects to improve their solution. That is, the venture capitalist may find himself in situations

where he has sufficient expertise and infrastructure for a project but insufficient funds. In such

cases, he may be able to get external financing for the project that the agent could never get on

his own because (i) the venture capitalist is known to have the expertise to assess the project and

(ii) the credibility of venture capitalist's announced assessment is increased by his investing his

own expertise, infrastructure, and money.

        Summing up, an investment project of the type described is more likely to be optimally

funded--that is, solved by venture capital--when:

• the expertise and infrastructure required are such that a venture capitalist can pay for the cost of

building and maintaining them by earning returns on a sufficiently large and diverse portfolio of

(somewhat related) projects;

• the venture capitalist does not so discount the future that he is unwilling to use his expertise and

infrastructure over multiple generations of projects;

• the expected returns to the project are sufficient to clear the threshold set by a venture
HOXBY                                    FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                             12

capitalist's opportunity costs of financial capital, expertise, and infrastructure;

• reasonably optimal contracts are possible. These will entail the venture capitalist's taking a

sufficiently small equity share that the agent's moral hazard problem is not crippling. The agent

will typically make some contribution (even if it is only his time and effort), and the venture

capitalist will typically hold a non-linear equity position in the project.



                                        III. THE UNIVERSITY'S PROBLEM

         In this section, I create a convenient fiction, the "founder," to embody the people whose

assets and actions have shaped what universities have become. While actual universities have

often developed what they do and how they finance it through a combination of vision, trial,

muddle, competition, and imitation, the founder is blessed with extremely clear vision, rational

expectations, and well-defined objectives. Obviously, the founder is not meant to be taken

literally, but he makes it easier to lay out a positive model of the university because he is the

prime mover and has an abstract understanding of the problem he is trying to solve. It is by no

means necessary for actual university leaders to have been so concerted or to articulate similarly

abstract models of their universities--just as it is not necessary for actual corporate leaders to

manage or speak about their firms in highly abstract ways.6

          6
            Although the founder is probably best thought of as an abstract person or persons, there are people who
have founded universities recently enough for us to observe their motives and action: Leland and Jane Stanford
(founders of Stanford University), Andrew Carnegie and Richard and Andrew Mellon (founders of the two parts of
what is now Carnegie-Mellon University), Peter and Hannah Widener (founders of Widener University), John D.
Rockefeller (founder of Rockefeller University), and so on. All of these people took funds that they had earned in
enterprises that were privately profitable--railroads, steel, chemicals, shipping, oil--and dedicated them to society's
good by founding a university. Their first moves were hiring faculty from other universities, accumulating libraries,
building laboratories, and otherwise creating expertise and infrastructure. Of course, great private universities like
Harvard and Yale also had founders, but they are sufficiently "historical" for their motives to be less easily
characterized. This is not to say that these universities do not fit the model, but that explaining them requires a more
historical approach.
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                  13

        The founder's goal is to use his initial capital, acquired through some exogenous means,

to make the maximum contribution to society's intellectual capital, each unit of which he values

at its social (private plus public) return. It is important that the founder wants to add intellectual

capital, not merely fund intellectual capital that society would readily create in his absence. For

instance, if a person's optimal education is such that he could finance it on his own using

conventional means, that person is not of interest to the founder. In practice, this puts aside a

good share of human capital investments that earn private returns, are not terribly risky, do not

require great expertise for a loan officer to assess, and do not require highly expert instructors or

infrastructure with convex adjustment costs.

        Rather, the founder takes as his problem some part of the market for intellectual capital

that will be missing without his intervention. This is parallel to the venture capitalist's taking on

some set of investments that will not occur if they are constrained to use conventional financing.

Advanced intellectual capital has properties that make investments in it likely to be missing or

undersized.

III.A. The peculiar properties of advanced intellectual capital

        I define intellectual capital as knowledge that generates welfare for society in any way--

private earnings, private non-monetary benefits, public benefits, and so on. Intellectual capital

takes one of two forms: human capital and research, which I differentiate, for clarity, as follows.

Human capital is knowledge that is stored in a person's brain and that cannot be used without his

making complementary effort. Human capital need not be new knowledge: a engineer who

knows how to solve a certain well-understood type of problem has human capital. Research is a

contribution to the stock of world knowledge that can be embodied in some form--a publication,
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                     14

for instance--that it is independent of any particular person. This is not to say that research

generates returns without some person's effort. A publication that contains new knowledge does

not generate returns unless someone interprets and employs it.

        Creating advanced intellectual capital generally requires three factors: human capital,

research, and infrastructure. It is hard to get to the frontier of knowledge without benefitting

from previous knowledge in the form of research and/or the human capital of instructors, who

help people learn how to interpret research for themselves and who transfer the knowledge in

their own brains. It is hard to conduct research without infrastructure such as laboratories in

which experiments are conducted, libraries in which research is stored, or classrooms in which

people with human capital instruct others. Moreover, these three factors--human capital,

research, and infrastructure--interact in complex ways so that, for instance, there is little point in

building a laboratory without the right complement of researchers to go in it. The result of all

this is that it is hard to build the capacity to create advanced intellectual capital "from scratch."

Building this capacity has costs that are convex in the per-period increase in amount and in

diversity.

        Even if they have access to the same human capital, research, and infrastructure, people

vary in their capacity to store human capital, generate research, and earn returns on knowledge to

which they have access. To store, create, or use advanced intellectual capital, a person may need

to be intelligent, have original ideas, or have the will to exercise human capital or develop

research into useful products. For convenience, I call this array of capacities "aptitude" and note
HOXBY                                     FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                               15

that there is ample evidence that the distribution of it has a long right-hand tail.7 Thus, a person

who has 99th percentile aptitude may generate returns that are an order of magnitude greater for a

given investment in intellectual capital than a person with 90th percentile aptitude.

         Estimating where a person is in the long right-hand tail of aptitude is a costly exercise. It

generally requires the person's own time or effort, the time and effort of an assessor who himself

has high aptitude, and the use of infrastructure. Furthermore, even a good estimate of aptitude is

only an estimate: we expect aptitude to be revealed over much of a person's adult life. For

instance, whether a person's contributions to knowledge are worthy of a Nobel Prize or only a

solid academic post is something usually revealed after mid-life. Similarly, whether a person

will use his knowledge to create a Fortune 500 company or to conduct a very successful but

largely unremarkable career is usually revealed slowly.

         Because aptitude varies and is revealed slowly, an individual should be risk averse when

making human capital investments in himself. If the person knows that his aptitude is at least

fairly high, then the risk of such investments is heightened by the long right-hand tail of aptitude,

the fact that his optimal investment may be very large relative to average income, and the fact

that completely unrelated risks (a debilitating accident, for instance) may destroy his ability to

exercise the advanced intellectual capital in which he has invested.

         The prohibition of slavery or, more prosaically, forced labor has the consequence that

people cannot easily take equity positions in one another's advanced intellectual capital and

thereby share risk. Similarly, even if a bank wished to invest in a portfolio of advanced


         7
           "Aptitude" is not the same as IQ or any other narrow definition of ability. It includes forms of
motivation, management and leadership skills, interpersonal skills, linguistic and rhetorical abilities, political skills,
luck, and so on.
HOXBY                                  FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                        16

intellectual capital (presumably by financing many persons' education and research), its inability

to take equity positions would cause it to under-invest greatly: it could not earn more on persons

whose returns happened to be very high than it could earn on persons whose returns were only

moderate. A bank or person who attempted to hold a diverse, advanced intellectual capital

portfolio would also find it challenging to acquire the expertise to assess each person's aptitude

well.

        Finally, it is hard to keep intellectual capital--especially research--fully private. It tends

to get revealed in the process of being used. Thus, a good share of the returns to intellectual

capital accrue to society, not to the people who produced it. The returns to human capital are

typically far more private but still not fully private because colleagues of a person with advanced

human capital typically acquire some of his knowledge through spillovers.8

B. The founder's problem

        If he is to maximize his contribution to society's intellectual capital, the founder must

invest in such a way that he deals with the peculiar properties of advanced intellectual capital,

described above. In particular, he cannot add much to society's intellectual capital all by himself.

He needs people who can store and exercise human capital. He also needs people who can create

new knowledge. He needs the expertise to assess which people have the highest aptitude. He

needs to combine the people with expertise and infrastructure. His expertise and infrastructure

assets must be sufficient in breadth and scale to support a portfolio of intellectual capital

investments with some diversity in risks and opportunities. Since the costs of building expertise


        8
          Of course, some individuals may have human capital that they use mainly for private returns and may also
produce research that earns mainly public returns. A physician who does both clinical and research work would be
an obvious example.
HOXBY                               FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                  17

and infrastructure are convex in the per-period increase in amount and diversity, he will want to

keep his investments going for some time, not make a one-off investment in intellectual capital

and then get out of the activity.

        In all these ways, the founder is in a position parallel to the venture capitalist. We can

give a name to his two types of projects: (i) students, people who have the capacity to store and

use human capital as alumni; (ii) researchers, people who have the capacity to invent new

knowledge. (To be clear, the founder of a university would have hundreds or thousands of

projects, not two projects called students and researchers.) High aptitude students are parallel to

agents with projects because, like them, they have a unique capacity (aptitude) to acquire and

exercise human capital without which the founder cannot do. Even the most able student

requires instruction and infrastructure, and his human capital pays out over a long career in which

his aptitude to generate social returns with it is slowly revealed. Even if they are able to capture

all of the returns to their human capital (none are public), high aptitude students should be risk-

averse about making very large investments in their own human capital and will find it hard to

get external financing for such investments without being vetted by an expert. Research projects

are also parallel to agents except that their problem is aggravated by the more public nature of

research. A researcher has a unique capacity to invent knowledge. He typically requires an array

of infrastructure and other experts to do so. The social benefits of the knowledge he creates are

likely to be revealed slowly and he will probably find it hard to capture more than small share of

them. Thus, he will under-invest and be risk-averse if asked to make large investments by

himself. Getting external financing will be stymied by others' lack of ability to assess his ideas

and by their (often justified) conviction that most of the returns will be public, not private.
HOXBY                                    FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                             18

C. The founder's solution

         Since the problem is parallel to the venture capitalist's, the founder's solution should

logically also be parallel. In particular, he would like to be in a situation where:

• He can build a foundation of experts and infrastructure useful for making investments in

intellectual capital. This is a university.

• He can use the experts to assess which students and researchers have the greatest expected

social returns to investments in their intellectual capital. His threshold rate of (social) return

should be based on the opportunity costs associated with his funds and the infrastructure and

expertise he has built. His threshold is embodied in a university's admissions and hiring

standards.

• He can invest money, expertise, and infrastructure in researchers and students who meet his

threshold. His investment is the "tuition subsidy" or difference between the cost of a student's

education and what he actually pays for it--as much as 80 percent on average in the case of very

high aptitude students (Hoxby 2009).

• He can demand that students who benefit from his investment contribute whatever they are able

to invest in their own human capital, to reduce the moral hazard problem. This contribution is

tuition, which is often need-based for high aptitude students.9

• He can ensure that his experts and infrastructure will be employed over sufficient cohorts of

students and researchers to justify their costs.

         It is on the final point that the founder runs into difficulties that the venture capitalist does



         9
           Because much research earns only public returns, there is no obvious parallel for a researcher's
contribution to reduce moral hazard--unless his research is likely to generate private returns from, say, a patent.
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                 19

not have. The venture capitalist can expect to earn enough on one generation of projects to

finance the next, thereby keeping his stock of expertise and infrastructure employed long enough

to make it worthwhile to have built them. The founder cannot write explicit contracts with his

students in which he takes equity stakes in their earnings since such contracts would entail illegal

forms of forced labor. Also, unlike the venture capitalist who is concerned with purely private

returns, the founder cannot write contracts in which he gets an equity stake in public returns to

research or human capital.

        This is where the founder's solution is, depending on how one thinks about it, clever or

fortuitous. It is also where endowments become necessary.

Students

        Consider what the founder would like to do with his students (research comes later). He

would like to convince them that it is their social and moral obligation to give the university the

equivalent of what the venture capitalist would require from them. This is the amount that will

maximize the intellectual returns generated by his initial capital. Because some of the students'

returns will presumably be social, the obligation on them can be multifaceted. Those who earn

private returns on their human capital can be asked for gifts in the form of money. Others could

be asked for gifts in the form of expertise. Others could be asked to use their political influence

to ensure that the university is treated well by the government. And so on. The founder will not

couch their obligation as an obligation to provide him with returns so as to maximize the impact

of his initial capital. He will instead couch it as an obligation to provide for the next generation

of students as they were provided for themselves.

        There are a variety of "soft" ways in which the founder could hope to convince students
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                   20

that this is their obligation. The university could use exhortation and inculcation. It could

develop loyalty by creating athletic teams, clubs, traditions, songs, events, and special apparel. It

is my belief that many of these soft methods work because the founder himself and the people

whom he recruits to run the university truly believe in the obligation and take a true interest and

pleasure in providing for the next generation.

        Nevertheless, it will be easier to convince a student of his obligation if, when he donates,

he knows that the university has tied its own hands in such a way that the gift will be worth much

less if it is not actually used to invest in the human capital of future generations. This is why

endowments make sense. Even if it has no restrictions other than that the principal must be

preserved in perpetuity and spent for university activities (broadly construed), much of the value

of a gift to the endowment is in the future. Therefore, a university that receives a gift as

endowment has a greater incentive to exist, as a university, in the future. It is less likely to so

exist if it uses its funds in some manner that does not generate solid returns to intellectual capital.

        To see this, consider a university that, starting with some cohort of students, begins to

instruct students in vacuous material that will not be valued by employers or society more

generally. Even if these students and their equally vacuously-educated successors feel an

obligation to donate a share of their earnings to the university, their donations will be small

because they do not have valuable human capital. The university will become increasingly

unable to maintain its infrastructure and expertise--losing experts to competing institutions, for

instance. Eventually, the university will find it hard to attract students because its infrastructure

and expertise are so depreciated, and at this point it will fold. The larger the share of its (pre-

vacuity) gifts were in the form of endowment, the faster the university will fold and more value it
HOXBY                                   FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                          21

must sacrifice when it folds.10 In short, by moving much of the value of a gift into the future, an

endowment gives a university's leaders an immediate incentive to engage in investments that can

sustain the university. These are necessarily investments in intellectual capital that are valued,

socially if not privately. (Below, I consider how a university might sustain investment in

intellectual capital that earns only public, not social returns.)

         A simple figure illustrates the point that the university will accept gifts in the form of

endowment up a point. Line A shows how the usefulness--for the purpose of maximizing the

contribution to intellectual capital--of a dollar of gift falls the larger the share of it that arrives in

the form of endowment. This line necessarily slopes down simply because the timing of the use

of the endowment is relatively inflexible. It will slope more steeply if there are additional

restrictions on how the endowment is used. Line B shows how total gifts increase as the share of

gift dollars going into the endowment rise. The logic of the shape of this line is described in the

previous paragraph, but it is not clear whether it merely flattens or actually falls as the

endowment share gets close to 100 percent. This is not important for line C, which is the product

of lines A and B: the usefulness of total gifts for contributing to intellectual capital. Line C

peaks at a point like D, and this point determines the share of gifts that the university accepts in

the form of endowments.




        10
           There are numerous colleges in the United States that have arguably suffered precisely the fate described.
There are examples in which the curriculum truly became vacuous. However, a more common problem is
curriculum not having kept pace with changes in what employers and the rest of society valued.
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                  22

                   Figure 1: Heuristic diagram of university's preferred endowment share




Researchers

        Now consider researchers, the returns on whose intellectual capital are more likely to be

public, not private. Of course, the university can explicitly contract with researchers who are

likely to generate private returns using university-derived expertise or infrastructure. For

instance, the university can share in patents. In such cases, the university should solve the

problem no differently than a venture capitalist would. In addition, the university can oblige its

researchers to devote part of their effort to instruction so that they produce human capital in

students, like any other input at the university. In this case, we are back to the problem of

students, with that problem's solution of obligations and implicit contracts. Indeed, the optimal

ratio of researchers' instructional to research time depends on the next part of the founder's

solution.
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                   23

        This is the interesting problem of maximizing the university's ability to generate research

that earns only public returns. The founder could simply sink his investment into a few

generations of research, but these investments would quickly peter out because the purely public

returns to this research would not generate university funds for new ones. The solution is a semi-

implicit/semi-explicit contract--this time with external funders--that is made more credible by the

endowment.

        The founder is not the only entity interested in knowledge that is a public good. There are

other philanthropists who wish similarly to maximize their contribution to intellectual capital but

who lack the wherewithal (or, perhaps more realistically, the timing) to build the expertise and

infrastructure that would allow them to invest efficiently in intellectual capital. There are also

philanthropists who wish only to contribute to intellectual capital in a narrow area and who

therefore could not support expertise and infrastructure assets on an efficient scale. Finally, there

is the government, which--to the extent that it maximizes social welfare--should internalize many

of the public returns to research as though they were private.

        To maximize his contribution to research that generates only public returns, the founder

can use his initial funds to build expertise and infrastructure assets and to sponsor some first

generation of research as a demonstration. He can then seek outside philanthropic and

government funds to support research that can use the university's existing infrastructure and

expertise or that only requires the university to build infrastructure and expertise in a cost-

efficient way--that is, gradually and in a manner related to existing infrastructure and expertise.

This is exactly parallel to the venture capitalist's problem. Recall, however, that the venture

capitalist could credibly vouch for a project because he would have his own contract with the
HOXBY                                    FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                               24

agent and would stand to lose also if his equity share were worthless. It is not so easy for a

university to credibly vouch for research that is projected to earn purely public returns. Of

course, the provisions of a grant can ensure that, as a formal matter, every dollar is spent as the

funder intends, but an outside funder should have more confidence in the research if the founder,

with his expertise, has also put his own investment at stake.

         This is where it will help to encourage some share of gifts for research to be in the form

of endowment. It will be easier to convince outside funders that their money will be used for the

intended research if the university has tied its own hands by making some research gifts less

useful if the university does not, in fact, build and maintain infrastructure and expertise in the

area in question over a long period. That is, the benefit of having some gifts for research go to

the endowment--as opposed to current use--is that the university thereby increases the total

outside funds (including government funds) for research. This benefit must be traded-off against

the costs of the restrictions imposed by the endowment rules.11

         In short, maximizing his contribution to intellectual capital through research should cause

the founder to solicit an optimal share of research-related gifts in the form of endowment. The

implied figure would parallel to that for student gifts in form, although--of course--the

parameters of the relevant curves would differ depending on the inferences outside funders draw

from the university's restricting itself via the endowment.




         11
            Interestingly, this is an argument for tenure of researchers that is quite independent of other arguments
for and against. If the university wants to increase the credibility of its commitment to research in some area,
tenuring researchers in that area is an effective way to tie its own hands to supporting that area for some time.
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                  25

                                IV. A PORTRAIT OF THE UNIVERSITY

        The university's problem, as presented in the previous section, is so abstract that it can be

hard to see how it matches the universities that we know from our own experience. What would

this university, which maximizes its contribution to society's intellectual capital by acting as a

social venture capitalist, actually look like?

        The instigating financial capital of the universities' founders--who undoubtedly would

have been less prescient that the fictional founder--would be unimportant, having long ago been

dwarfed or replaced by the gifts of former students complying with their implicit contracts.

Some alumni gifts would go to endowment and some to current use. The ratio would be a (surely

not explicit) function of the degree to which the endowment nature of gifts increased the amount

of gifts. Alumni who earned little (perhaps because they worked in public service) would not

give or would give in some non-monetary form: time, expertise, and so on. Above some

earnings threshold, alumni would tend to give a share of their lifetime returns that was either

steady or increasing in the scale of those returns. Thus, if the distribution of lifetime returns

among alumni had a long right-hand tail, so would the distribution of donations within a cohort.

(Note the word returns, as opposed to earnings or wealth. A alum who was born rich, for

instance, might have modest returns on the investment that the university made in him, even if he

had high earnings.)

        Second, research would be supported by a few means. The university would have venture

capital-like contracts with its researchers who use its assets to produce patentable or otherwise

private return-generating research. Faculty time would often be split between instruction (human

capital production) and research since the former activity would provide reliable returns through
HOXBY                                FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                  26

students. Finally, research that generated popular public goods would be supported by a

combination of the university's assets (infrastructure and experts) and outside funders' money.

Some gifts for research would be in the form of endowment, with the ratio again being dictated

by the degree to which the endowment nature of funds increased the amount of outside funds.

          The infrastructure and expertise of the university would continually, gradually drift from

the areas that earned high social returns in the past to areas that were likely to earn them in the

future. This would not necessarily be intentional. Rather, it would be an organic response to the

project (student and research) opportunities that arose. For instance, the university might

routinely accept grants that required it to add incrementally to infrastructure and experts, and the

gradual piling up of these increments would slowly change the nature of these key university

assets.

          The higher aptitude the students at a university, the greater would be the investment in

their education. Students would be asked to pay for part of the investment, according to their

ability to do so, to reduce their moral hazard. Unless the highest aptitude students were

systematically much more able to pay than their slightly lower aptitude peers (and so on down the

aptitude spectrum), the universities that enrolled the highest aptitude students would also

subsidize the current cost of their education the most. These same universities would thus be

most reliant on inculcating an sense of obligation to the next generation of students and on

supporting the credibility of their implicit contracts through thoughtful use of the endowment.

          A few caveats are in order here. First, it seems unlikely that a university could create a

sense of loyalty or obligation if it invested substantially different amounts in different students

(as a matter of planning, not of accident). Thus, universities are likely to be fundamentally
HOXBY                                    FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                             27

constrained in how heterogeneous their admissions can be.12 Second, a alum's sense of

obligation may be reduced if the next generation of students looks too dissimilar from his own

cohort. Thus, the university may be constrained to alter the character of its student population

gradually. Third, it may be easier to instill a sense of obligation in a student if he is surrounded

by a critical share of students who already have it. Thus, a university may find it difficult to

move wholesale into new campuses at which none of the students who enroll already have the

tradition of obligation. Fourth, nothing that has been said constrains a university to contribute

intellectual capital through both human capital and research. Indeed, very selective liberal arts

colleges fit the university model except that the research components do not apply.13

         It is important to observe that the university modeled here might make investments in

intellectual capital that simply do not get made in countries in which no one has solved the

founder's problem in the founder's way. That is, there is no reason to think that every country

will develop very selective private universities that make investments in human capital on the

same per-person scale as America's top private universities do. If some mechanism that mimics

the founder's solution does not arise, some intellectual capital investments will probably just not

be made because conventional financing would not work. Of course, in theory, it would be

possible for a government to mimic the founder's solution. However, governments have political

constraints that private universities do not.


         12
            That is, a university might find two students who have the same rate of return on human capital
investments but whose optimal size of investments differed substantially. If the university were constrained to make
similar investments in all of its students, it could not admit both students even if both students could in fact benefit
from the same university assets.
         13
             A handful of all-research universities appear to be sustainable (Rockefeller University, for instance), but
they are narrowly focused. The fact that many universities combine human capital creation and research suggests
that the activities enjoy substantial production synergies.
HOXBY                               FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                    28




                        V. IMPLICATIONS FOR ENDOWMENT MANAGEMENT

        It will be observed that the model implies that university endowments came into being for

fairly simple reasons. If the object of the university is to maximize its contributions to

intellectual capital, its social venture capital activities are its reason for existence. The

endowment arises simply because returns must enter an investment pool before being reinvested

and the university is able to make greater investments in intellectual capital if it accepts some

returns (and some gifts to support research) in the form of endowment. Thus, the main thing that

is true of the endowment is the obvious thing: it represents a series of commitments that the

university has made to invest funds in a set of intellectual capital projects. Importantly, the

endowment has no independent purpose or objective of its own. This is why it should not be

possible to define an objective for the endowment that is independent of the other side of the

university's portfolio--the social venture capital side.

V.A. The University's Investment Problem, the Basic Version

        Consider a university that is deciding what to do with its available investment pool. This

pool consists of all current use funds, all endowment income, and other funds that the university

could legally use, including various forms of decapitalization and even borrowing. (In this

subsection, I ignore specific restrictions on the use of funds but will return to this problem.) The

university's problem is fairly straightforward to describe, though not straightforward to solve in

practice.

        The university knows the current set of intellectual capital projects that it could pursue--

that is, all of the students and research in which it could potentially invest in the current period.
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                   29

Let us suppose it has rational expectations about the intellectual capital projects that will arise in

each future period. For each project, current or future, the university can assign probabilities to

each possible scenario of expenses and returns. That is, the university can reduce each project to

the market value and investment risk characteristics it would have if it were a traded asset: it has

a certain expected return, variation around that expected return, and correlations between its

return and those of other projects owing to exogenous events. For instance, some projects might

be sensitive to the price of oil. Other projects might be sensitive to which party controls

Congress.

        Suppose, for a moment, that projects did not need to use the assets specific to the

university--its infrastructure and expertise--that have the convex adjustment costs we have

emphasized. That is, suppose that projects only required inputs (in addition to the student or

researcher himself) that could bought at a world market price. Then, the projects could be

evaluated fairly independently. The university would compute the properties of each potential

project as an asset and find the optimal path of current and future portfolios, knowing that funds

would be available in each future period for projects in one of three ways: (i) there would be

returns generated by the endowment principal, (ii) there would be funds if some money currently

in the investment pool (such as current endowment returns) were not invested in current

intellectual capital projects but "saved" for future projects by being invested in financial markets,

(iii) there would be returns from past intellectual capital projects or cash flow from outside

funders who were committed to research projects. Then, the procedure for finding the optimal

financial market portfolio would be what Merton outlines--except that his solution is framed

quite differently because he does not think of projects/assets with expected investments flowing
HOXBY                                  FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                               30

in and returns flowing out. He thinks of cash flows, including expenses, which he models as an

exogenous, dynamic, stochastic process. However, for any given path of current and future

intellectual capital projects, there is a reduced-form that can be expressed purely as cash flows.

Thus, Merton's fundamental solution method carries over, although of course the solution would

look different with cash flows that are more realistic than the processes he actually uses.

Moreover, the insights he derives carry over as well, namely:

• The spending rate on the endowment falls out of the optimization process and depends on the

social venture capital side of the portfolio. In fact, no rule that is independent of the intellectual

capital side of the portfolio makes sense. This excludes simple rules such as "4.5 percent of the

last three years' rolling average of total endowment market value."

• The optimal portfolio allocation for the endowment will be such that the university's financial

assets have risks and returns that offset those of the university's intellectual capital portfolio. For

instance, if the university's intellectual capital is disproportionately in projects that depend on

demand for computer software, its financial assets ought to diversify its total portfolio away from

that industry.

• An important function of endowment investments is to hedge against unanticipated changes in

the costs of university activities. For instance, a university might invest some of its financial

portfolio in real estate near campus that could be used for faculty housing.14

V.B. Incorporating Restrictions on the Uses of Funds

        In fact, a university's pool of available investment funds is not unrestricted as to uses.

Sizeable parts of it are restricted, and returns and cash flows associated with current intellectual


        14
             This is an example drawn from Merton (1993).
HOXBY                               FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                               31

capital projects are often restricted as well. Flows from outside funders are often highly

restricted, but alumni often place restrictions on their gifts as well.

        Thus, instead of solving a single investment problem as described above, the university

ought instead to solve a series of investment problems, sequentially, as follows:

• Begin with the most restricted investment pools and the potential projects that qualify for them.

Solve for the optimal current and future portfolio of these projects. Remove the projects that get

funded from consideration. Remove the funds that are invested in these projects from the pool of

that could be invested in the financial markets instead of the intellectual capital side of the

portfolio.

• Proceed to the next most restricted investment pools and consider all of the remaining

potential projects that qualify for them. Again, solve and then remove the relevant projects and

funds from further consideration.

• Continue sequentially until the unrestricted investment pool is reached, at which time all

remaining potential projects are considered. Solve the problem as described in the last section,

noting that all investment pool funds that were not committed (that is, those from all of the

restricted pools as well as those from the unrestricted pool, if any) should be invested in the

financial market side of the portfolio to attain goals like diversification and cost hedging.

        Although the sequential process may appear at first to be onerous, in fact it should reduce

the scale of the problem at the final stages greatly because the university will need to consider a

smaller number of potential projects for unrestricted funds.
HOXBY                                    FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                              32

V.C. Adding Adjustment Costs to the University's Problem

         Unfortunately, if we make the problem more realistic by allowing for convex costs of

adjusting the university's expertise and infrastructure, the problem could go from being tractable

(though certainly demanding) to intractable. I first describe the problem broadly, at which point

it should appear intractable, and then discuss why it might be fairly tractable in practice.

         Suppose that the university fully understands the costs of adjusting its expertise and

infrastructure.15 Then, when it considers every potential intellectual capital project, it must

consider the costs of adjusting its expertise and infrastructure to serve the project. Those

adjustment costs will, in turn, depend on which other projects are being implemented

concurrently and which projects were done in the past. If we consider all of the ways in which

projects' use of expertise and infrastructure could interact, the number of portfolios that we

should consider would grow explosively large. That is, the state space would explode.

         To make this concrete, suppose that the same faculty member can either engage in

important instruction (an array of students) or lead an important research project. If the

university considers the research project first, it might allocate her to that project and invest in it.

It might then find that the instruction was a poor investment because it would require the

university to hire someone else just like her, and the cost of making this hire might be very

expensive. If the university had considered the same projects in the other order (instruction first,

research second), it might have come to a different conclusion--for instance, investing in the

instruction but not the research. Moreover, although the difference in these two decisions might



         15
             Of course, it might not understand its adjustment costs fully, but allowing for this would merely add a
layer of difficulty without adding clarity.
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                 33

seem small, they would not be because whichever project gets done would not only occupy the

faculty member's time but would also absorb some other infrastructure and expertise--which

would have domino effects on other projects. These other affected projects would affect yet

more projects, and so on.

        For another example, consider a university that foresees that some area of research that is

not productive now will possibly be highly productive in twenty years--if the university has

certain expertise and infrastructure by then. Then, the university must consider all of the

possible paths:

• starting projects now that are unproductive but that build some infrastructure and expertise in

the relevant areas. This will make related future projects more attractive, leading to more

infrastructure and expertise being built;

• starting projects at some intermediate time (10 years, say) and incurring greater adjustment

costs then, in the hope that the 10-year-out projects are sufficiently productive to justify the costs,

especially when the 20-year-out projects' dependence on that infrastructure and expertise is

considered;

• waiting for twenty years to start the relevant projects and incurring massive adjustment costs

then.

Each of these paths will have domino effects on other potential projects that overlap in time and

use of the university's infrastructure and expertise.

        Thus, with adjustment costs, the investment portfolios that should be considered would

appear to be endless in number. I would argue, however, that the situation is not so dire because:

(i) many of tomorrow's projects are extremely similar to today's projects so that the number of
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                   34

future contingencies is much smaller than it appears, and (ii) although universities' per-period

adjustment costs at the extensive margin are large and highly convex, its adjustment costs at

intensive margins are small.

        The first of these points is easy to see: next year's cohort of potential students is so much

like this year's cohort of potential students that they are nearly interchangeable. Thus, it is

possible that a biology course developed for this year's cohort of students (because it was a good

investment in them) might be a bad investment for next year's cohort of students. However,

possible is not likely. Similarly, a good share of the "new" research ideas that arise each year are,

in fact, very closely related to the "old" research ideas that arose in the previous year.

        The second of these points--extensive versus intensive margin adjustment costs--means

that it is costly for universities quickly to acquire expertise and infrastructure that forces them to

grow (in size or area of expertise) but not costly for universities to transform existing expertise

and infrastructure among uses that are already in their project portfolios. For instance, if a

university decided to double the size of its entering class overnight, this would entail tremendous

adjustment costs owing to the need to build student housing, increase faculty, and so on very

quickly. In contrast, if a university decided to stop admitting classes that were one-third

humanities majors, one-third sciences, and one-third social sciences and start admitting classes

that were two-thirds humanities, one-sixth sciences, and one-sixth social sciences, this would

generate costs but they would not be nearly so dramatic. Some libraries, classrooms, housing,

administrators, student support staff, and so on would flow fairly easily from, say, social science

to humanities use. Thus, the university should treat as similar various project portfolios that have

the same implications for the extensive margins of adjustment, even if they have different
HOXBY                              FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                   35

implications for the intensive margins of adjustment.

        In short, including adjustment costs in the university's investment problem does make the

problem more difficult, but perhaps not absolutely intractable. A practical person solving the

university's investment problem might do well to focus only on the adjustment cost implications

of (i) new projects that are very unlike existing projects and (ii) projects that involve building

substantial expertise or infrastructure at the extensive margin.



                                         VI. CONCLUSIONS

        The proposed, positive model of the university has implications for numerous questions,

and many of the more abstract questions have already been addressed. For instance, section V

described how the spending rule--which probably should be called a "function" rather than a

"rule"--should be derived. It also described how optimal portfolio allocations should be

determined--on both the intellectual capital and the financial capital side. But these answers,

which include the insights first derived by Merton, are very abstract. It may therefore be useful

to answer a few, less abstract but related questions.

VI.A. What should a university do if, for exogenous reasons, its financial market portfolio is

temporarily earning a very high rate of return?

        This is the circumstance in which a university thinks about keeping funds in the financial

market portfolio that might, in an ordinary period, be invested in the intellectual capital side of

the portfolio. The logic is that the university can make so much money on financial assets that

reducing its current intellectual capital investments makes sense: it will be enabled thereby to

increase future intellectual capital investments by so much that the university's total contribution
HOXBY                               FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                   36

to world intellectual capital is larger.

        This logic is, indeed, what falls out of the model so the thought is correct. Current

intellectual capital projects essentially face a higher hurdle rate. However, the university's

managers should take account of the fact that, if they restrict or reduce intellectual capital

projects now, they will face even higher adjustment costs of implementing intellectual capital

projects in the future, when the period of remarkable financial returns is over and they need to

start making intellectual capital investments at a higher rate than ever before.

        A related question that often occurs to potential donors is whether they should donate

now or later--because they believe that their personal rate of return will be high in the near

future, relative to the university's. Of course, potential donors are not always correct that their

personal rate of return will be higher than the university's. But, even if they are, potential donors

almost surely do not take account of how they affect adjustment costs when they give in the

future instead of now. This is problematic. Thus, universities should encourage potential donors

to give soon unless their personal rate of return is much higher than that of the university.

VI.A. What should a university do if, for exogenous reasons, considerable parts of its financial

market portfolio are underwater and cannot be liquidated except at very high cost?

        This is another circumstance in which a university thinks about keeping funds in the

financial market portfolio that might, in an ordinary period, be invested in the intellectual capital

side of the portfolio. The logic is that it is very expensive, in terms of foregone future

intellectual capital, to invest in intellectual capital now because the cost of funds is the rate at

which the institution can borrow.

        This logic is, indeed, what falls out of the model so the thought is correct: current
HOXBY                               FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                   37

intellectual capital projects do face a higher hurdle rate. However, the university's managers

should again take account of the fact that, if they shed infrastructure or expertise now, they may

face high costs of re-acquiring it in the future. This is an argument for universities developing a

clear understanding of their adjustment costs, especially those that occur after downward

adjustments in infrastructure and expertise (since these are not common). In addition, the

university may wish to shed expenses that are not associated with assets that have convex

adjustment costs--certain staff who have fairly generic skills, for instance.

VI.C. What should a university do if its financial market portfolio seems always to be earning a

substantially higher rate of return than its intellectual capital portfolio?

        Because the universities do not actually attempt to compute the value of their intellectual

capital projects as assets, it is quite possible that this question only appears to be common. Thus,

one response to this question is that it should not be answered until the university has made the

calculations to show that it is, in fact, a question.

        However, assuming that it is a legitimate question, the answer is quite possibly "do

nothing." The funds given to universities are there for the purpose of investing in intellectual

capital, not running a financial business on the side. Thus, the only legitimate, alternative use of

current investment funds is later investments in intellectual capital. It is quite possible that the

intellectual capital side of the portfolio will always earn lower returns.

        We can be more specific, however. The university should divide its intellectual capital

investments into those with and those without related financial assets. Consider first the

intellectual capital projects that should be related to financial market assets. For instance, if

some firms are making tremendous profits, why are not some of the university's alumni leaders of
HOXBY                                    FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                             38

or investors in these firms? If some inventors/entrepreneurs are making great profits, why does

not the university have a stake in them, either through a patent or through having educated the

inventors? Perhaps the university trains future managers and investors poorly. Perhaps the

university's research in areas that generate private profits is not conducted well. Perhaps the

university is not pursuing patents in which it has a legitimate stake. Perhaps the university is not

succeeding in convincing its students of their obligation to the next generation.

         Now consider the intellectual capital investments that have no or scarcely related

financial assets. The lack of related financial assets is prima facie evidence that the returns are

largely public. However, even these investments can be subdivided. For some, external funders

are in as good a position as university experts to evaluate the social return to the project--curing a

disease that affects a population of poor people, say. For other projects, external funders may

lack the expertise or political backing to evaluate the social return to the project--for instance,

moving the frontier in an abstruse area of math or deciphering a papyrus that contains a lost

Greek tragedy. If external funders are not funding a public returns-producing project that they

can evaluate, the university ought to improve its communications with them or reconsider the

public value of the project. However, if the only people expert enough to understand the

project's public value are experts who dwell in universities, then the university can do no better

than consulting its own understanding and that experts at peer institutions.16




         16
             In the long run, the universities should perhaps educate more people to understand the public value of
projects of the type in question.
HOXBY                               FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                   39

VI.D. What should a university do if its financial market portfolio seems always to be growing

as a share of its total (financial plus intellectual capital) portfolio?

        Again, because universities do not actually attempt to compute the value of their

intellectual capital projects as assets, it is quite possible that this question is wrongheaded. This

is another argument for making the calculations, even if they are imperfect.

        Assuming that the question is not wrongheaded, however, the model implies that the

financial side should only grow persistently as a share of the total portfolio if (i) the returns on

future intellectual capital projects are substantially higher than those of today's intellectual

capital projects and (ii) adjustment costs are such that when those future days arrive, the cost of

suddenly needing to provide infrastructure and expertise to them will not be exorbitant.

        Since circumstances (i) and (ii) probably do not often arise in conjunction, a university

should examine itself if its financial market portfolio's share of its total portfolio rises very

persistently. The likely answer is that the university is not solving its investment problem

correctly.

VI.E. Key Lessons

        A few key lessons should now be evident. First, universities should actively attempt to

compute the values in their intellectual capital portfolios. This may be difficult, but the best

available estimates are better than none for the purposes of university and endowment

management. Second, universities should attempt to calculate their adjustment costs. Knowing

these costs is important for making every investment decision, whether on the intellectual or

financial portfolio side. Third, a universities' leaders (the president, provost, and so on) should

be in close communication with its endowment managers, with the specific goal of exchanging
HOXBY                             FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                                 40

information on the value of existing intellectual capital investments, on returns to prospective

investments in intellectual capital, and on adjustment costs. These exchanges should general

spending rates on the endowment that depend and routinely adjust to circumstances on the social

venture capital side of the portfolio. If highly-endowed universities manage both sides of their

portfolios in a rigorous and coordinated manner, they should be more able to make contributions

to world intellectual capital that arguably would not exist without them.
HOXBY                            FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                              41

                                          REFERENCES

Advisory Committee on Endowment Management. Managing Educational Endowments: Report

        to the Ford Foundation. 1969.

Bergemann, D. and Hege, U. 1998 "Venture capital financing, moral hazard and learning,"

        Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 703–735.

Berglof, E. .1994. " A control theory of venture capital finance," Journal of Law, Economics, and

        Organization 10, 247–267.

Black, Fischer. 1976. "The Investment Policy Spectrum: Individuals, Endowment Funds and

        Pension Funds," Financial Analysts Journal, vol. 32.

Blume, Marshall E. 2009. "Institutional Spending Rules and Asset Allocation," Wharton

        working paper 01-09.

Brown, Jeffrey, Stephen Dimmock, Jun-Koo Kang, and Scott Weisbenner. 2010. "How

        University Endowments Respond to Financial Market Shocks: Evidence and

        Implications," NBER Working Paper 15861.

Brown, Jeffrey, Stephen Dimmock, and Scott Weisbenner. 2012. "The Supply of and Demand

        for Charitable Donations to Higher Education," NBER conference paper.

Brown, Keith, Lorenzo Garlappi, and CristianTiu. 2010. "Asset Allocation and Portfolio

        Performance: Evidence from university endowment funds," Journal of Financial

        Markets, 13, 268-294.

Campbell, John. 2012. "Investing and Spending: The Twin Challenges of University

        Endowment Management," in ed. Maureen Devlin, Forum Futures. Washington, DC:

        American Council on Education.
HOXBY                             FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                              42

Casamatta, C. 2003. "Financing and advising: Optimal financial contracts with venture

        capitalists," Journal of Finance, 58, 2059–2086.

Clotfelter, Charles. Buying the Best. Princeton University Press, 1996.

Dimmock, Stephen. 2012. "Background Risk and University Endowment Funds," Review of

        Economics and Statistics, vol 94(3), 789-799.

Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, Inc. eds., Managing Endowment Capital. 1969.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. Tuition Rising: Why College Costs So Much. Cambridge: Harvard

        University Press, 2000.

Ennis, Richard, and J. Peter Williamson. Spending Policy for Educational Endowments. 1976.

Eisner, Robert. 1974. "Endowment Income, Capital Gains and Inflation Accounting:

        Discussion," American Economic Review, vol 64, 438-41.

Gompers, Paul. A. 1995. "Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital,"

        Journal of Finance 50, 1461–1489.

Gorman, M. and Sahlman, W. A. 1989. "What do venture capitalists do?" Journal of Business

        Venturing 5, 77–90.

Grinold, Richard, David Hopkins, and William E. Massy. 1978. "A Model for Long-Range

        University Budget Planning under Uncertainty," Bell Journal of Economics, Vol 9, 396.

Hansmann, Henry. 1990. "Why do Universities Have Endowments?" The Journal of

        Legal Studies, Vol. 19, No. 1., 3-42.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 2009. "The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges," Journal of

        Economic Perspectives, vol 23, no. 4, 95–118

Hoxby, Caroline M. forthcoming. The Role of Markets in Education. The 2011 Clarendon
HOXBY                            FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                               43

        Lectures in Economics. Oxford University Press.

Kaplan, S. N. and Strömberg, P. 2003 "Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An

        empirical analysis of venture capital contracts," Review of Economic Studies 70, 281–315.

Kaplan, S. N. and Strömberg, P. 2001. "Venture capitalists as principals: Contracting, screening,

        and monitoring," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 91, 426–430.

Lerner, Joshua, Antoinette Schoar, and Jialan Wang. 2008. "Secrets of the Academy: The

        Drivers of University Endowment Success," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol

        22(3), 207-222.

Litvack, James M., Burton G. Malkiel, & Richard E. Quandt. 1974. "A Plan for the Definition

        of Endowment Income," American Economic Review, vol. 64, 433.

Merhling, Perry, Paul Goldstein, and Verne Sedlacek. 2005. Endowment Spending, Goals,

        Rates, and Rules. Forum for the Future of Higher Education.

Merton, Robert C. "Optimal Investment Strategies for University Endowment Funds," in Charles

        T. Clotfelter and Michael Rothschild, eds. Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher

        Education. University of Chicago Press: 1993.

Malkiel, Burton G. and Paul Firstenberg. Managing Risk in an Uncertain Era: An Analysis for

        Endowed Institutions. 1976.

Nichols, Donald A. 1974. "The Investment Income Formula of the American Economic

        Association," American Economic Review, vol 64, 420.

Repullo, Rafael, and Javier Suarez. 2004. "Venture Capital Finance: A Security Design

        Approach," Review of Finance, vol 8, 75-108.

Sahlman, W. A. 1990. "The structure and governance of venture-capital organizations," Journal
HOXBY                            FINANCIAL RULES FOR UNIVERSITIES                            44

        of Financial Economics, 27, 473–521.

Tobin, James. 1974. "What Is Permanent Endowment Income?" American Economic Review,

        vol. 64, 427.

Trester, J. J. 1998 "Venture capital contracting under asymmetric information," Journal of

        Banking and Finance 22, 675–699.

Williamson, J. Peter. "Background Paper," in Funds for the Future (Twentieth Century Fund

        Task Force on College and University Endowment Policy. 1975.
