                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                THE GREAT TRADE COLLAPSE

                                           Rudolfs Bems
                                          Robert C. Johnson
                                             Kei-Mu Yi

                                        Working Paper 18632
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18632


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve
System, or the International Monetary Fund. When citing this paper, please use the following: Bems
R, Johnson RC, Yi KM. 2013. The Great Trade Collapse. Annu. Rev. Econ. 5: Submitted. DOI:
10.1146/annurev-economics-082912-110201.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Rudolfs Bems, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Great Trade Collapse
Rudolfs Bems, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi
NBER Working Paper No. 18632
December 2012
JEL No. F1,F14,F17,F4

                                               ABSTRACT

We survey recent literature on the causes of the collapse in international trade during the 2008-2009
global recession. We argue that the evidence points to the collapse in aggregate expenditure, concentrated
on trade-intensive durable goods, as the main driver of the trade collapse. Inventory adjustment likely
amplified the impact of these expenditure changes on trade. In addition, shocks to credit supply constrained
export supply further exacerbating the decline in trade. Most evidence suggests that changes in trade
policy did not play a large role. We conclude that one benefit of the trade collapse is that it has stimulated
research in neglected areas at the intersection of trade and macroeconomics.


Rudolfs Bems                                          Kei-Mu Yi
Research Department                                   Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
International Monetary Fund                           90 Hennepin Avenue
Washington, DC                                        Minneapolis, MN 55401
rbems@imf.org                                         kei-mu.yi@mpls.frb.org

Robert C. Johnson
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
robert.c.johnson@dartmouth.edu
    During the global recession of 2008-2009, international trade collapsed. From 2008Q1
to 2009Q1, real world trade fell by about 15 percent, exceeding the fall in real world GDP
by roughly a factor of 4. This trade collapse echoed the collapse of trade during the Great
Depression and triggered fears of a protectionist policy backlash. In the three plus years since
its onset, there has been a great deal of research that examines the origins and consequences
of the trade collapse. This essay reviews this new literature, focusing our discussion around
three major themes.
    First, changes in real final expenditure were responsible for most of the collapse of in-
ternational trade. While early commentators suggested a variety of explanations for the fall
in trade relative to GDP, subsequent work has largely confirmed the central role of expen-
diture.1 The key to understanding how trade can fall more than GDP lies in understanding
how asymmetries in expenditure changes across sectors map to international trade. The
global recession saw large declines in spending on final goods (as opposed to services), and
specifically durable goods. Because changes in expenditure were largest in the most traded
sectors, these changes were transmitted forcefully to the border.
    With this intuition as a starting point, we emphasize several technical issues that are
important for quantifying the role of expenditure in driving the trade collapse. We first
highlight that one must account for input linkages across sectors and countries to estimate
the impact of spending changes on imports. We also discuss recent contributions suggesting
that inventory adjustment amplifies the response of total imports to changes in final sales of
imported goods.
    Second, financial shocks that disrupted export supply and impeded international trans-
actions played a secondary role in explaining the decline of trade. We highlight evidence
on two separate channels. Financial shocks constrained firms’ access to working capital,
thus restricting both production and export supply. On top of this general channel, inter-
national trade tends to be ‘finance intensive’ relative to domestic trade, due to long cash
cycles and higher payment uncertainty associated with foreign buyers/sellers. Therefore,
financial shocks also likely disrupted international trade transactions above and beyond the
effect they had on domestic transactions.
    Third, changes in trade policy – i.e., protectionism – played essentially no role in explain-
ing the trade collapse, at least in the aggregate. While there were many specific changes
in trade policy that affected individual sectors or partners, there was no wholesale increase
in either tariff or non-tariff barriers. The fact that protectionism is the “dog that did not
bark” during the global recession should be seen as a victory for the political consensus and
economic institutions that underpin the global economy.
  1
      For contemporary analyses of the trade collapse, see the VoxEU.org volume edited by Baldwin (2009).


                                                     2
    The rest of this paper elaborates on these three main themes. We begin in Section 1 by
reviewing some basic facts regarding the trade collapse that motivate general interest in the
collapse and are a launching point for empirical work on the causes of the collapse. Section
2 presents an organizing framework for the wide range of factors examined in the literature.
Sections 3, 4, 5, and 6 review four proposed mechanisms for explaining the collapse: changes
in final expenditure, inventory adjustment, financial shocks, and protectionist trade policy.
Section 7 concludes.


1       Stylized Facts
This section summarizes several stylized facts about the global trade collapse. These facts
serve to motivate and guide the search for explanations for the trade collapse in subsequent
sections.
    First, the trade collapse stands out relative to post-WWII experience in terms of its
abruptness, magnitude, and synchronization across countries. In Figure 1, we plot the ratio
of trade to GDP from 1970 to the present for four large countries (China, Germany, Japan,
and the United States), a composite rest-of-the-world region, and the world as a whole.2
    The trade collapse was concentrated in two quarters (Q4-2008 and Q1-2009) and affected
all major emerging markets and developing countries simultaneously. The result was an
unprecedentedly sharp contraction in world trade. While some countries (e.g., Germany in
1990-1993 or the United States in 1980-1983) had seen declines in trade to GDP of similar
size in the past, they had not seen such large declines concentrated in such a short period of
time. Further, most past trade contractions were not synchronized across countries to the
same extent as the 2008-2009 collapse. The 2000-2001 global recession is the only previous
episode in which trade declines were highly synchronized across countries, similar the 2008-
2009 collapse though not nearly as large.
    Second, the trade collapse was asymmetric across sectors. To start, trade in goods fell
substantially more than trade in services. For example, Borchert and Mattoo (2009) report
that service trade in the U.S. fell by only a quarter as much as trade in goods. Furthermore,
in some service sectors, such as business, professional, and technical services, trade continued
to increase throughout the crisis.
    Narrowing our focus to goods trade alone, large differences across sectors were also evi-
dent. To provide a sense of the magnitude of the differences, Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar
    2
    We measure the ratio of trade to GDP as the simple average of exports and imports divided by GDP.
Not all series start in 1970 due to data availability. See Freund (2009) for related evidence on world trade
to GDP ratios in previous global recessions.



                                                     3
                      Figure 1: The Ratio of Trade to GDP: 1970:Q1-2012:Q2
                    0.4

                                                                               Germany

                   0.35



                    0.3

                                                         Rest of world
                   0.25
   0.5*(X+M)/GDP




                                                                               World
                    0.2



                   0.15                               China

                                                                            Japan

                    0.1
                                                                               USA



                   0.05



                     0
                    Q1-70        Q1-80        Q1-90                 Q1-00                Q1-10



Source: IMF Global Data Source and authors’ calculations. Data includes 55 in-
dustrial and major emerging markets. Merchandise exports, merchandise imports
and GDP measured in current US Dollars. ‘World’ is defined as sum of all sample
countries. ‘Rest of the world’ is defined as ‘World’ excluding Germany, USA, Japan
and China. Shaded bars indicate periods of peak-to-trough declines in trade during
2000-2001 and 2008-2009 global recessions.




                                               4
(2010) report that the sharpest drops in U.S. imports occurred in the automotive (-47%)
and industrial supplies (-34%) sectors, while consumer goods trade fell by far less (-12%).3
One way to organize these differences is to note that imports of durables fell substantially
more than nondurable imports. For the U.S., Levchenko et al. report that exports of
non-automotive consumer durables fell by -24.5% while nondurable exports actually rose.
Behrens, Corcos, and Mion (forthcoming) report that in Belgium exports and imports of
consumer nondurables changed by -2% and 9%, while consumer durables fell by -36% and
-39%.
    Third, the trade collapse occurred almost entirely on the intensive margin of trade,
whether measured at the sector or firm level. Looking at Harmonized System sector-level
data for the U.S., EU, Brazil, and Indonesia, Haddad, Harrison, and Hausman (2010) find
that changes in trade on the intensive margin account for 70-95% of the fall in imports. In
firm-level data for Belgium, Behrens et al. estimate that close to 100% of the fall in imports
and exports took place at the intensive margin. Similarly, Bricongne et al. find that net
intensive margin accounted for around 90% of the fall in exports for French exporting firms.
    Fourth, the trade collapse was mostly due to changes in the volume of trade, not price
changes. While prices did fall in some commodity sectors, they were stable or rose in non-
commodity or differentiated goods sectors that make up the bulk of trade. Looking at
sector-level data in the U.S., Levchenko et al. report that roughly two-thirds of the decline
in values is accounted for by declines in quantities. Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Neiman (2012)
extend these findings using transaction level data for the United States from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics. They find that the decline in export and import price indexes was entirely
due to a decline in prices of non-differentiated goods. Despite the collapse in trade values,
export and import prices of differentiated goods remained broadly stable.
    This result is echoed for a broader set of countries by Haddad et al., who find that
unit value prices (computed for Harmonized System categories) fell overall, but actually
increased on average within manufacturing. Similarly, Behrens et al. and Bricongne et al.
also attribute the bulk of the trade collapse to quantities looking at Belgian and French firm-
level data. The message of these results is that the trade collapse was primarily a collapse in
the quantity of goods traded. The sharp fall in commodity prices during the global recession
accounts for only a fraction of the collapse in aggregate trade.
  3
      Bricongne, Fontagné, Gaulier, Taglioni, and Vicard (2012) find similar patterns for France.




                                                       5
2       Framework
In this section, we lay out an analytical framework to organize the empirical research on the
trade collapse. This research has focused on documenting mechanisms that explain devia-
tions of imports from levels predicted by benchmark theoretical or econometric models. We
focus our attention on one particular benchmark – CES import demand – that occupies a
prominent place in both the macroeconomic and trade literatures. By delineating the chan-
nels through which actual imports deviate from this benchmark, we arrive at a framework
to categorize alternative empirical stories.
    To start, consider a world with two countries (i and j), and suppose that aggregate
                                                   −σ
                                               τ p
import demand takes the CES form: dij = ijPj i          Dj , where dij is aggregate real imports
by country j from country i, pi is the price at the factory gate of the good from country i, τij
is an ad valorem cost of delivering goods from the factory gate in country i to final purchasers
in country j, Pj is the aggregate price index for final expenditure in country j; and Dj is real
aggregate expenditure (henceforth, expenditure or spending) by country j.4 Holding trade
costs (τij ) constant, we obtain the standard log-linear import demand equation:
                                                       
                                      ˆ
                                      dij = −σ p̂i − P̂j + D̂j ,                                      (1)

where the hat notation represents log differences. We will refer to dˆij as the CES-predicted
change in imports.
    This CES import demand equation immediately points to two reasons why trade col-
lapsed. The first is that real aggregate expenditure fell precipitously during the global
recession (D̂j < 0). During the crisis, however, much attention focused on the decline in
trade relative to real expenditure. This points toward a possible second explanation: an in-
crease in the relative price of imports. Increases in the relative factory-gate price of imports
(i.e., p̂i − P̂j > 0) could lead imports to fall more than proportionally with final expenditure
(i.e., dˆij − D̂j < 0).
    As noted in the previous section, import prices for the bulk of manufacturing imports did
not fall despite the large collapse in aggregate spending. This suggests that there may have
been shocks to export supply, for example due to declines in credit supply that hindered
production. We can think of these possible supply shocks as operating through this relative
price channel, pushing pi up and exacerbating the decline in imports.
    Early research suggested that these simple explanations could not explain the collapse of
    4
    To be clear, Dj includes consumption, investment, and government spending. The aggregate price Pj is
then the price level associated with this composite expenditure. With balanced trade, Dj would be equal to
GDP, but deviates from GDP with unbalanced trade.


                                                    6
trade.5 This motivated efforts to explain the gap between CES-predicted imports and actual
imports. If we define the actual change in imports as m̂ij , then the unexplained change in
imports is:                                                 
                         ω ≡ m̂ij − dˆij = m̂ij + σ p̂i − P̂j − D̂j .                   (2)

We will call ω the ‘trade wedge.’ The trade wedge measures the discrepancy between model
and data, serving as a model diagnostic in the spirit of Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007).6
    The trade wedge captures several economic mechanisms that could explain the large
collapse in trade relative to expenditure. To illustrate this idea, suppose that ‘true’ aggregate
import demand is given by: mij = f (τij , Ppij , Dj ), where mij represents actual imports. Log
linear import demand is then:
                                                             
                                 m̂ij = β1 τ̂ij + β2 p̂i − P̂j + β3 D̂j ,                               (3)

where β1 , β2 , and β3 are the (unrestricted) elasticities of the real imports with respect to
trade costs, relative prices, and aggregate expenditure, respectively.7 Combining Equations
(2) and (3), the trade wedge would be given by:
                                                          
                           ω = β1 τ̂ij + (β2 − σ) p̂i − P̂j + (β3 − 1) D̂j                              (4)

    This expression highlights that the trade wedge captures both trade costs and model
mis-specification. The first two terms in this trade wedge are associated with relative prices.
Increases in either policy (e.g., tariffs) or non-policy trade costs (e.g., costs of financing
international trade) raise the relative price of imported goods, holding factor gate prices
constant.8 Factors that amplify the empirical elasticity of imports to final demand relative
to calibrated CES elasticities (e.g., inventory adjustment) also appear in the trade wedge.
    The third component of the wedge is associated with mis-specification of the elasticity
of real imports to aggregate real expenditure.9 The aggregate CES import demand system
   5
     For example, see Levchenko et al. (2010) who use a trade wedge exercise of the type described here. See
also Freund (2009) who reported that the elasticity of trade to world GDP was roughly 3.5 in recent data,
well above the unitary elasticity implied by the aggregate CES framework.
   6
     See also Levchenko et al. (2010) and Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan (2011, 2012). Jacks, Novy,
and Meissner (2009, 2011) and Eaton, Kortum, Neiman, and Romalis (2011) study closely related metrics
to assess the magnitude of changes in border frictions.
   7
     Note that we allow changes in trade costs to affect true important demand here. This contrasts with
the CES benchmark in Equation (1) where we assumed trade costs were constant.
   8
     Changes in transport, distribution, and retail margins also can affect the wedge. We do not know of any
papers that focus on these, however. Looking at indexes such as the Baltic Shipping Index, transport costs
appear to have fallen sharply coincident with the trade collapse.
   9
     With a constant trade balance, aggregate real expenditure is related to aggregate real income or value
added, so with some abuse of language one can think of this as mis-calibration of the income elasticity of


                                                     7
assumes that real imports respond to aggregate final expenditure D̂j with an elasticity of
one. This need not be the case in a multi-sector model with asymmetric spending changes
across sectors, in a model with inventories, or in a model with non-homothetic preferences.
    To sum up, we propose mapping explanations for the trade collapse into either (a) relative
price changes, or (b) changes in the trade wedge. There are several candidates for explaining
changes in the trade wedge, including changes in trade frictions or mechanisms that raise
the elasticity of real imports to relative prices or real aggregate expenditure. In subsequent
sections, we discuss evidence on these factors in detail. Incorporating them yields a more
sophisticated import demand system that fits the data better than the CES benchmark.


3       The Composition of Expenditure Changes
The aggregate CES import demand system, as in Equation (1), embodies the assumption that
changes in aggregate expenditure translate one-for-one into changes in aggregate imports. In
this section, we examine several channels that lead this result to break down: asymmetries in
expenditure changes across sectors, input linkages across sectors, and vertical specialization
in trade. These examples highlight challenges researchers face in analyzing the quantitative
role of expenditure changes in explaining the trade collapse. We then review evidence from
multi-sector models with input-output linkages across sectors and countries.


3.1     Translating Aggregate Expenditure into Imports
We open this section with a basic point: the composition of expenditure changes across
sectors interacts with the import intensity of those sectors to drive aggregate real imports.
When expenditure changes are largest in import-intensive sectors, imports can easily decline
by more than overall aggregate expenditure. While this mechanism is general, quantifying
the importance of these expenditure asymmetries is complicated by the fact that imports
consist of both final and intermediate goods. We illustrate two complications that arise due
to input linkages across sectors and vertical specialization in trade.

3.1.1    Asymmetries in Expenditure Changes Across Sectors

Let us begin with a two-sector extension of the benchmark framework in which final demand
takes the nested CES form. Within each sector s ∈ {1, 2} of country j, domestic and foreign
goods, djj (s) and dij (s), are aggregated to form a composite sector level good, denoted dj (s).
imports or the elasticity of imports to GDP.



                                               8
These sector level goods are then aggregated to form a composite final good, denoted Dj .10
To isolate composition effects, we assume that aggregation of home and foreign goods within
sectors is Leontief, so that: dˆij (s) = dˆj (s).
    To make the analysis more concrete, let us label the two sectors so that s = 1 represents
services and s = 2 represents goods. And let us make the stark assumption that services are
not traded, reflecting the general idea that goods are more tradable than services. With this
set-up, changes in aggregate real imports are given by:
                                                       "             #
                                                           dˆj (2)
                                              m̂ij =                     D̂j ,                                  (5)
                                                            D̂j

where we used the Leontief assumption that dˆij (2) = dˆj (2).
    We note that asymmetric changes in sector-level expenditure show up in the trade wedge
because they drive the elasticity of imports with respect to aggregate expenditure away from
                                                  dˆj (2)
one. Using the notation of Equation (4), β3 = D̂          . If spending changes are identical across
                                                       j

sectors, so that dˆj (1) = dˆj (2), then it follows that dˆj (2) = D̂j .11 This implies that the
elasticity of imports to aggregate expenditure is equal to one (i.e., β3 = 1). Outside this
special case, changes in imports can either be larger or smaller than aggregate expenditure,
giving rise to a non-zero trade wedge.
    The sign of the trade wedge depends on how changes in expenditure are correlated with
sectoral openness. If final spending on tradable goods (s = 2) falls more than spending
on non-traded services (s = 1), then the elasticity of imports with respect to aggregate
expenditure is greater than one and the trade wedge will be negative ω̂ < 0. This intuition
generalizes in a straightforward way to an economy with many tradable sectors. In that case,
m̂ij = s αjm (s)dˆij (s) = s αjm (s)dˆj (s), where αjm (s) is the share of each sector in imports.
       P                   P

Rewriting:                             "                     !#
                                         X            ˆj (s)
                                                      d
                               m̂ij =        αjm (s)            D̂j .                         (6)
                                           s            D̂j
                                                                j                dˆ (s)
Thus, if sectors with relatively large expenditure changes ( D̂     > 1) have relatively large
                                                                  j
import shares αjm (s), then the elasticity of imports to aggregate expenditure will be greater
than one and the trade wedge will be positive.
   The intuition derived from this simple example is clear, but needs to be extended before it
can be taken to data. One important shortcut in the example is that we treated imports as if
  10
     In developing results in this section, we assume that we have data on sector-level expenditure changes.
We focus on the response of trade to these expenditure changes, but do not model the sources of these
changes directly. Therefore, we do not need to specify how the top level of aggregation works here.
  11
     This uses the fact that D̂j = s αjd (s)dˆj (s), where αjd (s) is the share of each sector in total expenditure.
                                   P


                                                           9
they are directly sold to final users. This is unrealistic since roughly two-thirds of imports are
used as intermediate inputs in most countries. The heavy use of imported intermediates has
two important implications. First, final expenditure need not be directly linked to imports
on a sector-by-sector basis. For example, goods may be used as inputs to the production
of services, so imports may depend on spending on services even if services are non-traded.
Second, imports are often used to produce exports. Therefore, imports depends not only on
domestic final expenditure, but also demand for exports. We take up these extensions in the
next two sections.

3.1.2   Input Linkages Across Sectors

To explain the issues that arise due to imported input linkages across sectors, we consider
an empirically motivated extension of the multi-sector model. We continue to analyze a
two sector economy (goods and services) and maintain the assumption that only goods are
traded. However, now we recognize that some goods are used as intermediate inputs in
production.
   Specifically, let us assume that the services sector uses imported goods as intermediate
inputs in production. We denote these intermediate goods imports by country j as xij (2, 1),
where the index (2, 1) indicates that goods (s = 2) are used by service sector (s = 1). Further,
assume that the production function for services is Leontief, so that changes in imported
inputs are proportional to changes in gross output of services. Denoting the change in gross
output as q̂j (1), then x̂ij (2, 1) = q̂j (1). Because services are non-traded, q̂j (1) = dˆj (1), so
demand for imported inputs is proportional to final spending on services: x̂ij (2, 1) = dˆj (1).
Finally, we continue to assume that the country imports goods for direct consumption (dij (1))
and combines these with domestically produced goods (djj (1)) via a Leontief aggregator.
   Given these assumptions, the change in aggregate imports can be expressed as:

                                 m̂ij = αjmd dˆij (2) + αjmx x̂ij (2, 1)
                                                                                                 (7)
                                      = αmd dˆj (2) + αmx dˆj (1)
                                              j              j


where αjmd and αjmx are the shares of final goods and intermediate inputs in aggregate
imports. The important point to note here is that aggregate imports of goods in country j
depend not only on final spending on goods, but also on final spending on services.
   We proceed to compute the change in real imports in this example:
                                        "                                 #
                                            αjmx dˆj (1) + αjmd dˆj (2)
                               m̂ij =                                         D̂j .              (8)
                                                       D̂j


                                                      10
The effect of imported intermediates on the trade wedge can be deduced from this expression.
    If there are no imported intermediates (αjmx = 0), then this expression collapses to the
multi-sector model of the previous section. In this case, the elasticity of imports to aggregate
expenditure is greater than one and the trade wedge is positive if expenditure falls by more
in the goods sector than overall aggregate expenditure. On the other hand, if αjmx > 0 and
the fall in expenditure is larger for goods than services (assuming both fall), the elasticity of
imports to aggregate expenditure gets pushed back towards one. That is, imported inputs
actually tend to decrease the magnitude of the trade wedge. The reason is that imports
depend on spending on both goods and services due to the cross-sector input linkage, and
this makes the response of imports more similar to overall expenditure. Because spending on
goods fell by more than spending on services in most countries, this insight directly carries
over to the trade collapse episode. The conclusion is that one needs to be careful to account
for input linkages across sectors when examining how changes in expenditure translate into
changes in imports.

3.1.3    Vertical Specialization in Trade

Input linkages that tie imports to demand for exports are also important in explaining
how imports respond to expenditure changes. Unlike previous examples where the size
of expenditure changes across sectors within countries was important in explaining import
responses, we now emphasize that the size of expenditure changes across countries can be
important as well.
      To illustrate this issue, we work with a different modification of the two-country exam-
ple.12 As in previous examples, goods are tradable and services are non-traded in both coun-
tries. However, suppose now that country j only imports intermediate inputs (dij (2) = 0),
while country i imports only final goods (dji (2) > 0). Unlike the previous example, assume
that imported inputs in country j are used to produce goods, not services. Assuming that
the goods production technology is Leontief, then x̂ij (2, 2) = q̂j (2), where the notation is the
same as in previous sections. Finally, to emphasize the role of cross-country differences in
expenditure changes, we assume that expenditure changes are symmetric within countries,
so dˆij (s) = D̂j .
      With this set-up, changes in aggregate real imports for country j are: m̂ij = x̂ij (2, 2) =
q̂j (2). Changes in gross output are themselves given by: q̂j (2) = αjj        q
                                                                                 (2)dˆjj (2) + αji
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                   (2)dˆji (2),
                    d (2)
where αjj  q                     q
             (2) = qjjj (2) and αjj        q
                                    (2) + αji (2) = 1. Since dˆij (s) = D̂j , then we can write imports
  12
    To be consistent with previous sections, we describe the economy as if it has two sectors here. As will
be obvious, the basic point we want to make holds for a one sector economy as well.



                                                      11
as:
                                            q             q
                                   m̂ij = αjj (2)D̂j + αji  (2)D̂i
                                          "                       #
                                              q        q      D̂i
                                                                                                      (9)
                                        = αjj   (2) + αji (2)       D̂j
                                                              D̂j

    Because imported inputs are used to produce exports, imports in country j depend on
final expenditure both at home and abroad. Further, the elasticity of imports with respect
to domestic expenditure depends on the ratio of domestic to foreign expenditure changes. In
previous examples, the distribution of expenditure changes across sectors pushes the elasticity
of imports to aggregate expenditure away from one. Here the distribution of expenditure
changes across countries does the same: heterogeneity in global expenditure influences the
size of the changes in trade.
    Another point to note is that vertical specialization can make changes in imports more
synchronized across countries than changes in final expenditure. For example, suppose that
expenditure in country j is constant, while expenditure in country i falls (i.e., expenditure
changes are not synchronized). Then, imports fall in country i due to the change in final
expenditure directly, and imports fall in country j because country j needs fewer imported
intermediate inputs to produce exported final goods.
    A final point to note is that the presence of vertical specialization by itself does not
amplify the response of global trade to expenditure. If expenditure changes are identical
across countries (D̂i = D̂j ), then the change in world trade is proportional to the change
in global demand.13 However, if expenditure changes are heterogeneous across sectors such
that expenditure declines more in vertically specialized sectors, then global trade can decline
more than global expenditure.14


3.2     Evidence on the Role of Expenditure Changes
There are two main messages from Section 3.1. First, asymmetric expenditure changes
across sectors interact with differences in sectoral import intensity to determine changes
in imports. Second, input linkages across sectors and countries mediate the relationship
between expenditure changes and changes in trade. Therefore, one needs to simultaneously
account for both asymmetric expenditure changes and input linkages to quantify the role of
expenditure in explaining the trade collapse.
  13
     To be clear, if D̂ is the change in global expenditure, then by construction D̂i = D̂j = D̂. Further,
m̂ij = m̂ji = D̂, and global trade is a weighted average of m̂ij and m̂ji .
  14
     See Bems, Johnson, and Yi (2011) for formalization of this argument.



                                                   12
    Several recent papers by Bems, Johnson, and Yi (2010, 2011), Eaton, Kortum, Neiman,
and Romalis (2011), and Bussière, Callegari, Ghironi, Sestieri, and Yamano (forthcoming)
do exactly that.15 Though these papers employ different underlying frameworks, they share
two main features. First, they feature multiple sectors and input linkages across sectors and
countries, as described in the previous section. Second, they take changes in expenditure as
given, and explore the consequences of those changes for international trade.
    Bems et al. work with a global input-output framework that describes bilateral final
and intermediate goods linkages across countries. They feed observed sectoral expenditure
changes into that framework to generate predictions for trade flows during the crisis. In this
exercise, Bems et al. abstract from changes in trade due to relative price changes.16 This is
an advantage in the sense that it isolates the role of expenditure changes in a clean way. It
is a disadvantage in that it is silent about what explains residual changes not attributable
to expenditure.
    Eaton et al. instead use a multi-sector, many-country Ricardian model with input link-
ages across sectors and countries in which trade endogenously responds to price changes.
Using the model, Eaton et al. perform an accounting exercise that splits the trade collapse
into components due to changes in final expenditure, changes in productivity, changes in
border trade frictions, and changes in trade deficits.17 Of course, because the model is used
as a measurement device, interpretation of these components is model-dependent.
    Bussière et al. take a less model-based, and more econometric approach. Bussière et
al. use input-output tables to construct a measure of the level of import demand that
takes input linkages into account. They start by using the input-output tables to measure
the import-intensity of consumption, investment, government spending, and exports. They
then combine these import intensities with the actual time series changes in each spending
component to construct a time series measure of the level of import demand. They then
use this import demand measure along with coefficients from import regressions estimated
off historical data to assess the contribution of expenditure changes in explaining import
collapses for 18 OECD countries.
  15
     Though we focus on aggregate evidence here, Behrens et al., Bricogne et al., and Haddad et al. (among
others) also conclude that expenditure changes are the most important explanation for the trade collapse by
examining firm and sector-level data.
  16
     Bems et al. assume that production functions and preferences are Leontief to shut down the response of
quantities to price changes. Formally, their approach is equivalent to assuming that prices are constant in
an alternative framework with CES production functions and preferences, described in Bems and Johnson
(2012).
  17
     Eaton et al. do not explicitly model non-manufacturing sectors, and so focus on changes in manufacturing
trade only in this exercise. In addition to the parameterized model, Eaton et al. use data on sector-level
changes in production, expenditure, trade balances, and prices (including imputed factor price changes and
producer price indexes) to separate these components.



                                                     13
    Despite differences in approach, these papers all find that changes in expenditure were
the most important explanation for declines in trade during the global recession. All three
present baseline estimates that expenditure changes accounted for 65-80% of the trade col-
lapse. These results imply an elasticity of world trade to GDP on the order of three, well
in excess of the unitary elasticity that would be implied by the benchmark aggregate CES
framework in Section 2.
    Further, all three papers emphasize that the composition of expenditure changes was
key to explaining the collapse.18 Spending on durables fell by roughly 30 percent during
the global recession, while spending on services was almost unchanged. Given that durables
tend to be both heavily traded and highly vertically specialized, this collapse was strongly
transmitted to trade. To put a number on this, Eaton et al. find that roughly 2/3 of the
decline in world trade to GDP is accounted for by the change in durables expenditure alone.19
    Consistent with the discussion in Section 3.1.3, changes in expenditure abroad signifi-
cantly affected not only exports, but also imports for many countries. Bussière et al. argue
that the collapse in exports was the main contributor to the fall in imports for Japan, France,
Italy, and Spain. Bems et al. estimate that the realized 4.4% fall in expenditure in the U.S.
(holding final expenditure in the rest of the world constant) decreased imports in Canada
and Mexico by 3.9% and in Emerging Asia by 1.7%. Similarly, the fall in expenditure in
EU15 took a large toll on imports in Emerging Europe. These results all point to verti-
cal specialization as playing an important role of synchronizing the collapse of trade across
countries.
    Shifting attention to the role of cross-sector input linkages as described in Section 3.1.2,
Bems et al. estimate that imports of intermediate inputs contracted by considerably less
than imports of final goods. For the world as a whole, final goods trade was roughly twice
as sensitive to the decline in global spending as intermediate goods trade: the elasticity of
final goods trade to total world expenditure was above 4, while the elasticity of intermediate
goods trade was 2. These results are consistent with the idea that ignoring intermediate
linkages and simply assuming that imports track changes in final expenditure would lead
one to over predict the elasticity of trade to expenditure.
    Overall, there is a consensus that the composition of expenditure changes was the main
  18
      Bems et al. and Eaton et al. focus on splitting goods into durables versus nondurables. Bussière
et al. split expenditure by national accounts expenditure categories, so instead emphasize the collapse in
investment spending.
   19
      Focusing instead on the elasticity of world trade to GDP, Bems et al. show that the elasticity of world
trade to GDP is roughly one if they assume expenditure changes are symmetric across sectors within each
country, rises to two if expenditure changes are allowed to be asymmetric across goods and services, and
rises to roughly 3 if expenditure changes are allowed to be asymmetric within goods across durables and
nondurables as well.



                                                     14
contributor to the abrupt fall in trade relative to aggregate expenditure and GDP. That
said, the estimates indicate changes in expenditure are responsible for perhaps 65-80% of
the collapse, so there is a substantial residual that remains to be accounted for. Therefore
we turn to additional mechanisms to fill this gap.


4      Amplification via Inventory Adjustments
In the previous section, we demonstrated that the composition of changes in final expenditure
across sectors and countries can lead imports to respond more than proportionally to changes
in aggregate final expenditure. In this section, we describe how inventory adjustments serve
as an additional mechanism that amplifies changes imports relative to final expenditure.
    As Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan (2010b) point out, economies of scale in trans-
portation and delivery lags for international shipments tend to imply that agents should hold
large inventories of imported goods. When a negative demand shock arrives, imports may
fall both because demand is lower and because lower levels of demand imply that agents
should reduce inventory levels. This amplification mechanism has the potential to explain
both the large short run elasticity of imports to demand shocks and movements in the trade
wedge.
    To illustrate the effects of inventory adjustment, we turn again to the benchmark frame-
work and now assume that agents hold inventories of imported goods.20 Specifically, let
imports in each period include both imports to satisfy final demand and imports to be held
in inventory. As an accounting identity, imports are then given by: mijt = dijt + Iijt − Iijt−1 ,
where Iijt − Iijt−1 is the change in inventories of imported goods from period t − 1 to period
t. Final sales of imported goods dijt are equal to final expenditure on imports less changes
in private inventories.21
    For simplicity, assume that there is a behavioral inventory rule where inventories are a
                                                     I
constant ratio of final sales of imported goods: dijt  ijt
                                                           = dI ∀ t. This implies that imports are
given by: mijt = dijt + dI [dijt − dijt−1 ]. With this set-up, we want to compute the elasticity
  20
     The basic story here holds if agents may hold inventories of domestic goods as well. The key assumption
needed to generate a larger response for imports relative to domestically supplied goods is that inventory-
to-sales ratios are higher for imported than domestic goods.
  21
     In previous sections, we did not take a stand on whether dijt represented final expenditure (inclusive
of inventory investment) or final sales. Here this distinction becomes important. In both Bems et al. and
Eaton et al., changes in final expenditure are measured inclusive of inventory investment, yet these papers do
not capture the amplifying role of inventories. In Bems et al. and Eaton et al., changes in final expenditure
lower demand for both domestic and imports proportionally at the sector level. The inventory adjustment
mechanism described here suggests that changes in expenditure should be associated with a larger than
proportional response of imports. A general model could clearly encompass both this inventory channel
along with the demand asymmetries and input-output linkages above.


                                                     15
of imports with respect to changes in final sales of imported goods. Starting from an initial
steady state with constant inventories, so that mij = dij initially, this elasticity is given by:
                                                               
                                                              I ˆ
                                                   m̂ij = 1 +     dij                       (10)
                                                              d

Inventory adjustment causes imports rise/fall more than proportionally with final sales of
imported goods.22 Combining this result with the benchmark CES demand for imports in
Equation (1), we get:
                                                                
                                              I                    I
                                 m̂ij = − 1 +    σ p̂i − P̂j + 1 +     D̂j .                (11)
                                              d                    d

    Inventory adjustment amplifies the sensitivity of imports to both changes in relative prices
and real final sales. In the language of Equation (3), the price elasticity is β2 = − 1 + dI σ
                                                                                            

and expenditure elasticity
                             is β3 = 1 + dI . Correspondingly, the trade wedge in this case
is given by: ω̂ = dI σ p̂i − P̂j + dI D̂j . Thus, as emphasized by Alessandria et al. (2011,
forthcoming), inventory adjustment ultimately gets picked up in the trade wedge.
    Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan (2010a, 2011) examine the role of inventory adjust-
ment in explaining the trade collapse. Direct evidence on this channel is difficult to come
by, as information on inventories and sales for imported goods is not available for most in-
dustries, or even in the aggregate. Data is available for the U.S. auto industry, however, so
Alessandria et al. use this industry as a case study. Consistent with the basic story above,
imports fell about two-and-a-half times more than sales of imported autos during the trade
collapse. Further, they show that the decline in sales was matched by a sharp rise in the
inventory-to-sales ratio for imported autos. The inventory-to-sales ratio then fell back to its
initial level over time as retailers filled orders out of inventory rather than imports. Once
the inventory-to-sales ratio returned to its ‘normal’ level, retailers started importing again
to meet consumer demand, and imports of autos rebounded.
    To generalize from this example to economy-wide adjustment, Alessandria et al. turn
to a model. In Alessandria et al. (2010a), they extend the partial equilibrium sS inventory
model in Alessandria et al. (2010b) to a two-country setting, and calibrate it using import
and inventory behavior for the U.S. They then simulate model responses to shocks to the
cost of labor and a shock to the carrying cost of inventory (in the form of an interest rate
shock), and evaluate the performance of the model against a benchmark model without
inventory frictions. The model generates the stylized fact that imports respond more than
final sales, as observed in the data. It also generates sharp v-shaped declines in imports and
 22
      If dˆij = dˆjj , then this result holds for total final sales, as well.


                                                             16
hump-shaped inventory-to-sales ratios, as in the time series data for autos during the trade
collapse.
    These results suggest that inventory dynamics may play an important role in amplifying
the transmission of changes in final demand to imports. From a quantitative perspective,
Alessandria et al. (2011) argue that inventory adjustment could account for as much as
one-third of the trade wedge during the 2008-2009 episode for the United States, implying
that it could account for up to 20% of the decline in US imports.23
    These results come with the caveat that there is little direct evidence for the inventory ad-
justment channel outside autos in the United States.24 While the preponderance of evidence
from the calibrated models and autos case study point toward the importance of inventory
adjustment, more work is needed to corroborate the importance of this mechanism in other
contexts. Further, whereas Alessandria et al. focus on a case study for inventories of a final
good, Altomonte, Di Mauro, Ottaviano, Rungi, and Vicard (2012) suggest that inventories
of inputs in global supply chains may have played an important role in the crisis. Empirical
work aimed at supply chain inventories would also be worthwhile.


5      Financial Shocks and Exports
The two previous sections focused on the implications of changes in expenditure for trade,
presumably arising from demand-side shocks. This section turns to the supply side. We
focus on an active literature that investigates the effects of the financial crisis and ensuing
credit crunch on trade. We separate this literature into two broad bins.
    First, the financial crisis impeded production and hence exports, because firms depend on
external credit to finance production. In the benchmark framework, we can interpret these
effects as an export supply shock that increases the factory gate price and hence depresses
imports, for a given level of aggregate expenditure. Further, the credit crunch is likely to
have more severe effects for countries, sectors, and firms that are more financially vulnerable.
Identifying the effects of the credit crunch rests on linking measures of financial vulnerability
to cross-country, cross-sector, and cross-firm changes in trade.
    Second, the financial crisis disrupted the financing of international transactions. Due
to long cash flow cycles and payment uncertainty, international trade tends to be ‘finance
  23
     To generate this estimate, Alessandria et al. make assumptions about steady-state inventory to sales
ratios, which are not directly observed for US imports, and the elasticity of substitution between home and
foreign goods in preferences. With more conservative assumptions, the estimate shrinks.
  24
     For example, Behrens et al. find that the ratio of inventories to sales at the firm level is not an important
determinant of changes in imports for Belgian firms during the crisis, though they cannot measure inventories
of domestic versus imported goods directly.



                                                       17
intensive’ relative to domestic trade.25 Therefore, financing disruptions may have hit inter-
national trade harder than domestic trade, which in our simple framework would look like an
increase in the trade wedge. That is, we think of international trade finance disruptions as
increasing the cost of delivering goods to foreign consumers, holding the factory gate price of
producing those goods constant.26 Disruptions to trade finance are hard to measure directly
due to lack of comprehensive data, but we review what indirect evidence exists below.


5.1     Export Supply Shocks
The launching point for analysis of the impact of financial shocks on export supply is the
observation that firms require working capital to produce. Therefore, disruptions to the
supply of working capital constrain their ability to supply goods to both domestic and
foreign markets. Following Paravisini, Rappoport, Schnabl, and Wolfenzon (2012), we think
of production or exports as a function of demand for output and the level of credit used
by the firm. And the amount of credit used is itself a function of the supply of credit to
the firm and the firm’s demand for credit, which itself depends on the demand for output.
This two-step formulation highlights several important challenges in examining how financial
disruptions influence exports.
    First, data on credit use is not typically available at the firm or industry level, particularly
in a form that can be matched to contemporaneous information on production. Therefore,
most papers rely on proxies for credit use, usually constructed from firms’ financial reports
or balance sheet information. For example, measures used include the share of capital expen-
diture not financed by internal cash flows (‘external financial dependence’), the tangibility
of assets, share of short-term debt, the incidence of defaults on creditors, and so on. These
capture how vulnerable particular firms or industries are to financial shocks. The expecta-
tion is that the financial crisis affected exports of firms/sectors with high vulnerability more
than firms/sectors with low vulnerability, controlling for other confounding factors.
    Second, even if credit data is available, the use of credit is clearly endogenous to pro-
duction decisions. To estimate the causal effect of credit disruptions on production, one
  25
      As discussed in Feenstra, Li, and Yu (2011), firms engaged in international trade may also face tighter
credit constraints in obtaining working capital loans (as opposed to loans that specifically finance export
transactions) than domestically oriented firms due to their longer cash cycles. Moreover, exporting firms
incur higher fixed costs as they enter foreign markets, which also need to be financed. These factors make
exporting firms relatively more sensitive to financial shocks than domestic firms, in addition to the pure
‘trade finance’ channels that we emphasize below. Direct evidence on how important these additional factors
were during the trade collapse is sparse.
   26
      This is helpful as an analytical construct, but not necessarily a guide to looking for the effects of trade
finance disruptions using actual price data. Whether trade finance disruptions show up in factory gate,
export prices at the border, import prices at the border, or consumer prices is an open question.



                                                       18
ideally needs instruments that pick up shocks to credit supply. For example, Amiti and
Weinstein (2011) and Paravisini et al. both match firms to the banks that supply them with
credit, and then use the health of those banks as an instrument for credit use. In all other
papers, instruments are not available. These papers instead measure the financial vulnera-
bility of firms/sectors using pre-crisis data, and then examine whether pre-existing financial
vulnerability explains differences across firms/sectors during the financial crisis.
    Third, changes in demand for output may be correlated with credit disruptions at the
firm or sector level. Failing to control for these demand changes would undermine the
identification of the causal effect of financial shocks on exports, because demand influences
both the level of exports conditional on credit and demand for credit itself. Most papers
therefore attempt to control for demand, for example by including proxies for export demand
or time-varying fixed effects for sectors, firms, products, or destinations (and interactions
thereof). The particular specifications used differ across papers depending on what data is
available, and these differences should be kept in mind when comparing results across papers.
    With these concerns in mind, we turn to the empirical evidence, grouping the evidence
into two broad categories. The first group consists of evidence based on proxies for financial
vulnerability. We further subdivide this area into firm-level versus sector-level evidence. The
second group consists of evidence using data on individual firms matched to the banks that
supply them with credit.
    Using firm-level data, Behrens et al., Bricongne et al., and Coulibaly, Sapriza, and Zlate
(2011) all find that financial constraints explain some of the decline in production and exports
during the trade collapse. Using data on Belgian firms, Behrens et al. find that firms with
shorter debt maturities and larger shares of financial debt in total liabilities tended to see
larger declines in exports. Bricogne et al. find that French firms subject to tighter credit
constraints due to past defaults on creditors experienced larger declines in exports, and that
these effects are most pronounced in sectors that are highly dependent on external finance.
Examining data on publicly traded firms for six emerging markets in Asia, Coulibaly find
that firms with higher working capital requirements, larger amounts of short-term debt,
greater external finance dependence, and lower retained earnings experienced larger declines
in total sales during the crisis.
    Using sector-level data, Chor and Manova (2012) examine how the sector-composition of
exports to the United States varies across countries depending on the cost of finance in those
source countries.27 They document that tight financial conditions (i.e., higher interbank
  27
     Iacovone and Zavacka (2009) present related results using data from 23 banking crises during the 1980’s
and 1990’s. They find that sectors with high external finance dependence or low asset tangibility tend to see
exports fall more than the average sector during a banking crisis.



                                                     19
interest rates) led exports to fall more during the 2008-2009 crisis in sectors with high
external finance dependence or low asset tangibility. They further show that countries with
tight financial conditions exported less to the United States than countries where financial
conditions were looser.
    Turning to matched firm-bank data, Paravisini et al. present evidence for exports from
Peru during 2008-2009 crisis. They match Peruvian customs records, with information on de-
tailed Harmonized System products exported by individual firms to each destination market,
to data on credit obtained by each firm from individual Peruvian banks. They then measure
the exposure of each bank to the sudden stop of capital flows to Peru that accompanied the
crisis, assuming that banks with a large share of foreign liabilities on their balance sheet
were hurt more by the sudden stop. Using this data, they regress firm-product-destination
exports on firm-level credit, instrumenting firm-level credit using the health of the banks
that lend to each firm.28 They find that the elasticity of exports to credit is 0.23 for firm-
product-destination pairs that are active both before and after the crisis, and that individual
firms are less likely to continue exporting during the crisis when credit dries up.29
    Amiti and Weinstein use matched firm-bank data for Japan during 1987-1999 period
and the 2008-2009 crisis. They obtain export data from corporate reports of firms listed on
the Japanese stock exchange. They then match these firms with banks, where each firm is
linked to the single bank that clears most transactions for the firm (i.e., the firm’s ‘reference
bank’). To measure the health of these banks, Amiti and Weinstein use market-to-book
values. In their main specifications, Amiti and Weinstein regress exports of each firm on the
market-to-book value of its reference bank.30 The resulting elasticity suggests that a 10%
drop in the reference bank’s book-to-market value induces a 1% drop in exports.31
    We interpret all these results as picking up the effects of the financial crisis that manifest
themselves as a supply shock at the firm or sector level. Seen through this lens, we expect to
   28
      This specification identifies the elasticity of exports to total credit separately from the elasticity of credit
to proxies for bank health. Further, they control for changes in demand using destination-product-time fixed
effects, and control for non-random matching between firms and banks using firm-product-destination fixed
effects.
   29
      In contrast to some of the previous evidence, Paravisini et al. do not find that sectors with high external
finance dependence are more sensitive to credit disruptions.
   30
      Their main specification uses data from 1987-1999 only, and they report similar but less exhaustive
results for 2008-2009. In this regression, they control for industry-time and bank fixed effects. These fixed
effects can be interpreted as controls for non-random matching between exports and bank, as well as industry-
specific demand changes. These controls are similar to the Paravisini et al. specification, but do not control
for destination-based matching between firms and banks or product-destination specific changes in demand
as in the Paravisini et al. specification.
   31
      Amiti and Weinstein argue that exports decline due to contractions in trade finance provided by the
reference bank, not necessarily due to a general supply constraint induced by decreased credit availability.
We discuss this point further below.



                                                         20
see declines in both production and exports for firms or sectors that face credit constraints.
One prominent topic of debate concerns whether the financial crisis caused exports to fall
more than production at the firm/sector level.32 Larger declines in exports than production,
controlling for differences in demand at home and abroad, would suggest that exporters
faced special problems as a result of the crisis. For example, many pointed to disruptions to
international trade finance during the crisis. We therefore turn to examine trade finance in
greater detail.


5.2     International Trade Finance
During the financial crisis, research interest in trade finance increased substantially. We
therefore open this section by defining terms and reviewing some background material.
Broadly, “trade finance” refers to payment arrangements between buyers and sellers of goods.
Of course, we focus on the international dimensions of trade finance here, i.e., financing ar-
rangements for cross-border transactions.
    There are two main categories of international trade finance.33 The first category is
bank-intermediated trade finance, in which banks facilitate transactions between buyers and
sellers.34 For example, with a letter of credit, banks serve two main functions: the importer’s
bank guarantees payment and the exporter’s bank provides working capital, taking the
payment guarantee as collateral. The second category is non-bank trade finance, in which
buyers and sellers extend credit to each other. For example, if payments terms are specified
as cash-in-advance, then the importer effectively provides finance to the exporter and bears
the risk of nonperformance by the exporter.35 Alternatively, with open account payment
terms (which show up as ‘trade credit’ on the seller’s balance sheet), the exporter effectively
provides finance to the importer and bears the risk of nonpayment by the importer.
    In practice, both bank-intermediated and non-bank trade finance are important. Though
data is sparse, the best estimates suggest that 20-40% of international trade is financed via
  32
      Aggregate data does not shed much light on this question, because aggregate exports can fall relative
to aggregate production for compositional reasons. Even at the firm level, differential changes in demand
across markets or compositional effects within multi-product firms could also induce changes in the ratio of
exports to production.
   33
      See Antrás and Foley (2011) and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2012) for models that analyze determinants of
financing choice. Both papers emphasize that differences in contract enforcement across countries provide
incentives to select payment terms that result in enforcement taking place in high enforcement jurisdictions.
Letters of credit via banks are attractive when contract enforcement is weak in both the importing and
exporting countries.
   34
      Olsen (2010) and Ahn (2011) provide models describing the role of banks and letters of credit in inter-
national trade finance.
   35
      Leibovici and Waugh (2012) propose a macroeconomic model of import demand in which imports must
be paid for up front and then are delivered in a subsequent period, which can be though of as cash-in-advance
financing.


                                                     21
banks, with the remainder financed via non-bank methods.36
    With this background, we see two main channels via which the financial crisis impaired
trade finance. First, the financial crises severely hobbled the banking system in most coun-
tries, which in turn led bank-intermediated trade finance to become more expensive or un-
available all together.37 Second, the general distress in financial markets and drying up of
credit availability, may have led firms to hoard liquidity. In that case, open account or
cash-in-advance financing of trade becomes more costly and/or harder to obtain as well.
Direct evidence regarding the extent to which these contributed to the trade collapse is
sparse. We first review here what direct survey and case study evidence exists on how trade
finance difficulties contributed to the trade collapse and then turn to several types of indirect
evidence.
    Surveys of firms and financial institutions provide the most comprehensive source of data
on changes in availability and terms of trade finance during the trade collapse. Drawing on
IMF-BAFT surveys of 40 major banks during 2008-2010, Asmundson, Dorsey, Khachatryan,
Niculcea, and Saito (2011, p.93) report that “bank-intermediated trade finance largely held
up during the crisis.” They found that the cost of procuring trade finance rose (relative
to bank’s cost of capital) and the quantity of trade finance fell.38 This decline in quantity
mostly reflected the decline in trade volumes. In fact, the share of trade supported by
bank-intermediated trade finance actually rose during the crisis as exporters shifted from
open account to bank-intermediated financing to obtain insurance against nonpayment risk.
Moreover, Korinek, Le Cocguic, and Sourdin (2010) report that bank-intermediated trade
finance generally declined by less than overall short-term finance during the financial crisis,
consistent with the idea that banks view trade finance as safe relative to other forms of
short-term lending.
    Malouche (2011) reports similar evidence of trade finance stresses from World Bank
surveys for firms and banks in 14 developing countries. In those surveys, the primary concern
of exporting firms appears to be lack of demand, with trade finance problems playing a
  36
      Appendix III in Asmundson et al. (2011a) puts the share of bank-intermediated trade finance at 35-40%
based on IMF staff estimates and available surveys of financial institutions. Antràs and Foley (2011) report
that 84% of transactions by the U.S. exporter for which they have data are financed on open account or cash-
in-advance terms. They also discuss the results of FCIB surveys (http://fcibglobal.com) that suggest
roughly 75% of trade is financed via non-bank methods. Senechal (2012) puts the share of open-account
financing at 80%.
   37
      Olsen (2010) emphasizes that small changes in the probability of bank survival can lead to big changes
in the ability of banks to guarantee transactions and Ahn (2011) argues that the premium paid for trade
finance over regular finance should be counter-cyclical. Both these models then can help explain disruptions
in bank-intermediated trade finance during the trade crisis.
   38
      Bank surveys by the International Chamber of Commerce from 2010-2012 echo these findings on the
decreased quantity and increased prices of bank-intermediated trade finance during the crisis. They also
show a rebound in trade finance following the crisis.


                                                     22
secondary role in explaining the drop in exports. Moreover, small and medium sized firms
appeared to suffer the most from tightening trade finance conditions, though they also cited
lack of export demand as their main concern and did not view trade finance as the binding
constraint on exporting.39
    Overall, these surveys indicate stresses in bank-intermediated trade finance, but markets
continued to function. The decline in the overall value of bank-intermediated trade finance
outstanding appears to be mostly due to the decline in trade itself, rather than vice-versa.
An important caveat to this conclusion is that there were substantial policy measures taken
by the G20, multilateral development banks, and national export credit agencies during the
crisis to support bank-intermediated trade finance.40 Further, interest rate cuts by central
banks offset some of the increase in margins on trade finance lending. The decline in bank-
intermediated trade finance likely would have been more severe in the absence of these
measures.
    Turning from survey evidence to a case study, Antràs and Foley (2011) have unique data
on trade and non-bank financing relationships for a large US exporter of frozen and refrig-
erated food products that includes the 2008-2009 crisis period. They found that importers
who traded on cash-in-advance terms prior to the crisis decreased their imports by more
than those that traded on open account terms, consistent with the idea that buyers were
liquidity constrained. Further, new importers during the crisis were more likely to trade on
cash-in-advance terms than in periods outside the financial crisis, indicating that the export-
ing firm was concerned about payment defaults. This evidence suggests that trade finance
may be important for understanding heterogeneity in responses to the financial crisis across
firms or countries.41
    Pursuing this idea that payment arrangements matter, Coulibaly et al. examine the
extent to which open account financing (trade credit) substituted for bank credit during the
financial crisis in Asian emerging markets. They point out that trade credit declined by less
for financially vulnerable firms (with more short-term debt) during the crisis and that firms
that were able to substitute towards trade credit (away from financial credit) experienced
smaller declines in sales. These observations both suggest that trade credit may substitute
  39
      The access of smaller firms to bank-intermediated finance seems to have been crowded out by larger
firms that turned from using international to domestic banks during the crisis. Moreover, even for firms
using non-bank finance, they suffered from delayed payments by buyers and shorter payment cycles with
suppliers.
   40
      See descriptions of policy measures in Asmundson et al., Auboin (2009), or various chapters in Chauffour
and Malouche (2011).
   41
      For example, cash-in-advance terms are more often adopted for destinations with weak contract enforce-
ment, so these underlying institutional differences across importers may play a role in explaining differential
declines in trade across destinations.



                                                      23
for financial credit, at least in part. They also argue that exporters generally are less able
to substitute trade credit for financial credit, and that this lower ability to use trade credit
is one reason why their sales fell more than comparable domestically oriented firms. This
inability to substitute across modes of trade finance could thus partly explain why exporters
were hit harder by the financial crisis.42
    These results all point to trade finance disruptions as part of the explanation for de-
clines in trade. There are also several types of indirect evidence that have used to assess
the importance of trade finance. There is some disagreement between various studies re-
garding whether this indirect evidence supports the view that trade finance disruptions were
significant.
    The first piece of evidence concerns whether exports fell more than domestic sales (equiv-
alently, more than total production or sales) at the firm level.43 Amiti and Weinstein show
that exports did fall more than domestic sales for Japanese firms served by unhealthy refer-
ence banks during the 1990’s financial crises in Japan. In contrast, Behrens et al. find that
the ratio of exports to total sales or production is stable during the crisis in their sample of
Belgian firms.
    The second piece of evidence concerns whether exports fell by more to destinations with
longer cash cycles or higher risk of nonpayment. For example, exporting to more distant
markets or exporting via sea rather than air shipment both lengthen delivery times and hence
the length of the cash cycle. Further, exporting to countries with less developed financial
markets might increase the risk of default. Consistent with these ideas, Amiti and Weinstein
find that shocks to bank health have a larger effect on exports for firms that ship by sea.
Further, Berman, De Sousa, Martin, and Mayer (2012) find that exports tend to fall by more
to destinations with longer shipping times following banking crises in the destination country
(which proxy for increased payment default risk).44 In contrast, Paravisini et al. do not find
that the sensitivity of exports to credit differs across destinations as a function of distance
in their Peruvian data. Bricogne et al. also find that the effect of tighter credit constraints
on exports does not vary across destinations with distance or financial development of the
  42
     Chor and Manova (2011) find that exports in sectors that use trade credit extensively were more resilient
to the crisis. These results could indicate that high pre-crisis use of trade credit offered opportunities to
substitute trade credit for bank credit during the crisis. They could also be explained by the fact that high
use of trade credit is associated with low use of cash-in-advance terms, which Antràs and Foley found to
predict declines in trade. Further investigation of these mechanics regarding trade credit is warranted.
  43
     Sector level or aggregate evidence is generally not very informative regarding whether trade finance is
important, since aggregate changes may be driven by composition effects.
  44
     Ahn, Amiti, and Weinstein (2011) and Berman et al. both examine export unit values as well, looking
for evidence that firms respond to export supply restrictions or increased risk of nonpayment by raising
prices. Both papers find evidence that prices are in fact higher to destinations served by sea (Ahn et al.) or
with longer shipping times (Berman et al.).



                                                     24
destination.


5.3     Quantitative Magnitudes
The preponderance of evidence above suggests that financial shocks impaired the ability
of firms to export. An important follow-up question is: how much of the overall export
decline can be attributed to financial shocks? Based on a variety of estimates, we see a
rough consensus emerging that perhaps 15-20% of the fall in trade can be attributed to the
financial shock.
    Amiti and Weinstein and Paravisini et al. provide the clearest statements on this point.
Amiti and Weinstein attribute 20% of the decline in Japanese trade during 2008-2009 to
shocks to bank health, while Paravisini et al. put the figure at 15% for Peru.45 This
comfortingly narrow range of 15-20% is prima facie consistent with the previous discussion
regarding the role demand in explaining the bulk of the trade collapse.
    These figures are broadly consistent with studies that use balance sheet information to
infer financial constraints. Behrens et al. argue that about one-third of the decline in Bel-
gian exports is due to the financial shock. Bricogne et al. find that financially constrained
firms lowered exports by 20% in response to the financial shock, but that these responses did
not affect aggregate French exports. Finally, Chor and Manova examine several counterfac-
tual scenarios for interest rates during the 2008-2009 crisis to gauge the impact of financial
constraints. They conservatively estimate that US imports in a typical country and sector
would have fallen about 10% more than they actually did if interest rates had remained at
their September 2008 peaks throughout the crisis, and about 25% less if interest rates had
fallen immediately to their August 2009 levels.46


6      Trade Policy
During the early stages of the trade collapse, many worried that the macroeconomic crisis
would provoke a repeat of the destructive spiral of protectionism that broke out during the
Great Depression. With this backdrop in mind, we review evidence on changes in protection
during the crisis in this section. By and large, there was not a significant shift toward
  45
      Amiti and Weinstein find that the importance of financial constraints was somewhat larger during the
financial crises of the 1990’s, accounting for between 20-40% of the decline in exports during that time.
   46
      To be clear, we construct this estimate from their finding that US imports would have been 2.5% lower
than they actually were if interest rates had stayed high during the crisis and 5.5% less if interest rates
had fallen immediately, combined with the fact that U.S. imports contracted by about 23% during October-
November 2008. This is clearly a back-of-the-envelope calculation.




                                                    25
protectionism during the trade collapse. We close this section describing several explanations
regarding why protectionism may have been muted.
    To assess the extent of protectionism, one needs to examine changes in several types
of trade policy instruments. First, tariffs are the most prominent trade policy instrument.
Though changes in tariffs are restricted by both the World Trade Organization (WTO)
and regional trade agreements, many countries have substantial discretion to raise tariffs
since their WTO bound rates exceed their applied rates.47 Second, non-tariff measures –
including WTO-legal temporary trade barriers, such as antidumping, safeguards, and coun-
tervailing duties – also introduce substantial discretion in trade policy. On top of these well-
documented measures, many other measures fall into the category of ‘murky protectionism,’
defined by Baldwin and Evenett (2009) as “abuses of legitimately-created discretion which
are used to discriminate against foreign goods, companies, workers and investors.” Examples
of murky protectionism include countries using health and safety regulations to keep foreign
goods out of the domestic market, bailouts of domestic firms, or ‘Buy America’ style provi-
sions in government procurement that bias spending toward domestic goods. These types of
protectionism are particularly difficult to quantify.
    On the tariff front, there is little evidence that applied tariffs systematically increased
during the crisis. Kee, Neagu, and Nicita (forthcoming) examine applied most-favored-nation
and bilateral tariff schedules for 135 countries during 2008 and 2009, and find that average
tariff rates were unchanged or actually fell for 125 of the 135 countries in their sample.
Gawande, Hoekman, and Cui (2011) find very few increases in average bilateral tariffs for
seven major emerging markets against their major trading partners.
    In contrast to tariffs, increases in non-tariff barriers are more prevalent in the data.48
Using the World Bank’s Temporary Trade Barriers Database, Bown (2011) reports that
G20 countries increased the number of product lines subject to temporary trade barriers
by 25% during 2008-2009. Emerging markets were the most active users of these measures,
increasing the number of product lines covered by 40%.
    These raw numbers of new temporary trade barriers overstate the extent of protectionism
induced by the crisis for at least two reasons. First, these barriers are applied to a relatively
small number of categories that account for small shares of total trade. For example, they
cover about 5% of HS 6-digit categories and 3% of total imports for the US and 2.5% of
HS 6-digit categories and 2.5% of total imports for the EU during 2008-2009. This limited
  47
     In the colloquial language of trade policy, this policy space is referred to as ‘water in the tariff.’ See
Foletti, Fugazza, Nicita, and Olarreaga (2011) for summary measures of the extent of tariff policy discretion.
  48
     During the crisis, The Global Trade Alert project was established to provide a real time catalog of
measures impeding trade. See http://www.globaltradealert.org/. See also the World Bank and CEPR
volume on temporary trade barriers edited by Chad Bown.



                                                      26
application necessarily limits the aggregate importance of these measures, though they may
of course have large effects on particular industries or partners. Second, Bown (2011) em-
phasizes that the increase in temporary trade barriers in emerging markets during the crisis
is largely explained by pre-existing trends. That is, emerging markets were increasing their
use of temporary trade barriers prior to the crisis, and they continued to do so during the
crisis. This suggests that these measures were not introduced due to the crisis, but rather
reflect an underlying shift in the structure of protection over time.
    To quantify the importance of changes in trade barriers in explaining the trade collapse,
Kee et al. combine data on tariff changes and antidumping duties to compute indexes
of aggregate trade restrictiveness for 135 countries during 2008-2009. Consistent with their
findings on average tariffs, they find most countries actually continued to liberalize during the
crisis even after taking antidumping duties into account. There are some notable exceptions
where protection rose, including for some major emerging markets like Brazil and China. But
even there, changes typically only amounted to an aggregate tariff-equivalent increase of a few
percentage points. Kee et al. conclude that tariff changes and anti-dumping duties accounted
for perhaps 2% of the decline in world trade. Given this estimate and the observations
regarding other forms of protectionism above, it is difficult to see trade policy as a central
protagonist in explaining the trade collapse.
    The resilience of the open trading system was a victory for both the political consensus
and institutions that underpin the global economy. The fact that there was no strong
protectionist response to the crisis begs the question: why was protectionism contained?
There are several lines of work that suggest answers, though more work is certainly needed
to answer this question.
    First, the institutional architecture of international trade – including the WTO and re-
gional preferential agreements – may have served to manage protectionist pressures. For
example, the ability of countries to adopt WTO-legal temporary trade barriers may placate
the most injured or politically powerful industries, alleviating pressure to adopt more com-
prehensive or permanent barriers. Moreover, though WTO tariff bindings exceed applied
tariffs in many cases, preferential agreements shrink the genuine discretion that countries
have in adjusting tariffs after a crisis.49 More generally, the role of the WTO as a forum
for monitoring trade policy and exerting moral suasion in discouraging protectionism is also
likely important, though extremely difficult to quantify.
    Second, some have argued that the political economy of trade policy has changed with the
rise of cross-border foreign direct investment and supply chain fragmentation. For example,
  49
    Foletti et al. argue that around 7% of the difference between applied and bound rates is effectively
eliminated once one takes preferential agreements into account.



                                                  27
use of imported inputs likely induces firms to lobby for freer trade, offsetting traditional
lobbying for import-substituting protection. Gawande et al. present suggestive evidence
that vertical specialization in production at the sector level is negatively correlated with
the level of tariffs across sectors and changes in tariffs during the 2008-2009 crisis in some
important emerging markets (e.g., China).
    Third, one way in which the 2008-2009 crisis differed from the Great Depression was that
most countries had flexible exchange rates, and hence the ability to respond to the crisis
using macroeconomic policy rather than trade policy. Looking at the Depression episode,
Eichengreen and Irwin (2010) point out that countries that stayed on the Gold Standard
were significantly more protectionist than countries that floated their exchange rates. They
argue that countries that stayed on gold resorted to trade policy as a second-best form
macro-policy, rather than due to protectionist pressures per se.
    Bown and Crowley (2012) provide some evidence that exchange rate flexibility played a
role in explaining the muted protectionist response during the 2008-2009 episode.50 Using
pre-crisis data on temporary trade barriers for the US and EU, they show that higher unem-
ployment tends to raise protectionism, while exchange rate depreciations tend to alleviate
protectionist pressure. Given these results, we should have seen large increases in protec-
tionism during the crisis, since unemployment rose and the U.S. dollar appreciated sharply
in late 2008 and early 2009. However, protectionist policy did not materialize. Bown and
Crowley suggest that one reason for this is that currency appreciation was short lived. In
fact, the dollar and euro depreciated from mid-2009 onward, relieving protectionist pressures
before they could turn into new trade barriers.


7      Conclusion
Our review indicates that there were three main proximate causes and/or propagation mech-
anisms that account for the collapse of international trade during the 2008-2009 global re-
cession. Compositional effects associated with changes in final expenditure explain most
of the magnitude and sectoral pattern of the trade collapse. In addition, shocks to credit
supply – affecting both firms’ ability to secure working capital and trade finance – played an
important secondary role. Inventory adjustments were an amplification mechanism that led
imports to decline more than proportionally with respect to final sales. Finally, our reading
  50
    They also argue that a switch in the typical behavior of the US and EU in imposing temporary trade
barriers was important in explaining the absence of protectionism. Historically, the US and EU tended
to impose barriers against slow growing partners. During the global recession, they switched to imposing
protection against relatively fast growing countries, and this clearly limited the number of potential targets
for protection.


                                                     28
is that trade policy played virtually no role in explaining changes in aggregate trade.
    No study has integrated all four explanations into a single coherent framework that would
allow one to assign weights to each. This remains an important topic for future work. We
can, however, summarize the quantitative results from the research we have reviewed. The
research finds that 65-80% percent of the trade collapse can be attributed to compositional
effects associated with changes in expenditure. Credit shocks can account for about 15-
20% percent of the collapse, and inventory adjustments may responsible for as much as
20% of the collapse. These estimates are obtained from independent papers, each focusing
on a particular channel, so they do not necessarily sum to 100%. Nonetheless, the central
estimates from each set of papers do in fact come close to adding up to 100%.
    One benefit of the trade collapse is that it stimulated work on neglected areas at the
intersection of international trade and macroeconomics. Narrowly, one can read individual
contributions as focused on understanding the role of particular mechanisms in explaining the
collapse. More broadly, the entire literature points the way toward a better understanding
of the determinants of import demand and the role of finance in production and exporting.
We believe that much has been learned, but this research is still in its early stages and there
is ample scope to develop these new insights further. With that in mind, we conclude by
highlighting four areas that we believe deserve more work.
    First, though existing research examines the role of expenditure changes in the trade
collapse, this research takes those changes as given and is silent regarding the underlying
sources of those changes. More work explaining the nature of the shocks that drove changes
in expenditure would be worthwhile. For example, conventional models imply that spending
in one country is linked to spending in all other countries, in that home income depends
on foreign spending on imports. Incorporating these demand spillovers would permit one to
quantify how shocks were propagated across countries (e.g., from the U.S. to the rest of the
world) during the recession. Pushing further, one might also incorporate credit constraints
into such a model to examine how financial shocks shaped expenditure changes during the
recession, and hence were propagated across countries via real channels.51
    Second, contemporary commentators on the trade collapse often pointed to ‘vertical
specialization’ or ‘global supply chains’ as an explanation for the severity of the collapse.
Yet, we have not extensively discussed their role in our review. There are two reasons for
this. The first reason is that several possible roles for vertical specialization are sub-sets
of explanations discussed above. For example, Bems et al. (2011) point out that vertical
  51
     Credit constraints may be partly responsible for the large fall in durables expenditure relative to non-
durable expenditure. Further, credit constraints also likely contributed to the collapse of investment, which
has a high import content.



                                                     29
linkages mechanically amplified the trade collapse because expenditure changes tended to be
largest in vertically specialized sectors.52 Similarly, Kim and Shin (2011) examine the role
global supply chains in propagating financial shocks, while Altomonte et al. suggest that
inventory adjustment along the supply chain also amplified the collapse.53 These can all be
read as extensions of existing stories, reinterpreted to emphasize the role of global supply
chains. The second reason is that there is (as of yet) not enough direct evidence regarding
how global supply chains responded to the shock to confidently assign guilt or innocence to
them. More empirical work is needed in this area.54
    Third, we can learn more about the importance of each explanation by carefully studying
the trade increase following the trade collapse. As Figure 1 shows, trade rebounded almost
as rapidly as it fell. This fact, and a deeper pursuit of related facts, may help discriminate
between alternative explanations for the collapse. For example, consider explanations that
rely heavily on weakening of vertical specialization, in which foreign suppliers are replaced
by domestic suppliers. Because these vertical links take time to break and to re-create, the
rapidity of the trade decline and rebound suggests that vertical specialization stories are not
that important. Similarly, this evidence may provide further support for our interpretation
that changes in trade policies have not played an important role, because policy changes also
take time. These thoughts are all speculative, but they do point to the value of studying the
rebound data.
    Fourth, while recent work highlights the important role of financial frictions in shaping
the response of trade to shocks, there is ample room for further work in this area. Given
the concerns about trade finance disruptions expressed by policymakers during the trade
collapse, one is struck by the paucity of available data on trade finance. Efforts to improve
data collection in this area would likely have large benefits. In addition, more effort is needed
to study trade financing decisions in the context of more general firm financing decisions.
Whereas existing papers focus on one class of financial decisions at a time, we see benefits
from analyzing multiple decisions simultaneously. For example, we would like to better
understand how firms substitute working capital loans for trade finance (e.g., trade credit)
  52
     Consistent with this argument, Johnson and Noguera (2012) find that gross trade fell by more than
trade measured in value added terms between 2008 and 2009.
  53
     Kim and Shin (2012) suggest that financial shocks are likely to disrupt global supply chains because
they require large amounts of credit to finance inventory holdings across stages and delays between initial
production stages and eventual payment.
  54
     In one relevant study, Alfaro and Chen (2012) highlight a channel via which global supply chains may
have attenuated, rather than exacerbated, the collapse. They show that affiliate firms in industries that are
upstream from their foreign multinational parents (i.e., vertically linked) fared better than comparable firms
with no vertical linkages to multinational parents during the 2008-2009 crisis. They argue this is evidence
that input demand on the part of the parent sustains firms in the face of idiosyncratically bad shocks in
their home markets.



                                                     30
during crisis, or how firms substitute between bank-intermediated and non-bank forms of
trade finance. Recent models of trade finance by Olsen (2010), Ahn (2011), Antrás and Foley
(2011), and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2012) provide a good starting point for this analysis. Better
data combined with better models could contribute to better policymaking during the next
financial crisis.




                                            31
References
Ahn, JaeBin. 2011. “A Theory of Domestic and International Trade Finance.” IMF Work-
   ing Paper WP/11/62.

Ahn, JaeBin, Mary Amiti, and David E. Weinstein. 2011. “Trade Finance and
   the Great Trade Collapse.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
   101(3): 298–302.

Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2010a. “The Great
    Trade Collapse of 2008-2009: An Inventory Adjustment?” IMF Economic Review,
    58(2): 254–294.

Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2010b. “Invento-
    ries, Lumpy Trade, and Large Devaluations.” American Economic Review, 100(5): 2304–
    2339.

Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2011. “U.S. Trade
    and Lumpy Inventory Dynamics.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
    101(3): 303–307.

Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2012. “Trade
    Wedges, Inventories, and International Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics.

Alfaro, Laura, and Maggie Ziaoyang Chen. 2012. “Surviving the Global Financial Cri-
    sis: Foreign Ownership and Establishment Performance.” American Economic Journal:
    Economic Policy, 4(3): 30–55.

Altomonte, Carlo, Filippo Di Mauro, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Armando Rungi,
    and Vincent Vicard. 2012. “Global Value Chains During the Great Trade Collapse:
    A Bullwhip Effect?” European Central Bank Working Paper No. 1412.

Amiti, Mary, and David Weinstein. 2011. “Exports and Financial Shocks.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 126(4): 1841–1877.

Antràs, Pol, and C. Fritz Foley. 2011. “Poultry in Motion: A Study of International
   Trade Finance Practices.” Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard University.

Asmundson, Irena, Thomas Dorsey, Armine Khachatryan, Ioana Niculcea, and
   Mika Saito. 2011a. “Trade and Trade Finance in the 2008-2009 Financial Crisis.” IMF
   Working Paper No. 11/16.

Asmundson, Irena, Thomas Dorsey, Armine Khachatryan, Ioana Niculcea, and
   Mika Saito. 2011b. “Trade Finance in the 2008-2009 Financial Crisis: Evidence from
   IMF and BAFT-IFSA Surveys of Banks.” In Trade Finance during the Great Trade
   Collapse. , ed. Jean-Pierre Chauffour and Mariem Malouche, Chapter 5, 89–116. The
   World Bank.


                                          32
Auboin, Marc. 2009. “Restoring Trade Finance During a Period of Financial Crisis: Stock-
   Taking of Recent Initiatives.” WTO Staff Working Paper ERSD-2009-16.

Baldwin, Richard, ed. 2009. The Great Trade Collapse: Causes, Consequences, and
    Prospects. VoxEU.org.

Baldwin, Richard, and Simon Evenett, ed. 2009. The Collapse of Global Trade, Murky
    Protectionism,, and the Crisis: Recommendations for the G20. VoxEU.org.

Behrens, Kristian, Gregory Corcos, and Giordano Mion. forthcoming. “Trade Crisis?
   What Trade Crisis?” The Review of Economics and Statistics.

Bems, Rudolfs, and Robert C. Johnson. 2012. “Value-Added Exchange Rates.” NBER
   Working Paper No. 18498.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2010. “Demand Spillovers and
   the Collapse of Trade in the Global Recession.” IMF Economic Review, 58(2): 295–326.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2011. “Vertical Linkages and
   the Collapse of Global Trade.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
   101(3): 308–312.

Berman, Nicolas, José De Sousa, Philippe Martin, and Thierry Mayer. 2012.
   “Time to Ship During Financial Crises.” NBER Working Paper No. 18274.

Borchert, Ingo, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2009. “The Crisis-Resilience of Services Trade.”
    World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4917.

Bown, Chad P. 2011a. “Taking Stock of Antidumping, Safeguards and Counterveiling
   Duties, 1990-2009.” The World Economy, 34(12): 1955–1998.

Bown, Chad P., ed. 2011b. The Great Recession and Import Protection: The Role of
   Temporary Trade Barriers. Washington, DC:The World Bank.

Bown, Chad P., and Meredith A. Crowley. 2012. “Import Protection, Business Cycles,
   and Exchange Rates: Evidence from the Great Recession.” World Bank Policy Research
   Working Paper No. 6038.

Bricongne, Jean-Charles, Lionel Fontagné, Guillaume Gaulier, Daria Taglioni,
    and Vincent Vicard. 2012. “Firms and the Global Crisis: French Exports in the
    Turmoil.” Journal of International Economics, 87(1): 134–146.

Bussière, Matthieu, Giovanni Callegari, Fabio Ghironi, Giulia Sestieri, and Nori-
   hiko Yamano. forthcoming. “Estimating Trade Elasticities: Demand Composition and
   the Trade Collapse of 2008-2009.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2007. “Business Cycle
   Accounting.” Econometrica, 3(5): 781–836.



                                          33
Chauffour, Jean-Pierre, and Mariem Malouche, ed. 2011. Trade Finance during the
   Great Trade Collapse. Washington, DC:The World Bank.

Chor, Davin, and Kalina Manova. 2012. “Off the Cliff and Back? Credit Conditions
   and International Trade during the Global Financial Crisis.” Journal of International
   Economics, 87(1): 117–113.

Coulibaly, Brahima, Horacio Sapienza, and Andrei Zlate. 2011. “Trade Credit
   and International Trade during the 2008-2009 Global Financial Crisis.” Unpublished
   Manuscript, Federal Reserve Board.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis. 2011. “Trade
    and the Global Recession.” NBER Working Paper 16666.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Douglas A. Irwin. 2010. “The Slide to Protectionism in the
    Great Depression: Who Succumbed and Why?” The Journal of Economic History,
    70(4): 871–897.

Feenstra, Robert C., Zhiyuan Li, and Miaojie Yu. 2011. “Exports and Credit Con-
    straints under Incomplete Information: Theory and Evidence from China.” NBER
    Working Paper No. 16940.

Foletti, Liliana, Marco Fugazza, Alessandro Nicita, and Marcelo Olarreaga. 2011.
    “Smoke in the (Tariff) Water.” The World Economy, 34(2): 248–264.

Freund, Caroline. 2009. “The Trade Response to Global Downturns.” World Bank Policy
    Research Working Paper No. 5015.

Gawande, Kishore, Bernard Hoekman, and Yue Cui. 2011. “Determinants of Trade
   Policy Responses to the 2008 Financial Crisis.” World Bank Policy Research Working
   Paper No. 5862.

Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Brent Neiman. 2012. “Trade Prices and the
   Global Trade Collapse of 2008-2009.” IMF Economic Review, 60: 303–328.

Haddad, Mona, Ann Harrison, and Catherine Hausman. 2010. “Decomposing the
   Great Trade Collapse: Products, Prices, and Quantities in the 2008-2009 Crisis.” NBER
   Working Paper No. 16253.

Iacovone, Leornado, and Veronika Zavacka. 2009. “Banking Crises and Exports:
    Lessons from the Past.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5016.

Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner, and Denis Novy. 2009. “The role of trade
    costs in the great trade collapse.” In The Great Trade Collapse: Causes, Consequences
    and Prospects. , ed. Richard Baldwin. VoxEU.org.

Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner, and Denis Novy. 2011. “Trade Booms,
    Trade Busts, and Trade Costs.” Journal of International Economics, 83(2): 185–201.


                                           34
Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012. “Fragmentation and Trade in
   Value Added over Four Decades.” NBER Working Paper No. 18186.

Kee, Hiau Looi, Cristina Neagu, and Alessandro Nicita. forthcoming. “Is Protec-
    tionism on the Rise? Assessing National Trade Policies during the Crisis of 2008.” The
    Review of Economics and Statistics.

Kim, Se-Jik, and Hyun Song Shin. 2012. “Working Capital, Inventories, and Optimal
   Offshoring.” Unpublished Manuscript, Princeton University.

Korinek, Jane, Jean Le Cocguic, and Patricia Sourdin. “The Availability and Cost
    of Short-Term Trade Finance and its Impact on Trade.” OECD Trade Policy Working
    Paper No. 98.

Leibovici, Fernando, and Michael Waugh. 2012. “International Trade and Intertempo-
    ral Subsitution.” Unpublished Manuscript, New York University.

Levchenko, Andrei A., Logan T. Lewis, and Linda L. Tesar. 2010. “The Collapse of
    International Trade during the 2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun.” IMF
    Economic Review, 58(2): 214–253.

Malouche, Mariem. 2011. “World Bank Firm and Bank Surveys in 14 Developing Coun-
   tries, 2009 and 2010.” In Trade Finance during the Great Trade Collapse. , ed. Jean-
   Pierre Chauffour and Mariem Malouche, Chapter 5, 89–116. Washington, DC:The
   World Bank.

Olsen, Morten. 2010. “Banks in International Trade: Incomplete International Contract
    Enforcement and Reputation.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Navarra.

Paravisini, Daniel, Veronica Rappoport, Phillip Schnabl, and Daniel Wolfenzon.
    2012. “Dissecting the Effect of Credit Supply on Trade: Evidence from Matched Credit-
    Export Data.” Unpublished Manuscript, Columbia University.

Schmidt-Eisenlohr, Tim. 2012. “Towards a Theory of Trade Finance.” Unpublished
   Manuscript, University of Oxford.

Senechal, Thierry, ed. 2012. ICC Global Survey 2012: Rethinking Trade and Finance.
    Paris:International Chamber of Commerce.




                                           35
