NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROMINENT JOB ADVERTISEMENTS, GROUP LEARNING AND WAGE DISPERSION
Julio J. Rotemberg
Working Paper 18638
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18638
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

I wish to thank Francis Kramarz, Pawel Krolikowski, Benjamin Schoefer and audiences at Ca' Foscari
University, the Banque de France and the University of Michigan for comments. All errors are my
own. I also thank the Harvard Business School Division of Research for support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Julio J. Rotemberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Prominent Job Advertisements, Group Learning and Wage Dispersion
Julio J. Rotemberg
NBER Working Paper No. 18638
December 2012
JEL No. D83,J31,J64
ABSTRACT
A model is presented in which people base their labor search strategy on the average wage and the
average unemployment duration of people who belong to their peer group. It is shown that, if the distribution
of wage offers is not stationary so lower wage offers tend to arrive before higher wage ones, such learning
can induce a great deal of wage inequality. An equilibrium model is developed in which firms can
choose either to advertise their job openings prominently or not. Prominent ads are assumed to have
more influence on more inexperienced job searchers who are less able to identify a multiplicity of
viable jobs. Equilibria can then feature groups that learn naively from the experience of their members
and accept low wage offers from prominent ads while other groups do not find these offers acceptable. A
new test statistic is proposed that measures whether, as predicted by the model, the gains from increasing
one's reservation wage are larger than either those that people expect or those predicted by models
in which job offers are stationary.
Julio J. Rotemberg
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University, Morgan Hall
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jrotemberg@hbs.edu

The process of job search entails deepening one’s knowledge about potential jobs by,
for example, interviewing on site. This research takes time. If being employed limits one’s
capacity to do this research, unemployed workers have to rely on their subjective beliefs
about likely future job prospects when they decide whether to accept a particular oﬀer.
But, where do these beliefs come from? A convenient assumption in the literature is that
unemployed workers have an accurate mental model of the stochastic process followed by
oﬀers, so that the subjective probability they assign to receiving any particular oﬀer at any
particular point in time is identical to the true probability of receiving such an oﬀer. The
precise mechanism that leads to this correspondence of objective and subjective probabilities
is not usually spelled out. Moreover, in an environment in which workers learn about the
distribution of wage oﬀers while engaging in costly search, they are likely to accept a job
well before their beliefs converge to the truth.1
Because workers search for jobs only a few times in their entire lifetimes, their ability to
learn about the distribution of wage oﬀers from their own experience is extremely limited.
They may thus base their decisions mostly on the information provided by people they
know. To focus on this issue, I neglect individual learning altogether and focus on three
bits of information that seem likely to be available from peers. First, information about the
amount of time that unemployed individuals have spent looking for a job is relatively visible
so that it may travel widely within a group. Wage information is both less visible and more
sensitive, but individuals may still have a good sense of the average wage earned by the
people who are both close and similar to them.2 Lastly, little should stop people within a
group from sharing their beliefs about what the minimally acceptable wage is, so that people
should have good information about their group’s reservation wage.
This leads me to focus on outcomes that are stable in the sense that people are happy to
go along with the group’s reservation wage when they believe both that the arrival rate of
acceptable jobs is one over the group’s average unemployment duration and that the average
1

See Rothschild (1974) for an early and classic proof of a closely related proposition.
For a protocol that allows a group to learn only the mean value of a sample when each member knows
one observation, see Abbe et al. (2012).
2

1

wage they will receive by using this reservation wage is the group’s mean wage. One rationalization for this is that people believe that they live in a stationary environment where all
possible wage oﬀers have constant arrival rates. When this stationarity assumption, which is
ubiquitous in the search literature, happens to be true, the stable learning outcome coincides
with the outcome in which workers have accurate beliefs (i.e., “rational expectations”) about
the wage distribution.
When the distribution of wage oﬀers is not stationary, however, group learning of the
form I consider need not converge to the outcome with accurate beliefs. I focus on the case
where the oﬀers that a worker receives early in her unemployment spell tend to be worse than
those she receives later. This nonstationarity is not detectable if, for example, people obtain
wage information from a diﬀerent source than they obtain unemployment spell information.
Moreover, it seems plausible to suppose that wage information comes from employed friends,
who may mostly have forgotten the length of their past unemployment, while information
about unemployment spells originates mostly from more distant individuals.3 I thus consider
situations where a group of workers continues to treat the facts to which they have access
as coming from a stationary environment. The key ﬁnding of the paper is that the presence
of two distinct groups, one that learns in this way while the is more sophisticated, can lead
to wages that are substantially more dispersed than those that result from accurate beliefs.
The reason for this is that the group that learns naively accepts the low wages that are
available early in their unemployment spell. Newly unemployed members of the group thus
expect wages to be low and accept these jobs as well.
More sophisticated workers wait for higher wages and learn from their group that it is
rational to do so. A crucial assumption, then, is that groups do not learn from each others
experience. While I do not pursue the root causes for this in detail, it is easy to imagine
settings where the group that earns little miss-attributes the high earnings of the other group
by blaming the diﬀerence in earnings, for example, on favoritism.
3

Professional surveyors faces the same recall issues so that the best and most extensive sources of wage
data for researchers do not coincide with the best and most extensive sources of data on unemployment
spells.

2

A question this raises is whether there are any good reasons to expect early oﬀers to be
relatively less generous than later ones. I provide an answer to this question that is based
on the inexperience of job searchers as they begin their spell of unemployment. I suppose
that this inexperience limits the sophistication with which they process job advertisements.
They thus spend time investigating ads that are highly visible or striking but which have a
good chance of being inappropriate for them. With experience, searchers become less likely
to be distracted by these “prominent” ads, and more likely to focus on ones that are suitable
for them. I also imagine that workers are investigating several possible jobs at the same
time, so that they may have access to more than one job oﬀer in any given period.4 Because
inexperienced searchers are more likely to focus on dead ends, this is less likely for them
than for experienced searchers.
Relative to ﬁrms posting more ordinary jobs, those posting prominent oﬀers may thus
reach fewer appropriate workers but the appropriate workers that they do reach are less
likely to have competing oﬀers. I demonstrate that this reduced competition leads ﬁrms
posting prominent jobs to oﬀer a distribution of wages that is stochastically dominated by
the distribution of wages oﬀered by less prominent job ads. This occurs even if all workers
have rational expectations, though the eﬀect can be magniﬁed if a subset of workers draws
incorrect (but plausible) inferences from the experience of their peer group.
It is worth asking at this point whether the idea that more prominently displayed jobs
have lower wages has any empirical validity. The inter-industry wage observations of Katz
and Summers (1989) are somewhat consistent with this. They show that retail employees,
and particularly employees of eating and drinking establishments, have low wages even within
narrowly deﬁned occupations. In particular, Katz and Summers (1989) report that the lowest
wages for janitors are earned in the “Eating and Drinking” industry, with “Other Retail
Trade” not being far behind. These jobs are often advertised on the premises, and these
advertisements have large audiences. Janitors that work in Banking or Insurance, industries
where help wanted advertising on the premises is more unusual, earn more.
4

This assumption has been used earlier by Lang (1991).

3

The question of whether imperfect information about the identity of ﬁrms that pay
particular wages can lead to a realistic degree of wage dispersion has received a great deal of
attention. Mortensen (2003) summarizes an extensive literature saying that it does. In an
important recent paper that the current one follows closely, Hornstein, Krusell, and Violante
(2011) (HKV) note that implausible parameters are needed in these models to obtain realistic
levels of wage dispersion. They focus on the implications of search models for the ratio of
the mean wage to the minimum wage that is paid/accepted in the market and show that,
for empirically plausible parameters, the baseline search model implies that this ratio should
equal 1.036. When they turn to Census observations, and after using a variety of controls
including occupation and geographic area, the observed ratio is between 2.5 and 3. Using
Census as well as other data, they estimate ratios of the mean wage to the 10th percentile
(which is less aﬀected by measurement error than the minimum) that hover around 1.6 - 1.7.
I follow them both by computing implications of my model for these ratios and by adopting
most of their model parameters. The paper can thus be read as an attempt at using social
learning and the diﬀerential prominence of diﬀerent job oﬀers as explanations of the puzzle
uncovered by HKV.
The paper implies that, for some people, there are outsize rewards from continuing to
search. These rewards are higher both than the rewards that these individuals expect and
than those that would be predicted if wage oﬀers were in fact stationary. These two predictions turn out to be testable if one has access to the wage and unemployment duration
outcomes of people with diﬀerent reservation wages. In eﬀect, one has to compare the “returns to delay” (which depend on the size of the wage gains of people with higher reservation
wages to the extra amount of time they spend searching) to the ratio of the mean to the
minimum wage.
For young white male workers, the returns to delay implied by the estimates in Holzer
(1986) contradict the stationarity of job oﬀers. This test is derived by ignoring on-the-job
search, which HKV regard as having the potential to resolve the puzzle of high mean to minimum wages. The test statistic I propose, however, would actually yield stronger rejections
4

of stationarity if people were able to raise their wages by engaging in on-the-job search. To
evaluate rational expectations one needs to know not only people’s reservation wage but also
the wages they expect to receive. If one supposes that Lancaster and Chesher’s (1983) survey
provides an accurate measure of the mean ratio of expected wages to reservation wages, the
evidence in Holzer (1986) also contradicts rational expectations for both white and black
young male workers.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 studies group learning when the distribution
of wage oﬀers is exogenous. Its ﬁrst subsection considers the standard case where this
distribution is stationary while the second one lets early oﬀers be less attractive than later
ones. The stability of an outcome in which two groups have diﬀerent average wages because
they have diﬀerent beliefs is demonstrated for this latter case.
In the rest of the paper, starting with Section 2, the distribution of wages is endogenous
and is the result of letting ﬁrms post wages in a discrete time model whose structure borrows
heavily from Burdett and Judd (1983). To allow comparison with the existing theoretical
literature, the ﬁrst subsection of Section 2 makes all oﬀers equally visible to all unemployed
individuals. Subsequent subsections, by contrast, distinguish between prominent and other
oﬀers and let ﬁrms decide which type of oﬀer they wish to make. Section 2.2 studies the case
where everyone has accurate beliefs while Section 2.3 focuses on the case where everyone
belongs to a group that learns naively from the experience of other members. Section 2.4
demonstrates the existence of stable outcomes where one group is naive while another is
sophisticated, and shows that the resulting equilibria can display a great deal of inequality.
Section 3 derives the statistic that allows one to test the stationarity of oﬀers and the
rationality of expectations. Section 4 considers an extension to study whether the most
productive ﬁrm necessarily pays the highest wage, while Section 5 oﬀers some concluding
remarks.
Related Literatures
This paper combines assumptions that are made in three distinct theoretical literatures.
First, there is fairly large literature on individualistic learning in search models, of which
5

Nishimura and Ozaki (2004) provide a recent example. This literature neglects the possibility
of learning from peers and I am unaware of examples in which the equilibrium wages posted
by ﬁrms are incorporated into such models. A diﬀerent departure from accurate beliefs
in search is provided by Rotemberg (2002), who also oﬀers a theory of equilibrium wage
determination that can lead to inequality. However, Rotemberg’s (2002) model does not
explicitly involve group learning.
Second, there is a literature that, like this paper, starts from the assumption that people
have a network of peers and investigates the eﬀect of these connections on individual wages.
The more extensive branch of this literature supposes that all individuals have the same
knowledge about the wage distribution while peers are uniquely capable of referring each
other to jobs. Two prominent examples are Montgomery (1991) and Calvó-Armengol and
Jackson (2004). Given these assumptions, it is not surprising that these papers ﬁnd that
peers can only help improve an individual’s wages, whereas here that is not the case. A
case where groups provide guidance but not referrals, and which is thus closer to what is
studied here, has been studied by Ahmed (2008). He considers a situation with directed
search where some groups convince their members that they will be discriminated against
and shows that there is an equilibrium where members of this group only apply to jobs with
low wages. One important diﬀerence between Ahmed (2008) and the current papers is that
he does not let groups learn because he considers only an extreme case in which diﬀerent
groups apply to wholly distinct jobs.
Third, there is literature of search in product markets that considers the case where some
ﬁrms are systematically sampled before others. Both in Armstrong, Vickers and Zhou (2009)
and Haan and Moraga-Gonzalez (2011), the ﬁrm that is sampled ﬁrst oﬀers a particularly
good deal (a low price in the product search context). This is the opposite of what occurs
here. One important diﬀerence between these models and the current one is that they
suppose that products are imperfect substitutes in the eye of the consumer. Given perfect
recall, this means that the ﬁrm that is sampled ﬁrst in Armstrong, Vickers and Zhou (2009)
faces a more elastic demand than other ﬁrms. Similarly, the result in Haan and Moraga6

Gonzalez (2011) is due to a selection eﬀect in which customers who are dissatisﬁed by the
product of the prominent ﬁrm reveal themselves to have an inelastic demand for the product
of the second (and only other ﬁrm).

1

Group Learning with Exogenous Wages

Consider an unemployed worker in a setting where time is discrete, the worker is risk neutral
and discounts next period’s revenue using the factor ρ. Each period that this worker is
unemployed, she investigates job postings. This time consuming research is needed for
the worker to learn the characteristics of the job, including its wage w. The non-wage
characteristics of jobs make them unsuitable for a randomly selected subset of workers. For
simplicity, I treat all those that are suitable as having the same non-pecuniary beneﬁts. In
a given period, the worker may discover more than one suitable job, and would then prefer
the one with the highest wage. At the end of the period, the unemployed individual must
decide whether to accept any of the suitable jobs she has found. If she does, she earns the
job’s posted wage w in every period that she works. It is common knowledge that people
who are employed at a particular point in time can cease to have their job at the beginning
of the next period with probability σ. At that point, they become unemployed again.
People belong to groups, and groups have a common perception of the present value
of earnings that an unemployed individual can expect to receive. I denote this perceived
present value by Ũ (w̃, w̄, λ̂). The value of Ũ depends on the three bits of information which,
as discussed in the introduction, members of groups have access to. These are w̃, the
reservation wage of her peers, w̄, the average wage earned by them, and λ̂, an estimate of
the probability that a viable job paying at least w̃ arrives in any given period. Often, λ̂ is
simply the inverse of S, the average length of the group’s unemployment spells, since this is
the natural estimate of λ̂ under stationary beliefs.5 Indeed, a key characteristic of Ũ is that,
5

Observations of long spells are more often incomplete than observations of short spells, and this may aﬀect
people’s ability to infer the true average length of unemployment spells S (as is true for econometricians).
An extension might thus consider a more complicated estimation exercise for individuals with more limited
data about their group.

7

under the assumption that job oﬀers are stationary, it is the best estimate of the present
value of earnings for an unemployed individual that uses the group’s reservation wage of w̃.
If they believed this stationarity assumption, members of the group would agree with the
group’s Ũ .
An unemployed worker is also able to form an estimate of Ṽ (w), the expected present
value of revenues she expects the moment she starts working at a job that pays w. If the
job does not terminate after one period, the wage w is earned again and the present value of
earnings is Ṽ (w) once more. If it does terminate, the group would expects the individual to
earn a present value of Ũ at this point. Accepting this expectation as her own, Ṽ (w) obeys
Ṽ (w) = w + ρ(σ Ũ + (1 − σ)Ṽ (w) =

w + ρσ Ũ
,
1 − ρ(1 − σ)

(1)

where the second equality follows from the ﬁrst.
The key assumption regarding individuals that learn from their groups is that they accept
all viable jobs for which
Ṽ (w) ≥ Ũ (w̃, w̄, λ̂)

w ≥ w∗ ≡ (1 − ρ)Ũ (w̃, w̄, λ̂),

or

(2)

and turn down the jobs for which these inequalities are strictly reversed. There are two
equally valid interpretations for members’ use of (1 − ρ)Ũ as their reservation wage w∗ . The
ﬁrst is that people agree completely with the calculations of the group, so they too regard
the distribution of job oﬀers as stationary. The second is that, even when they are uncertain
whether this is true, they feel group pressure to accept jobs for which (2) is true and pressure
to turn down jobs for which it is false.
Now turn to the group’s calculation of Ũ itself. A worker that is unemployed in a
particular period receives a ﬂow of utility b in that period. The group expects that, with
probability λ̂, she will land a viable job that pays w̄ on average as long as the worker uses
the group’s reservation wage w̃. Since Ṽ (w) is linear in w, the expected present value of a
viable job under this strategy is Ṽ (w̄). Thus, under stationary beliefs, the group’s Ũ is

8

Ũ (w̃, w̄, λ̂) = b + ρ(λ̂Ṽ (w̄) + (1 − λ̂)Ũ ) =

Db + ρλ̂w̄
(1 − ρ)(D + ρλ̂)

where D ≡ 1 − ρ(1 − σ), (3)

and the second equality is obtained by using (1) to substitute for Ṽ (w̄) and solving the
resulting equation for Ũ . It is important to emphasize that this solution for Ũ is being
computed under the supposition that the worker follow her group’s strategy of using the
reservation wage w̃. The analysis does not require group members to have views on the
present value of unemployment for any other reservation wage.6
If, however, the actual reservation wage w∗ in (2) diﬀers from w̃, the group reservation
wage cannot be expected to remain equal to w̃. This leads to a natural deﬁnition of stability
for outcomes that result from group learning. In particular, w∗ is a stable value of w̃ if
Ṽ (w∗ ) = Ũ (w∗ , w̄, λ̂)

w∗ = (1 − ρ)Ũ (w∗ , w̄, λ̂),

or

(4)

In other words, accepting jobs with w ≥ w∗ is stable under group learning if the mean wage
and hazard rate of employment that is generated when the group uses the reservation wage
w∗ justify the use of w∗ as the reservation wage.7 Using (3), w∗ satisﬁes
w∗ =

1.1

Db + ρλ̂w̄
D + ρλ̂

.

(5)

Stationary Wage Oﬀers

Groups in this model implicitly assume that the probability of ﬁnding a viable oﬀer is
constant through time and that the distribution of the most favorable wage available at any
given point in time is time invariant as well. It is perhaps not surprising that, if both of these
premises are valid, the stable group learning outcome is identical to the unique outcome that
6

Calculating the present value of being unemployed for alternative reservation wages requires more detailed wage data than just the mean wage for the group. Because wage data is so sensitive, estimates of
the group’s mean wage may be much more reliable than more ﬁne-grained estimates of the group’s wage
distribution.
7
This stable outcome is “self-conﬁrming” in the Fudenberg and Levine (1993) sense of not being inconsistent with what agents observe.

9

would obtain if people had a correct assessment of the true underlying stochastic process for
job oﬀers. This is shown in the next proposition.
Proposition 1. Suppose that the probability that an unemployed worker will ﬁnd a viable
oﬀer is λu per period and that the highest wage among the viable oﬀers that the unemployed
worker gets in any given period has a cumulative density function G(w). If workers know
λu and G, they accept viable oﬀers if and only if they pay at least w∗ in (5) where λ̂ =
λu (1 − G(w∗ )) while w̄ is the mean of G(w) conditional on w being greater than or equal to
w∗ so that it equals

∫
w̄ =

wdG(w)
.
1 − G(w∗ )
w∗

(6)

Just like the rational expectations optimum to which it is equal, the stable group learning
outcome is unique in this case.
Therefore, group learning leads to conventional outcomes when wage oﬀers are stationary
as they are in much of the theoretical labor search literature starting with McCall (1970). As
shown by HKV, the resulting dispersion of wages is quite small when plausible parameters
are used and inequality is measured by the ratio of mean to minimum wages. To make this
point transparent, they suppose that b is equal to γ w̄ for all workers, and I follow them in
this assumption. Equation (5) then implies that
D + ρλ̂
w̄
=
∗
w
Dγ + ρλ̂

(7)

On the basis of economy-wide average separation rates, job ﬁnding rates and real interest
rates HKV set σ, λ̂ and ρ to .02, .39 and .9959 respectively. Lastly, they set γ equal to .4 on
the basis that smaller numbers both create problems for the model as a model of economic
ﬂuctuations and are fairly implausible given the rules governing unemployment insurance.
These numbers imply that the ratio of mean to average wages w̄/w∗ equals 1.03.
While keeping the same parameters for comparability, the next subsection shows that
group learning can lead to considerably more dispersed wages if the arrival rate of high-wage
jobs is delayed relative to the arrival rate of low-paying jobs. Under stationary arrivals,
10

the probability of obtaining an oﬀer above w equals λu (1 − G(w)), which is declining in
w. Thus, individuals with higher reservation wages must wait longer on average to obtain
jobs. It might thus be thought that this assumption already implies that “higher wages come
later.” On the other hand, the stationary arrivals assumption predicts that, for a common
reservation wage, the average wage of people who ﬁnd jobs early is the same as the average
wage of people who ﬁnd jobs later. I drop this aspect of the stationary arrivals assumption
from now on.

1.2

High Wage Oﬀers Start Arriving in Period 2

To depart as little as possible from standard models of labor search, unemployed workers
continue to have a probability λ of ﬁnding a viable job in every period. The distribution of
oﬀers is non-stationary, however. All viable job oﬀers found by workers in their ﬁrst period
of unemployment carry a wage of w1 while, in subsequent periods, viable jobs pay a wage
w2 > w1 with probability η and pay w1 with the remaining probability. The total population
is normalized to equal one and all individuals have the same tastes and productivity levels.
If unemployed workers knew the stochastic process followed by job oﬀers, they would
realize that their decision environment is stationary in the sense that the probability distribution of future job oﬀers is the same at every node at which workers decide whether
to accept an oﬀer or not. The distribution of wages in the ﬁrst period is the only source
of non-stationarity, and since all decisions are made after this, it has no eﬀect on rational
decision-making.
Except in the uninteresting case in which b > w2 , unemployed workers all accept oﬀers of
w2 since there are no higher wages worth waiting for. The critical issue is whether any worker
also accepts an oﬀer of w1 . This decision depends on whether, as in (2), w1 is greater or
smaller than (1 − ρ)Ũ , where Ũ represents the worker’s expectation of the value of remaining
unemployed and accepting only jobs that pay w2 . This decision thus depends on λ̂. For
individuals with accurate beliefs, this ﬁnding rate equals the hazard of ﬁnding jobs that pay
w2 from period 2 onward, which is λη.
11

Now consider members of a group that has used the reservation wage w2 in the past. The
average length of unemployment spells for these individuals is S = 1 + 1/λη. If the group
were naive, and treated the environment as stationary, its value of λ̂ would equal 1/S, which
is smaller that λη. If the group were more sophisticated and noticed that no one found a
job in period 1, it would alert its members that the constant arrival rate of jobs that pay
w2 starts in period 2. The group would then infer that the arrival rate of jobs is 1/(S − 1),
which would lead its members to conclude, correctly, that it equals λη.
Many of the results below hinge on some groups being naive, so that they use the group’s
average wage and average length of unemployment spells to estimate the parameters of a
stationary model. As discussed in the introduction, this naiveté may be reasonable in situations where people obtain their estimate of the mean wage from people they know closely and
these, consistent with the parameters used below, have mostly been employed for some time.
If the passage of time erases people’s memory of the length of their unemployment spells,
the close friends of unemployed people are not helpful in determining the joint distribution
of wages and the length of these spells.
On the other hand, information about how long people who belong to one’s own group
have been unemployed is both more visible and less sensitive so that it may travel relatively
widely within a group. For the most part, I suppose that the way this information travels is
in condensed form, so that people know the average length of unemployment. If, however,
there is a group that never accepts a job in the ﬁrst period, this may become known to the
group as well. As a result, the group may become sophisticated in the sense of concluding
that viable oﬀers start arriving in the second period. This non-stationarity becomes more
diﬃcult to discern if people start accepting oﬀers in the ﬁrst period. I start the analysis
of nonstationary oﬀers by studying the case where both w1 and w2 would be acceptable if
people had accurate information.
Proposition 2. Individuals with accurate beliefs have a reservation wage of w1 if and only

12

if
w1 ≥

Db + ρληw2
.
D + ρλη

(8)

When this condition is met, and whether individuals are naive and treat the environment
as stationary or sophisticated, there is no stable group learning outcome in which a group
turns down oﬀers of w1 .
This shows that the level of sophistication of group learners is not important when (8)
holds. The reason is that, even if a group that learns naively were to turn down oﬀers of
w1 , the appeal of such oﬀers to its unemployed members would not be reduced. In a sense,
naive group learners obtain an accurate assessment of what happens if their members only
accept high wages. Matters are diﬀerent when (8) is violated. In particular
Proposition 3. Suppose (8) is violated. As long as λ < 1, values of w1 can be found for
any w2 > b such that
Db + ρλη(1 − λ)w2
Db + ρληw2
≤ w1 ≤
.
D + ρλη(1 − λ)
D + ρλη

(9)

At these values there is a naive stable group learning outcome with a reservation wage w1
even though individuals with accurate beliefs have a reservation wage of w2 . There is also a
sophisticated group learning outcome with a reservation wage of w2 .
Proposition 3 shows that there exist values of w1 that workers with rational expectations
would turn down but that naive group learners would accept. This is possible because, once
naive group learners accept low wages in the ﬁrst period, their average wage falls. This leads
naive group learners to overestimate the fraction of oﬀers that has low wages from the second
period onward so that they ﬁnd oﬀers of w1 more attractive.
Even if a group of workers that learns naively accepts a wage w1 that is signiﬁcantly
lower than w2 , (7) still keeps wage inequality among members of the group low. As long
as there is also a group of workers that is more sophisticated, however, overall inequality
can be large if the two groups have diﬀerent average wages. To see this, suppose that (8) is
violated and that a group of size N L accepts oﬀers with a wage of w1 while a group of size
13

N H = (1 − N L ) does not. I refer to the members of the former as being of “type” L, while
the members of the latter are of type H. Note that types diﬀer only in the group whose
experience they use to draw inferences about the labor market. The overall average wage in
this economy is then
w̄ = w2 + N L [1 − (1 − λ)η](w1 − w2 ).

(10)

Thus, the ratio of the average wage w̄ to the minimum wage w1 is increasing in w2 /w1 . As
in HKV, the size of w2 /w1 is limited by the need to ensure that oﬀers of w1 are accepted,
though the limit is quite diﬀerent here.
Since individuals of type L accept lower wages, we can expect them to receive lower
unemployment insurance payments on average, and this depresses their b relative to that of
individuals of type H. To simplify the analysis, I follow HKV and do not let the level of an
individual’s b depend on his personal employment history. Instead, like HKV, I suppose that
b equals a proportion γ of average wages. Because there are two distinct groups, however, I let
the b of each type equal γ times the average wage of her group. Aside from its simplicity, the
main aim of this assumption is to preserve comparability with HKV. With this assumption,
the maximum value of w2 /w1 that is consistent with the violation of (8) is
1+

D(1 − γ)
.
(Dγ + ρλ)(1 − λ)η

Using this to substitute for w2 /w1 in (10), the maximum value of w̄/w1 is
[
]
D(1 − γ)
1+
1 − N L [1 − (1 − λ)η] .
(Dγ + ρλ)(1 − λ)η
As in HKV, an increase in γ lowers this maximum ratio because it implies that workers
obtain a higher fraction of the mean wage while unemployed. Thus, the minimum wage they
accept is closer to this mean. What is more novel is how this maximum depends on λ. The
derivative of the expression above with respect to λ is
[
]
D(1 − γ)
1
ρ
L
− ηN +
−
(Dγ + ρλ)(1 − λ)η
Dγ + ρλ
1−λ
The ﬁrst term inside the square brackets is negative and captures the eﬀect emphasized by
HKV, namely that an increase in the job ﬁnding rate leads workers to demand a higher wage
14

since they have less to lose from unemployment. The second term, which is also negative, is
a composition eﬀect. A higher λ leads more workers of type L to accept oﬀers that pay w1 in
the ﬁrst period, so that a smaller fraction of workers earns w2 and the mean shifts towards
w1 . The last term is positive, and becomes dominant for large λ. It captures the idea that
a high λ leads more workers of type L to match with a job that pays w1 in the ﬁrst period
and thereby reduces their estimate of the likelihood that they will obtain w2 by waiting. It
thus leads them to be more willing to accept a lower w1 . In the limit in which λ equals one,
w2 is irrelevant to their decision so that it can be arbitrarily high relative to w1 .
The expression above is positive only if λ is suﬃciently high. This raises the question of
whether such high values of λ are inconsistent with the properties of the aggregate hazard
rate of exiting unemployment. In the case where all workers have accurate beliefs and w1 is
the lowest wage that workers accept, this hazard rate equals λ itself. A very high value of λ
would then be incompatible with the fact that about half the people who become unemployed
do not ﬁnd a job during their ﬁrst month of unemployment.
When groups diﬀer in their beliefs, the computation of aggregate hazard rates is more
complex. This is true in part because the willingness of workers of type L to accept lower
wages implies that they leave unemployment more quickly. This implies that people of type
L have a higher employment rate, which in turn means that a disproportionate number
of the newly unemployed are of this type. To show this formally, let Ψ be the fraction of
people who become unemployed in any given period who are of type L. Let M i represent the
number of people of type i who are employed in steady state, U i the corresponding number
of unemployed people, and U i1 the number of people of type i who are unemployed in the
current period but were employed in the last one. For both types U i1 is equal to σM i . Thus
Ψ, which is deﬁned by U L1 /(U L1 + U H1 ), equals M L /(M L + M H ).
For people of type L, the outﬂow from unemployment equals λU L , and this must equal
the inﬂow σM L . Given that U L + M L = N L , the equality of λU L and σM L implies that
ML =

λ
NL
λ+σ

UL =

15

σ
N L.
λ+σ

(11)

Individuals of type H start receiving acceptable oﬀers only in the second period of unemployment so that the outﬂow from unemployment equals λη(U H − U H1 ), where U H1 equals
the inﬂow into unemployment σE H . Since U H + M H = (1 − N L ), we have
MH =

λη(1 − N L )
λη + σ(1 + λη)

UH =

σ(1 + λη)
.
λη + σ(1 + λη)

(12)

After some rearranging, Ψ thus equals
Ψ=

λ(σ + λη(1 + σ))N L
,
λ(σ + λη(1 + σ)) − σλ(1 − η(1 − λ))(1 − N L )

which has been written so that it is clear that it is larger than N L .
The number of individuals of type L that are newly unemployed in any given period
equals Ψ(U L1 + U H1 ). Because these people have a probability λ of accepting a job in each
period that they are unemployed, a fraction (1 − λ)τ −1 of them also experience a τ ’th period
of unemployment, while a fraction λ(1 − λ)τ −1 ﬁnds a job during this τ ’th period.
Similarly, (1 − Ψ)(U L1 + U H1 ) individuals of type H become newly unemployed in a given
period. None of them accepts a job in their ﬁrst period of unemployment and, afterwards,
those who are unemployed have a probability λη of accepting a job. Thus, for τ ≥ 2, a
fraction (1 − λη)τ −2 experiences a τ ’th period of unemployment and a fraction λη(1 − λη)τ −2
accept jobs in that period.
To an outside observer who does not distinguish between these groups, the “hazard”
of ﬁnding a job in the τ ’th period of being unemployed is the fraction of the U L1 + U H1
who become unemployed in any given period that ﬁnd jobs in the τ ’th period of their
unemployment divided by the fraction that was still unemployed in their τ ’th period. It
thus equals λΨ in the ﬁrst period. For τ ≥ 2 it equals
λ(1 − λ)τ −1 Ψ + λη(1 − λη)τ −2 (1 − Ψ)
.
(1 − λ)τ −1 Ψ + (1 − λη)τ −2 (1 − Ψ)

(13)

Since (1 − λ)τ −1 becomes negligible faster than (1 − λη)τ −2 , this converges to λη as τ gets
large though it diﬀers from this exact value unless λ is equal to one. There is thus only one
case in which the hazard is constant, and equal to η. This is when λ equals one while η = Ψ.
16

Insofar a constant hazard is a good approximation to what is observed, a high value of λ
appears justiﬁed.8 Admittedly, the case where η = Ψ is somewhat arbitrary since there is no
force in the model that forces the fraction of workers who accept low wages to correspond
to the fraction of jobs that oﬀer w2 from period 2 onwards.

2

Equilibrium in a Discrete Time Wage Posting Model

The inequality obtained in Section 1.2 hinges on wage oﬀers being lower in the ﬁrst period
than they are subsequently. The plausibility of this requirement may not be immediately
obvious, particularly because ﬁrms play a role in setting wages and it may be doubted that
they would not compete by raising the wages that individuals see when they ﬁrst look for
work. To respond to this concern, this section derives such an outcome in an equilibrium
where ﬁrms can pay any wage that they wish. The source of the rise in wage oﬀers over time
is that, when they ﬁrst become unemployed, workers are more susceptible to visible, and
likely inappropriate, opportunities. Firms whose jobs are prominent then have an incentive
to oﬀer low wages. For comparability with the literature, this discrete time model is ﬁrst
analyzed under the assumption that all oﬀers are equally visible at all times and that workers
have accurate beliefs.

2.1

Stationarity with a Single Type of Wage Oﬀer

Firms have productive opportunities in which the marginal product of labor is a constant R
and can post job oﬀers at a cost of c. The total number of job postings equals v. Once a
worker accepts a posting, he becomes employed. As before, employees face a probability σ
of becoming unemployed in the next period. The value to a ﬁrm of having an employee who
accepted a posting that promised a wage w is
Π(w) = R − w + ρ(1 − σ)Π(w) =
8

R−w
.
D

(14)

See Machin and Manning (1999) for a discussion suggesting that the evidence against a constant hazard
rate, once one controls for individual heterogeneity, is weak.

17

Following the idea of Burdett and Judd (1983), unemployed workers have a probability
λ(1 − δ) of identifying a single viable job and a probability λδ of identifying two. One way of
thinking about this is that most job oﬀers are inappropriate for most workers so that workers
must pore over ads and decide which to explore at more length. In each period, they have
time to do this for only a limited number of jobs so that a period can end without ﬁnding
any attractive jobs. Because the search process is stretched over time, one can think of the
worker as following various exploratory steps in parallel for several jobs so that the period
can end with the worker having identiﬁed more than one opportunity.
This particular interpretation of the model supposes that ﬁrms are passive and willing to
take all comers. However, as discussed in Lang (1991), the idea that workers are somewhat
likely to have several job oﬀers at once does not require this. What it does require is the
parallel pursuit of several leads and the assumption that ﬁrms cannot make exploding oﬀers
that disappear unless the worker accepts them instantly. In practice, workers can usually
claim that there are aspects of the job that they are uncertain about even after they receive a
formal oﬀer so that they are given some time to decide. Since applications are being pursued
simultaneously, another job may become available while the worker is still thinking about
the ﬁrst. The idea that workers have some probability of having access to competing oﬀers
thus seems applicable beyond the model considered here. The current model with passive
job posting ﬁrms captures this idea in a simple manner but deserves to be extended to the
case where each ﬁrm also gets to decide how many oﬀers to extend to its pool of applicants.
Now consider a particular unemployed worker-oﬀer pair and suppose for the moment that
the oﬀer has a wage that exceeds the worker’s reservation wage. The probability that this
particular oﬀer is the single one that this particular individual is willing and able to accept
is λ(1 − δ)/v. At the same time, the probability that this oﬀer is one of two oﬀers that this
individual deems viable is 2λδ/v. So, for a posting ﬁrm, the probability of facing a competing
oﬀer conditional on having its own oﬀer deemed viable by a worker is 2δ/(1 + δ), while the
probability of not facing a competing oﬀer conditional on its own oﬀer being acceptable is
(1 − δ)/(1 + δ).
18

Given U unemployed workers, the expected number of workers that explore a particular
oﬀer and ﬁnd it viable is Q/v, where Q is the total expected number of viable contacts made
by all oﬀers and equals λ(1 + δ)U . If a worker ﬁnds two viable oﬀers that pay the same
wage, he chooses one at random, whereas he chooses the one that pays more if their wages
are diﬀerent. An equilibrium requires the expected present value of proﬁts of a ﬁrm that
makes an oﬀer be independent of w for any w that is actually posted. Burdett and Judd’s
(1983) argument then implies that the distribution of oﬀered wages has neither mass points
nor holes. If it had a mass point at a wage w below R, a ﬁrm would be able to raise proﬁts
by raising its wage slightly above w because this would cause a jump in the probability of
having its oﬀer accepted. Moreover, paying R leads to negative proﬁts since c > 0. Similarly,
if the distribution had a hole, a ﬁrm could increase its proﬁts by lowering its wage slightly
from the upper bound of the hole, and this would not lower its probability of having its oﬀer
accepted.
Let F (w) represent the cdf of wages across job postings, so that a fraction F (w) of them
oﬀer less than w. Given the analysis so far, and taking F (w) as given, the expected present
value of the proﬁts that accrue from oﬀering a job that pays w is
)
λU (
1 − δ + 2δF (w) (R − w) − c.
Dv
A free entry equilibrium requires that cv adjust so that this is zero for any w in the support
of F and negative for wages outside this support. It follows that, in such an equilibrium,
F (w) =

1−δ
θ
−
2δ(R − w)
2δ

where

θ≡

cvD
.
λU

(15)

The minimum wage w∗ and maximum wage wm implied by this satisfy
w∗ = R −

θ
1−δ

wm = R −

θ
.
1+δ

(16)

These equations still depend on the endogenous value of cv (or θ). For θ to be consistent
with equilibrium, it is necessary that unemployed workers ﬁnd this minimum wage acceptable
given the mean wage implied by F (w). In other words, cv (or θ) must adjust so that (7) is
19

satisﬁed as well. To calculate this equilibrium θ, one must ﬁrst compute w̄, the mean wage
earned by workers. For unemployed individuals who ﬁnd two viable jobs in a given period,
the probability that they both oﬀer wages below w is F (w)2 . Given that all ﬁrms must oﬀer
more than the reservation wage in equilibrium, the cdf of the best oﬀer received by workers
in a period, G(w), is given by
G(w) = (1 − δ)F (w) + δF (w)2 .
Using (15), this becomes
(1 − δ)2
(1 − δ)2
θ2
−
=
G(w) =
4δ(R − w)2
4δ
4δ

((

R − w∗
R−w

)

)2

−1 ,

(17)

where the second equality uses the ﬁrst equation in (16). The average wage received by
workers is thus

θ

R− 1+δ
∫wm
∫
w̄ =
wdG(w) =
w∗

θ
R− 1−δ

θ2 wdw
= R − θ,
2δ(R − w)3

(18)

where the substitution of w by R − w in the integral simpliﬁes the computation that leads
to the last equality. Combining (18) and the ﬁrst equation in (16) yields
w̄ = δR + (1 − δ)w∗ ,
which makes it clear that the eﬀect of competition in the form of a higher δ is to raise oﬀers
towards R. This linear equation in w̄ and w∗ can be combined with (16), which is also linear
in these two variables. This yields the equilibrium minimum wage
w∗ =

δ(D + ρλ)R
.
δ(γD + ρλ) + D(1 − γ)

(19)

Diﬀerentiation of this equation leads to the conclusion that the minimum wage is increasing in the level of competition δ and in the arrival rate λ. The latter results from the eﬀect
we saw earlier, namely that a higher arrival rate of jobs makes unemployed individuals less
willing to accept a wage that is below the average wage. For equilibrium wages to rise with
20

λ, of course, it is necessary that the cost of posting jobs decline in λ. This is indeed what
happens, as is apparent once one uses the ﬁrst equation of (16) to obtain θ:
θ = (1 − δ)(R − w∗ ) =

(1 − δ)2 (1 − γ)DR
.
δ(Dγ + ρλ) + D(1 − γ)

Since θ is proportional to cv, this shows that an increase in λ lowers cv. Note that the
model is silent as to how changes in cv are distributed between changes in c and v. It is thus
consistent with many technologies for posting jobs, including the one in which the cost per
posting c is constant and the one in which the total number of postings v is ﬁxed while their
cost c is determined in a competitive market. The nature of this technology does matter in
Section 4.

2.2

Prominent Job Advertisements with Accurate Beliefs

Unemployed workers continue to have accurate beliefs in this subsection, but a nonstationarity is introduced in that some job advertisements are more prominent than others. Only
prominent ads are seen in the ﬁrst period. As unemployed workers gain experience they get
better at tuning out prominent ads and have a better chance of seeing ordinary ones. This
is captured by supposing that, in each period starting in period 2 on, individuals have a
probability η of seeing only ordinary ads and a probability (1 − η) of seeing only prominent
ones. For people who have already been unemployed for one period, one can thus imagine
that there is an indicator variable κ in each period that equals 1 with probability (1 − η)
and 2 with probability η. In the ﬁrst period of unemployment, κ is sure to equal 1. Using a
parallel notation, the number of prominent postings and their cost is denoted by v1 and c1
respectively while the corresponding magnitudes for ordinary ads are denoted by v2 and c2 .
Prominent ads are assumed to be distracting in another sense as well, namely that individuals who pay attention to them (i.e. who are not able to ﬁlter these out) are less likely
to have access to two viable oﬀers. This assumption is crucial, and leads the distribution
of wages oﬀered by prominent jobs to be dominated by the distribution of wages oﬀered by
other jobs. The assumption itself can be interpreted in two related ways. The ﬁrst is that
21

people who do not tune out prominent ads are less eﬃcient at processing ads in general so
that they are less likely to ﬁnd appropriate jobs. The second is that the prominent ads themselves, precisely because they are prominent, tend to snare people who are not well-matched
for the job into wasting time investigating them.
In either case, one can capture this aspect of prominent ads by supposing that δ2 > δ1 ,
the probability that an individual ﬁnds two viable jobs in a period is λδκ , the probability
she ﬁnds only one is λ(1 − δκ ), and κ is the individual’s indicator variable in that period.
While this leads the temporal structure of wages to resemble somewhat that of Section 1.2,
this subsection demonstrates that the existence of prominent job oﬀers does not increase
wage dispersion when beliefs are accurate. Indeed, the ratio of mean to minimum wages is
actually lowered by diﬀerences between δ1 and δ2 , where the case where they are the same
is equivalent to the one studied in Section 2.1.
Before carrying out any detailed computations regarding wages, it is worth giving a simple
argument demonstrating that accurate beliefs lead workers to have a constant reservation
wage w∗a even though some ads are prominent. The reason is that the future stochastic
process for oﬀers is invariant from the ﬁrst decision point (at the end of period 1) onward,
and thus the same is true for wage expectations in the case where these are accurate. Since
no ﬁrm wants to make an oﬀer below all workers’ reservation wages, the constancy of the
reservation wage implies that any unemployed individual who identiﬁes a viable oﬀer becomes
employed. Thus, λ is once again the hazard rate of leaving unemployment. Total employment
M thus equals λN/(λ + σ) and the number of people that are unemployed for the ﬁrst time
in any given period, U 1 , equals σλN (λ + σ).
These magnitudes allow one to compute the total number of viable contacts with unemployed individuals made by all postings of type i, which are denoted by Qi . An individual
whose indicator variable equals κ can expect λ(1 + δκ ) contacts with viable oﬀers because

22

he expects λ(1 − δκ ) contacts with a single oﬀer and λδκ contacts with two. Therefore,
(
) λσ(1 + δ )(1 − η(1 − λ))N
1
Q1 = (1 + δ1 )λ U 1 + (1 − η)(U − U 1 ) =
λ+σ
λσ(1 + δ2 )η(1 − λ)N
Q2 = (1 + δ2 )λη(U − U 1 ) =
.
λ+σ

(20)
(21)

A ﬁrm that posts an oﬀer of type i with a wage of w greater than or equal to workers’
reservation wage thus earns expected proﬁts equal to
)
Qi R − w (
1 − δi + 2δi Fi (w) − ci ,
vi D(1 + δi )

(22)

where Fi (w) is the cdf for the wages paid by oﬀers of type i. It follows that the lowest wage
oﬀered by each type of ad equals the workers’ common reservation wage. If the lowest wage
oﬀered by ads of type i were higher, a ﬁrm of this type could raise its proﬁts by having a
slightly lower wage. It would hire workers just as often and make additional proﬁts when it
did.
In an equilibrium with zero proﬁts, (22) is zero for all wages that are actually oﬀered so
that we have
Fi (w) =

1 − δi
θi
−
2δi (R − w)
2δi

where

θi ≡

ci vi D(1 + δi )
.
Qi

(23)

Since the lowest wage oﬀered by both types of ads is w∗a , it must be the case that w∗a =
F1−1 (0) = F2−1 (0) so that

Using this in (23),

θ1
θ2
=
= R − w∗a .
1 − δ1
1 − δ2

(24)

[
]
1 − δi R − w∗a
Fi (w) =
−1 .
2δi
R−w

(25)

Since δ1 < δ2 , F1 (w) ≤ F2 (w) with equality when w = w∗a and strict inequality otherwise.
Thus the distribution of wages oﬀered in ordinary ads dominates the distribution of wages
in prominent ones. This is a direct eﬀect of the lower level of competition in the latter
ones. This result helps rationalize the idea that unemployed workers are better oﬀ learning
to ignore prominent ads.
23

The cdf of the wages earned by those workers who ﬁnd viable jobs when their indicator
variable is κ is
Gκ (w) = (1 − δκ )Fκ (w) + δκ Fκ (w)2 =

(1 − δκ )2
θκ2
−
,
4δκ (R − w)2
4δκ

(26)

where the second equality is obtained using the logic that leads to (17). The average wage
earned by such workers is thus
∫
w̄κ =

w∗a

wdGκ (w) = R − θκ ,

(27)

where the second equality follows from the argument that leads to (18).
With accurate beliefs, the average wage that unemployed workers can expect to earn
from period 2 onward is
w̃ = (1 − η)w̄1 + η w̄2 .

(28)

Because all workers who take jobs in the ﬁrst period draw their wage from the cdf G1 (w),
the overall average wage earned by workers w̄ is
w̄ = λw̄1 + (1 − λ)w̃ = w̄1 + η(1 − λ)(w̄2 − w̄1 )

(29)

This equation shows that the fraction of workers who obtain their jobs through a prominent
ad is 1 − (1 − λ)η while the rest obtain them through ordinary ads.
The value to a worker of accepting a job that pays w remains Ṽ (w), which is given by
(1). With accurate beliefs, the value Ũ under the strategy of using w∗a as the reservation
wage is
Ũ = γ w̄ + ρ(λṼ (w̃) + (1 − λ)Ũ ) =

Dγ w̄ + ρλw̃
.
(1 − ρ)(D + ρλ)

Since w∗a must ensure that Ṽ (w∗a ) equals Ũ , it must equal (1 − ρ)Ũ so that
w∗a =

Dγ w̄ + ρλw̃
.
D + ρλ

This implies

24

(30)

Proposition 4. With accurate beliefs regarding the distribution of oﬀers,
w∗a =

Dγ[δ1 + η(1 − λ)(δ2 − δ1 )] + ρλ[δ1 + η(δ2 − δ1 )]
R.
D(1 − γ) + Dγ[δ1 + η(1 − λ)(δ2 − δ1 )] + ρλ[δ1 + η(δ2 − δ1 )]

(31)

Moreover
D + ρλ
w̄
≤
,
∗
w
Dγ + ρλ

(32)

with equality if η = 0 or δ1 = δ2 and strict inequality otherwise.
The Proposition shows that inequality as measured by the mean/min ratio is lower when
there are prominent ads. This follows almost directly from the fact that the wages of ordinary
ads dominate those from prominent ads. As a result, people who take jobs in the ﬁrst period
of unemployment earn relatively little, and this brings the average wage closer to w∗a .
As HKV have shown, one beneﬁt of focusing on the ratio of average to minimum wages is
that, under a broad set of conditions, this ratio depends only on worker behavior. Nonetheless, empirical attempts to measure this may be more sensitive to measurement error than
measures such as the ratio of the mean to the 10th percentile. This ratio can be computed
from the overall distribution of wages, which of course depends on the equilibrium behavior
of ﬁrms as well. Since a fraction 1 − (1 − λ)η of workers obtain their jobs from prominent
ads, this overall distribution is
G(w) = [1 − (1 − λ)η]G1 (w) + (1 − λ)ηG2 (w)

2.3

(33)

Naive Group Learning by a Single Group

Notice ﬁrst that the rational expectations equilibrium computed in Section 2.2 is not consistent with naive group learning. The reason is that the average wage earned by all workers is
below the average wage that workers who have a reservation wage of w∗a can expect to earn
by turning down their wage oﬀer in period 1. Unemployed individuals whose expectation is
that a reservation wage of w∗a will lead to an average wage of w̄ will accept jobs that pay
less than w∗a . Indeed, it would seem fairly diﬃcult to learn the true mean wage w̃ that one
can earn in the future by using the reservation wage w∗a . Knowledge of the average wage
25

earned by people who accept their jobs at diﬀerent times conditional on their reservation
wage, seems beyond even what is known in the scholarly literature. Attempts to collect such
data using interviews is likely to be subject to considerable measurement error. On the other
hand, it is not at all clear how a good estimate of w̃ can be computed without such data if,
as in the equilibrium of Section 2.2, everyone is just as likely to accept jobs in the ﬁrst as in
subsequent periods.
This subsection studies the opposite extreme, namely a situation where everyone is a
naive group learner. As in Section 1, all people act as they would in a stationary world
where the average length of unemployment spells equals the inverse of the hazard rate of
ﬁnding a job while the economy-wide average wage always equals the average wage that
one can expect to earn by using the common reservation wage. Since all the unemployed
individuals regard the economy as stationary, their reservation wage is constant once again.
Moreover, the logic of (5) ensures that wage inequality within this group remains small.
Instead, the main conclusion from the subsection is that w∗b , the common reservation wage
when everyone is a naive group learner, is smaller than w∗a . For certain parameters, the
diﬀerence between the two can be substantial.
Except for one key diﬀerence, almost all the steps used to analyze the case of accurate
beliefs in Section 2.2 can be applied to this case as well. For example, the lowest wage oﬀered
by both types of ads must equal the reservation wage in equilibrium. The reason is, again,
that oﬀering a lower wage leads to the waste of ci whereas having a lowest wage that exceeds
w∗b implies that ﬁrms can raise their proﬁts by undercutting this lowest wage. These two
facts imply that the hazard of leaving unemployment remains λ for all workers so that the
total number of viable contacts made by oﬀers of type i equal the Qi values displayed in (20)
and (21).
Other parallels between the cases can be seen in the demonstration of Proposition 5,
which characterizes the equilibrium in this case
Proposition 5. If all unemployed workers infer that the use of the reservation wage w∗b
yields a job with probability λ in each period whose average wage is the economy-wide average
26

wage of w̄, the reservation wage satisﬁes
w∗b =

(Dγ + ρλ)w̄
,
D + ρλ

(34)

so that the unique equilibrium reservation wage is
w∗b =

(Dγ + ρλ)[δ1 + η(1 − λ)(δ2 − δ1 )]
R.
D(1 − γ) + (Dγ + ρλ)[δ1 + η(1 − λ)(δ2 − δ1 )]

(35)

The economy-wide average wage is given by (29) while
w̄i = δi R + (1 − δi )w∗b .

(36)

ci vi D(1 + δi )
= R − w̄i .
Qi

(37)

Lastly,

Comparison of w∗b in (35) and w∗a in (31) shows that w∗a is obtained from the formula
for w∗b after multiplying the coeﬃcient of ρλ(δ2 − δ1 ) in the numerator and denominator
by 1/(1 − λ), which exceeds one. This brings w∗a closer to R so that it is larger than w∗b .
This is to be expected because the unemployed workers who take jobs with probability λ in
the ﬁrst period depress the average wage. With naive group learning, this lowers the wage
expected from continued search and thus lowers reservation wages. Note that this eﬀect is
more pronounced the larger is the diﬀerence between δ2 and δ1 . The reason for this is that
large diﬀerences between these parameters imply that ﬁrms with prominent ads have a larger
incentive to set low wages.
With large values of λ and (δ2 − δ1 ), these eﬀects can be dramatic. Suppose that, as in
HKV, σ, ρ, and γ are set to .02, .9959, and .4 respectively, while R is normalized to equal 1.
If λ, δ1 , δ2 and η are set equal to .99, .01, .8, and .6 respectively, w∗a equals .96, while w∗b
equals .48.
Equation (34) ensures that the mean wage is almost the same as the minimum wage in
the case of economy-wide group learning. Indeed, for the parameters above, the ratio of the
average to the minimum wage is 1.015. This is even smaller than the value given in HKV
because λ is assumed to be larger so that workers have even less cause to accept a wage
27

below the mean wage. With accurate beliefs, these parameters yield a ratio of the mean to
the minimum wage of 1.0006, which is even smaller.
Because the minimum wage is hard to measure accurately, HKV also report measures of
the mean to the 10th percentile. To compute this here, one has to start from the fact that the
distribution of wages oﬀered by ﬁrms continues to be given by (25) as long as one replaces
w∗a with w∗b . With the resulting values of Fi (w), the formula in (26) gives the distribution
of wages received by workers who accept an oﬀer from a ﬁrm of type i. Finally, the formula
in (33) gives the overall distribution of wages. Therefore the wage such that a fraction x of
workers earn less than this wage is given by
)
(
) ((
)
2
2
∗b 2
(1 − δ1 )
(1 − δ2 )
R−w
x = [1 − (1 − λη)]
−1 .
+ (1 − λ)η
4δ1
4δ2
R−w
Using this formula, the ratio of the mean to the 10th percentile wage is 1.012, so that
dispersion is very small once again. The above formula for the wage such that a fraction x
earns less is also valid when everyone has accurate beliefs as long as w∗b is replaced with w∗a .
The ratio of the mean to the 10th percentile wage is then even smaller and equals 1.0005.
While the model with economy-wide social learning does not generate any additional
wage inequality beyond that in HKV, the diﬀerence between w∗a and w∗b suggests it should
be possible to induce inequality between groups if two groups learn diﬀerently. The next
subsection shows that such outcomes can indeed be stable.

2.4

Two Groups with Stable Heterogeneous Beliefs

In this subsection I consider the stability of outcomes in which a group of size N L has a
reservation wage of w∗L and the rest of the population (N − N L ) has a reservation wage of
w∗H > w∗L . As in Section 1.2, I treat the members of the former group as being of type L
while those of the latter are of type H. For the two groups to believe that they are optimizing
when they accept jobs, it must be the case that people of type L incorrectly expect future
wage oﬀers to be lower than they are. This, in turn, is possible only if the average wage of
people of type L is low, which requires that many of them accept low wages in period 1.
28

Letting U i1 denote the number of people of type i that become unemployed in a particular
period, this requires that the fraction of U L1 that ﬁnd jobs in the ﬁrst period exceeds the
corresponding fraction of U H1 . Letting U it be the number of individuals of type i that have
been unemployed for t periods, U Ht /U H1 must therefore exceed U Lt /U L1 for all t greater
than one. Since the total number of unemployed individuals of type i, U i equals the sum
over t of U it , we must have
U H − U H1
U L − U L1
<
.
U L1
U H1

(38)

This inequality turns out to help sustain equilibria in which prominent ads oﬀer wages
below w∗L while ordinary ads oﬀer wages above. The reason is that ordinary ads end up
being seen mostly by people of type H that have high reservation wages, so that it is not
as proﬁtable to oﬀer low wages with such ads. By the same token, prominent ads are seen
disproportionately by people of type L, and the beneﬁt of posting high wages in such ads is
correspondingly lower.
The section proceeds as follows. First, formulas are presented for the number of contacts
Q that oﬀers of type i make with workers who ﬁnd the wage w acceptable. Then, Proposition
6 gives conditions under which a particular type of ad only oﬀers wages above w∗H and shows
that this is more likely for ordinary ads. After this, Proposition 7 gives conditions under
which a particular type of ad only has wages below w∗H , which turns out to be more likely
for prominent ads. Proposition 8 is the analytic heart of the subsection because it provides
conditions on the parameters such that the two types of ads have non-overlapping wage
ranges with only people of type L accepting jobs from prominent ads.
Using the analysis that leads to (20), the total contacts of prominent ads with unemployed
workers are given by
(
)
L1
L
L1
H1
H
H1
=
λ(1
+
δ
)
U
+
(1
−
η)(U
−
U
)
+
[U
+
(1
−
η)(U
−
U
)]
.
QH
1
1

(39)

Similarly, the total contacts between ordinary ads and unemployed workers are
(
)
L
L1
H
H1
QH
=
λη(1
+
δ
)
U
−
U
+
[U
−
U
]
.
2
2
29

(40)

An individual oﬀer of type i, of course, has only 1/vi as many contacts as the total
contacts of all oﬀers of type i. All these contacts ﬁnd the job acceptable if its wage is greater
than or equal to w∗H , and this is captured by the H superscript in the deﬁnitions of Q above.
If a posting pays a w less than w∗L , it is rejected by everyone while, if w∗L ≤ w < w∗H ,
the unemployed workers that appear in square brackets in the expressions above do not ﬁnd
the job acceptable while the rest do. It is thus helpful to deﬁne QLi by the expressions for
L
QH
i when the terms in square brackets are set to zero. Then, Qi /vi denotes the number of

unemployed individuals that ﬁnd an oﬀer of type i acceptable if its wage satisﬁes w∗L ≤ w <
w∗H . Using these deﬁnitions, one can show that,
Proposition 6. If

QLi (R − w∗L )
<1
∗H )
QH
i (R − w

(41)

no job postings of type i oﬀers a wage below w∗H . In this case, free entry implies that the
distribution of wages paid by postings of type i satisﬁes (23) with Qi replaced by QH
i . As a
result, θi equals (1 − δi )(R − w∗H ). If the inequality (41) is reversed, a positive fraction of
postings of type i oﬀer less than w∗H .
If some ordinary oﬀers pay a wage below w∗H , then some prominent ones do as well. The
converse is not true.
The proposition shows that, if wages below w∗H are oﬀered at all, they must also be
oﬀered by prominent ads. At the same time,
Proposition 7. If

QLi (R − w∗L )(1 − δi )
>1
∗H )(1 + δ )
QH
i
i (R − w

(42)

no wage greater than or equal to w∗H is oﬀered. In this case, the distribution across postings
of wages oﬀered is given by (23) with Qi replaced by QLi . The variable θi is then equal to
(1 − δi )(R − w∗L ).
Suppose (41) and (42) are reversed. Then, for any values of ci and vi , the condition that
ﬁrms make the same proﬁts at any wage they post implies that no wage between wmL < w∗H
30

and w∗H is posted though both wages above w∗H and wages between w∗L and wmL are. The
wage wmL is deﬁned by
QLi (R − wmL )
= 1.
∗H )
QH
i (R − w

(43)

For suﬃciently low δ1 , (42) holds for prominent ﬁrms whenever (41) is violated for such
ﬁrms. The Proposition then implies that their wages are all below w∗H . I thus focus on
the existence of free entry equilibria in which people of type H work only for ordinary ﬁrms
while prominent ﬁrms hire only people of type L. This requires that (41) hold for i = 2
while (42) holds so that (41) is reversed for i = 1. The next proposition gives conditions for
such equilibria.
Proposition 8. If

and
∗L

w∗H
δ2 (Dγ + ρλη)
=
,
R
D(1 − γ) + δ2 (Dγ + ρλη)
[
(Dγ + ρλ) (1 − (1 − λ)η)δ1 +

(1−λ)ηδ2 (D+ρλη)
D(1−γ)+δ2 (Dγ+ρλη)

(44)
]

w
=
,
R
D(1 − γ) + (Dγ + ρλ)((1 − (1 − λ)η)δ1 + (1 − λ)η)
while, for these values of w∗L and w∗H ,
(
)
R − w∗H
(λ + σ)(1 − N L )
> 1,
1+
(σ + λη(1 + σ))(1 − λ)N L R − w∗L
(
)
R − w∗H
(λ + σ)(1 − N L )
1+
< 1,
(σ + λη(1 + σ))N L R − w∗L

(45)

(46)
(47)

there exists a free entry equilibrium in which ﬁrms of type 1 only oﬀer wages strictly below
w∗H while ﬁrms of type 2 only oﬀers wages above. At the same time, it is stable for the
N L workers who are naive group learners to set w∗L as their reservation wage. Whether the
workers of group H have accurate beliefs or are sophisticated group learners, it is stable for
them to have a reservation wage of w∗H .
This proposition gives necessary conditions for an equilibrium where it to be stable for
the two types to have diﬀerent reservation wages while ﬁrms behave optimally. It does not
say whether parameters exist such that (46) and (47) hold when the reservation wages are
given by (45) and (44) respectively. However, inspection of these inequalities does suggest
31

that they are likely to hold if both λ and δ2 are high while δ1 is low. The reason is that a high
λ implies that (46) holds regardless of the values of w∗i . A high value of λ also ensures that
w∗L in (45) is low when δ1 is low. Lastly, because D(1 − γ) is small relative to (Dγ + ρλη), a
high value of δ2 leads w∗H to be fairly high as well. The result is that (R − w∗H )/(R − w∗L )
is low so that (47) holds as well.
For N L equal .4, the parameters used as illustration in Section 2.3 do indeed satisfy all
the conditions of Proposition 8. Recall that, as in HKV, σ, ρ, and γ were equal to .02, .9959,
and .4 respectively, while R was normalized to equal 1. The parameters λ, δ1 , δ2 and η were
set equal to .99, .01, .8, and .6. Here, this leads w∗L to equal .52 while w∗H equals .97. The
former is somewhat larger than the common reservation wage when everyone is a naive group
learner while the second is slightly larger than the common reservation wage when everyone
has accurate beliefs. The fact that w∗L exceeds the wage when everyone is a naive group
learner is easy to understand. It comes about because more sophisticated workers are willing
to wait until competition for workers becomes more intense and thus receive higher wages.
Because some naive group learners also receive these higher wages, their average wages are
increased, and this raises w∗L .
The diﬀerences between the wage earned by more sophisticated workers in this subsection
and the wage earned when everyone has accurate beliefs are more subtle. The former is
given by (44) while the latter is given by (31). Comparing the two formulas, it is seen that
coeﬃcient of ρλ is larger for w∗a . This eﬀect, which tends to raise w∗a relative to w∗H comes
about because workers with accurate beliefs receive acceptable oﬀers more frequently if all
workers have accurate beliefs. Otherwise, they often encounter oﬀers that are meant for
more naive workers. The second diﬀerence between the formulas is that the coeﬃcient of
Dγ is larger in (44), which tends to raise w∗H relative to w∗a . The diﬀerence here is that the
high value of λ implies that, when all workers have accurate beliefs, many of them accept
jobs in the ﬁrst period. This depresses their average wage relative to the case where they all
wait and lowers the minimum wage they require. For the parameters in this example, this
eﬀects slightly dominates.
32

The overall average wage in this economy w̄ is given by
(

)

w̄ = [1 − (1 − λ)η]w̄1 + (1 − λ)η w̄2 N L + w̄2 (1 − N L ).

(48)

For the parameters described above, this equals 1.55 times the minimum wage w∗L .
Since the distribution of wages oﬀered by postings of type i is given by (23), the distribution of wages received by workers who obtain them from postings of type i is given by (26).
Because the fraction of workers that obtains jobs from oﬀers of type 1 equals N L [1−(1−λ)η],
and all these workers earn less than w∗H , the wage w such that a fraction x of workers earns
less than this wage is given by
(1 − δ1 )2
x = N L [1 − (1 − λ)η]
4δ1

((

R − w∗L
R−w

)

)2

−1 ,

(49)

when x is below N L [1 − (1 − λ)η]. For the parameters above, the 10th percentile is below
N L [1 − (1 − λ)η] so this formula can be used to compute the ratio of the mean wage to the
10th percentile. For the parameters above this ratio equals 1.54, which is not far from the
empirical estimates of HKV.

3

Tests of Stationarity and Accurate Beliefs

The main source of wage dispersion according to the theory presented here is that some
people accept jobs too soon because they learn from their peers that this is a good idea.
If these people raised their reservation wage, they would be surprised at how quickly they
would receive oﬀers that met this higher reservation wage. A simple test of this idea involves
comparing the wage gains from having a slightly higher reservation wage to corresponding
increases in the time it takes to ﬁnd a job. If the former are high relative to the latter,
the standard assumptions that wage oﬀers originate from a stationary distribution and that
workers have accurate beliefs about this distribution can be rejected.
Questionnaire evidence makes it clear that individuals diﬀer in the reservation wage.
Leaving aside diﬀerences in their opportunity sets, this can be for the result of diﬀerences
in tastes, in the level of unemployment insurance coverage, or, as stressed here, in beliefs.
33

Suppose then that individuals have a constant probability λ of receiving oﬀers that are
drawn from the constant distribution G(w). Whether time is continuous, as is standard in
this literature, or discrete, the expected duration of unemployment S for an individual with
a reservation wage w∗ is
S=

1
.
λ(1 − G(w∗ ))

Meanwhile, the average wage received upon employment by such an individual is given by w̄
in (6). Diﬀerentiating these equations, the eﬀect of changes in w∗ on the percentage changes
in S and w̄ is
dS
g(w∗ )
=
dw∗
S
1 − G(w∗ )

dw̄
g(w∗ )
=
w̄
1 − G(w∗ )

(
)
w∗
1−
dw∗ .
w̄

(50)

Taking the ratio of the two elasticities in (50) and calling it r
r≡

dw̄/w̄
w∗
=1−
dS/S
w̄

(51)

This remarkably simple formula is the basis of the tests I propose.9 The ratio r is akin
to a “return” earned by people for spending more time looking for a job. Those that set
higher reservation wages turn down more jobs so their unemployment duration is longer, and
r measures the beneﬁt in terms of obtaining higher wages from doing so.
One reason to be interested in r is that it is amenable to measurement and, indeed, one
can obtain estimates of it from Holzer (1986)10 . Holzer (1986) uses retrospective data on
unemployed men aged 16 through 21 from the NLS New Youth Cohort. He uses the 1980
survey to obtain the wage individuals received upon employment as well as their duration
of unemployment and relates these to these individual’s stated reservation wage in 1979. As
controls, he uses 1979 data on the individual’s past occupation, industry and union status as
well as schooling, experience, household income, region, marital status, “Knowledge of the
World of Work,” and the existence of a library card in the home. In some of his speciﬁcations,
past individual wages are used as controls instead.
9

Derivatives of the form of (50) can be found in Holzer (1986), but the ratio in (51) appears to be new
to the literature.
10
Krueger and Mueller (2011) provide indirect evidence that higher reservation wages lead to higher wages
and longer unemployment durations, but their published estimates do not permit a calculation of r.

34

Holzer (1986) presents regressions of the log wage ultimately earned and of the log duration of unemployment on the individual’s log reservation wage as well as on controls. The
ratio r is thus equal to the ratio of the primary coeﬃcients obtained in these two regressions.
When using weighted least squares (based on sample weights), the resulting ratios are either
2.33 or 1.85 for whites depending on controls.11 For blacks, they are either .32 or .18.
The stationarity of wage oﬀers combined with the existence of a well-deﬁned reservation
wage implies that these values of r should be the same as those on the right hand side of
(51), so they should be close to (1 − w∗ /w̄). HKV provide estimates of w̄/w∗ based on
the average and minimum wages for narrow occupations in particular locations, and obtain
values between 2 and 3. The resulting values of (1 − w∗ /w̄) are not out of line with the r’s
for blacks discussed above but they are quite inconsistent with the r’s for whites. Indeed,
these exceed 1, and the right hand side of (51) cannot do so for any w∗ /w̄ that is estimated
by the ratio of the minimum to the average of a series of wage observations.
It is worth noting that the inconsistency of the “return to waiting” r and the observed
ratio of average to minimum wages is not a simple reiteration of HKV’s ﬁnding that the ratio
of average to minimum wages is too large for the standard search model. In particular, HKV
emphasize that high values of the ratio of average to minimum wages might be consistent
with search models in which workers continue to search and ﬁnd jobs after they start working.
A key property of these models is that employees accrue wage gains that are not associated
with any unemployment, and this turns out to intensify the puzzle discussed here. The
reason is that on-the-job search implies that the measured average wage exceeds the mean
wage that people receive in their ﬁrst job after a spell of unemployment. In equation (51),
w̄ represents the latter. For a given value of measured minimum and average wages, the
theory-consistent value of r is thus lower when there is on-the-job search than when there
isn’t. On-the-job-search thus makes it more diﬃcult to explain high returns from raising
11

The OLS results seem less applicable than the WLS results as estimates of the typical eﬀect in the
population he considers. Nonetheless, it is worth noting that the OLS coeﬃcients of reservation wages in the
equation explaining the unemployment duration of whites are negative, which is a sign of misspeciﬁcation.
These duration regressions do not include the past wage as a control.

35

one’s reservation wage.
If one is armed not only with people’s reservation wages but also with their own estimates
of how much they expect to earn when they get a job, one can use (51) to test whether
their expectations are accurate (conditional on oﬀers being stationary and people using
their reservation wage consistently). Lancaster and Chesher (1983) have data of this sort.
Their appendix presents a joint frequency distribution for their respondents expected and
reservation wages. Unfortunately, the responses concerning both wages are amalgamated
into 11 discrete values for wages, with the highest of these being over ﬁve times larger than
the smallest. The large distance between these wage “buckets” is presumably responsible
for the fact that the reported frequencies in Lancaster and Chesher (1983) includes a great
many observations in which the reservation wage and the expected wage coincide. As a
result, computation of w∗ /w̄ from these data is somewhat perilous. Still, it seems relevant
that the average of the ratio of the expected wage to the reservation wage in their reported
distribution equals 1.15. When this is interpreted as being equal to w̄/w∗ , it implies that r
should equal .13, which remains smaller than any of the estimates based on Holzer (1986).
While the Lancaster and Chesher (1983) and the Holzer (1986) samples are not the same,
this suggests that the returns to increasing the time spent searching could be larger than
what is implied by their own subjective beliefs.
One can calculate a variant of r for the model developed in Section 2.4 by taking the
ratio of the log diﬀerence in average wages for the two groups divided by the log diﬀerence
in their durations. To calculate this, note that the average wage earned by workers who
obtained their job through a prominent oﬀer is w̄1 = w∗L + δ1 (R − w∗L ) while the average
wage of those that obtained their job through an ordinary ad is w̄2 = w∗H + δ2 (R − w∗H ).
The average wage earned by workers of type H is simply w̄2 while that of people of type L
equals w̄1 + (1 − λ)η(w̄2 − w̄1 ). The expected unemployment duration for workers of type L
is 1/λ whereas that for employees of type 2 is (1 + 1/λη).
For the parameters used in Section 2.4, the value of r based on the ratio of log diﬀerences
of the average wages for the two types and the log diﬀerence of their average durations is .51,
36

which is actually lower than the average of the four Holzer (1986) estimates reported above.
More important than the model’s capacity to yield relatively high values of r is its capacity
to yield values of r that exceed the right hand side of (51). As discussed below equation
(48), these parameters imply that w̄/w∗ equals 1.55. The right hand side of (51) thus equals
.35, which is indeed smaller than r. This shows that instances in which measurements of
the left hand side yield smaller values than measurements of the right hand side do indeed
correspond to rejections of the null hypothesis that the models derived from stationarity
and accurate beliefs are valid against an alternative hypotheses that is consistent with the
current model.

4

Productivity and Wages

The reason more productive ﬁrms pay higher wages in the variant of the Burdett and Mortenson (1998) model discussed in Mortensen (2003 p. 21) is that these ﬁrms are particularly
keen to have a high probability of recruiting workers (or to recruit a large number of them).
In their model, the only way to raise the probability of recruitment is to raise wages, and
the result follows. Here, however, ﬁrms also have to decide whether to purchase ordinary or
prominent ads. Insofar the recruitment probability is maximized using the latter type, the
most productive ﬁrms may not have the highest wages.
To see this, consider two ﬁrms with marginal products of labor equal to R′ and R′′
respectively where R′′ > R′ . Let Q′ and Q′′ denote, respectively, their Q values. Supposing
that the conditions of Proposition 8 are met for all possible values of the marginal product
of labor including R′ and R′′ , Q′ and Q′′ must equal either QL1 or QH
2 . Thus, the identity of
the ﬁrms’ Q also determines their v’s, their c’s, their F ’s and their δ’s, where I continue to
use primes and double primes to denote the values for the two ﬁrms. Keeping this in mind,
and supposing that the two ﬁrm’s wages are w′ and w′′ , let A′ and A′′ be given by
A′ =

1 − δ ′ + 2δ ′ F ′ (w′ )
Dv ′ (1 + δ ′ )

A′′ =

1 − δ ′′ + 2δ ′′ F ′′ (w′′ )
.
Dv ′′ (1 + δ ′′ )

The ﬁrm with R′ must at least weakly prefer the combination of Q′ and w′ to the com37

bination of Q′′ and w′′ , with the reverse being true for the ﬁrm with R′′ . Therefore
Q′′ A′′ (R′′ − w′′ ) − c′′ ≥ Q′ A′ (R′′ − w′ ) − c′

Q′ A′ (R′ − w′ ) − c′ ≥ Q′′ A′′ (R′ − w′′ ) − c′′ .

Subtracting one of these inequalities from the other, we have
Q′′ A′′ (R′′ − R′ ) ≥ Q′ A′ (R′′ − R′ ).
Since R′′ exceeds R′ , Q′′ A′′ must be at least as large as Q′ A′ . If Q′ = Q′′ so the ﬁrms use the
same types of ads, A′′ ≥ A′ . Since A is rising in the wage for a given type of ad, the most
productive ﬁrm must have the highest wage paid by any ﬁrm that advertises in the same
way.
To see that it need not have the highest wage overall, imagine that essentially all ﬁrms
have a marginal product of labor of R′ and that a single inﬁnitesimal ﬁrm has the marginal
product of labor R′′ . The analysis of Section 2.4 then remains intact, except that the ﬁrm
with R = R′′ pays either the highest wage of ﬁrms of type 2, w2m or the highest wage of ﬁrms
of type 1, w1m . In either case, Fi (wim ) = 1 so that A′ and A′′ at these wages equal 1/Dv ′ and
1/Dv ′′ respectively. The ﬁrm with R = R′′ thus fails to have the highest wage overall if it
prefers a prominent ad, which occurs if
QL
QH
2
< 1
Dv2
Dv1

(52)

whereas it does have the highest wage if the inequality is reversed.
For ﬁrms with R = R′ , oﬀering a wage of w1m with a prominent advertisement and oﬀering
a wage of w2m with an ordinary one should yield the same proﬁts of zero. Therefore
m
QL (R − w1m )
QH
2 (R − w2 )
= 1
.
Dc2 v2
Dc1 v1

If the conditions of Proposition 8 are met, w2m is higher than w1m . This implies that, if
the cost of the two postings c1 and c2 are the same, (52) is reversed and the most productive
ﬁrm oﬀers the highest wage. For a suﬃciently high c1 /c2 however, (52) holds and the most
productive ﬁrm oﬀers only w1m which is less even that w∗H .
38

The purchase of the most expensive ads can be an attractive solution for the most productive ﬁrms because, in equilibrium, ads are expensive if they have a high likelihood of
attracting employees. This can occur, for example, if prominent job advertisements are both
in ﬁxed supply and scarce relative to the number of susceptible unemployed individuals.
They can then be a very eﬀective recruitment device with a high shadow cost. Productive
ﬁrms may then choose these ads and feel no pressure to pay more than the highest wage
oﬀered by other prominent advertisements. If, instead, prominent ads are cheap, the low
wages that they advertise attract a large number of ﬁrms that try their chance at hiring
workers in this way, so that more productive ﬁrms prefer to use ordinary ads and pay more.

5

Conclusions

This paper has presented a very stylized model that generates wage inequality as a result
of people’s reliance on peers for information about expected wages and the unemployment
durations. The key idea of the model is that people whose peers have low wages and short
unemployment spells come to expect that all jobs have relatively low wages so they accept
low-wage jobs relatively quickly. People with peers that have higher wages are, instead, more
choosy and wait for better jobs.
While the model is consistent with a great deal of inequality, its current incarnation
does not yield continuous and concave distributions of wages of the sort that are empirically
observed and displayed in Mortensen (2003, p. 48-51). This raises the question of whether
extensions that allow for a more diverse set of groups or for a richer range of productivity
diﬀerences across ﬁrms can ﬁt the wage distribution better.
The model implies that some people (those of type L) would beneﬁt from staying unemployed longer. This need not be be true for everyone, however. Indeed, being too reliant
on the wages earned by one’s peer group as indicators of one’s future oﬀers might well lead
people who belong to high-wage groups to remain unemployed too long, and thereby lose
marketability. An extension incorporating this idea might ﬁt with the observation in Lollivier and Rioux (2010) that some people experience declines in the oﬀers they receive as
39

they stay unemployed, suggesting that they should have accepted earlier oﬀers.
A diﬀerent extension that seems worth pursuing is to allow workers to quit endogenously,
as in Mortensen (2003). This ought to lead workers of type L to quit often since both their
wages and their unemployment durations are low. High wage ﬁrms would then have much
lower turnover than low-wage ones, as is documented for example in Abowd, Kramarz and
Roux (2006).
This paper stands in a complementary relation with the theoretical literature on job
referrals by peers. That literature emphasizes the role of peers in communicating information
about particular job openings, which this paper ignores, but neglects the role of peers in
assessing whether a particular job is worth taking, which this paper emphasizes. While
modeling both of these roles of peers simultaneously may be challenging, it seems worthwhile
because several empirical papers on job referrals suggest that jobs obtained through peer
contacts sometimes carry low wages.12 This seems consistent with the idea suggested in
this paper that peer groups can lead their members to accept relatively unattractive jobs
by causing them to believe that better opportunities are more scarce than they actually
are. Firms that pay low wages should be particularly eager to enroll their employees in the
recruitment of others, and this might reinforce the phenomenon discussed here.

12

For examples, see Loury (2006), which contains several references from the sociology literature, and
Bayer, Ross and Topa (2008).

40

References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and Sebastien Roux, “Wages, Mobility and Firm
Performance: Advantages and Insights from Using Matched Worker-Firm Data,”
Economic Journal, 116, June 2006, 245–85.
Ahmed, Ali M., “If You Believe that Discrimination Exists, it Will,” The Manchester
School, 76, December 2008, 613–28.
Armstrong, Mark, John Vickers and Jidong Zhou, “Prominence and Consumer Search,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 40, July 2009, 209–33.
Bayer, Patrick, Stephen L. Ross, and Giorgio Topa, “Place of Work and Place of Residence: Informal Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes,” Journal of Political
Economy, 116, December 2008, 1150–96.
Burdett, Kenneth and Kenneth L. Judd, “Equilibrium Price Dispersion,” Econometrica,
51, July 1983, 955–69.
Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T. Mortensen, “Wage Diﬀerentials, Employer Size, and Unemployment,” International Economic Review, 39, May 1998, 257–73.
Calvó-Armengol, Antoni and Matthew O. Jackson, “The Eﬀects of Social Networks on
Employment and Inequality,” American Economic Review, 94, June 2004, 426–54.
Fudenberg, Drew and David K. Levine, “Self-Conﬁrming Equilibrium,” Econometrica,
61, May 1993, 523–45.
Haan, Marco A. and Jose L. Moraga-Gonzalez, “Advertising for Attention in a Consumer
Search Model,” Economic Journal, 121, May 2011, 552–579.
Holzer, Harry J. “Reservation Wages and their Labor Market Eﬀects for Black and White
Male Youth,” Journal of Human Resources, 21, April 1986, 157–77.
Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Frictional Wage Dispersion
in Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment,” American Economic Review, 101,
December 2011, 2873–98.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers, “Industry Rents: Evidence and Implications,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1989, 209–75.
Krueger, Alan B. and Andreas Mueller, “Job Search, Emotional Well-Being, and Job
Finding in a Period of Mass Unemployment: Evidence from High-Frequency Longitudinal Data,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, April 2011, 1–57.
41

Lancaster, Tony and Andrew Chesher, “An Econometric Analysis of Reservation Wages,”
Econometrica, 51, November 1983, 1661–76.
Lang, Kevin, “Persistent Wage Dispersion and Involuntary Unemployment,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106, February 1991, 181–202.
Lollivier, Stefan and Laurence Rioux, “An Empirical Examination of the Sources of
Changes over Time in the Job Finding Rate Using Reservation Wages and Rejected
Wage Oﬀers,” International Economic Review, 51, November 2010, 1039–69.
Loury, Linda Datcher, “Some Contacts Are More Equal than Others: Informal Networks,
Job Tenure, and Wages,”Journal of Labor Economics, 24, April 2006, 299–318.
Machin, Stephen and Alan Manning, “The Causes and Consequences of Longterm Unemployment in Europe,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.), Handbook
of Labor Economics, 3, New York and Oxford: Elsevier Science, North-Holland,
1999, 3085–3139.
McCall, John J., “Economics of Information and Job Search,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, February 1970, 113–26.
Montgomery, James D., “Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Toward an Economic Analysis,” American Economic Review, 81, December 1991, 1408–18.
Mortensen, Dale T., Wage Dispersion: Why Are Similar Workers Paid Diﬀerently?, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Nishimura, Kiyohiko G. and Hiroyuki Ozaki, “Search and Knightian Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Theory, 119, December 2004, 299–333.
Rotemberg, Julio J., “Perceptions of Equity and the Distribution of Income,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 20, April 2002, 249–88.
Rothschild, Michael, “A Two-Armed Bandit Theory of Market Pricing,” Journal of Economic Theory, 9, October 1974, 185–202.

42

Appendix: Proofs of Propositions
Proof of Proposition 1: Let V (w) represent the present value of revenues for workers
who are currently employed at a ﬁrm that pays w. The argument in the text still applies so
that [1 − ρ(1 − σ)]V (w) equals w + ρσU for workers who know λu and G, where U represents
the value of being unemployed. For the reservation wage w∗ , V (w∗ ) must equal U , so they
both equal w∗ /(1 − ρ). As a result, [1 − ρ(1 − σ)](V (w) − U ) equals w − w∗ , which I use
below. Given a reservation wage w∗ , the value of U for a worker who knows λu and G is
∫
[
]
U = b + ρ U + λu
(V (w) − U )dG(w) .
w∗

Therefore

ρλu
w =b+
1 − ρ(1 − σ)
∗

∫
w∗

(w − w∗ )dG(w).

Once one carries out the substitutions spelled out in the Proposition, this is a restatement
of (5). For values of w∗ below b, the left hand side is below the right hand side, while the
opposite is true for the largest value of w in the support of G (as long as this exceeds b).
Moreover, the derivative of the left hand side with respect to w∗ is positive while that of the
right hand side is negative. The equation thus has a unique solution.
Proof of Proposition 2: Using (2), individuals accept w1 rather than turning it down
and setting their reservation wage to w2 if and only if
w1 ≥

Db + ρλ̂w2
D + ρλ̂

,

where the right hand side is based on the present value of the utility of being unemployed
under the strategy of using a reservation wage of w2 . Thus, w1 is the reservation wage for
individuals with accurate beliefs if this inequality holds when λ̂ is replaced with λη. In this
case, sophisticated social learners also accept oﬀers of w1 . Reductions in λ̂ lower the right
hand side of the above inequality. This implies that naive social learners, whose λ̂ is lower,
accept oﬀers of w1 as well.
Proof of Proposition 3: The second inequality in (9) implies that (8) is violated so that
individuals with accurate beliefs have a reservation wage of w2 . If a group is sophisticated,
there is also a stable group learning outcome where the reservation wage is w2 . This follows
from computing Ũ under a reservation wage of w2 coupled with these beliefs and noting that
the violation of (8) leads individuals with λ̂ equal to λη to turn down oﬀers of w1 . I now
demonstrate that the ﬁrst inequality implies there is a stable group learning outcome with
a reservation wage of w1 . If a group uses this reservation wage, its average unemployment
spell is 1/λ so that λ̂ is equal to λ itself. Its average wage w̄1 is given by
w̄1 = λw1 + (1 − λ)(ηw2 + (1 − η)w1 ),
where the ﬁrst term captures that a fraction λ of newly unemployed workers ﬁnd a job in
the ﬁrst period. This job pays w1 . The second term captures that the rest get an oﬀer of w2
with probability η and an oﬀer of w1 with the remaining probability. Using (3), the expected
value of being unemployed for this group is
Ũ1 =

Db + ρλ[(1 − η(1 − λ))w1 + η(1 − λ)w2 ]
.
(1 − ρ)(D + ρλ)
43

Inequality (2) then implies that this group accepts a wage of w1 if the ﬁrst inequality in (9)
holds. The last step is to show that values of the parameters can be found that satisfy both
inequalities. Notice that both the left and the right hand side of (9) are convex combinations
of b and w2 , with the weight on b being larger on the left hand side if λ < 1. Thus, as long
as w2 > b, there is a range of values that satisﬁes both inequalities.
Proof of Proposition 4: Equations (24) and (27) imply that
w̄i = δi R + (1 − δi )w∗a .
Using this in (28) and (29), and plugging the results in (30), (31) follows. Moreover, for
η = 0 or δ1 = δ2 , both w̄ and w̃ equal w̄1 so that (32) holds as an equality. Otherwise w̄ is
smaller than w̃ so that it holds as a strict inequality.
Proof of Proposition 5: Since the Qi are the same, the expected proﬁts of a ﬁrm using
an ad of type i and oﬀering a wage w are given by (22) once again. Therefore (23) holds
at a zero proﬁt equilibrium, though the values of θi can be diﬀerent. It follows that both
(24) and (25) hold when w∗a is replaced by w∗b . Since (26) still deﬁnes the cdf of the wages
earned by people who obtain their job using an ad of type i, (27) still gives the value of the
average wages w̄i as long as w∗a is replaced by w∗b . This implies (36).
Meanwhile, (29) continues to deﬁne the economy-wide wage w̄ and Ṽ (w) in (1) still gives
the value to a worker of accepting a job. With group learning, the expected value of Ũ when
using the reservation wage w∗b is
Ũ = γ w̄ + ρ(λṼ (w̄) + (1 − λ)Ũ ) =

(Dγ + ρλ)w̄
.
(1 − ρ)(D + ρλ)

Given this expectation, the actual reservation wage of workers w∗b ensures that Ṽ (w∗b ) equals
Ũ , so that it equals (1 − ρ)Ũ . Equation (34) follows. Using (29) and (36) in this equation,
the unique solution for w∗b is (35).
Average wages are then given by (29) and (36). Since (27) still holds and θi continues to
be deﬁned by (23), (37) follows.
Proof of Proposition 6: There is no mass point of oﬀers at either w∗H or w∗L because
ﬁrms would be better oﬀ oﬀering slightly more. If a wage below w∗H is oﬀered, w∗L must be
oﬀered as well. The reason is that, if the lowest wage were higher, higher proﬁts would be
earned by undercutting this lowest wage slightly. The proﬁts from oﬀering w∗L are
QLi (R − w∗L )
(1 − δi ) − ci .
(1 + δi )Dvi

(53)

Even in the case where F (w∗H ) = 0, the expected proﬁts from oﬀering a wage of w∗H
equal
∗H
)
QH
i (R − w
(1 − δi ) − ci ,
(54)
(1 + δi )Dvi
and they are higher still if F (w∗H ) > 0. Thus oﬀering a wage of w∗H strictly dominates
oﬀering any lower wage when (41) holds. With free entry, the lowest wage oﬀered is w∗H ,
which implies that the distribution of wages is given by (23) with Qi replaced by QH
i and
∗H
that θi = (1 − δi )(R − w ).
44

If no one oﬀers a wage below w∗H , w∗H is the lowest wage oﬀered. This means that, if
the inequality in (41) is reversed, expected proﬁts are strictly higher by oﬀering w∗L rather
than w∗H .
Using the deﬁnitions of Qji given in (39), (40) and the discussion below
Q1H
=1+
Q1L
Q2H
=1+
Q2L

U H1 + (1 − η)(U H − U H1 )
U L1 + (1 − η)(U L − U L1 )
U H − U H1
.
U L − U L1

Since (38) implies that
U H − U H1
U H1
<
,
U L1
U L − U L1
it follows that Q1H /Q1L < Q2H /Q2L . Therefore (41) holds for i = H if it holds for i = L but
the converse need not be true.
Proof of Proposition 7: If oﬀers above w∗H are made, so are oﬀers of w∗H . The
expected proﬁts from making such oﬀers are
∗H
QH
)
i (R − w
(1 − δi + 2δi Fi (w∗H )) − ci ,
(1 + δi )Dvi

(55)

so they are bounded above by
∗H
QH
)
i (R − w
(1 + δi ) − ci .
(1 + δi )Dvi

(56)

The inequality in (42) implies that (41) is reversed so that ads of type i include oﬀers
of w∗L and proﬁts at this wage are given by the expression in (53). Therefore (42) implies
that the highest possible proﬁts from setting a wage greater than or equal to w∗H are below
those of setting a wage of w∗L . Therefore, these higher wages are not oﬀered.
Free entry then ensures that the expression in (53) equals zero so that (23) with Qi
replaced by QLi gives the distribution of wages while θi = (1 − δi )(R − w∗L ).
Now consider the case where both (41) and (42) are reversed There must then exist an
0 < Fi (w∗H ) < 1 such that the expression in (55) equals the expression in (53). Moreover,
because (41) is reversed, there exists a value of w∗L < wmL < w∗H such that (43) is satisﬁed.
Expected proﬁts at the posted wage of wmL are then the same as at w∗H as long as Fi (w∗H ) =
Fi (wmL ).
For ﬁxed ci and vi , proﬁts at all wages must equal those in (53). Thus, for w∗L ≤ w ≤
wmL , the cdf of wages Fi (w) is given by
(R − w)(1 − δi + 2δi Fi (w)) = (R − w∗L )(1 − δi ),
while it is given by
∗L
L
QH
i (R − w)(1 − δi + 2δi Fi (w)) = Qi (R − w )(1 − δi ),

for w ≥ w∗H .
45

Proof of Proposition 8: The proof starts by supposing that, indeed, prominent job
advertisements oﬀer wages between w∗L and wmL < w∗H while ordinary job advertisements
oﬀer wages greater than or equal to w∗H . It ﬁrst computes the distribution of wages at a free
entry equilibrium of this sort. It then shows that members of H should set their reservation
wage to w∗H whether they have accurate beliefs or are sophisticated group learners, while it
is stable for naive group learners of type L to set it to w∗L . Lastly, it shows that (46) and
(47) are suﬃcient to prevent both the deviations in which job advertisements of type 1 oﬀer
wages greater than or equal to w∗H and the deviations in which job advertisements of type
2 oﬀer wages smaller than w∗H .
Suppose that prominent ads oﬀer wages below w∗H while ordinary ads oﬀer wages that
are above. For zero proﬁts, the cdf’s Fi (w) must lead (22) to be zero when Q1 is equated
with QL1 while Q2 is equated with QH
2 . These cdf’s must therefore satisfy (23) with these
Q’s while, as in (24) the values of ci vi ensure that
(R − w∗L )(1 − δ1 ) = θ1

(R − w∗H )(1 − δ2 ) = θ2 .

It follows that the people who accept jobs from ads of type i have a cdf of wages Gi (w)
given by (26) so that their average wage w̄i satisﬁes (27). Together with the equation above,
this implies that
w̄1 = δ1 R + (1 − δ1 )w∗L

w̄2 = δ2 R + (1 − δ2 )w∗H

(57)

Now consider individuals of type H. Since wages greater than or equal to w∗H are only
oﬀered by ordinary ads, they arrive with probability λη starting in period 2. Thus, whether
these workers have accurate beliefs or are sophisticated learners who realize that wages above
w∗H start arriving in period 2, their subjective hazard of receiving such oﬀers in the next
period, λ̂, equals the objective hazard λη. Proposition 1 thus implies that, in either case,
their reservation wage is w∗H if this satisﬁes (5) when b = γw∗H . Using (57), this requires
that
(D + ρλη)w∗H = (Dγ + ρλη)(δ2 R + (1 − δ2 )w∗H )
which is equivalent to (44). When combined with (57) this implies that
w̄2
δ2 (Dγ + ρλη)
=
R
D(1 − γ) + δ2 (Dγ + ρλη)
Now turn to individuals of type L. Suppose that they accept all viable oﬀers above w∗L ,
so that their estimated and their actual hazard of leaving unemployment is λ while their
average wage w̄L is given by the expression in (29). Given that the people of type L are
naive group learners, w∗L is a stable reservation wage for them as long as it satisﬁes (5) with
b = γ w̄L . Noting that w̄L = w̄1 + (1 − λ)η(w̄2 − w̄1 ) and using (57) for w̄1 , this requires that
(
)
∗L
∗L
(D + ρλη)w = (Dγ + ρλη) (1 − η(1 − λ))(δ1 R + (1 − δ1 )w ) + η(1 − λ)w̄2 .
Using the solution for w̄2 above, this is equivalent to (45).
With this worker behavior the total number of employees and unemployed individuals of
types L and H are given by (11) and (12) respectively. Given that the number of people of
type i who become unemployed in the current period U i1 is given by σM i , we have
U H1 + (1 − η)(U H − U H1 )
(σ + λ)(1 − N L )
=
U L1 + (1 − η)(U L − U L1 )
(σ + λη(1 + σ))N L

U H − U H1
(σ + λ)(1 − N L )
=
U L − U L1
(1 − λ)(σ + λη(1 + σ))N L
46

As a result, (46) ensures that (41) holds for i = 2 while (47) ensures that (42) holds for
i = 1.

47

