                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     INCREASING OUR UNDERSTANDING OF THE HEALTH-INCOME GRADIENT
                            IN CHILDREN

                                            Jason Fletcher
                                           Barbara L. Wolfe

                                        Working Paper 18639
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18639


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




We thank Angela Fertig , Mayu Fujii, Robert Nuscheler, participants at the IFO/CESIFO and University
of Munich, Conference on Empirical Health Economics, participants at the 2010 ASHEcon Conference
and participants in the econometrics for health economics seminar at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jason Fletcher and Barbara L. Wolfe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Increasing Our Understanding of the Health-Income Gradient in Children
Jason Fletcher and Barbara L. Wolfe
NBER Working Paper No. 18639
December 2012
JEL No. I1,I12,I14,I3

                                              ABSTRACT

There have been numerous attempts to both document the income-health gradient in children and to
understand the nature of the tie. In this paper we review and summarize existing studies and then use
a unique school based panel data set from the US to attempt to further our understanding of the relationship.
The long duration (5 observations, 9 years) allows us to add to the understanding of the pattern of
the tie, through our ability to test for changes in health status and multiple measures of income, and
the school-based nature of the data allow us to add community SES to the model. Increasing understanding
of the income-health gradient may allow more effective targeting of interventions to decrease the gradient
and hence decrease health disparities among children.


Jason Fletcher
Yale School of Public Health
Department of Health Policy and Management
60 College Street, #303
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
jason.fletcher@yale.edu

Barbara L. Wolfe
1225 Observatory Dr
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
BWolfe@wisc.edu
INTRODUCTION AND LITERATURE REVIEW

        The observation that there is a relationship between income and health has a long history

but research on the nature of the relationship and its causes has exploded in recent years. Part of

the interest may be tied to trying to understand the increasing inequality in income and wealth

found in many developed countries; but part of it is likely tied to the large disparities in health

that seem to exist and perhaps increase even in the face of more and more effective health care.

These disparities seem closely tied to disparities in income and more generally socio-economic

status (SES). The relationship has been difficult to study because the causal pattern is far from

clear, in part due to important and unresolved empirical issues in most investigations of potential

reverse causality (whether poor health leads to low income (and/or vice versa)) as well as

potential “third factors” that simultaneously affect both health and income. And there are

derivative questions for policy such as how to design policies to reduce disparities in health.

        Recent efforts to understand the so-called income gradient have focused on two

strategies: study children, for whom the likely path is from family income to health, and use

natural experiments. We follow the first strategy and focus on children but we note here that the

study of natural experiments has provided consistent evidence that an increase in income, or in

some cases an increase in community resources, is tied to improvements in health1. These studies

include unexpected changes in pensions for elderly black and Coloured in South Africa (Case,

2004), an experimental program providing conditional cash transfers in Mexico (the Progresa or

Opportunidades program (see Ferdinand, Gertler and Neufield, 2008)), and the introduction of

casinos by American Indian tribes once legalization was established in 1988 (see Costello, 2003

and Wolfe, et al 2012).

        Children are studied because, for most children in developed countries, family income

does not depend on their own health. This largely eliminates one possible causal path. However,


        1
            A possible exception is work by Ruhm on the influence of unemployment on health; but the test
in that research is not only on income but changes in the allocation of time and in stress.
there is some evidence that children’s health can affect family income through effects on (usually

maternal) labor supply (see Gould 2004).

        There are consistent and well established differences in children’s health based on family

income along a variety of measures and across countries (see Appendix Table 1). The sources of

these differences are not yet fully elucidated. Indeed, the functional form of this relationship is

also in question. Potential threshold effects of low income (e.g. extreme deprivation) may be an

important factor driving poor health through inadequate nutrition, lack of access to and utilization

of quality health care. Deprived geographic areas may also expose individuals to a variety of

physical hazards and high stress levels. If so, then we expect to see a much flatter gradient in

countries with more generous support systems either in terms of income and/or access to health

care.

        An alternative to the threshold model of the effects of income on health is that ever more

income continues to lead to better health, as those with more income can buy more nutritious

food, live in a safer environment, belong to health clubs, obtain high quality medical care. That is,

more income continuously allows one to have better health. And if so, a corollary question is

whether there a declining marginal gain in health from increasing income at high levels of

income. This last question is particularly relevant for transfer programs and, if true, suggests that

among two communities with equal average income, the one with more equality in income will

have better average health than a community with more inequality in income.

        A new variant of the question and one we pursue here is to ask if family income leads to

significant changes in children’s health as they age. That is, does the health of children in the

family improve (decline) over time depending on family income? If so this would provide

additional and perhaps more convincing evidence that income influences health (rather than other

family characteristics such as parental education.) And, related to this, among children in

poor/very good health at Kindergarten, we examine whether the links between income and health

are similar as they age through school.
         In the rest of the paper we focus on children in order to better understand the gradient.

We first review the existing literature beginning with the Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson paper of

2002 before turning to our own work. In doing so we point out some of the limitations and lay

out the contribution of our work that follows. The model underlying the work is quite standard

and is found in Appendix 2. Briefly, the focus of the conceptual framework is to use a child

health production function, where measured child health at a point in time t is determined by an

initial stock of health at birth as well as subsequent parental and other inputs between birth and

time t (during elementary school).

         The literature using children as the subjects often use general health as the outcome of

interest and focus on log family income as the primary variable of interest2. A set of controls

including race/ethnicity dummy variables, parental background, child’s sex and sometimes

measures of the child’s initial health (birth weight) or mother’s mental health and education are

also included. The model is estimated separately by age of the subjects. Once this model is

specified there remain several core issues: (1) even with children, family income may be

endogenous (in the case of a child with severe disability, parents may alter their work behavior

and hence income) (2) How to measure health? The most commonly used measure is general

health in which an individual or responsible adult responds whether their children’s health is

excellent, very good, good, fair or poor (3) How to best measure income? The possibilities

include current or annual, permanent, neighborhood, or for some purposes, whether the family is

poor or near poor.

         The first paper to explore the question of the time path of the income gradient among

children is Case, Lubotsky and Paxson (2002) (CLP). Using primarily cross sectional data from

the National Health Interview Survey [NHIS] for years 1986 to 1995 for children 0–17 they


2
  A small but growing set of papers have extended the analysis of child health to include other health
indicators, such as body mass index, asthma, risky behaviors, and other measures of child development
(e.g. Berger et al. 2005, Blau 1999, Currie et al. 2007, Dooley and Stewart 2008, Violato et al 2009, 2011,
Reinhold and Jurgen 2011)
explore the time path using four age categories (0–3; 4–8; 9–12 and 13–17). Using the general

health measure and ordered probit regression they find clear evidence of an income-health

gradient at all ages and a steepening gradient with age. They explore this pattern as well using a

panel data set (Panel Study of Income Dynamics or PSID) and find the same pattern. Through

using the panel data, they explore a limited set of alternative income measures that all show the

same steepening influence of income as children age. We note here that while the PSID has

numerous measures over family income over time, there are few measures of children’s health

collected.

         This paper set off a chain of other studies—some use data from other countries, which

have universal health insurance (e.g. U.K., Germany and Canada), while others use alternative

data sets for the U.S. Many of these are included in Table 1 below, which documents the question

asked, the data set used, methods, findings and a summary-sentence on implications. For

example, Currie and Stabile (2003) use data from Canada to ask if the same steepening pattern

exists for children under universal coverage. In addition to replicating the CLP study they also

attempt to understand if the “cause” for this pattern is that low income children are less able to

recover from a health shock than higher income children or that low income children are subject

to more health shocks. Health shocks are defined by a set of chronic conditions. Their results

suggest that, at least in Canada, low income children recover as well as higher income children

from a health shock but have more of them.

         In Table 2 we compare results across several studies and countries. We bring together the

coefficients from ordered probit runs using log income. Each of these studies uses the same five

response general health outcome variable, excellent = 1 to poor = 5.3 The right hand side control


         3
          In some cases these categories have been collapsed to two or three categories. Numerous studies
have explored the reliability of self or parent reported general health. The focus is on their ability to predict
future morbidity and mortality. Maarten Lindeboom and Eddy van Doorslaer 2004 in Journal of Health
Economics 23(6): 1083–1099 reported on using data on Canadian adults and found homogenous reporting
of health status for language, income and education. Marja Jylha 2009 in Social Science & Medicine 69(3):
307–316 states this more strongly: “In population studies, self-rated health is probably the most feasible,
variables generally include child’s sex, race/ethnicity, mother’s age, mother’s education and

parent’s marital status.4 In each case we see a substantial increase in the coefficient going from

the youngest age group, 0–3 to the next age group, 4–8. However moving to the third age group,

9–12, the results are more mixed with half of the studies showing no steepening between the

second and third group. Finally moving to the oldest group, 13+, suggests an increase or

steepening, with the study of the U.K. as the only exception (the fifth study of Australian children

only has the two youngest ages included.) German data suggest a slightly different pattern where

the coefficients are largest for the oldest age group but flat for the three younger groups. Thus all

six of the included studies provide evidence of a general steepening of the income gradient as

children age with strong evidence for young children but more mixed evidence for the 9–12 year

olds.

         All of these studies are either done with cross sectional data or short panels (2

observations per child). This limits their ability to study whether it is current income or

permanent income that appears more closely tied to a child’s health and whether health changes

in response to permanent low or high income.5 The one study (Condliffe and Link 2008) that

uses the PSID has two observations on child health but does not make use of the fuller data on

family income. Murasko (2008) does explore a few dimensions of income including hot deck

imputations for missing income, the use of income from one year rather than a 2 year average and

the use of wage income in place of family income. He finds that the two year average income

(and family income vs. wage income) shows a stronger tie to child health. But his use of year two

income, measured subsequent to the initial observation of child health casts some doubt on the


most inclusive and most informative measure of health status. In a given cultural environment, it is a
powerful predictor of future health and use of health services.”
         4
           We exclude studies that use a more limited set of covariates such as Chen et al 2006 which uses
only child age, sex and race.)
         5
          Permanent income is generally defined in these short panels as the average income over two years
and is then used to explore the health income gradient for all measures of children’s health regardless of
timing.
reliability of his comparison of permanent versus current income. The approach used in both

Khanama et al and Murasko is to use the earliest or prior health status to capture the influence of

income on children prior to the age under study. Thus they suggest that including prior health (by

an indicator of poor/fair health for example) captures the influence of income on health up until

the most recent period of time. Under this perspective, estimates of the tie between income and

health in the current period capture only the marginal influence of income on health. This

approach reduces the coefficient on income but still retains the overall pattern of results. We

explore this pattern for the U.S.

        Thus the existing literature confirms that children’s health is tied to income with some

steepening as child age, particularly in earlier childhood, and, that universal health care is not

sufficient to significantly reduce, let alone eliminate, this income gradient. But there are several

remaining problems with the analysis that we address in our analysis below. Our primary

contribution is to our ability to test how income influences repeated measures of health of the

same individual over time. That is, while others such as Case et al have used repeated measures

of income, and so can compare prior income measures, they have not been able to measure the tie

between alternative measures and repeated measures of health. Second, we have a measure of

neighborhood income, so we can test both the tie between community income and child health

and whether inclusion of community income reduces the influence of family income. The first of

these—the tie between community income and health is potentially important when considering

possible policy interventions and is built upon the natural experiment literature which suggests a

greater influence of increases in health if community (and individual) income increases rather

than simply individual family income (Wolfe et al 2012 )

        Compared to our analysis, each of the studies we discussed above has one or more of the

following limitations: (1) use of cross-sectional data or short panel data rather than long duration

panel data, and especially single time observations of health (2) reliance on noisy income

measures and (3) inability to control for environmental confounding influences, such as
neighborhood SES and crime, which can affect both family income and child health status. In this

study we overcome these limitations by using a long panel data set with repeated measures of

each child’s health and a (repeated) measure of neighborhood income. In particular, we employ

the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort data, which follows children from

the US over 9 years between Kindergarten entry and 8th grade and includes five observations of

health and family income per child. The ECLS-K also uses a school-based sampling scheme,

which allows the use of average income of the school as well as the average health of children in

the school; it also includes an appropriate measure of the child’s health endowment (birth

weight). The multiple observations per child allow us to construct a far better measure of

permanent income, and to compare it with a variety of alternative measures. Finally the panel

nature of the data allows us to explore how family income influences changes (declines) in health.

We turn to our research below.


DATA

        In the research reported below we use the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-

Kindergarten Cohort data [ECLS-K]. These data were collected beginning in 1998–99 and trace

US children from kindergarten through grade 8. The correspondence between grade and child’s

age is: Kindergarten 6.28 (.88); 1st grade 7.24 (.87), 3rd grade 9.25 (.87), 5th grade 11.87 (0.80)

and 8th grade, 14.45 (.49) thus the sample goes from about age 6 to age 15. There are 6431

observations. Table 3 shows basic descriptive information of our sample at kindergarten and 8th

grade. Across all five observations, the proportion of children in the sample with health that is

less than or equal to good health varies from .15 to .20 over the five observations with a standard

deviation [S.D] of .36–.40. Current income in $10,000s varies from $5.1 to $7.0 with a S.D. that

varies from 4.6 to 5.2. Permanent income, measured as the average income over the survey

waves, (in 10,000s) varies from $5.1 to $ 6.1 with a S.D. of 4.4 to 5.1. These rather narrow and
consistently sized S.D. suggest that any pattern that emerges should not be due to changing S.D.

in income or health.


RESULTS

        We begin by replicating the CLP model using the longer panel of the ECLS-K data.

These full results are shown in Appendix Table 2. The equations we estimate are:

                                       H it    1 log(Yit )   2 X it   it

where the health measure is the five response general health in which 1 = poor and 5 = excellent

health in the specified grade, which are estimated separately by grade-level using an ordered

probit specification. In addition to current log income (which is based on 26 categories with a top

category of greater than $200,0006) the additional control variables are male, age in years,

dummy variables for race (Black, Hispanic and Other race with White, non-Hispanic as the

omitted category), Mother’s age, mother’s marital status, mother’s education, and a dummy

variable indicating missing parent information7 8. We modify the specification slightly to include

birth weight, a measure of initial health that we believe belongs in the model9. We also estimate

the model for subsets of students, such as those with poor/fair health and those with good or

better health at baseline and we explore whether income is protective of declines in health as

children age through school.



6
 The mid-point of each category is used in the analysis; for the highest category we use 1.5* the highest
cutoff. In two data waves, continuous income measures are available; we use continuous when available.
7
 Mother’s age and marital status are updated each wave, but mother’s education at baseline is used
throughout the analysis.
8
  Consistent with most of the literature we use family income without adjusting for family size. Below we
test the importance of this by adjusting family income using the equivalence scale suggested by the
National Academy Committee’s recommendations for measuring poverty. We also control for family size
in a robustness check.
        9
           See Conley et al (2003) for an overview of the importance of birth weight on health and
socioeconomic outcomes. We estimated all of our models without the birth weight variable as well; in no
case did these results differ substantially in terms of the underlying income health gradient (results
available from the authors by request).
         The initial results show the expected tie between more income and better health from K

to 5th grade but a flat or decreasing tie by the 8th grade10. These results then are consistent with the

literature reviewed above and suggest that the use of grades in place of age maintains the income-

health gradient11. We next explore the income health gradient making use of the richness of the

ECLS-K.

         Permanent income: As in other avenues of economic research focusing on the long term

role of income, it is important to have an accurate measure of permanent income. Our first

definition of permanent income is one that uses only those measures of income observed up to the

present at each grade level; by grade 8, all five measures of income are included. We run the

same basic ordered probit but substitute our measure of permanent income for current income.

Figure 1 indicates that the gradient is steeper with the use of permanent income and shows a

pattern of continual steepening, with a far greater slope between 5th and 8th grade with a

difference that reaches .07 or nearly 30 percent higher by 8th grade. The influence of income

appears to be more than 100 percent greater by grade 8 compared to kindergarten. All of the

coefficients on income are statistically significant at the one percent level.12

         Next, with our rich data we compare our several alternative definitions of permanent

income, including that used in other studies; that is we compare permanent income which only

uses income already observed at the time the health data is gathered with a definition that uses all

income measures for each family, first a two year rolling average and then a three year rolling



         10
          Pooling the data, we can test whether the coefficient on income is statistically different across
data waves in comparison to the effect in Kindergarten. We find that the effect, relative to baseline,
becomes statistically distinguishable in the 5th grade and 8th grade waves in models that control for
demographic variables. The 5th grade and 3rd grade effects are different at p<0.12 level.
         11
            To explicitly review the comparability of using grade based data for ages, we compared our
results using grades to the Khanama et al study based on Australian data which also used grade levels. In
results available upon request, we found a high degree of consistency, including a steepening gradient
between Kindergarten and 1st grade. These results provide evidence of the consistency of using grades for
age in studies of the income-health gradient of children.
         12
           By definition the gradient begins at the identical spot for kindergarten.
average13 from Kindergarten to grade 8 and tie that measure to health at each grade (see Table 4).

The use of these measures of permanent income suggests a greater tie between income and health

at early grades than our other measures but a flatter overall tie. The permanent income measure

that uses all years of observed income is the flattest of these estimates of the gradient with a much

greater coefficient at kindergarten and then a gradually increasing set of coefficients except for a

slightly smaller coefficient for 5th grade compared to 3rd grade. Again, the coefficient for 8th grade

is the largest of the set (and by definition equal to that in our first estimate of permanent income).

Compared to the coefficients on current income and our first measure of permanent income, the

pre-post measure does not seem to accurately represent the income health gradient on children in

the earlier years, when the measure is most likely to be an error of the families’ income at those

points in time. Overall our interpretation of this three way comparison is that the pre-post

measure of permanent income overstates the initial extent of the income gradient and understates

the steepening. It raises a question of the interpretation by Case et al. (2002) that long term

average income determines health investments and health status at different ages. Our findings

using both repeated measures of income and health suggest that the exact pattern of the

steepening of the gradient as a child ages is sensitive to the measure of income employed.14

         Finally we ask whether the use of an equivalence scale modifies the results. In most

economic analysis, the use of income adjusted for family size is preferred. In this way, rather than



         13
            These rolling measures allow three waves of income measures to be included in each
calculation, based on the closes measurements in time. For example, Wave 1 includes income from Wave
1, 2, and 3, Wave 2 also includes measures from Wave 1, 2, and 3, while Wave 4 includes measures from
Waves 3, 4, and 5.
         14
             In another test of the sensitivity of the gradient to the definition of income, we explore a 3 year
and then a 2 year rolling average which only includes income up to the grade level observed. For first grade
this is the same as that reported above but for later grades it is not. For example, for fifth grade we use
grades 1, 3 and 5 for the 3 year rolling average here but income from grades 3, 5, and 8 in the measure
reported above. For both of these specifications, the gradient is continually increasing but the gradient is
flatter than our preferred use of all measures of income up to the grade observed. Again, the timing of
measures does seem to matter to our measurement of the tie between family income and child health
(results available from authors.)
assuming that the full family income is available for all family members, an adjustment is made

so that larger families have less income available for each household member than the same total

family income for a smaller unit. The problem however, is which equivalent scale to use. The

federal poverty line has one scale while the World Bank and other research organizations use

quite different scales. Below we report on results using two different equivalence scales: the first

a simple one that uses the square root of family size (Smeeding et al 1993) and the other a three

parameter scale that was recommended by a volume from The National Academy on measuring

poverty15.

         Appendix Table 3 shows our results comparing our measure of permanent income with

these two alternative equivalence scales. The results are quite similar using the two different

scales. Compared to the unadjusted estimates the adjusted versions suggest a somewhat flatter

gradient although in all cases the gradient is increasing over the 9 year period. And once again,

all coefficients on income are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.



         Timing of Income and Health Transitions: A unique feature of our study is our ability to

explore several aspects of the link between family income and health using the long duration

panel data. Here we pursue several aspects of the income gradient of health. We first examine

how income at a point in time (i.e. different baseline periods) is related to child health at the

various ages captured in our sample. We then utilize the relatively unique information contained

in multiple reports of child health for each child to examine the likelihood of health transitions

linked to family income. Table 5 presents results that link family income measured in each of the

first four waves of data with current and future measures of child health. Row 1 provides

baseline results from prior tables. Row 2 suggests that income measured at school entry is

         15
           More specifically this scale has the following form: (1 + α*(A -1) + κK)θ where A are adults,
K are children, an additional adult increases needs by α percent of the needs of a single individual, a child
increases needs in the family by κ percent of the needs of a single individual, and the scale elasticity is
constant and is equal to θ. We use .7 for κ and θ.
associated with good child health throughout elementary and middle school but that this effect is

constant rather than increasing. Similarly, Rows 3-5 each suggest that income measured at later

child ages increases in its effect on child health (consistent with Case et al. 2002 and others) but

that the effect of income at each “baseline” is then relatively constant in its effect as children age.

This is suggestive that income is related to child health both due to current expenditures/resources

as well as due to the serial correlation and accumulation of these advantages as children age.

         Related to our ability to test timing, we next examine the effects of family income in

predicting negative transitions in child health (see Table 6a). These results begin with a sample

of children who are in excellent/very good health at baseline and follow them over time, noting

when their health declines. We then examine whether family income is linked to the likelihood

that children’s health declines as they transition through elementary and middle school ages.

Indeed, we find that income reduces the likelihood of health declines in 1st Grade by nearly 4

percentage points, which grows to 6.6 percentage points by eighth grade.16 This pattern is fully

consistent with the income gradient results we report above and suggest that higher family

income protects a child’s health over the childhood years. This is an important addition to

understanding the income-health gradient.

         Finally in Table 6b we explore an alternative way of trying to understand ways in which

income influences child health: we examine whether the health of most children remains the same

as they age (being generally good or better), but as health conditions develop over time, some

children become manifestly sicker. These could be the children of poorer parents. To examine

this question, we divide the sample into two subsamples: children with baseline very good or

excellent health and children with baseline poor, fair or good health. What we find is that

children who had very good or better health in kindergarten appear to experience the same pattern


         16
            We examined these effects in two ways. In Table 5b, the outcome variable is an indicator of
whether the child’s health in the current grade is lower than at the previous grade. In unreported results, we
find similar effects if instead the outcome variable is an indicator of whether the child’s health in the
current grade is lower than at school entry.
as the overall sample: an increasing influence of family income over time as the children get

older. In contrast, those children who reported poor or fair health in kindergarten do not appear to

be influenced by income through the third grade and only then begin to experience a similar

income gradient as other children. Thus in contrast to the idea that the income gradient is based

primarily on children whose health was poor early in life, we find a stronger pattern for those who

reach age 4-5 with very good or better health.

         School Level Measures: Another unique aspect of the ECLS-K data is the school based

design. This allows us to take into account the average SES of the neighborhood in which these

children live. That is, we view each school as being similar to a relatively homogeneous

community in terms of SES. We base this perspective on the neighborhood feeder pattern of a

large majority of schools in the U.S.17 To test the influence of neighborhood income on the

health gradient, we aggregate the individual level income measures to the school level (leaving

out the focal individual). Our interest in this stems at least in part from results using American

Indian tribes where running casinos both increased average income and improved health

suggesting an important role for community SES (Wolfe et al, 2012). Table 7 presents these

results. We do this first using the mean and then the median of school income defined as noted

above. Next we examine whether there appears to be an additional influence of average school

income on the health of students; in this case we have both family permanent income and school

income (mean and median in separate estimates). The results including only school average

income suggest positive influence of school income on health with weaker effects for 8th grade.

This could be due to the larger school and less precise measure of income in 8th grade or that

neighborhood income matters less for adolescents. For both measures of school income, the

largest coefficient is for 1st grade. Thus these results suggest a positive tie between neighborhood

or school income and health but not an increasing gradient over time. The estimates with both
         17
           For example Jorge Martinez-Vazquez, Mark Rider and Mary Beth Walker 1997 found in their
study of the heterogeneity of geographic areas by race that the number of school districts tend to increase
when racial heterogeneity of a state population increases.
family income and school average income suggest that school income is an additional factor

influencing health of young children (kindergarten and 1st grade). Thus at least for younger

school aged children living in a higher SES area does appear tied to better health., That is, in

kindergarten and first grade, attending school with wealthier classmates seems to be tied to

reporting better health and that this does not differ according to own family income. The

influence of family permanent income is little changed with the addition of school average

income, especially when mean school income is included.18

         As an additional examination using the school-based nature of the dataset, we also

estimated results with school (classmate)-level measures of health included. Table 8 presents

these results. Although the health of classmates is statistically linked with own-health, we both

find that this relationship declines as children age and also find little detectable change in the

effect of family income on child health, results fully consistent with those on school based

income. Thus family income matters for child health over and above the “purchase” of higher

income or healthier peers in a child’s school.

Magnitude of Effects

         Thus we conclude that we find strong evidence of an important income gradient of health

that increases as children age (are in older grades). To get a sense of the magnitude of the likely

influence, we calculated marginal effects for the ordered probit specifications for the entire

sample and the two subsets based on initial health using current-period measures of family

income. These results are presented in Table 9. For the overall sample, the marginal effect of

increasing income is found to predict a 5.7 percentage point increase in the likelihood of reporting

excellent health in Kindergarten, which increases to a 12.1 percent increase by 8th grade. In all

these calculations, the income variables are statistically significant at the 1% level, and these

marginal effects are calculated at the mean of all variables in the model. In Table 9 Panel B we

         18
           We also estimated specifications using a school fixed effects model over children in all schools
in the sample. The school fixed effects results suggest a general pattern of an increasing income gradient
but with a decreasing slope between grades 5 and 8. Results are available from the authors.
first show marginal effects for those with poor, fair or good health at our first measure, during

Kindergarten (following Table 6b). Since the coefficients underlying these estimates were not

significant for Kindergarten, first or 3rd grade, we pay no attention to the effects for those grades.

Turning to the marginal effects for those who started school with very good or excellent health,

we see the following pattern, which is similar to the overall pattern in panel a; the marginal effect

of increasing income is found to predict a 4.3 percentage point increase in the likelihood of

reporting excellent health in Kindergarten, which increases to a 8.5 percent increase by 8th grade.

This is not as dramatic an increase as that for the overall population together, especially by 8th

grade. The explanation is that the groups in fair, poor, or good health experience a significant

improvement in their health in grades 5 and 8, so that the full sample experiences the large and

significant 12.1 percentage point increase in grade 8. In all these calculations, the income

variables are statistically significant at the 5% level and these marginal effects are calculated at

the mean of all variables in the model. These results then confirm a strong influence of family

income on health along with an increasing gradient for all children in the ECLS. Those in very

good or excellent health experience the income gradient over all grades while those in poor, fair

or good health (the less healthy kindergarten children) experience the income gradient beginning

in about fifth grade.


CONCLUSION

        After reviewing many aspects of the existing literature we find robust evidence of a

strong and generally steepening income gradient of health regardless of the exact measure of

family income that is included in the analysis. A primary contribution of this paper is our ability

to explore multiple measures of health for the same child, allowing novel investigations on the

impact of family income on changes in children’s health as they age through elementary school.

Second, since we have such a long period of time over which we observe each child, we construct

a variety of measures of long term or permanent income over time and show the robustness of our
principal findings. Third, we add to the current exploration that focuses only on family income,

by including community SES as captured by the SES of the children who attend the same school

as the “observation” child. That is, by using school average income, we include a measure for

otherwise unobserved community heterogeneity and implicitly include a test for the extent to

which the child’s family income matters, once we take community income into account.

        Our results using panel data of children from age 6 to 15 provides quite clear evidence of

a tie between family income and child health that steepens at least from ages 6 to about 12. We

provide evidence that the use of permanent income, including only income measured prior to the

period when a child’s health is measured, shows a strong increasing income gradient of health,

and we provide evidence that, at least for kindergarteners and first graders, community (school)

income may itself influence a child’s health. The fact that family income is robust to the

inclusion of school income suggests there is little bias in excluding neighborhood income in other

studies, at least for the U.S. Finally, we show novel evidence that family income is related both

the levels and the changes in children’s health as they age.

        Of course there are caveats in using the ECLS-K data. Chief among these is that not all

children are present at each wave. In the analysis presented above we chose to present the results

using the maximum sample possible at each grade. But this opens up the possibility that

temporary attrition may influence the results. To partly answer this, we conducted an analysis

using a balanced sample. These results, presented in Appendix Table 4 suggests that while there

are some differences in using the balanced sample, the overall pattern remains and so again the

evidence on the income gradient appears robust to numerous modifications.
                                            References
Berger LM, Paxson C, Waldfogel J. 2005. Income and child development. Center for Research on
       Child Wellbeing. Working Paper ] 05-16-FF, Princeton University.

Blau DM. 1999. The effect of income on child development. Review of Economics and Statistics
      81: 261–276.

Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. 2002. “Economic Status and Health in
       Childhood: The Origins of Gradient.” American Economic Review 92(5): 1308–1334

Case, Anne. 2004. “Does Money Protect Health Status? Evidence from South African Pensions.”
       In Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, edited by D. Wise. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press.

Case, Anne, Diana Lee, and Christina Paxson. 2007. “The Income Gradient in Children’s Health:
       A Comment On Currie, Shields And Wheatley Price.” NBER Working Paper No. 13495.
       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chen, Edith, Andrew Martin, and Karen Matthews 2006. “Socioeconomic Status and health: Do
       gradients differ within childhood and adolescence?” Social Science and Medicine. 629:
       2161-2170.

Condliffe, Simon, and Charles R. Link. 2008. “The Relationship between Economic Status and
        Child Health: Evidence from the United States.” American Economic Review 98(5):
        1605–1618.

Conley, Dalton, Kate W. Strully, Neil G. Bennett, The Starting Gate: Birth Weight and Life
        Chances (Berkeley, University of California Press, 2003).

Costello, E. Jane, Scott N. Compton, Gordon Keeler, and Adrian Angold. 2003. “Relationships
        between Poverty and Psychopathology: A Natural Experiment.” Journal of the American
        Medical Association, 290(15): 2023–2028.

Currie, Janet, and Mark Stabile. 2003. “Socioeconomic Status and Child Health: Why Is the
         Relationship Stronger for Older Children?” American Economic Review 93(5): 1813–
         1823.

Currie A, Shields MA, Wheatley Price S. 2007. The child health/family income gradient:
        evidence from England. Journal of Health Economics 26: 213–232.

Dooley M, Stewart J. 2007. Family income, parenting styles and child behavioural-emotional
       outcomes. Health Economics 16: 145–162.

Fernand, Lia CH, Paul J. Gertler, Lynnette M. Neufeld. 2008. “Role of Cash in Conditional Cash
       Transfer Programmes for Child Health, Growth, and Development: An Analysis of
       Mexico’s Oportunidades.” Lancet 371(9616): 828–837

Gould, Elise. (2004). “Decomposing the Effects of Children’s Health on Mother’s Labor Supply:
       Is It Time or Money?” Health Economics, 13(6):525-541
Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
      Journal of Political Economy 80(2): 223–255.

Jylha, Marja. 2009. “What Is Self-Rated Health and Why Does It Predict Mortality? Towards A
        Unified Conceptual Model.” Social Science & Medicine 69(3): 307–316.

Khanama, Rasheda, Hong Son Nghiemb, and Luke B. Connelly. 2009. “Child Health and the
      Income Gradient: Evidence from Australia.” Journal of Health Economics 28(4): 805–
      817.

Lindeboom, Maarten, and Eddy van Doorslaer. 2004. “Cut-Point Shift and Index Shift in Self-
       Reported Health.” Journal of Health Economics 23(6): 1083–1099.

Martinez-Vazquez, Jorge, Mark Rider, and Mary Beth Walker. 1997. “Race and the Structure of
       School Districts in the United States.” Journal of Urban Economics 41(2): 281–300.

Murasko, Jason E. 2008. “An Evaluation of the Age-Profile in the Relationship between
      Household Income and the Health of Children in the United States.” Journal of Health
      Economics 27(6): 1489–1502.

Propper, Carol, John Rigg, and Simon Burgess. (2007). “Child Health: Evidence on the Roles of
       Family Income and Maternal Mental Health from A UK Birth Cohort.” Health
       Economics, 16: 1245-1269

Reinhold, Steffen and Hendrik Jurges. 2011. “Parental Income and Child Health in Germany.”
       Health Economics. 21:5562-579.

Smeeding, T. M., P. Saunders, J. Coder, S. Jenkins, J. Fritzell, A. J. M. Hagenaars, R. Hauser,
       and M. Wolfson. 1993. “Poverty, Inequality, and Family Living Standards Impacts
       Across Seven Nations: The Effect of Noncash Subsidies for Health, Education, and
       Housing”. Review of Income and Wealth 39, 229-256.

Violato M, Petrou S, Gray R. 2009.The relationship between household income and childhood
        respiratory health in the United Kingdom. Social Science & Medicine 69: 955-963.

Violato M, Petrou S, Gray R, Redshaw M. 2011. Family income and child cognitive and
        behavioural development in the United Kingdom: does money matter? Health
        Economics. 20: 1201–1225.

Wolfe, Barbara, Jessica Jakubowski, Robert Haveman, and Marissa Courey. 2012. ““ The Income
       and Health Effects of Tribal Casino Gaming on American Indians”. Demography, 49:2
       May. 499-524.
Table 1: Table of Studies of Children
Paper            Case, A. Lubotsky, D.,     Currie, J. and Stabile,    Condliffe, S. and Link,    Currie, A. Shields, M.    Currie, J. Decker, S.,    Murasko, J., 2008          Khanama, R.,               Reinhold and Jurges,
                 and Paxson, C., 2002       M., 2003                   C. R., 2008                A., and Price, E. 2007    and Lin, W., 2008                                    Nghiemb, H. S., and        2011
                                                                                                                                                                                 Connelly, L., 2009
Motivation       Focus on children;         Canada; Focus on           US; Focus on recovery      England; Compare          Focus on public health    Health; cumulative vs.     Australia; panel;          Gernamy
                 sources of the gradient    recovery and quantity      and quantity of shocks     with US                   insurance expansions      current income; panel      explain gradient
                                            of shocks
Data             Maternal reported                                     US MEPS and PSID,          HSE (2–15)                US NHIS 1986–2005         US MEPS 1996–2005          LSAC 2 Cohorts             KiGGS 2003–2006
                 general health status of                              1996–2002                                                                                                                            parental and medical
                 children (0–17)                                                                                                                                                                            interviews. Use general
                                                                                                                                                                                                            health and biomarkers.
Method           Ordered probit             Ordered probit             Ordered probit             Ordered probit            Index of generosity of    Ordered probit             Binary and ordered         Ordered probit.
                 regression                 regression and linear      regression and linear      regression and linear     the state’s public                                   Probit models
                                            probability regression     probability regression     probability regression    health insurance
                                                                                                                            programs as IV for
                                                                                                                            individual
                                                                                                                            Medicaid/SCHIP
                                                                                                                            eligibility and conduct
                                                                                                                            2SLS
Findings         Children’s health is       Depsite the universal      In U.S., children in low   Although family           More generous             Replicate Case (2002)      Similar findings as US     Larger but flatter
                 positively related to      health coverage, there     income families are        income has a positive     insurance coverage at     pattern though             studies in that children   income gradient for
                 family income at every     exists an income           more likely than           relationship with         early childhood is        somewhat weaker.           from higher income         subjective health. No
                 age, and the slope of      gradient of children’s     children in high           general health status,    associated with better    Increased persistence      families have better       evidence of a
                 the gradient increases     health that steepens       income families to still   strength of the           health at older ages      of health status among     health but gradient        significant income
                 for older children         during childhood. The      suffer from chronic        relationship is smaller   (ages 9–17). In           older children; stronger   flatter. No evidence of    differential in
                                            gradient is likely due     conditions present 5       than in US. Gradient      addition, the             contemporaneous            more health shocks or      probablility of child
                                            to higher rate of health   years ago. Income          does not increase with    relationship between      influence of income on     failure to respond to      having a chronic health
                                            shocks among low-          gradient becomes           children’s age. No        family income and         adolescents.               shocks by income.          condition but severity
                                            income children.           steeper with age, partly   evidence of a             children’s health has                                Some suggestion that       is less among higher
                                                                       because low income         significant income        weakened for older                                   health of mother part      income children.
                                                                       children are less able     differential in           children after the year                              of explanation of the
                                                                       to recover from health     porbability of a child    the SCHIP initiated.                                 gradient.
                                                                       shocks.                    having a chronic health
                                                                                                  condition.
Implications     Low family income on       Policies that focus only   Public policies that       Family income may         Assuring access to        Since influence of SES     National health service    Low income creates a
                 chilren’s health tend to   on reducing gaps in        increase access to         not be a major            health care in early      cumulative,                can reduce gradient but    severeity effect among
                 accumulate during          access to medical care     medical care for low       determinant of            childhood may prevent     interventions at an        not come close to          children but not an
                 childhood. Thus,           may not be sufficient      income children could      children’s health in      the income gradient of    earlier age may be         eliminating it.            increase in the
                 children from lower        to reduce disparities in   be useful in reducing      England. NHS may          children’s health from    most effective.                                       probability of health
                 income families may        health.                    the income gradient of     infuence. Challenged      becoming steeper over                                                           problems .
                 suffer from both lower                                children’s health.         by Case, Lee, and         time.
                 SES and poorer health                                                            Paxson that findings
                 when they transition                                                             reflect miscoding of
                 into adulthood                                                                   chronic conditions.
     Table 2: A Comparison of Results from Studies of Four Countries of the Tie between
     Family Income and Child Health Parent’s reports of child general health, 1=excellent,
     5=poor. Ordered probits

                                                               Age of Child
Study                 Country           0–3              4–8              9–12               13+
CLP                    USA             -0.183          -0.244            -0.268         -0.323
                                       [0.008]         [0.008]           [0.009]        [0.008]
CS                    Canada           -0.151          -0.216            -0.252         -0.272
                                       [0.026]         [0.019]           [0.024]        [0.040]
CLP07                   UK             -0.143          -0.212            -0.203         -0.194
                                       [0.036]         [0.026]           [0.030]        [0.034]
KNC                     AU             -0.05           -0.131
                                       [0.024]         [0.024]
M                      USA             -0.079          -0.134            -0.132         -0.195
                                       [0.023]         [0.018]           [0.022]        [0.036]
RJ                   Germany           -0.268          -0.277            -0.250         -3.52
                                       [0.050]         [0.040]           [0.043]        [0.040]

Notes: CLP = Case. Lubotsky and Paxson 2002 using NHIS; CS = Currie and Stabile, 2003 using
NLSCY.
CLP07=Case, Lee and Paxson 2007 using HSE and KNC= Khanam, Ngheim and Connelly 2009 using
LSAC.
M=Murasko 2008 using MEPS. Control variables include age dummies, sex, race, parent education, ln
family size with some additions that vary by study.
RJ= Reinhold and Jurges 2011 using data for 2003-2006 KiGGS
Table 3: Descriptive Characteristics of ECLS-K Sample
                                            Kindergarten                  8th Grade
Variable                             Obs       Mean        Std.   Obs      Mean       Std.

Poor Health                         7,431       0.17       0.37   6,953     0.15      0.36
Child Health Status (5=excellent,
1=poor)                             7,431       4.33       0.83   6,953     4.33      0.81
Child Health Status = Excellent     7,431       0.53              6,953     0.51
Child Health Status = Very Good     7,431       0.30              6,953     0.34
Child Health Status = Good          7,431       0.14              6,953     0.12
Child Health Status = Fair          7,431       0.03              6,953     0.03
Child Health Status = Poor          7,431       0.00              6,953     0.00
Log Income                          7,405      10.51       0.96   6,953    10.84      0.85
Current Income (10000s)             7,431       5.17       5.15   6,953     6.98      5.18
Permanent Income (current and
previous wave) (10000s)             7,431       5.17       5.15   6,953     6.09      4.46
School average income (10000s)      7,032       5.71       3.31   6,369     6.02      2.66
Parent Health (1=excellent,
5=poor)                             7,411       2.26       0.79   6,933     2.26      0.79
Mom Depressed (1=never,
4=most of the time)                 7,395       1.34       0.50   6,928     1.35      0.51
Birth weight (lbs)                  7,291       7.38       1.32
Male                                7,431       0.52       0.50   6,953     0.51      0.50
Age                                 7,426       6.23       0.38   6,948    14.45      0.49
Black                               7,431       0.17       0.37   6,953     0.16      0.36
Hispanic                            7,431       0.17       0.38   6,953     0.18      0.38
Other Race                          7,431       0.04       0.20   6,953     0.04      0.20
Mom Education                       7,431      13.48       2.45   6,953    13.50      2.46
Mom Age (wave 1)                    7,431      33.56       6.49   6,953    33.82      6.28
Married                             7,431       0.71       0.45   6,953     0.70      0.46
Table 4: Comparing Alternative Measures of Permanent Income
 Grade                         K                    1         3         5         8
 Set uses only current and prior family incomes
 Log (Perm Income)              0.142*** 0.165*** 0.204*** 0.238*** 0.305***
                               (0.037)      (0.046)   (0.047)   (0.046)   (0.055)
 Set uses all years of income
 Log (All Years Income)         0.248*** 0.264*** 0.280*** 0.261*** 0.305***
                                 (0.050)     (0.054)   (0.053)   (0.047)   (0.055)

 Log (2 Year Rolling)          0.182***    0.171***    0.254***    0.248***    0.262***
                                (0.044)     (0.046)     (0.046)     (0.041)     (0.048)

 Log (3 Year Rolling)          0.182***    0.183***    0.260***    0.233***    0.261***
                                (0.046)     (0.048)     (0.051)     (0.043)     (0.049)

Notes: each coefficient is from a separate regression. Standard errors in parenthesis, ***1%,
**5%, *10%
       Table 5: The Effects of Family Income on Child Health
       Varying the Baseline Income Measure and Examining Future Health Outcomes
Outcome                        SRHS         SRHS          SRHS       SRHS           SRHS
Grade                               K             1             3          5             8
Log (Perm Income)               0.141***      0.165***     0.204***    0.238***      0.305***
                                 (0.037)       (0.046)       (0.047)    (0.046)       (0.055)
Log (K Income)                  0.141***      0.114***      0.088**    0.113***      0.132***
                                 (0.037)       (0.038)       (0.036)    (0.034)       (0.042)
Log (1st Grade Income)                        0.157***      0.174***   0.133***      0.175***
                                               (0.045)       (0.048)    (0.040)       (0.046)
Log (3rd Grade Income)                                      0.201***   0.132***      0.191***
                                                             (0.044)    (0.040)       (0.042)
Log (5th Grade Income)                                                 0.224***      0.202***
                                                                        (0.038)       (0.045)
Observations                      7,265         7,001         6,800      7,032         6,533

      Note: Same controls as previous tables. Each cell is a separate regression.
      Standard errors in parenthesis, ***1%, **5%, *10%
      Table 6a: The Effects on Family Income on Child Health Declines
Outcome                       Decline in Health Decline in Health Decline in Health        Decline in Health
Grade                                  1                3                  5                       8

Log Permanent Income                  -0.039**            -0.042**              -0.046**      -0.066***
                                       (0.019)             (0.018)               (0.020)        (0.021)
Log Current Income                     -0.033*            -0.044**             -0.054***       -0.041**
                                       (0.017)             (0.017)               (0.018)        (0.019)
Observations                            5,990               5,975                 6,127          5,507
R-squared                               0.040               0.047                 0.124          0.048
       Note: Same controls as previous tables. Each cell is a separate regression.
       Standard errors in parenthesis, ***1%, **5%, *10%
Table 6b: Comparison of Income Gradient for Children by Initial health defined according
to health in Kindergarten
 Outcome                       SRHS               SRHS              SRHS               SRHS
 Grade                           1                  3                 5                  8
 Full Sample                 0.157***           0.201***          0.224***          0.239***
                              (0.045)            (0.044)           (0.038)            (0.045)
 Observations                  6,559              6,247             7,032              6,533
 Baseline Poor Health          0.125              0.031            0.156**          0.276***
                              (0.106)            (0.075)           (0.075)            (0.098)
 Observations                   951                905              1,044               979
 Baseline Very Good
 Health                       0.113**           0.224***          0.209***          0.217***
                              (0.044)            (0.049)           (0.041)            (0.047)
 Observations                  5,950              5,668             6,450              5,968
Standard errors in parenthesis, ***1%, **5%, *10%. Other variables in regressions include male,
age, race dummies, mom and dad education, mom age, parent's married. Income variable is log of
current income. Baseline poor health refers to those with general health reported as poor, fair or
good in kindergarten; baseline very good health refers to those reported in very good or excellent
health in kindergarten.
Table 7: Adding School Average Income to Model with and without family income
            Grade                  K          1          3         5          8

Estimates with only the noted
measure of income included
Log (Perm Income)                    0.142***    0.165***   0.204***    0.238***    0.305***
                                     (0.037)     (0.046)    (0.047)     (0.046)     (0.055)

Log (School Mean)                    0.161***    0.265***   0.157***    0.135**     0.102*
                                     (0.060)     (0.059)    (0.061)     (0.054)     (0.056)

Log (School Median)                  0.191***    0.197***   0.149***    0.147***    0.092*
                                     (0.057)     (0.052)    (0.054)     (0.045)     (0.053)

Estimates with both family and
school income included
Log (Perm Income)                    0.124***    0.117***   0.233***    0.259***    0.325***
                                     (0.039)     (0.044)    (0.054)     (0.051)     (0.058)
Log (School Mean)                    0.108*      0.215***   0.059       0.058       0.048
                                     (0.062)     (0.061)    (0.065)     (0.056)     (0.058)

Log (Perm Income)                    0.112***    0.124**    0.246***    0.208***    0.306***
                                     (0.038)     (0.053)    (0.058)     (0.051)     (0.060)
Log (School Median)                  0.134**     0.130**    0.010       0.054       -0.005
                                     (0.060)     (0.054)    (0.062)     (0.050)     (0.058)

      Notes: each coefficient is from a separate regression in the top rows. Sets of two
      coefficients from separate regressions in the bottom rows. Standard errors in parenthesis,
      ***1%, **5%, *10%
   Table 8: Effects of Family Income and School-Level Health on Child Health
Outcome                      SRHS      SRHS      SRHS       SRHS       SRHS           SRHS       SRHS       SRHS       SRHS       SRHS
Grade                            K        K          1          1          3             3          5          5          8          8

Log (Perm Income)            0.141***   0.123***    0.165***   0.159***   0.204***    0.226***   0.238***   0.257***   0.305***   0.328***
                              (0.037)    (0.037)     (0.046)    (0.044)    (0.047)     (0.051)    (0.046)    (0.049)    (0.055)    (0.057)
School Level Child Health               0.411***               0.270***               0.279***               0.136*                 0.092
                                         (0.102)                (0.076)                (0.082)               (0.074)               (0.085)

Observations                   7,265      7,240      7,001       6,851      6,800       6,449     7,032      6,551      6,533      6,407

   Note: Same controls as previous tables. Standard errors in parenthesis, ***1%, **5%, *10%
          Table 9: Marginal Effects of Permanent Income on Child Health:
          Panel A: Results using Current and Prior Values of Income.
                                  Mfx         Mfx          Mfx           Mfx         Mfx      Sample
                                  Poor        Fair        Good       Very Good    Excellent
                 Coefficient     Health      Health       Health        Health     Health
Kindergarten      0.142***      -0.001*    -0.008***    -0.025***     -0.023***   0.057***    7265
                   (0.037)      (0.000)     (0.002)      (0.007)       (0.006)     (0.015)
1st Grade         0.165***     -0.001**    -0.007***    -0.026***     -0.031***   0.065***     7001
                   (0.046)      (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.007)       (0.009)     (0.018)
3rd Grade         0.204***      -0.001*    -0.010***    -0.036***     -0.033***   0.081***    6800
                   (0.047)      (0.000)     (0.003)      (0.009)       (0.008)     (0.019)
5th Grade         0.238***     -0.001**    -0.011***    -0.049***     -0.034***   0.095***    7032
                   (0.046)      (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.010)       (0.007)     (0.018)
8th Grade         0.305***       -0.001    -0.014***    -0.049***     -0.057***   0.121***    6533
                   (0.055)      (0.001)     (0.003)      (0.010)       (0.010)     (0.022)
Table 9
Panel B: Results Stratified by Baseline Health

                                Baseline Poor/Fair/Good Health
                            Mfx         Mfx          Mfx          Mfx           Mfx       Sample
                            Poor        Fair        Good       Very Good      Excellent
           Coefficient     Health      Health       Health      Health         Health
 1st
 Grade        0.125         -0.005      -0.019      -0.025         0.017        0.031      951
             (0.106)       (0.004)     (0.017)     (0.021)        (0.015)      (0.027)
 3rd
 Grade        0.031         -0.000      -0.005      -0.007         0.002        0.010      905
             (0.075)       (0.001)     (0.011)     (0.018)        (0.005)      (0.024)
 5th
 Grade      0.156**         -0.003    -0.019*     -0.038**        0.011*      0.050**     1,044
            (0.075)        (0.002)    (0.010)      (0.019)        (0.006)     (0.024)
 8th
 Grade      0.276***        -0.003    -0.026**   -0.067***         0.011      0.086***     979
             (0.098)       (0.003)     (0.012)    (0.025)         (0.008)      (0.030)



                            Baseline Very Good/Excellent Health
                          Mfx         Mfx         Mfx             Mfx           Mfx       Sample
                          Poor        Fair       Good          Very Good      Excellent
         Coefficient     Health      Health      Health         Health         Health
1st
Grade      0.113**        -0.000     -0.003**     -0.014***      -0.026**     0.043**     5,950
           (0.044)       (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.006)        (0.010)     (0.017)
3rd
Grade     0.224***       -0.000*     -0.007***    -0.033***      -0.046***    0.087***    5,668
           (0.049)       (0.000)      (0.002)      (0.007)        (0.010)      (0.019)
5th
Grade     0.209***        -0.001     -0.006***    -0.040***      -0.036***    0.083***    6,450
           (0.041)       (0.000)      (0.002)      (0.008)        (0.007)      (0.016)
8th
Grade     0.217***        -0.000*     -0.009*** -0.032***         -0.045***   0.085***    5,968
           (0.047)        (0.000)       (0.002)       (0.007)       (0.010)    (0.018)
                       Standard errors in parenthesis, ***1%, **5%, *10%
                               Figures




             Figure 1: Basic Results on Income Gradient
       ECLS Data, Permanent Income vs. Current Income, Ordered
                        Probit, Weighted Data
0.35


 0.3


0.25


 0.2


0.15


 0.1


0.05


  0
         K           Grade 1         Grade 3         Grade 5     Grade 8

                      Permanent Income    Current Income
                    Figure 2
   Comparison of Estimates by Income Measure




Current                           Permanent (All Years)
Permanent (Prior/Current Years)   Permanent (Equiv Scale)
Permanent (w/school)


      Notes: All estimates include birth weight
                                     Appendix Tables


                                          Tables


Appendix Table 1: Health of Poor vs. Nonpoor Children; NHIS Data, Children 2-17 US 2001–05
Health Measure                                        Poor                 Nonpoor
Low birth weight                                       0.112                  0.078
Ever told had asthma                                     .159                   .131
Ever mental problems                                     .119                   .079
Ever told ADHD                                           .071                   .060
Activity limitations                                     .114                   .070
 ages 2-3                                                .061                   .037
 ages 4-8                                                .097                   .062
 ages 9-12                                               .139                  .067
Days missed Illness/injury 12 mos                      4.471                  3.531
Any chronic condition                                    .324                   .265
N                                                  7,363                 36,858
Source: Currie and Lin 2007.
Appendix Table 2: Full Results for Association between Current Income and Child Health
Outcome                             SRHS         SRHS    SRHS       SRHS         SRHS
Grade                                 K            1       3          5            8
Log (Current Income)             0.142***     0.157*** 0.201*** 0.224***      0.239***
                                  (0.037)      (0.045)  (0.044)    (0.038)     (0.045)
Male                             ‐0.113**        0.011  ‐0.000     ‐0.073       ‐0.086
                                  (0.049)      (0.055)  (0.057)    (0.046)     (0.054)
Age                                ‐0.119       ‐0.055  ‐0.101     ‐0.083     ‐0.141**
                                  (0.076)      (0.077)  (0.073)    (0.096)     (0.061)
Black                              ‐0.041     ‐0.204**  ‐0.121    ‐0.241**   ‐0.247***
                                  (0.100)      (0.102)  (0.096)    (0.097)     (0.088)
Hispanic                           ‐0.082    ‐0.174***  ‐0.057   ‐0.203***   ‐0.231***
                                  (0.060)      (0.063)  (0.065)    (0.061)     (0.067)
Other Race                         ‐0.088       ‐0.092   0.155     ‐0.143       0.018
                                  (0.107)      (0.135)  (0.113)    (0.108)     (0.128)
Birth Weight                        0.022       0.014    0.028      0.018       0.005
                                  (0.019)      (0.022)  (0.022)    (0.019)     (0.019)
Maternal Education               0.054***    0.040***  0.058*** 0.051***     0.044***
                                  (0.012)      (0.015)  (0.014)    (0.013)     (0.014)
Paternal Education                  0.016      0.026*    0.005     0.022*       0.000
                                  (0.012)      (0.014)  (0.015)    (0.012)     (0.012)
Maternal Age                        0.004      ‐0.007*  ‐0.002     ‐0.001      ‐0.004
                                  (0.004)      (0.004)  (0.005)    (0.004)     (0.004)
Parents Married                  0.218**      0.186**   ‐0.122     ‐0.106      ‐0.077
                                  (0.087)      (0.086)  (0.088)    (0.069)     (0.067)
Missing Parent Information       0.242**      0.218**    0.063     ‐0.025     0.156**
                                  (0.095)      (0.093)  (0.098)    (0.079)     (0.077)
Observations                        7265         6559    6247       7032         6533
Standard errors in parenthesis, ***1%, **5%, *10%
Appendix Table 3: Comparing Income and alternative equivalent scales
Grade                                     K           1          3            5           8
Log (Perm Income)                         0.142*** 0.165*** 0.204*** 0.238*** 0.305***
                                          (0.037)     (0.046)    (0.047)      (0.046)     (0.055)
Log (Perm Income with Equiv Scale)        0.150*** 0.155*** 0.205*** 0.211*** 0.229***
2‐parameter                               (0.037)     (0.043)    (0.044)      (0.043)     (0.049)
Log (Perm Income with Equiv Scale)        0.150*** 0.153*** 0.208*** 0.212*** 0.242***
3‐parameter                               (0.037)     (0.043)    (0.044)      (0.043)     (0.050)
Notes: each coefficient is from a separate regression. Standard errors in parenthesis, ***1%,
**5%, *10%
                     Appendix Table 4: Results for Balanced and Unbalanced Samples
Outcome                       SRHS         SRHS         SRHS         SRHS          SRHS        SRHS           SRHS           SRHS         SRHS         SRHS
Grade                           K            K            1            1             3           3              5              5            8            8
                          Unbalanced     Balanced   Unbalanced     Balanced    Unbalanced    Balanced     Unbalanced       Balanced   Unbalanced     Balanced
Log (Perm Income)         0.142***     0.130***     0.165***     0.177***      0.204***    0.218***       0.238***       0.252***     0.305***     0.283***
                          (0.037)      (0.044)      (0.046)      (0.055)       (0.047)     (0.055)        (0.046)        (0.054)      (0.055)      (0.058)
Male                      ‐0.113**     ‐0.130**     ‐0.000       ‐0.036        0.006       0.011          ‐0.072         ‐0.083       ‐0.082       ‐0.079
                          (0.049)      (0.055)      (0.053)      (0.059)       (0.053)     (0.059)        (0.046)        (0.051)      (0.054)      (0.057)
Age                       ‐0.119       ‐0.149*      ‐0.070       ‐0.066        ‐0.137*     ‐0.097         ‐0.077         ‐0.105       ‐0.135**     ‐0.136**
                          (0.076)      (0.085)      (0.073)      (0.081)       (0.074)     (0.082)        (0.098)        (0.116)      (0.062)      (0.066)
Black                     ‐0.041       0.008        ‐0.202**     ‐0.183        ‐0.212**    ‐0.242**       ‐0.230**       ‐0.204*      ‐0.212**     ‐0.173*
                          (0.100)      (0.121)      (0.097)      (0.119)       (0.099)     (0.114)        (0.098)        (0.114)      (0.091)      (0.098)
Hispanic                  ‐0.082       ‐0.090       ‐0.214***    ‐0.265***     ‐0.090      ‐0.091         ‐0.192***      ‐0.174**     ‐0.212***    ‐0.204***
                          (0.060)      (0.072)      (0.061)      (0.069)       (0.063)     (0.069)        (0.061)        (0.068)      (0.067)      (0.074)
Other Race                ‐0.088       ‐0.086       ‐0.119       ‐0.149        0.097       0.124          ‐0.150         ‐0.086       0.025        ‐0.001
                          (0.107)      (0.127)      (0.135)      (0.155)       (0.108)     (0.126)        (0.111)        (0.122)      (0.136)      (0.147)
Birth Weight              0.022        0.010        0.018        0.009         0.030       0.032          0.016          0.004        0.004        ‐0.003
                          (0.019)      (0.022)      (0.021)      (0.023)       (0.020)     (0.022)        (0.019)        (0.022)      (0.019)      (0.020)
Maternal Education        0.054***     0.043***     0.043***     0.041***      0.056***    0.057***       0.050***       0.052***     0.038***     0.045***
                          (0.012)      (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.015)       (0.013)     (0.014)        (0.013)        (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.014)
Paternal Education        0.016        0.024*       0.017        0.010         0.004       0.000          0.022*         0.019        ‐0.006       ‐0.009
                          (0.012)      (0.014)      (0.015)      (0.016)       (0.014)     (0.015)        (0.012)        (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.013)
Maternal Age              0.004        0.007        ‐0.007**     ‐0.006        ‐0.002      ‐0.001         ‐0.002         0.000        ‐0.005       ‐0.005
                          (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.004)
Parents Married           0.218**      0.309***     0.164**      0.263***      ‐0.080      ‐0.110         ‐0.058         ‐0.019       ‐0.044       ‐0.082
                          (0.087)      (0.099)      (0.083)      (0.095)       (0.081)     (0.092)        (0.067)        (0.078)      (0.066)      (0.072)
Observations              7265         5926         7001         5926          6800        5926           7032           5926         6533         5926
Test of Equality                       0.511                     0.597                     0.545                         0.562                     0.375
                             Notes: Additional Control: Missing Parental Information. Standard errors in parenthesis, ***1%, **5%, *10%
Appendix 2: Discussion of Motivating Model


BASIC MODEL

        Underlying the research on the income gradient that focuses on children is a standard model

based on work by Grossman (1972 and 2000).

        The model begins with a family utility maximization problem

                                        U t  U ( H t , X t , C t , Llt ; tu ,  tu )                       (1)

where U t is utility of the family at time t, H t is the health of a child, X t is a set of goods that affects

child health (e.g., food, toys and housing), Ct represents other commodities consumed by the household,

( Llt ) is leisure time, and  tu and  tu are exogenous observable and unobservable

factors, respectively, that influence U t .


        Following the accumulation of health stock as in Grossman, the production of child health can be

represented as:

                                              H t  H ( X t , Lht ; th ,  th )                             (2)

where Lht is the amount of time used in the production of child health,  th and  th are respectively

exogenous observable and unobservable variables influencing H t . (Note: H t 1 is sometimes included in

these models as well but the original Grossman model used initial health stock, which might best be

captured by stock at birth and is sometimes empirically captured as birth weight.)

        The budget constraint of the household or family can be represented as

                                          Yt  wt LLt  Pt X X t  Pt C C t                                  (3)

where Yt is family income, LLt is the time spent to earn wage income, wt , Pt X and Pt C are respectively the

wage rate, and prices of X t and Ct .

        The household’s time constraint can be thought of as
                                                 L  Llt  LLt  Lht                                      (4)

where L is the total fixed amount of time available (e.g., 24 hours per day).

        A household maximizes its intertemporal utility with a discount rate a, subject to the budget and

time constraints plus the condition of positive initial stock of child health ( H 0 > 0, frequently conceived

of as birth weight).

        Taking first derivatives of the Lagrangian function with respect to child health, and taking its lag

repeatedly until the initial condition is met, the Marshallian demand function for child health is:

                                      H t*  H ( H 0 ,  k ; th , tu ,  th ,  tu )                    (5)

where   {H , X , C, L , L , L } and k=1, 2, . . ., t−1.
                        L   l   H



        According to (5) the optimal level of child health is determined by allocation of parental time

between income generated through work, household chores and leisure, the consumption of child health-

related goods and other goods and services

        The empirical specification is then something like the following:

                                             H it  Y  Z it   it                                     (6)

where H it is the stock of health of child i in period t, , Y represents average income of the family, where

there is a question of whether current or permanent income is preferred, Zit is a set of exogenous variables

that affect child health and it represents unobservable determinants of H. Again Hit 1 , the stock of

health of child i in period t−1, is sometimes included to reduce unobserved influences on child health. The

error term of this demand equation, µit has two components: a child specific component that does not vary

over time and a time varying component which is assumed to be exogenous and uncorrelated over time.
