                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SOCIAL FRAGMENTATION, PUBLIC GOODS AND ELECTIONS:
                            EVIDENCE FROM CHINA

                                         Gerard Padro i Miquel
                                              Nancy Qian
                                               Yang Yao

                                         Working Paper 18633
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18633


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2012




We acknowledge financial support from NSF Grant no. 0922087 for the collection of the Village Democracy
Surveys (2006, 2011), the Yale University EGC Faculty Grant and the European Union's Seventh
Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013) / ERC Starting Grant Agreement no. 283837. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Gerard Padro i Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Fragmentation, Public Goods and Elections: Evidence from China
Gerard Padro i Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao
NBER Working Paper No. 18633
December 2012
JEL No. O38,O43,P16,P35

                                              ABSTRACT

This study examines how the economic effects of elections in rural China depend on voter heterogeneity,
for which we proxy with religious fractionalization. We first document religious composition and
the introduction of village-level elections for a nearly nationally representative sample of over two
hundred villages. Then, we examine the interaction effect of heterogeneity and the introduction of
elections on village-government provision of public goods. The interaction effect is negative. We interpret
this as evidence that voter heterogeneity constrains the potential benefits of elections for public goods
provision.


Gerard Padro i Miquel                                Yang Yao
STICERD                                              China Center for Economic Research
London School of Economics                           Peking University
Houghton Street                                      Peking, China
London, WC2A 2AE                                     yyao@ccer.pku.edu.cn
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
g.padro@lse.ac.uk

Nancy Qian
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
nancy.qian@yale.edu
1       Introduction

        A central question for economists, political scientists and policymakers is why the introduction of

democracy in developing countries during the 20th century has so often failed to produce the public

policy changes that Western European countries historically experienced when they democratized

(e.g. Acemoglu and Robinson, 2000; Lizzeri and Persico, 2004). One potential answer, as argued

by the modernization (Lipset, 1959) and the critical junctures hypotheses (Acemoglu et al., 2008),

is that democracy can only survive and succeed in contexts where certain historical pre-conditions

exist. However, existing studies provide little concrete evidence on what the exact pre-conditions

are and which economic outcomes are sensitive to these conditions. This paper addresses this

gap in the literature by examining how the introduction of village elections interacts with voter

fragmentation, defined as the clustering of citizens in different groups with potentially distinct

identities, in determining the allocation of government-provided public goods in rural China.

        Village elections were introduced during the 1980s and 1990s to address challenges in local gov-

ernance that had led, among other problems, to severe under-provision of public goods in rural

China. These elections partially replaced the Communist Party-appointment system that had pre-

viously determined village leadership and represent a marginal shift towards democracy in village

government.1 Consistent with the belief that electoral accountability incentivizes village leaders to

improve public goods provision, several recent studies have found that the introduction of elections

increased average local public goods provision in a way that corresponded to the demand of vil-

lagers (e.g., Luo et al., 2007, 2010; Martinez-Bravo et al., 2012; Mu and Zhang, 2011; Zhang et

al., 2004). These results on the average effect of elections together with the size and diversity of

China’s social-geographic landscape makes China a natural context for studying the relationship

between the underlying heterogeneity in villages and the effectiveness of elections in determining

public goods.

        A priori, the interaction of heterogeneity and elections on government-provided public goods

is ambiguous. A number of factors suggested in the literature (i.e. lack of trust and altruism,

preference divergence, conflict between groups) can cause social fragmentation to reduce the gov-

ernment’s ability and willingness to raise revenues to provide public goods his literature, reviewed
    1
        See Section 2 for a more detailed discussion and references.




                                                             1
in.2 This negative relationship should in principle hold for both appointed and elected governments.

Hence, the sign of the interaction depends on whether this relationship is stronger under an elected

government than under an appointment one. For instance, if fragmentation limits the benefits of

elections because it weakens electoral accountability, the interaction would be negative. In contrast,

if heterogeneous villages have more to gain from the introduction of elections because elections ag-

gregate conflicting preferences, the interaction would be positive. Therefore, whether the effects of

elections are larger or smaller in heterogeneous polities is ultimately an empirical question.

       There are two main challenges in studying the interaction effect of democratization and voter

heterogeneity on public goods provision: identification and data. The main concern for identification

is that voter heterogeneity is correlated with other factors (such as a history of conflict or weak

administrative capacity) that could influence whether elections are implemented, as well as the effect

of elections on public goods. Similarly, voter heterogeneity could be an outcome of democratization.

For example, across countries, if democracies are more tolerant of diversity and are better able to

provide public goods for reasons unrelated to diversity, the sign of the interaction effect would not

necessarily reflect whether heterogeneity is an important pre-condition for a working democracy.

       The second difficulty is finding high quality data from the appropriate context. A study on the

interaction effects of voter heterogeneity and the introduction of elections, or any democratization

reforms, requires a context that fulfills the following criteria: i) the units of observation must be

responsible for determining and financing public goods; ii) these units must undergo a similar and

well-defined shift towards democracy; iii) there must be variation in voter heterogeneity across the

populations in these units; iv ) the introduction of democracy should be exogenous with hetero-

geneity; and v ) these units should be otherwise similar so that they are comparable for statistical

analysis. While cross-national analyses struggle with ii), iv) and v), within-country comparisons

tend not to satisfy i) and ii). The introduction of village-level elections in China and the natural

variation in local population mixes across this large country provides a context in which both of

these difficulties can be successfully addressed.

       Our study proceeds in two steps. First, we document the introduction of elections, public goods

expenditures and provision, and social composition of villagers in each village for a nearly nationally
   2
     There is a large literature that finds a negative relationship between social heterogeneity and public goods in
different contexts. Please see the discussions towards the end of the introduction and in Section 3.



                                                         2
representative sample of over two hundred villages and twenty years. The Village Democracy Survey

(VDS), the main source of the data, is a unique survey conducted by the authors that digitized data

from village records. This dataset is supplemented with demographic variables from the National

Fixed Point Survey (NFS), which is collected by the Ministry of Agriculture each year in the same

villages as the VDS.

    For practical reasons, we focus on religious fragmentation as a proxy of voter heterogeneity. Of

the three dimensions of ethnic, religious and linguistic fragmentation that dominate the literature

on diversity, religion is the only one that varies substantially across the villages in our sample.

The re-emergence of religion after years of state repression is also interesting as it has received

little attention from researchers so far, and because religious fragmentation has been shown to be

important for economic performance in European countries (e.g., Alesina et al., 2003; Montalvo

and Reynal-Querol, 2003) and the historical Chinese context (e.g., Weber, 1968), and for economic

attitudes in the cross-country evidence (e.g., Guiso et al., 2003).3 Since religious conflicts are

practically non-existent in our context, we interpret religious fragmentation broadly as a proxy for

social fragmentation. In other words, our study will reveal the importance of religion as a dimension

for social clustering in post-Mao rural China.

    The second step is to use the data to examine the interaction effect of the introduction of

elections, which varied in time across villages, and a time-invariant measure of the level of average

religious fragmentation that varies across villages.4 Because data for religious population shares

are not available every year, we use the average of religious fragmentation over time to maximize

sample size. The baseline specification controls for village fixed effects, which absorb all time-

invariant differences across villages; year fixed effects, which control for all changes over time that

affect all villages similarly, such as macro economic changes taking place in China during this period;
   3
     We discuss the re-emergence of religion in rural China in section 2. We do not have reliable data for other
dimensions of heterogeneity such as the education composition of villagers, and income is not a stable dimension
of social clustering since elections caused significant income redistribution (Martinez-Bravo et al., 2012). Another
potentially relevant dimension of heterogeneity in this context is kinship networks. However, several studies by
sociologists find that extended kinship networks have become less important in China over time due to factors such
as the collectivization of agriculture during the Maoist era and the rapid economic growth and social modernization
that followed (e.g., Cohen, 1992; Jiang, 1995). For completeness, we will examine the influences of fragmentation
along kinship lines and other sources of heterogeneity such as pre-election income after we present the main results
on religious fragmentation.
   4
     In most of the paper, we measure fragmentation by constructing an index of fractionalization. This particular
choice of measurement is not important for our results, which are robust to using an alternative polarization index.
This is shown and discussed in more detail later in the paper. See Alesina et al. (2003), Duclos et al. (2004), Esteban
and Ray (2007) and Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2003) for discussions of the different measures of fragmentation.


                                                          3
and province-time trends, which control for the growing economic divergence across regions during

the reform era. Our strategy is similar to a triple differences estimate that compares public goods in

villages before and after the introduction of elections, between villages that have already introduced

elections to those that have not, and between fragmented and less fragmented villages.

   To address the fact that religious fragmentation is a non-random variable that is correlated with

other factors that can influence elections and public goods, the baseline equation controls for corre-

lates such as village population, the average share of religious population in the village interacted

with year fixed effects, and most importantly, the interaction of average religious fragmentation in-

teracted with the full vector of year fixed effects. The latter set of controls is extremely conservative

as it controls for all differences across villages of different levels of fragmentation and allows these

differences to matter over time in a fully flexible manner. It forces our estimates to be identified

only from a systematic change in the difference in public goods between fractionalized and less

fractionalized villages from the year that elections are implemented.

   Our interpretation of the interaction effect relies on two assumptions. First, our measure of

religious fragmentation must not be an outcome of elections. We support this by showing that

elections have no effect on the time-varying measure of religious fragmentation, and that average

religious fragmentation is uncorrelated with the timing of the introduction of elections. Second, we

assume that, conditional on our baseline controls, the interaction of the introduction of elections and

religious fragmentation is not jointly determined with public goods. In other words, we assume that

fragmentation is not correlated with other factors (beyond the baseline controls) that can influence

the effect of elections on public goods. This is highly unlikely since the baseline controls for the

interaction of fragmentation and year fixed effects. Nevertheless, we do not take this as given and

provide a large body of evidence against alternative explanations in the Robustness section. Note

that the interpretation of the interaction effect as causal does not require that the timing in the

introduction of elections was random.

   The main results show that prior to the introduction of elections, village government expenditure

on public goods was very similar across villages with different degrees of fragmentation; elections

increase public goods expenditure, and the magnitude of the effect declines with fragmentation.

We find similar results when examining proxies for public goods provision as the dependent vari-

able, which supports our interpretation of expenditure as reflecting provision. Taken literally, the

                                                   4
estimates imply that approximately 92% of the villages in rural China were homogenous enough to

experience some increase in public goods expenditures after the introduction of elections, while 8%

of villages were so heterogeneous that elections reduced village public goods expenditure. The high

share of villages to experience some increase from elections is not surprising given the homogeneity

of most Chinese villages.

       In addition, we show that the changes in public goods expenditure occur exclusively for village-

raised funds; we have no effect of elections or the interaction for public goods funded by the upper

levels of government. Together with the large number of robustness checks we conduct, these results

suggests that mechanisms local to the village are causing heterogeneous villages to experience lower

gains from elections. In particular, there are two possible and non-mutually-exclusive mechanisms,

both related to the fact that elections increase accountability: i) heterogeneous villages have a lower

preference for public goods and elected village leaders reflect better this underlying preference or

ii) homogeneous villages are better able to keep elected leaders accountable.5 Importantly, we are

able to rule out the alternative explanation that our results are driven by poor implementation

of the electoral reforms in fragmented villages by showing that there is no relationship between

heterogeneity and the quality of election implementation.

       Our study makes several contributions to the literature. It is the first to provide direct and

rigorous empirical evidence on the interaction of formal institutional reform and pre-existing condi-

tions. The results show that the presence of distinct groups in society can severely limit the effects

of a democratic transition for public goods provision. Our study is most similar to a recent study

by Bandiera and Levy (2010), which provides theoretical and empirical evidence that heterogeneity

causes democratically elected local governments in Indonesia to implement policies that favor elites.

       This study complements a large empirical literature studying the relationship between hetero-

geneity and public goods provision (e.g., Alesina et al., 1999; Alesina and La Ferrara, 2000, 2002,

2005).6 The object of our analysis differs in that we investigate how heterogeneity modulates the

effects of institutional change on public goods instead of the cross-sectional effect of heterogeneity

on public goods. In focusing on a developing country, we are most similar to Khwaja (2009), Okten
   5
     Please see the discussion in Section 3.
   6
     The seminal paper in the cross-sectional literature is Alesina et al. (1999), which generated a literature that is
surveyed in Alesina and Ferrara (2005). Luttmer (2001) and Alesina and La Ferrara (2002) find that fragmentation
affects preferences towards neighbors. See also Munshi and Wilson (2010) for an analysis of the origin and transmission
of fragmentation in the United States.


                                                          5
and Osili (2004) and Miguel and Gugerty (2005), which find that social fragmentation reduces col-

lective action towards public goods in Pakistan, Indonesia and Kenya; and Banerjee et al. (2001),

Banerjee and Somanathan (2007) and Munshi and Rosenzweig (2008), which examine how groups

mobilize through the political system to obtain public goods in India.7 In focusing on religious frag-

mentation as our measure of heterogeneity, we contribute to the macro-empirical literature on the

effect of religious fragmentation on growth (e.g., Alesina et al., 2003; Montalvo and Reynal-Querol,

2003).

    We also add to the studies discussed earlier on Chinese elections by initiating research for

understanding the pre-conditions for elections. Since the average effect reflects the conditions of a

very specific context, an analysis of the pre-conditions is crucial towards obtaining generalizeable

lessons for policymakers. Moreover, in the discussion of China’s transition, religion has become an

object of increasing academic interest and systematic data collection.8 To the best of our knowledge,

we produce the first village-level dataset that documents regional religious composition during the

modern era, which together with the other data we have collected, make a general contribution

by facilitating future research on the relationship between informal and formal institutions and

economic outcomes in China.

    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the background. Section 3 discusses the

conceptual framework and the empirical strategy. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 presents

the results. Section 6 concludes.

2     Background

2.1      Religion in Rural China

    The Chinese government officially recognizes five religions, which were initially sanctioned in the

1950s, but then abolished during the Cultural Revolution: Buddhism, Daoism, Islam, Catholicism

and Protestantism (e.g. Cohen, 1992). The official statistics for religious populations in 2003
   7
     See also Glennerster et al. (2010) and Dayton-Johnson (2000) for analyses of this relationship in Sierra Leone
and Mexico, and Habyarimana et al. (2007) for an experimental study in Uganda. Our study is loosely related
to cross-country studies of the relationship between ethnic/linguistic/religious fragmentation and macro economic
performance that was pioneered by Easterly and Levine (1997). See also Desmet et al. (2009) and Alesina et al.
(2003).
   8
     See for instance the recent release of the first Spatial Explorer of Religion (accessible at
http://chinadataonline.org/religionexplorer/) a joint initiative of Purdue University and University of Michi-
gan.




                                                        6
are shown in Table 1 column (1).9 The most popular official religion is Buddhism, which was

introduced from India during the 4th Century. In 2003, 100 million Chinese were officially Buddhists.

90.5 million were of the Mahayana school, which includes distinctly Chinese Han branches of this

religion. 7.6 million were Tibetan Buddhists, who mostly live in the province of Tibet. 1.5 million

were Theravada Buddhists, who mostly live in the province of Yunnan. The second most popular

religion is Islam, which was introduced through the area now known as Xinjiang during the 8th

Century. In 2003, approximately 20.3 million of the Chinese population were Muslim. These are

followed by the Christian religions, which were introduced in China during the 17th Century. In

2003, Protestantism officially comprised approximately sixteen million followers and Catholicism

comprised approximately five million followers. The fifth most popular religion is Daoism, which

originated at the same time as Buddhism and is indigenous to China. Approximately three million

Chinese were Daoists in 2003.

      More popular than all of the official religions combined is what anthropologists and historians

refer to as folk religion (e.g., Cohen, 1992). While it is not recorded in official statistics, survey

evidence suggests that approximately 20% of the rural population follows the practices of traditional

folk religions (Le and Jiang, 1998: p. 75). Folk religions come in varied and diffused forms, including

utilitarian ancestor or lineage worship (worshipping one’s ancestors so that the ancestor’s soul can

intervene on behalf of its living descendants), the worship of local deities, divination, geomancy (e.g.

fengshui), witchcraft (e.g., sorcery, exorcism and planchette writing), physiognomy, and certain

taboos (Gao, 1994, p.330-55; MacInnis, 1989, p. 367-74, p. 385-410; Dean, 1993; Siu, 1989, p.

121-37). Folk religions tend to vary across regions, and their followers generally believe in several

variants at any one time. Since our study focuses on cross-village variation, it is important to note

that folk religions typically vary little within each village (Faure and Siu, 1995; Feuchtwang, 2001).

      The post-Mao regime (1978- ) has been much more tolerant towards religion than its predecessor

(1949-78), which peaked with anti-religion fervor during the Cultural Revolution (1966-76). The

policy of the post-Mao regime is similar to the historical policy of the former Imperial governments

– although it espouses and promotes one official belief (atheism), it tolerates other religions as long

as they do not challenge the power of the central government. During the reform era, all forms of
  9
      These official statistics are taken from Gong (1998: Table 2).




                                                            7
traditional practices have gradually revived.10

       Official religions enjoy relatively well-demarcated and open places of worship (e.g., Lai, 2003).

Unofficial religions comprise sects of Buddhism/Daoism (e.g., Falung Gong, Zhong Gong Fawen) and

Christianity not recognized by the state and Tibetan Buddhists and Xinjiang Muslims who challenge

Beijing’s control (e.g. Cohen, 1992, Youngliang, 1994). However, these groups are unlikely to be

relevant for our context since our sample does not include Tibet and Uyghur regions of Xinjiang, or

urban areas, where most unrecognized sects of Buddhism and Protestantism reside. Another group

that have had conflict with the central government in the past is the underground Catholic church,

which includes individuals (often residing in the rural areas) who follow the Vatican’s appointed

bishops instead of those appointed by the Chinese State (e.g., Madsen and Fan, 2009; Hunter and

Chan, 2007, p. 241; Gong and Zhou, 1999, p. 73). However, the conflict between this group and

the state has typically been diplomatic and recent events suggest that a reconciliation has been

gradually achieved.11 Thus, we believe that it is unlikely for religious-state conflict to play an

important role in the context of our study.

       There are several additional facts to keep in mind for our analysis. First, religious beliefs in rural

China are typically uncorrelated with educational background or occupation (Lai, 2003). In fact,

even village officials and Communist Party members are known to partake in religious ceremonies

and rituals (e.g., Tsai, 2002, 2007). In a survey of Hubei province, Gong and Zhou (1999, p.71) find

that 11% of the followers of Buddhism and Daoism were school teachers and Party cadres. Second,

there is generally little hostility between religious groups in China. For example, anthropologists

such as Sweeten (2001) have noted that even before the Communist regime subdued religion, conflict

between followers of different religions in rural areas dominated by the Han-Chinese (who are over
  10
     The revival of religion and state tolerance is consistent with the growth in the number of religious individuals
over time. Folk religions were the first to rebound, resulting in a marked rise in the number of new temples being
built and a boom in sales of manuals and books on folk religions. Also, survey evidence in Hubei province by Gong
and Zhou (1999) show that the number of Buddhists and Daoists fell from 98,000 and 65,300 in 1966 to 93,000 and
46,000 in 1982, but then grew to be 800,000 and 300,000 in 1996. The number of places for worship and religious
meetings in China exhibit the same pattern. They decreased from 120,000 during the early Communist era to 40,000
in the late 1980s, but then grew steadily to 100,000 by 2003 (Zhu, 1994; He, 1999). Similarly, the China Christian
Council was re-established in 1980 to repair state-religious relationships with Chinese Christians. According to this
organization’s statistics, the number of churches grew from 4,000 in 1986 to 7,000 in 1991. Even more numerous were
“gathering places”, which grew from 25,000 in 1991 to over 50,000 in 2004, 70% of which are in rural areas (Luo, 2004,
Ch. 2).
  11
     For example, the recent government appointment of the Bishop of Shanghai, one of the most prominent positions
for Chinese Catholics, was neither officially sanctioned nor opposed by the Vatican and followed by members of both
the official and under-ground Church (Madsen and Fan, 2009).



                                                          8
92% of the total population today) were mostly about practical issues. This is consistent with our

belief that religion is a reasonable proxy for social fragmentation and can affect local public goods

provision.

       Finally, while the revival of religion reflects the persistence of traditional beliefs, the State’s past

efforts to eliminate religion is believed to have significantly weakened religious beliefs relative their

historical predecessors (e.g. Madsen, 1989; Siu, 1989). This implies that the differences between

religious groups are likely to be much weaker in China than in other contexts.

2.2       Village Government and Public Goods

       Villages are the lowest level of administration in rural China. Village governments were first

organized by the communist government during the early 1950s and they comprise two groups of

leaders: the village comittee and party branch. The village committee, which typically comprises

three to five members, is led by the village chairman, henceforth VC. This position is also sometimes

called the village chief or village head. The village Chinese Communist Party (CCP) branch, which

is similar in size, is led by the party secretary, henceforth PS. Before elections were introduced, all

positions were filled by appointment by the county government and village party branch.12 Since

all levels of government above the village are dominated by the CCP, we will sometimes use the

term party to refer to the village party branch and all the upper-levels of government as one body.

       The village government serves several critical roles; one that greatly impacts citizen welfare is

its power to determine and finance village public goods (e.g., O’Brien, 1994; Oi and Rozelle, 2000;

Rozelle, 1994, Brandt and Turner, 2007; Whiting, 1996). The village government allocates public

goods spending and raises most of the funds. Since it is not an official level of government, it

does not have the legal power to force villagers to comply with local taxation. Instead, village

governments finance public goods by imposing ad hoc fees and levies, which they mostly enforce

with social pressure and the threat of social sanctions. In our paper, we refer to these tariffs as

taxes for simplicity.13 The reliance on social mechanisms to enforce tax compliance means that
  12
      The Chinese government, led by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), is broadly ordered in a vertical hierarchy,
from the central government in Beijing down to the rural levels that comprise counties and townships. According to
the National Statistical Yearbooks, rural population decreased from approximately 83% of total population in 1980
to approximately 75% by 2000.
   13
      Such taxes can be controversial when villagers believe them to be extortionary and misallocated by corrupt village
governments. This led the central government to ban village taxes altogether in the Tax and Fee Reform in 2003.
For our study, this ban will have little effect as it occurred towards the end of our study period. But we will check
that our estimates are robust to controlling for their introduction. Note that informal taxes have been found to be



                                                           9
raising revenues and determining the object of investment requires a high amount of effort from

village leaders. It is therefore not surprising that the provision of public goods prior to the electoral

reforms, when leaders had little incentive to exert effort towards satisfying villagers, was far below

the demands of villagers (e.g., Luo et al., 2007, 2010).

2.3    Village Elections

    The main motivation for the introduction of elections was to resolve information problems faced

by the central government. China is a large, heterogeneous and quickly changing nation with

almost 700,000 villages. Proponents of the reform argued that making local leaders accountable

to villagers would impose checks on the VC’s behavior and would also allow villagers to select the

most competent candidates (Kelliher, 1997; O’Brien and Li, 1999). Public goods provision featured

prominently in the discussion of whether elections should be introduced, and proponents hoped that

local leaders with a democratic mandate would better determine which public good investments were

necessary and would better facilitate the local coordination necessary for providing them.

    The democratization reforms were gradual. The VC and the village committee were to be elected

by the villagers instead of appointed by the regional party and VCs would serve three-year terms

with no stipulated term limits. However, to ensure that village leaders would still be partially

accountable to the party, there was no change in the selection method of the members of the

village party branch and PS positions, who continued to be appointed. Initially, the regional party

nominated the candidates but was required by law to nominate more candidates than open positions.

Only in a second wave of reforms were nominations opened to all villagers. This is commonly referred

to as haixuan. Both reforms were irreversible – once elections or open nominations were introduced,

they remained in place thereafter.

    Elections were introduced in a top-down fashion by the provincial and county governments as

early as the late 1970s and early 1980s. Once the provincial government decided to implement village

elections, almost all villages within that province followed shortly thereafter (O’Brien and Li, 1999).

By all accounts, villages had little discretion over the timing of introduction of elections, which is

characteristic of reforms in rural China.14 Our companion paper uses the same data that we use
important in other contexts such as in Indonesia (e.g. Singhal and Olken, 2009).
  14
     “These [elections] should not be interpreted as bottom-up initiatives by the villagers themselves; they are not in
a position to play any precedent-setting part in the initiation of new electoral reforms. There is a mistaken belief
among some people outside China regarding this... elections are quietly being instituted at levels above the village,



                                                          10
here to document that the roll-out of elections was consistent with rapid top-down implementation.

Most villages within a county implemented elections in the same year, and over 60% of villages

within a given province introduced elections within three years of the first election in that province

(Martinez-Bravo et al., 2012).

    After some debate within the party, village elections were formally codified by the central gov-

ernment in the Organizational Law on Village Committees (henceforth OLVC) in 1987. From this

point onwards, all provinces were pushed to introduce elections for all rural areas. A later revision

of the OLVC in 1998 required candidate nominations to be open to all villagers.

3     Conceptual Framework

3.1    Religious Fragmentation, Public Goods Provision and Elections

Social Heterogeneity and Public Goods The first step towards conceptualizing the relation-

ship between religious diversity, government-provided public goods and elections is to focus on the

different mechanisms that link social heterogeneity and low public goods, regardless of institutions.

Existing research has proposed several different channels to explain the often observed negative

cross-sectional correlation between fragmentation and public goods provision. This literature, re-

viewed in Alesina and Ferrara (2005) and Banerjee et al. (2008), often considers a public goods game

in which citizens willingly contribute to the public good. In the case of rural China, the village

government needs to collect contributions to provide goods, but has limited enforcement power.

Hence, the insights of the literature are applicable to this context – i.e., by refusing to cooperate,

villagers have the ability to significantly increase the cost of collecting contributions for the village

government. These increased costs will decrease the provision of public goods through a mechanism

similar to the voluntary contribution public goods game.

    Among the proposed mechanisms, the most plausible in the context of rural China is that re-

ligious activity induces altruism, trust, and willingness to join efforts with other members of the

religious group (Vigdor, 2004; Guiso et al.; Alesina and Ferrara,2000). Rituals, practices and festi-

vals throughout the year induce repeated and intense interactions among those who share their faith,

facilitating communication, trust and empathy. As in many other contexts, each religious group

builds a strong social identity that helps accumulate these different dimensions of within-group
engineered first in selected districts at a distance from Beijing, through the connivance of the [central] Ministry of
Civil Affairs and middle-ranking officials out in the regions.” — Unger (2002, p. 222).



                                                         11
social capital. Theoretically, in the extreme case in which religious participants fully internalize

the preferences of the other followers of their faith, a religiously homogeneous village would enjoy

optimal voluntary contributions to the public good. By the same logic, to the extent that altruism

and trust are limited to the religious group, the more fragmented the village, the lower the willing-

ness to contribute to public goods.15 Similarly, social sanctions might be weaker for members of

other religious groups, which results in less social leverage for enforcing contributions in fragmented

villages (Miguel and Gugerty, 2005). Note that this mechanism would be active even if there was

consensus on which public good to provide and what would be the ideal level of expenditure.

       A different mechanism posits that preferences differ across groups. In particular, groups might

prefer different varieties of public goods, and technological constraints are such that only one va-

riety can be provided (Alesina et al., 1999). In a fragmented village, villagers might refrain from

contributing since they suspect they will not get their preferred variety. In the context of rural

China this mechanism would be most directly relevant when the public good under consideration

is schooling, since different religions might have diverging preferences over the religious orientation

of education. However, note that even if all citizens prefer the same public good, such as bet-

ter irrigation, groups can still differ on their preferences over the location of the public amenity

since individuals of similar religions often cluster into neighborhoods within villages (e.g., Cohen,

1992). Hence religious diversity may also result in preference divergence for public goods due to the

geographic differences across groups.16

       In the extreme, divergent preferences can generate wasteful conflict between groups (Esteban

and Ray, 1999; Montalvo and Reynal-Querol, 2003). Such conflict could also result in lower public

good provision. However, given the scant anecdotal evidence of conflict across religious affiliations

in China today, this does not appear to be a first order mechanism for our context.

The Interaction of Social Heterogeneity and Elections in Determining Public Goods

The mechanisms discussed so far predict a negative cross-sectional relationship between fragmenta-

tion and public goods provision given a fixed institutional environment. Hence, we would expect the
  15
     For example, Guiso et al. (2003) finds that religious people are more intolerant of diversity than non-religious
ones, regardless of the type of religion, albeit some religions are worse than others.
  16
     This has been documented in historically in mainland China (e.g., Yang , 1961, p. 98, 158) and in a modern
context in Taiwan (e.g., Deglopper, 1974, p. 65). Unfortunately, our data does not allow us to identify the geographic
location of households within villages.




                                                         12
level of public goods to be higher in homogeneous villages under both appointed leaders (e.g., our

baseline before the electoral reforms) and under elections (e.g., after the electoral reforms). How-

ever, there are two main differences between the two institutional situations: (i) elections increase

accountability to villagers and (ii) elections provide a mechanism for preference aggregation. As we

now discuss, these two functions of elections have opposite predictions on the sign of the interaction

effect of fragmentation and the introduction of elections.

       On the one hand, elected leaders are more directly accountable to citizens than appointed leaders.

This has two effects reinforcing effects. First, accountable governments better reflect the preferences

of the population. As discussed above, fragmented villages have a lower preference for public goods,

so the relationship between heterogeneity and public goods provision should be stronger – more

negative – under elected leaders than under appointed leaders, since the former are more responsive

to the underlying preferences of the village than the latter. Second, all else equal, citizens are

more willing to contribute to the village government for public goods when they feel that they can

hold the government accountable. A necessary condition for effective government accountability

under elections is that some citizens need to gather and distribute information on government

performance. Since these monitoring activities are public goods in themselves, and public goods

are better provided in homogeneous villages for the reasons stated earlier, elected officials are more

accountable in homogeneous villages.17 This causes villagers to be more willing to contribute to the

government for public goods when the government is elected rather than appointed, and more so

in homogeneous villages. These two mechanisms predict that the interaction effect of elections and

heterogeneity is negative.

       On the other hand, elections also serve as a mechanism for aggregating voter preferences. In

fragmented villages, with low communication and contentious relationships across groups, it is likely

to be more difficult for appointed village leaders to determine the most preferred public goods by the

majority of villagers. His inability to propose the majority-preferred public good will cause villagers

to resist contributing to the public goods that he chooses. Hence, in terms of preference aggregation,

heterogeneous villages will have more to gain from the introduction of elections. This mechanism

predicts that the interaction effect of elections and heterogeneity is positive. This mechanism is
  17
    For a review of reasons why democracy works better in high social capital environments see Boix and Posner
(1998). See also Banerjee and Pande (2007), Bandiera and Levy (2010) and PadroiMiquel (2007) for other reasons
strongly fragmented polities find it difficult to keep elected leaders accountable.


                                                     13
likely to be stronger if the pre-election correlation between heterogeneity and public goods is highly

negative, since it is predicated on heterogeneous villages catching up to homogeneous villages.

   As we show below, in the context of rural China, prior to the implementation of elections public

goods provision was extremely low and not correlated to fragmentation. This is most probably a

result of lack of accountability: since the village leaders were appointed by upper levels of govern-

ment, they could i) safely ignore the preferences of the villagers and ii) shirk the work necessary to

accomplish public goods provision. This fact has two consequences.

   First, the theoretical discussion above suggests that the interaction between elections and het-

erogeneity will be negative. Since the relationship between heterogeneity and public goods is non-

existent before elections, there is very little catching up that heterogeneous villages can do. As

a consequence, the accountability mechanisms described above should dominate. Hence, we will

interpret a negative interaction as the result of the fact that the accountability introduced by elec-

tions works better in homogeneous villages. As described, this is reinforced by the fact that in

heterogeneous villages, preferences are such that public goods games result in lower provision, and

the newly introduced accountability also induces the elected government to closely reflect this.

   Second, because there is no relationship between heterogeneity and public goods under the ap-

pointment regime, our empirical analysis will not be able to clearly distinguish between the different

mechanisms that the literature proposes for the cross-sectional relationship between heterogeneity

and public goods. In other words, our estimates will capture the sum of these mechanisms.

3.2   Religious Fractionalization

   We measure fragmentation with an index of fractionalization, which proxies for the lack of trust

and altruism and the difference in preferences regarding the type of public goods across groups (e.g.,

Alesina et al. (2003), 2003). This can be written as
                                                   X N
                                          Fi = 1 −     s2ij .                                      (1)
                                                        j=1
The fractionalization index for village i is equal to one minus the sum of the squares of sri , the

population share of religion j in village i, where N is the total number of religions. This index

captures the probability that two randomly drawn villagers belong to different groups.

   Note that an alternative index used to measure heterogeneity is the polarization index (e.g.,

Montalvo and Reynal-Querol, 2003; Esteban and Ray, 1994). In principle, this index captures the


                                                   14
potential for conflict for a given group composition. However, in our context, the fractionalization

and polarization indices are highly positively correlated (and there is little known conflict across

religious groups).18 Hence, in our context the two indices are conceptually similar and we focus on

the fractionalization index for brevity. Nonetheless, when we present the baseline estimates, we will

show that our results are similar when we use the polarization index.

3.3       Identification

       The main outcome we examine is village government expenditure on public goods. To estimate

the impact of voter heterogeneity on expenditures induced by the introduction of elections, we

estimate the following equation

       Yijt = α1 Eijt + α2 (Eijt × H ij ) + β1 Oijt × +β2 (Oijt × H ij ) + γXijt + τ θj + δij + ρt + εit ,        (3)

where the outcome of interest for village i in province j during year t is a function of: the inter-

action effect of fragmentation, Hij , and the introduction of elections, Eijt ; the interaction term of

fragmentation and the introduction of open nominations in each village, Oijt ; the main effects of

the introduction of elections and open nominations; a vector of village-year specific controls, Xijt ;

province-year trends, τ θj ; village fixed effects, δi ; and year fixed effects, ρt .

       Our main estimates cluster the standard errors at the village level to correct for serially correlated

shocks within each village. Given the top-down nature of the reform, one may also be concerned

about correlated shocks within provinces. To address this, we will also present the standard errors

clustered at the province level and show that they are very similar.

       In this equation, village fixed effects control for all differences across villages that are time-

invariant (e.g., geography, the main effect of fragmentation), and year fixed effects control for all

changes over time that affect villages similarly (e.g., macro economic growth, economic liberaliza-

tion). Moreover, province-time trends control for the regional economic and cultural divergence

across China during our period of study (e.g. the coastal regions experienced more rapid economic

growth and were more exposed to outside cultural influences).19 Because elections were introduced
  18
       The polarization index is
                                                      N            2
                                                      X   0.5 − sij
                                           Pi = 1 −                      sij .                                     (2)
                                                      j=1
                                                                 0.5

The correlation is 0.98 across villages and statistically significant at the 1% level, see Appendix Figure A.1.
  19
     We can alternatively control for distance to the coast interacted with year fixed effects, province GDP, province
GDP growth or other province-level time-varying controls. The estimates are very similar and we do not present
these alternative results for brevity. They are available upon request.



                                                            15
rapidly across villages within provinces, we do not have enough variation in the data to control for

province-year fixed effects. However, after we present the main results, we will show that our results

are robust to controlling for province-time trends with other functional forms.

   The vector of controls, Xijt , includes several variables. First, we control for village population,

which addresses the fact that there may be economies of scale in public goods provision or that

it may be more difficult to coordinate larger populations. Second, we control for the share of

village population that is religious, which is highly correlated with religious heterogeneity and could

affect the provision public goods. Since we use it as a time invariant measure, we control for its

interaction with the full set of year dummy variables to allow its influence to vary flexibly over time.

Finally, we control for the interaction of religious heterogeneity and year fixed effects. Since our

heterogeneity measure is time invariant at the village-level, we interact it with the full set of year

fixed effects to allow villages to differ according to the level of fragmentation in a way that is fully

flexible over time. Hence, our estimate of the interaction of heterogeneity and the introduction of

elections is very conservative in that it captures the systematic change in public goods after the

introduction of elections in villages with higher levels of heterogeneity that is not already captured

by the interactions of heterogeneity and year fixed effects.

   To interpret the estimates, consider the case of religious fragmentation. α1 is the total effect of

the introduction of elections for villages with no fragmentation, Hi = 0. α1 + α2 is the total effect

of the introduction of elections for villages where there is a high (“infinite”) degree of fragmentation,

Hi = 1. α2 is the differential effect of the introduction of elections between these two types of village.

The hypothesis that religious fragmentation limits the benefits of the introduction of elections

predicts that α̂2 < 0. In contrast, if fragmentation has no influence, then α̂2 ≈ 0.

   Conceptually, our empirical strategy is similar to a triple differences estimate (DDD). We com-

pare public goods investment: i) in villages before and after the introduction of elections (first dif-

ference), ii) between villages that have already introduced elections to those that have not (second

difference), and iii) between villages that have high heterogeneity to villages with low heterogene-

ity (triple difference). Our identification strategy makes two assumptions. First, we assume that

our measure of religious fragmentation is not affected by the introduction of elections. We will

demonstrate that this is true with the data before we present the main results. Second, we assume

that conditional on the baseline controls, our measure of heterogeneity is not correlated with other

                                                   16
factors that influence the effects of elections on public goods expenditures. We do not take this as

given and will provide a large body of evidence to address this concern after our main results. It is

important to note that our differences strategy does not rely on the timing of the introduction of

elections being random.

4        Data

4.1        Main Data Sources

         This study mainly uses village- and year-level data from a panel of 217 villages for the years

1986-2005 from The Village Democracy Survey (VDS), a unique retrospective survey conducted by

the authors of this paper. In 2006, our survey recorded the history of electoral reforms and public

goods expenditures. In 2011, we returned to the same villages to collect data on the presence of

voluntary social organizations and on the number of households per surname for the four most

prevalent surnames in the village roster (in 2011), which we will use in the robustness exercises.20

Our main variables are obtained from village records, and therefore are not subject to reporting or

recall biases. For information not contained in records, our survey relies on the collective response

of current and former living village leaders and elders, who were all invited to be present together

to answer our surveyors. The only variables in this study that rely on these responses are those

related to family trees, which are used in the robustness exercises.

         We supplement the VDS with annual data collected each year by the Ministry of Agriculture in

the National Fixed Point Survey (NFS), which surveys the same villages as the VDS. These surveys

are nationally representative and the villages are updated over time. The NFS began in 1986 and is

available for each year, except 1992 and 1994 for administrative reasons. The NFS provides us with

data on village household income, inequality, the share of population that is religious and many

other demographic variables.

         These two surveys are merged at the village and year level to form the sample that we use for

estimating the main results. It comprises a balanced panel of 217 villages for the years 1986-2005.

In addition, the NFS surveys a random sample of approximately 100 households per village each

year (out of approximately 420 households per village on average) with detailed questions regarding
    20
    For administrative reasons, the 2011 wave includes only 195 of the original villages. The VDS questionnaires are
available at
  http://www.econ.yale.edu/~nq3/NANCYS_Yale_Website/Village_Democracy_Survey.html




                                                        17
household expenditures. We were able to obtain this additional household data for approximately

a third of the villages in the total sample.

       These are the most comprehensive data on village-level reforms and village-level outcomes ever

constructed, as well as the first data to document religious composition of rural villages in post-Mao

China. Our data cover a larger and more nationally representative sample, and span a longer time

horizon than any other existing data of rural China that are available to researchers. The panel

aspect of our data means that we can control for village fixed effects and year fixed effects. Since

we have many villages from each province, we can also control for province-year trends, which are

important for addressing the growing economic divergence across regions in China. An additional

advantage of the data is the accuracy and uniformity of the historical public expenditures data,

which come from administrative records overseen by the Ministry of Agriculture. The Ministry of

Agriculture imposes the same book keeping rules across villages and requires each village to record

public goods expenditure by type and by the source of financing. The latter adds to the granularity

and comparability of the data. Note that government policy strictly limits permanent migration

from rural areas.21

4.2      Measuring Religion

       The NFS categorizes religions according to the official religions that are sanctioned by the

State: Buddhists, Christians, Muslims and “other” religions, which in our context mostly comprise

of Daoists. We categorize the remaining villagers as “atheists.” Hence, for the fractionalization

index shown in equation (1), N = 5. The data on the share of population belonging to each religion

is collected by the NFS for the years 1993 and 1994-2002. These data are obtained by asking village

leaders for the number of individuals that belong to each official religion. To minimize misreporting,

surveyors only ask about officially sanctioned religions and ask village leaders instead of individual

villagers, who may have outdated perceptions of government attitudes towards religion. The authors

of this paper conducted numerous interviews with village officials, county-government officials and

Ministry of Agriculture surveyors. Based on these and the structure of the survey, we have little

reason to doubt the integrity of the NFS data on religious composition.
  21
     Workers in China often migrate temporarily for work. However, the household registration system that ties
access to public goods and government benefits makes permanent migration costly. Also, rural residents are also
dis-incentivized to migrate permanently away because that results in the loss of the right to farmland.




                                                      18
    The main caveat for our measure is that our data only includes official religions. For reasons

that we discussed earlier, this categorization causes the substantial group of villagers that practice

folk religions to be mis-measured as “atheists”. Another concern is that Protestants and Catholics

are mixed into one group of “Christians”. We will address these issues and other concerns of mis-

measurement by constructing alternative measures of religion with independent data collected by

academics. Since the results using imputed measures are similar to those using the NFS data, we

will use the NFS data as our main measure and present the alternative results afterwards in the

Robustness section.

    The religion data varies over time in the number of followers of each religion within as well

as across villages.22 The population that belongs to each religion increases over time, which is

consistent with the national trends. This is consistent with the data capturing real information.

To maximize the number of observations for our estimates, we average the share of population

belonging to each religion in each village over time. Thus, the measures of the share of religious

population and religious fractionalization we use for the analysis will be time-invariant.

4.3    Descriptive Statistics

    The average village has 420 households. By the end of our sample, all villages had introduced

elections, but only half of them had introduced open nominations. Indeed, 50% of villages intro-

duced elections between 1984 and 1993. Public goods expenditures by the village government follow

Ministry of Agriculture guidelines. In descending order of the average share of total public expendi-

tures, the categories are roads and sanitation, irrigation, electricity, schools, planting trees and the

environment, and other. 68% of all government spending on public goods is financed with funds

raised from villagers, while the rest is funded by transfers from higher levels of government.23

    Regarding religious composition, the descriptive statistics are presented in Table 1 columns (4)-

(6). The average level of fractionalization, which we calculate from the data on the population

shares of each religion and non-religious individuals, is 0.053. Crucially for our paper, the standard

deviation of 0.1 shows that there is significant variation across villages despite the fact that average
  22
     The mean religious fractionalization across villages is .053, whereas the average standard deviation of this variable
over time within-village is .0355.
  23
     For a more comprehensive discussion of the VDS data, see a companion study on the effect of the introduction
of elections on economic policy by Martinez-Bravo et al. (2012). The main economic and demographic variables for
our analysis and the data source are shown in Appendix Table A.1.




                                                           19
fractionalization is low. Figure 1a presents a histogram of the fractionalization index across villages.

It shows that while approximately 40% of villages have zero fractionalization, there is substantial

variation across the remaining 60% of villages. To better illustrate this variation, Figures 1b, 1c

and 1d present similar histograms for the villages in the bottom half, top half and top quarter

of the distribution of religious fractionalization. They show that there is significant variation in

fractionalization across villages, especially for high levels of fractionalization.

      Another important fact to note is that there is substantial variation in religious fractionalization

both across and within provinces. This can be demonstrated by regressing average fractionaliza-

tion on province fixed effects. The R-Squared is 0.51. In other words, 49% of the variation in

fractionalization is within provinces.24

      There are still several potential concerns over our using a measure of average religious compo-

sition for our main empirical analysis. First, one may be concerned that the timing of the elections

is correlated with religious fractionalization, which raises the issue of omitted variables for our in-

terpretation – i.e., religious fractionalization is correlated with other factors that influence elections

and public goods. Second, even if we establish that the electoral reform timing is uncorrelated with

religious fractionalization, one may still be concerned that the introduction of elections affected the

religious composition of villagers. It is possible that our explanatory variable, which is the average

of religious composition from pre- and post-reform years, confounds aspects of religious composition

that are uncorrelated to elections with aspects that is are potential outcomes of elections. In the

next two sections of the paper, we will mitigate these concerns by showing that neither relationship

exist in the data.

4.4      The Correlates of Religious Fractionalization

      Table 2 aggregates our data to the village level and presents the correlates of religious fraction-

alization. It also shows that fractionalization is positively correlated with total village population,

(mechanically) correlated with the population share of all religious individuals, and positively corre-

lated with the pre-election level of income. These correlations highlight the fact that fractionaliza-

tion is not randomly assigned and the need to carefully control for the correlates of fractionalization

in our empirical analysis.
 24
      These estimates are not presented in tables for brevity.




                                                           20
       Note, however, that fractionalization is not correlated with pre-election income inequality. Nor is

it correlated with the fraction of high school graduates in a village. Interestingly, fractionalization

is uncorrelated with the physical geography of a village, which we measure with three dummy

variables that reflect whether a village is in a plain, hilly or mountainous region (these are official

definitions provided by the Ministry of Agriculture). This is likely due to the fact that villagers

typically live in one geographic cluster so that the terrain for the village at large does not affect the

fragmentation of households. Similarly, there is no correlation between religious fractionalization

and the fractionalization of surnames. The latter captures the presence of different kinship groups,

which could be another dimension of social clustering. We do find that religious fractionalization

is positively correlated with the presence of a village temple and the number of Buddhist temples

in the same county in 1820.25 We will return to discuss these variables after we present the main

results.

       Finally, there are two pieces of information that are important for our approach. First, note

that fractionalization is uncorrelated with the average pre-election level of government spending on

public goods, and the fraction that is financed by villagers. This is consistent with the belief that

there was little difference in government public goods provision across villages prior to elections

because provision was universally low, and that any existing differences were unrelated to social

heterogeneity. Second, fractionalization is uncorrelated with the timing in the introduction of elec-

tions (or open nominations), which supports the belief that fractionalization did not affect the way

elections were rolled out.

       It is important to emphasize that the correlation between average fractionalization and other

variables does not confound our baseline estimates per se, because the baseline controls of the

interaction of average fractionalization and year fixed effects control for all differences between

fragmented and less fragmented villages in a way that is fully flexible over time. In the section

on robustness, we will demonstrate the robustness of our baseline estimates by controlling for the

interaction of these correlates (and other variables) with the introduction of elections.
  25
       The latter variable is obtained from Qing Dynasty Gazetteers (1820).




                                                          21
5        Results

5.1         Main Results

         To allay concerns that our measure of average fractionalization is endogenous, we first establish

that the introduction of elections has no effect on a time-varying measure of religious fractional-

ization. To support this claim, we regress the time-varying measure of fractionalization on the

introduction of elections.26 The sample for this regression is smaller than the full sample because it

is restricted to villages that held its first election after 1993, when the NFS begin to collect religious

population data. The post-election dummy in Table 3 column (1) shows that there is no effect;

the coefficient is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. Together with the descriptive

statistics which show that average fractionalization and election timing is uncorrelated, we conclude

that there is no relationship between religious fractionalization and elections per se. Henceforth, we

only consider the time-invariant measure of average religious fractionalization since this allows us

to extend the empirical analysis to the mid 1980s.

         For the rest of the table, the dependent variable is government public goods expenditure, mea-

sured in 10,000s RMB. In column (2) we estimate a similar equation to equation (3), except that we

replace the village fixed effects with the religious fractionalization main effect to examine the pre-

election difference in public goods expenditure across villages of different levels of fractionalization.

The estimate of the main fractionalization effect is small in magnitude and statistically insignifi-

cant. This, together with the qualitative evidence and the correlations shown earlier, establishes

that fragmented and homogeneous villages had very similar public goods expenditure prior to the

first election.

         Column (3) presents our baseline estimate. The main effect of elections is positive and the

interaction effect with religious fractionalization is negative. Both are statistically significant at

the 1% level. To assess the magnitude of the coefficients, note that the estimates for the main

effect of post-election in column (3) shows that the introduction of elections increased government

public goods expenditure by 207,300 RMB (37,914 Constant 2000 USD) for villages with zero
    26
         We estimate the following equation

                                    Hijt = αEijt + βOijt + γXijt + τ θj + δi + ρt + εit ,                               (4)
where religious fractionalization for village i in province j during year t is a function of: the introduction of elections,
Eijt ; the introduction of open nominations in each village, Oijt ; village population, Xijt ; province-year trends, τ θj ;
village fixed effects, δi ; and year fixed effects, ρt .


                                                             22
fractionalization. For villages with the mean level of fractionalization of 0.053, elections increased

government public goods expenditure by 150,040 RMB (21,194 Constant 2000 USD, (−107×0.053+

20.73) × 10, 000 = 150, 040). This is shown at the bottom of the table in column (3).

   Another way to assess the magnitude is to ask how many villages experienced increases in public

goods due to the introduction of elections given their levels of religious fractionalization. Dividing

the absolute values of the main effect by the interaction effect (20.73/107), we find that a village

with a fractionalization index below 0.193 will experience some increase in public goods from the

introduction of elections. This includes approximately 92% of the villages in our sample. Thus, our

results show that although increased religious fractionalization reduces the increase in government

public goods expenditure that followed the introduction of elections, most villages were homogenous

enough to experience some increase.

   In terms of standard deviations, we find that a one standard deviation increase in fractionaliza-

tion (0.105) causes the increase in public goods expenditure due to elections to decline by 112,560

RMB (0.105 × −107 = 11.255), which is 0.08 standard deviations of average public goods expen-

diture (11.255/135.466 = 0.083). Thus, our estimates imply strong, but plausibly sized effects of

heterogeneity.

   In column (4), we examine polarization while controlling for all of the baseline coefficients.

The estimated interaction effect is negative and statistically significant at the 1% level, and the

magnitude is about half of that of fractionalization in column (1). Since the standard deviation of

polarization doubles that of fractionalization, the implied effects for heterogeneity are essentially

the same, which is not surprising since these two variables are highly correlated in the data.

   We do not control for fractionalization and polarization simultaneously due to their high correla-

tion. Hence, our results cannot distinguish the role of cross-group conflict from the other mechanisms

discussed in Section 3. However, the lack of documented open conflict between religious groups in

the provinces of our study suggests that the most plausible mechanism behind the deleterious effect

of heterogeneity on elections is given by the interaction of the lack of trust, empathy and divergent

preferences with the increase in accountability brought about by the reform.

   In column (5), we address the concern that the top-down nature of electoral reforms means

that correlated shocks within provinces may cause our main estimates to under-reject hypotheses.

We therefore alternatively estimate the baseline equation by clustering the standard errors at the

                                                 23
province level. The standard errors are very similar to those clustered at the village-level. However,

one may be concerned that having 29 provinces can induce small-sample bias when we cluster at the

province level, so we address this by correcting for potential biases with wild-bootstrapped standard

errors as recommended by Cameron et al. (2008). The standard errors, presented in column (6) are

almost identical. Since the different levels of clustering make little difference to our estimates, we

will continue to present standard errors clustered at the village-level.

       Finally, we note that the estimated effect of the introduction of open nominations and religious

fractionalization is always small in magnitude and statistically insignificant, as is the main effect of

open nominations. For this reason we will not report these coefficients in the rest of the regressions.27

We return to discuss the estimate in column (7) later in the paper.

5.2      Timing of the Effects

       In order to ensure that the estimated effects are a consequence of the introduction of elections

and not of spurious changes that may have occurred in the pre- or post-election periods, it is

important to examine the timing of our estimated effects. We estimate the following equation
                 X4            X4                     4
                                                      X              4
                                                                     X
           yit =     ατ eitτ +     βτ (eitτ × H i ) +    θτ oitτ × +   λτ (oitτ × H i )      (5)
                     τ =−3           τ =−3                    τ =−3             τ =−3

                  + γXijt + τ θj + δij + ρt + εit ,

where eitτ = 1 if village i experienced the introduction of elections τ years ago in year t , and oitτ = 1

if village i experienced the introduction of open nominations τ years ago. The other variables have

the same notation as in the baseline equation.28 ατ is a vector of dummy variables that captures

the number of years since the first election for villages with zero fractionalization (Fi = 0), βτ is

a vector of coefficients that reflects the differential effect of elections between hypothesized villages

with fractionalization equal to one and villages with with zero fractionalization, for each year since

the election. θτ and λτ are the analogous estimates for the introduction of open nominations.

       For our identification strategy, we would like to establish that there are no pre-trends in public

goods expenditure in the years leading up to the first election (βˆτ ≈ 0 when τ < 0); that for villages

with no fractionalization, the positive effect on public goods expenditure occurs with the introduc-
  27
    They are available upon request.
  28
    Note that although we examine a similar window of time before and after each reform for consistency, we do not
exclude any observation. Instead, we follow convention to maximize the information in our estimation and group all
of the observations that are four or more years prior to the first reform together, and they constitute the reference
group; and similarly, we group all of the observations that are four or more years after the reform together.



                                                         24
tion of elections (α̂τ > 0 when τ ≥ 0); and that public goods expenditure between homogenous and

heterogeneous villages diverge when elections are introduced (β̂τ < 0 when τ ≥ 0).

    The estimates are presented in Appendix Table A.2.29 The coefficients of the dummy variables

for the years since the first election and the coefficients of their interaction with religious fractional-

ization are plotted in Figure 2a (on two different vertical axes for presentational purposes). It shows

that there is no pre-trend in government spending on public goods in the years leading up to the

first election for either homogenous or heterogeneous villages. Consistent with the “parallel trends”

assumption, the pre-election coefficients move in parallel between the two types of villages. The

spending in the two types of villages diverge exactly when elections were introduced – they increased

for very homogenous villages and decreased for very heterogenous villages. These estimates provide

strong support for our identification strategy and interpretation.

    In Figure 2b, we plot the effect of elections over time for the average village (α̂τ + 0.053β̂τ ).

This figure shows that the average village experienced no change in public goods expenditure over

time prior to the introduction of elections, but then experienced an increase when elections were

introduced. The large increase in the first year after elections are introduced may reflect the newly

elected government’s response to latent demand for public goods. However, the important fact to

note is that although spending is somewhat lower in the second and third years after the first election,

all post-election spending is nevertheless positive and much higher than pre-election years.30

5.3    Public Goods Provision

    Our main results focus on public goods expenditure mainly because the data for this measure

are better than the data on provision. However, we are able to proxy for the provision of two

public goods that together approximately constitute a quarter of total public goods expenditure

by the village government; we proxy for irrigation with the amount of arable land in a village,

and for schooling with primary school enrollment rates. This is based on the logic that increases

in spending on irrigation should increase the amount of arable land and increases in spending in

schooling should increase enrollment rates. In our sample, 83% of the villages have a school and
  29
     Note that the statistical significance of the year-by-year interaction point estimates is not important. Instead,
we are interested in the joint statistical difference between the point-estimates after the reform and those before the
reform, which is similar to the main interaction effect of the introduction of elections and religious fractionalization.
  30
     Our main pre-post estimates are very similar when we exclude the first year after the first election. These
estimates are not presented for brevity.




                                                           25
94% of these are primary schools (the others are middle schools). These data are not available for

all years, which reduces the precision of our estimates. Table 4 columns (2) and (3) show that the

estimated interaction effect of religious fractionalization and the introduction of elections on these

proxies for provision are negative and the main effects of the introduction of religion are positive, as

in the baseline equation, restated in column (1). The interaction effects are statistically significant

at the 15% and 1% level. These results show that actual public good provision followed the same

pattern as recorded expenditure and support our interpretation of changes public goods expenditure

as reflecting changes in public goods provision.

    Note that an interesting implication of the changes in provision is that the increase in public

expenditure is unlikely to have completely crowded-out private expenditure on public goods. If

there is complete crowd-out, we should observe no change in provision.31 For a third of the sample,

we can investigate this more directly by examining private expenditures on irrigation and schooling

as outcomes in columns (4) and (6) (columns (5) and (7) repeat the estimates for public goods

provision on a similarly restricted sample of villages). Column (4) shows that household expenditures

parallel public expenditure for irrigation, but, interestingly, this is not the case for expenditure in

schooling, in column (6). For the latter, it seems that there is some substitution of public and

private expenditure.

5.4    Interpreting the Results

Local Funds for Public Goods The main results show that elections increased public goods

expenditure, but that this increase was smaller in fragmented villages. Following the discussion in

section 3, we interpret our results as evidence that voter heterogeneity causes elected governments

to be unwilling or unable to finance public goods. In Table 5, we examine alternative explanations

that might threaten this interpretation.

    First, we examine government expenditure on public goods separately according to the source

of the funds. A comparison of columns (1) and (2) shows that the main results on total public

goods is entirely driven by financing from villagers. In contrast, column (3) shows that there is no

effect on funds from the upper government. Consistent with our interpretation, this provides strong

evidence that the effect of heterogeneity is local to the village.
  31
     See Hungerman (2007) and the studies referenced within for empirical evidence on private-expenditure crowd-out
in other contexts.



                                                        26
   Column (4) examines tax payments made by households to local governments. Unfortunately,

this measure includes payments to the county and township as well as to the village governments,

and is only available for a third of the villages in our sample. Nevertheless, it is interesting to note

that the signs of the main effect and interaction effect are consistent with those in columns (1)-(3).

This estimate is insignificant, but it also points in the direction of our interpretation.

   We interpret religious fragmentation as a proxy for reduced cross-group social capital caused

by social clustering along religious lines. While we cannot test for this directly, we can investigate

if there is a difference in terms of the presence of social organizations between homogeneous and

heterogeneous villages. The VDS survey measures the presence of organizations that are voluntary,

do not exclude any villager, and are partly or wholly funded and organized by villagers. Approxi-

mately 14% of our village-year observations have at least one such organization. Column (5) shows

that the interaction effect on voluntary village-wide social organizations is large in magnitude and

negative in sign. However, it is not statistically significant. Thus, we interpret this as weak sugges-

tive evidence consistent with heterogeneous villages having reduced village-wide social capital also

after the introduction of elections.

Alternative Mechanisms An obvious alternative to our preferred interpretation is that the

central government changed public goods targeting when elections were introduced such that it

favored homogenous villages. However, our finding that the interaction effect of the introduction

of elections and fractionalization on public goods expenditures financed with funds from the upper

government is zero makes this alternative highly unlikely.

   Another potential threat for our interpretation is that our main results may be driven by poor

implementation of the electoral reforms in fragmented villages. For instance, this would be the

case if the limited interaction across religions makes it more difficult to inform villagers of proper

electoral procedures, and therefore allow more corrupt elections. If this were true, then the correct

interpretation of our main results would be that heterogeneous communities underwent less formal

institutional change. To investigate this hypothesis, we collected data on the occurrence of the most

common aberrations in elections from village records. These include the presence of roving ballot

boxes, not having anonymous ballots, and allowing voting by proxy without a signed permission

form by the individual who is away. We create a dummy variable that equals one if any of these



                                                  27
aberrations occurred after the introduction of the first election, or if it is before the first election.

In our sample, 85% of the observations have poor quality elections. We examine this variable as the

dependent variable in our main estimating equation. Table 6 column (1) shows that the coefficient

of the interaction term between fractionalization and post first election is very small in magnitude

and statistically insignificant. Thus, we conclude that our estimates are not driven by differences

in electoral quality between heterogeneous and homogenous villages.

   Similarly, we can examine other political outcomes that may reflect the quality of elections such

as voter participation, the probability that the newly elected VC was persecuted during the Cultural

Revolution, was from a family that was officially classified as a rich farmer or landlord in the initial

communist land reforms during the early 1950s, or was a party member before entering the office.

As a placebo, we can also examine the characteristics of the Party Secretaries (PS), who were not

directly affected by elections. These data are recorded by the VDS and vary slightly in the number

of observations because records were not always available. The estimates in columns (2)-(8) are all

statistically zero. There is no evidence that elections were implemented or interpreted differently

across villages of different levels of heterogeneity. Consistent with the anecdotal evidence, there is

no effect on the PS.

   Finally, note that mean reversion is extremely unlikely to have caused our results, since we find

that there is little difference in pre-election public goods expenditure between homogeneous and

heterogeneous villages (Table 3 column (2)).

5.5   Robustness

Mismeasurement of Religious Composition The NFS data on religious composition does not

distinguish between Catholics and Protestants and only report officially sanctioned religions, which

will cause individuals who follow folk religion to be mis-categorized as non-religious. These errors

in measurement will likely cause our data to understate fragmentation.

   To address this, we construct an alternative measure of fractionalization using the most reliable

data available on actual religious populations in China. These data are collected by anthropologists,

ethnographers and sociologists and are only available at the national level. Lai (2003) summarizes

these estimates, which we show in Table 1. Column (3) shows that according to these estimates,

our data may underreport Buddhism (Mahayana) by 46.6% and Christianity by 66.7% (where



                                                   28
Protestants are underreported by 67% and Catholics are underreported by 100%). They also show

that approximately 28.5% of Christians are Catholics.

       To impute the true religious population, we first divide Christians in each village into two

categories – Protestants and Catholics, where we assume that 28.5% of the Christian population

is Catholic. Then, we adjust the number of religious individuals for each group by the estimated

difference shown in column (3). Then, we add the category of folk religion by assuming that 20% of

the total village population follow folk religious practices. The descriptive statistics for the imputed

measures are shown in Table 1 columns (7)-(9). A comparison with the measures constructed from

the raw NFS data show that the share of all religious population increases from approximately

5% to 26%. Average fractionalization increases from approximately 0.053 to 0.2. Figure 1e is a

histogram of the fractionalization index constructed from the imputed data across villages. Note

that the cross-sectional correlation between the imputed measure of religious fractionalization and

the reported measure is 0.71 and is statistically significant at the 1% level.

       We re-estimate the baseline equation using the imputed measure of religious fractionalization.

Table 3 column (7) shows that the estimated interaction effect of fractionalization and the intro-

duction of elections is very similar to the baseline estimate, which we re-state in column (1). It is

also statistically significant at the 5% level.

       A shortcoming of our imputation exercise is that it attributes mismeasurement equally across

all villages. To be cautious, we have conducted several alternative imputations where we assigned

higher mis-measurement to villages that gained more from elections. For example, we can divide

the villages into two groups according to whether they are in the top half or bottom half in terms of

the gains in public goods from elections. We can then assume that religious composition is correctly

reported by the NFS for the bottom half, but use the imputed measures for the top half, and

re-estimate the baseline equation. This exercise yields very similar results as the ones presented.32

       We conclude that it is highly unlikely that our main results are driven mismeasurement of the

religious population.
  32
    We tried several alternative ways of assigning mismeasurement differentially across villages. For example, we
can only adjust the number of catholics upwards in the provinces known to have more Catholics (Hebei, Shaanxi,
Guangxi, Gansu and Xinjiang (Lai, 2003)). Regardless of how we adjust the data, the results are always very similar.
They are not reported for brevity and available upon request.




                                                        29
Correlates of Religious Fractionalization The baseline controls of the interaction of aver-

age fractionalization and year fixed effects control for all differences between fragmented and less

fragmented villages in a way that is fully flexible over time. However, to fully eliminate concerns

of omitted variable bias, it is important to show that our main effect is robust to allowing these

correlates to have a differential effect when elections are implemented.

    The correlates, shown in Table 2, are: the average share of villagers that belong to any religion,

the presence of a village temple, the number of temples historically in the same county, dummy

variables for whether the village is in a hilly or mountainous area, and average pre-election household

income for the 10th, 50th and 90th percentile households.33

    In addition, we also control for other potentially important factors: surname fragmentation,

the presence of a lineage group (e.g., the presence of a family that has an ancestral hall or family

tree), the population share of the two most popular surnames, the pre-election average public goods

expenditure and the pre-election average Gini coefficient, each interacted with the introduction of

elections and open nominations.34

    The estimates for these tests are shown in Table 7. In column (2) we omit our usual baseline

controls of the interaction of the average share of villagers that belong to any religion and year fixed

effects when we control for the interaction of post election and the average share of villagers that

belong to any religion due to collinearity. In column (13), we control for all of these interactions

in one equation (except the interaction of surname polarization because it is highly correlated with

surname fractionalization, and the interaction of the average share of villagers that belong to any

religion because it is highly correlated to our baseline controls that interact the same variable with

all year fixed effects). Our main result is very robust and similar to the baseline, which we re-state

in column (1). This provides strong evidence that our main results are not driven by spurious

correlations.

    There are several interesting results to note in addition to the robustness of our main results.
   33
      Controlling for the presence of temples is motivated by the concern that our main results may be confounded by
the potential influence of other dimensions of social capital. Studies in political science such as Tsai (2007) interpret
village temples as plausible proxies for social capital because they are not specific to any one religion and are used
to worship a range of local deities by all villagers, are funded and maintained by voluntary villagers, and are an
important venue for village events such as fairs, festivals, and public discussions. In short, functioning temples are
civic organizations which could be behind the differential effect of elections.
   34
      We use surname fragmentation and the presence of lineage groups to proxy for the presence of kinship networks,
which are a historically important feature of rural life and could be another dimension of social clustering.



                                                           30
First, the interaction of surname fragmentation and the introduction of elections is small in mag-

nitude and statistically insignificant. This suggests that religion is more important as a factor of

social clustering in rural China than extended kinship networks, which confirms the claims of the

qualitative literature.35 Second, pre-election income levels and income inequality (Gini) have little

influence on the effect of elections. This is likely to be due to the fact that elections significantly

increased income redistribution (e.g. Martinez-Bravo et al., 2012), which means that individuals

can move across income groups. In other words, income does not affect the impact of elections on

public goods provision most likely because the clustering of individuals into income groups is not

very stable over time.

Additional Controls In Table 8 columns (2)-(4), we control for additional factors that could

potentially influence the effect of elections on public goods: the interaction of a dummy variable

indicating that a village is a suburb of an urban area and year fixed effects; a dummy variable

indicating that the Tax and Fee Reform has been introduced; and a dummy variable for whether

a village ever experienced an administrative merger interacted with year fixed effects. In column

(6), we control for all of these additional variables simultaneously. In column (5), we control for a

quadratic province-time trend.

       The estimates show that our main result is robust to controlling for any or all of these additional

controls. Similarly, we find that our results are very similar when we control for a quadratic-province

time trend instead of a linear one.

Sample Selection In our context, the majority of the population is not religious. Therefore one

might be concerned that our results are mainly given by the comparison between fully atheist villages

and the rest. Table 9 columns (2)-(3) show that our estimates are robust to the exclusion of villages

with no religious population or zero fractionalization. Similarly, public goods expenditures are not

made every year, but the estimates in column (5) show that our results are robust to the exclusion

of village-year observations that make no public goods expenditure. Alternatively, column (4)
  35
    Several scholars have observed that kinship networks have declined in importance relative to other dimensions
of social clustering as China modernizes (e.g., Cohen, 1992; Jiang, 1995). The decline of the importance of kinship
networks has also been observed for societies that are culturally Chinese outside of the People’s Republic of China. For
example, in a description of villages in Taiwan during the 1970s, Deglopper, 1974, p. 65 states that “Neighborhoods...
are composed of diverse populations who bear different surnames, who earn a living in different ways, and whose
income ranges from high to very low. They have nothing in common except residence in an arbitrarily and rather
vaguely defined area, and they do nothing in common except worship. This is because the other traditional social
divisions – guilds and surnames – no longer matter today”.


                                                          31
examines a dummy variable for whether any public expenditure is made. The estimated coefficients

have the same sign as the main results in column (1). Thus, our main results on expenditures

recorded reflect the frequency of expenditures as well as the total amount of expenditures.

    In summary, the results in this section show that the main results are extremely robust to a

large set of additional controls and sensitivity checks.

6   Conclusion

    Between 1970 and 2003, the average Polity Index for the world has increased from approximately

negative two to three, meaning that the world as a whole has experienced a dramatic increase

in democracy. Together with the fact that the rise in democratization has been driven by poor

countries, this means that understanding the pre-conditions for successful democratization and

the underlying mechanisms must rank amongst the most important questions for researchers and

policymakers in development economics and political economy.

    This study takes a first step in providing rigorous empirical evidence on the necessary pre-

conditions for democratization in the context of grassroots elections in rural China and local public

goods provision. The centrally determined electoral reforms in China provide a stark example

of how an identical reform can have very different effects depending on the pre-existing level of

voter heterogeneity. Specifically, we find that voter heterogeneity – i.e., religious fragmentation –

significantly reduces the gains from introducing elections.

    The findings suggest that the dominant force behind the differential effects of elections in het-

erogeneous versus homogeneous villages was that elections increased the accountability of local

governments towards villagers; this increase was larger in homogeneous villages due to their capac-

ity to better monitor the leader. In addition, the elected village leader was forced to implement

policies that reflected the underlying preferences of villagers for public goods. It is particularly

noteworthy that our main result on total government public goods expenditure is entirely driven

by differences in expenditure financed by villagers. Neither the introduction of elections nor its

interaction with religious fragmentation has any effect on expenditure financed by other revenue

sources.

    A general lesson from our results is that pre-conditions are very important for determining

the impact of institutional reforms. Since the influence of religion in China has been significantly



                                                  32
weakened by the historical presence of a strong secular state, our estimates provide a striking

illustration of a high “lower bound” on the influence of social fragmentation on elections and public

goods.

   Generalizations aside, we believe that understanding the determinants of the impact of electoral

reforms in China is inherently important, since they are among the largest democratization reforms

in history and have changed the lives of almost one billion individuals. For those interested in the

social organization of rural China, our findings identify religion as an important dimension for group

clustering during the post-Mao era. Indeed, we find that religion has overtaken other important

traditional differences such as those across kinship groups.

   There are two important caveats to keep in mind for interpreting our results. First, when

attempting to extrapolate our results to other contexts, it is important to realize that the estimated

sign and magnitude of the interaction effect are specific to our context. For example, we interpret

the increase in public goods expenditure as beneficial because of the severe under-provision of public

goods prior to the introduction of elections. Had public goods expenditure been excessive relative

to demand from villagers prior to the electoral reforms (e.g., high taxation and elite rent-seeking),

the increased accountability caused by elections would reduce public goods expenditure on average,

and would cause the interaction with heterogeneity to be positive. Second, although the severe

under-provision of public goods prior to the electoral reforms is consistent with elections improving

efficiency and heterogeneity reducing it, the inability to measure demand or total public goods

provision means that welfare assessments are beyond the scope of this paper. This is an important

topic for future research.

   More generally, this study and the data it constructs open many avenues of study. In particular,

the data’s comprehensive record of Chinese electoral reforms and informal institutions (e.g., religion,

kinship networks), its long panel structure and its richness provide a good context for studying the

interaction between formal and informal institutions in determining economic outcomes.




                                                  33
References
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson, “Why did the West extend the Franchise? Democ-
 racy, Inequality and Growth in Historical Perspective,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 2000, 115, 1167–1199.

  , Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared, “Income and Democracy,”
  American Economic Review, June 2008, 98 (3), 808–42.

Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara, “Participation In Heterogeneous Communities,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2000, 115 (3), 847–904.

   and Eliana La Ferrara, “Who trusts others?,” Journal of Public Economics, August 2002, 85
  (2), 207–234.

   and Eliana La Ferrara, “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, September 2005, 43 (3), 762–800.

  , Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat, and Romain Wacziarg,
  “Fractionalization,” Journal of Economic Growth, June 2003, 8 (2), 155–94.

  , Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, November 1999, 114 (4), 1243–1284.

Bandiera, Oriana and Gilat Levy, “Diversity and the Power of the Elites inDemocraticSocieties:
 A Model and a Test,” STICERD - Economic Organisation and Public Policy Discussion Papers
 Series 018, Suntory and Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines, LSE
 August 2010.

Banerjee, Abhijit and Rohini Pande, “Parochial Politics: Ethnic Preferences and Politician
 Corruption,” Discussion Papers 6381, C.E.P.R. July 2007.

   and Rohini Somanathan, “The political economy of public goods: Some evidence from India,”
  Journal of Development Economics, March 2007, 82 (2), 287–314.

  , Dilip Mookherjee, Kaivan Munshi, and Debraj Ray, “Inequality, Control Rights, and
  Rent Seeking: Sugar Cooperatives in Maharashtra,” Journal of Political Economy, February 2001,
  109 (1), 138–190.

  , Lakshmi Iyer, and Rohini Somanathan, Public Action for Public Goods: Theory and
  Evidence, Vol. 4 of Handbook of Development Economics, Elsevier Science and Technology Books,

Boix, Carles and Daniel N. Posner, “Social Capital: Explaining its Origins and Effects on
 Government Performance,” British Journal of Political Science, 1998, 28 (04), 686–693.

Brandt, Loren and Matthew A. Turner, “The usefulness of imperfect elections: The case of
 village elections in rural China,” Economics & Politics, 2007, 19 (3), 453–480.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, “Bootstrap-Based Improve-
 ments for Inference with Clustered Errors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2008,
 90 (3), 414–427.

Cohen, Myron L., Family Organization in China Asia: Case Studies in the Social Sciences,
 Sharpe, Inc., 1992.

                                               34
  , “Religion in a State Society : China,” Asia Case Studies in the Social Sciences Armonk NY ME
  Sharpe, 1992, p. 17ï¿œ31.

Dayton-Johnson, Jeff, “Determinants of collective action on the local commons: a model with
 evidence from Mexico,” Journal of Development Economics, June 2000, 62 (1), 181–208.

Dean, K., Taoist Ritual and Popular Cults of Southeast China, Princeton University Press, 1993.

Deglopper, Donald R., Religion and Ritual in Lukang Religion and Ritual in Chinese Society,
 Stanford University Press,

Desmet, Klaus, Ignacio Ortuno-Ortin, and Romain Wacziarg, “The Political Economy of
 Ethnolinguistic Cleavages,” NBER Working Papers 15360, National Bureau of Economic Research
 September 2009.

Duclos, Jean-Yves, Joan Esteban, and Debraj Ray, “Polarization: Concepts, Measurement,
 Estimation,” Econometrica, 2004, 72 (6), pp. 1737–1772.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine, “Africa’s growth tragedy: policies and ethnic divisions,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (4), 1203–1250.

Esteban, Joan and Debraj Ray, “On the Measurement of Polarization,” Econometrica, July
  1994, 62 (4), 819–51.

   and    , “Conflict and Distribution,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1999, 87, 379–415.

   and    , “A Comparison of Polarization Measures,” UFAE and IAE Working Papers 700.07,
  Unitat de Fonaments de l’Analisi Economica (UAB) and Institut d’Analisi Economica (CSIC)
  May 2007.

Faure, D. and H.F. Siu, Down to Earth: The Territorial Bond in South China, Stanford Univer-
  sity Press, 1995.

Feuchtwang, S., Popular Religion in China: The Imperial Metaphor, Curzon, 2001.

Gao, Shouxian, Zhongguo zongjiao liyu [Chinese Religions and Rites]., Taipei, Taiwan: Zhidao
 Chuban Youxian Gongsi, 1994.

Glennerster, Rachel, Edward Miguel, and Alexander Rothenberg, “Collective Action in
 Diverse Sierra Leone Communities,” NBER Working Papers 16196, National Bureau of Economic
 Research July 2010.

Gong, Zhebing and Yetao Zhou, “’90 niandai Hubeisheng zongjiao xianzhuang jiqi fenxi’ [The
 Current Situation and an Analysis of Religions in Hubei Province in the 1990s],” Shehui zhuyi
 yanjiu [Research on Socialism], 1999, 3, 70–73.

Gong, Zuezeng, “’Zhongguo zongjiao xianzhuang ji fazhan qushi’ [The Current Situation and
 Developmental Trend of Religions in China],” Zhongyang shehui zhuyixueyuan xuebao [Journal of
 Central Socialist College], 1998, 6, 24–27.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “People’s opium? Religion and economic
 attitudes,” Journal of Monetary Economics, January 2003, 50 (1), 225–282.



                                               35
Habyarimana, James, Macartan Humphreys, Daniel N. Posner, and Jeremy M. Wein-
 stein, “Why Does Ethnic Diversity Undermine Public Goods Provision?,” The American Political
 Science Review, 2007, 101 (4), 709–725.

He, Kemin, “’Zhongguo de zongjiao he zongjiao zhengce’ [Religions and Religious Policies in
 China].,” Zhongwai jiaoliu [Sino-External Exchange], 1999, 3, 40–41.

Hungerman, Daniel M., “Diversity and Crowd-out: A Theory of Cold-Glow Giving,” NBER
 Working Papers 13348, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc August 2007.

Hunter, A. and K.K. Chan, Protestantism in Contemporary China Cambridge Studies in Ideol-
 ogy and Religion, Cambridge University Press, 2007.

Jiang, Lin, “Changing Kinship Structure and its Implications for Old-Age Support in Urban and
  Rural China,” Population Studies, 1995, 49 (1), pp. 127–145.

Kelliher, Daniel, “The Chinese debate over village self-government,” The China Journal, 1997,
 pp. 63–86.

Khwaja, Asim Ijaz, “Can good projects succeed in bad communities?,” Journal of Public Eco-
 nomics, August 2009, 93 (7-8), 899–916.

Lai, Hongyi Harry, “The Religious Revival in China,” Copenhagen Journal of Asian Studies,
  2003, 18, 40–64.

Le, Guoan and Guoping Jiang, “’Fengjian mixin yu shehui wending’ [Feudal Superstitions
  and Social Stability],” Gangnan shifan xueyuan xuebao [Journal of the Southern Jiangxi Normal
  College], 1998, 1, 73–76.

Lipset, Seymour Martin, “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Development and
  Political Legitimacy,” The American Political Science Review, 1959, 53 (1), pp. 69–105.

Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico, “Why did the Elites Extend the Suffrage? Democracy
  and the Scope of Government with an Application to Britain’s "Age of Reform",” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2004, 119, 707–765.

Luo, Renfu, Linxiu Zhang, Jikun Huang, and Scott Rozelle, “Village Elections, Public
 Goods Investments and Pork Barrel Politics, Chinese-style,” Journal of Development Studies,
 2010, 46 (4), 662–684.

Luo, W., Christianity in China, China Intercontinental Press, 2004.

Luttmer, Erzo F. P., “Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistribution,” Journal of Political
 Economy, June 2001, 109 (3), 500–528.

MacInnis, D.E., Religion in China today: policy and practice, Orbis Books, 1989.

Madsen, Richard, “Religious Renewal,” in Richard Madsen Perry Link and Paul Pickowicz, eds.,
 Unofficial China: Popular Culture and Thought in the People’s Republic, Boulder, Colorado:
 Westview Press, 1989, pp. 103–120.

  and Linzhu Fan, The Catholic Pilgrimage to Sheshan The Politics of Religion in Modern China:
  Making Religion Making the State, Stanford University Press,


                                              36
Martinez-Bravo, Monica, Gerard Padro-Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao, “The Effect
 of Democratization on Public Goods and Redistribution: Evidence from China,” Yale Working
 Paper, 2012.
Miguel, Edward and Mary Kay Gugerty, “Ethnic diversity, social sanctions, and public goods
 in Kenya,” Journal of Public Economics, December 2005, 89 (11-12), 2325–2368.
Montalvo, Jose and Marta Reynal-Querol, “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Development,”
 Journal of Development Economics, 2003, 76, 293–323.
Mu, Ren and Xiaobo Zhang, “The Role of Elected and Appointed Village Leaders in
 the Allocation of Public Resources: Evidence from a Low-Income Region in China,” IF-
 PRI Working Paper http://www.ifpri.org/publication/role-elected-and-appointed-village-leaders-
 allocation-public-resources, International Food and Policy Research Institute 2011.
Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig, “The Efficacy of Parochial Politics: Caste, Commit-
 ment, and Competence in Indian Local Governments,” NBER Working Papers 14335, National
 Bureau of Economic Research September 2008.
   and Nicholas Wilson, “Identity and Mobility: Historical Fractionalization, Parochial Institu-
  tions, and Occupational Choice in the American Midwest,” Department of Economics Working
  Papers 2010-22, Williams College August 2010.
O’Brien, Kevin J., “Implementing Political Reform in China’s Villages,” Australian Journal of
 Chinese Affairs, 1994, (32), 33 – 59.
   and Lianjiang Li, “The Struggle over Village Elections,” in Merle Goldman and Roderick Mac-
  Farquhar, eds., The paradox of China’s post-Mao reforms, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
  Press, 1999.
Oi, Jean and Scott Rozelle, “Elections and power: The locus of decision-making in Chinese
 villages,” The China Quarterly, 2000, 162, 513–539.
Okten, Cagla and Una Okonkwo Osili, “Contributions in heterogeneous communities: Evidence
 from Indonesia,” Journal of Population Economics, December 2004, 17 (4), 603–626.
PadroiMiquel, Gerard, “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The Politics of Fear,”
 The Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74, 1259–1274.
Rozelle, Scott, “Decision-Making in China’s Rural Economy: The Linkages between Village Lead-
 ers and Farm Households,” The China Quarterly, 1994, (137), 99–124.
Singhal, Monica and Benjamin A. Olken, “Informal Taxation,” Technical Report 2009.
Siu, Helen F., “Recycling Ritualst,” in Richard Madsen Perry Link and Paul Pickowicz, eds.,
  Unofficial China: Popular Culture and Thought in the People’s Republic, Boulder, Colorado:
  Westview Press, 1989, pp. 121–37.
Sweeten, A.R., Christianity in rural China: conflict and accommodation in Jiangxi Province,
 1860-1900 Michigan monographs in Chinese studies, Center for Chinese Studies, University of
 Michigan, 2001.
Tsai, Lily Lee, “Cadres, Temple and Lineage Institutions, and Governance in Rural China,” The
  China Journal, 2002, (48), 1–27.

                                              37
  , Accountability without Democracy: Solidary Groups and Public Goods Provision in Rural China,
  New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2007.

Unger, Jonathan, The Nature of Chinese Politics: From Mao to Jiang, Cambridge, MA: M.E.
 Sharpe, 2002.

Vigdor, J.L., “Community Composition and Collective Action: Analyzing Initial Mail Response
 to the 2000 census,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2004, 86 (1), 303–312.

Weber, M., The religion of China: Confucianism and Taoism Free Press paperback, Free Press,
 1968.

Whiting, Susan, “Contract Incentives and Market Discipline in China’s Rural Industrial Sector,”
 in John McMillan and Barry Naughton, eds., Reforming Asian Socialism, The Growth of Market
 Institutions, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996.

Yang, C.K., Religion in Chinese Society: A Study of Contemporary Social Functions of Religion
 and Some of Their Historical Factors, University of California Press, 1961.

Youngliang, Du, Jianming yinghan, hanying shijie zongjiao cidian [A Concise English-Chinese
 and Chineseï¿œEnglish Dictionary of World Religious Terms], Zhongguo Duiwai Fanyi Chuban
 Gongsi, 1994.

Zhang, Xiaobo, Shenggen Fan, Linxiu Zhang, and Jikun Huang, “Local governance and
 public goods provision in rural China,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88, 2857–2871.

Zhu, Yulie, Jinri zhongguo zongjiao [Religion in Today’s China], Beijing: Jinri Zhongguo chuban-
 she, 1994.




                                              38
                             Table 1: Statistics on Religious Populations in China

                                                                                                            Imputed Measures of the Share
                                  Share of Religious Population       Aggregate Religious Population in        of Religious Population per
                                  per Village (NFS, 1986-2005)                 China (Lai, 2003)             Village (Calculated by Authors)
                                     (1)         (2)      (3)           (4)        (5)             (6)           (7)        (8)        (9)
                                    Obs         Mean Std. Dev.        Official Non-Official % Difference        Obs        Mean     Std. Dev.
Mahayana Buddhism (Han)            4340         0.022    0.086         90.5       132.7        46.63%          4340        0.028      0.104
Daoism                             4340         0.003    0.010           3          3            0.00%         4340        0.003      0.010
Islam                              4340         0.017    0.094         20.3        20           -1.48%         4340        0.015      0.089
Christian                          4340         0.008    0.030          21         35          66.67%
  Protestanism                                                          16         25          56.25%         4340        0.199      0.007
  Catholicism                                                            5         10          100.00%        4340        0.004      0.011
Folk Religions                                                                                                4340        0.200      0.000

All Religions                       4340        0.050      0.146                                              4340        0.050      0.146
Non Religious                       4340        0.950      0.153                                              4340        0.723      0.161

Religious Fractionalization          4340        0.053      0.105                                               4340        0.202     0.072
Religious Polarization               4340        0.101      0.193                                               4340        0.667     0.043
Notes: Religious fractionalization and polarization indices at the bottom of the table are computed by authors. See text for formula.




                              Table 2: The Correlates of Religious Fragmentation

                                                                                       Religious
                                                                                    Fractionalization
                               Religious Polarization                                   0.9952*
                               Village Population                                       0.1881*
                               Share of Religious Population (Any Religion)             0.8445*
                               Fraction of Highschool Graduates                         -0.0413

                               Avg. Pre-Election Pub Goods Exp                           0.0229
                                 Financed by Villagers                                   0.0347

                               Avg. Pre-Election Income -- 10th Percentile               0.1756*
                               Avg. Pre-Election Income -- 50th Percentile               0.1974*
                               Avg. Pre-Election Income -- 90th Percentile               0.2367*
                               Avg. Pre-Election Gini                                    0.0588

                               Year of 1st Election                                      -0.0556
                               Year of 1st Haixuan                                        0.1306

                               Fractionalization of Surnames                             -0.0731
                               Population Share of the Two Largest Surnames               -0.023
                               Presence of Village Temple                                0.2048*
                               Number of Temples in County in 1820                       0.1637*
                               Plain                                                      0.056
                               Hilly                                                      0.0166
                               Mountainous                                               -0.0799

                               Observations are at the village level. * indicates that the correlations
                               are statistically significant at the 5% level.




                                                                 39
                                Table 3: The Effect of Religious Fragmentation × the Introduction of Elections
                                                                                 Dependent Variable
                                                                    (1)                (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)                 (7)
                                                                                                             Government Public Goods Expenditure
                                                              Time-Varying                                                                    Cluster SE at
                                                               Measure of                                                     Cluster SE at   the Province Imputed Measure
                                                                Religious                                                     the Province     Level, Wild         of
                                                             Fractionalization                   Baseline                          Level       Bootstraps   Fractionalization
     Post 1st Election x Religious Fractionalization                                  -14.35      -107.4                          -107.4          -107.4         -200.5
                                                                                     (33.00)     (46.84)                         (42.76)         (47.29)        (85.02)
     Post 1st Election x Religious Polarization                                                                  -53.79
                                                                                                                (23.42)
     Religious Fractionalization (Average)                                            -3.647
                                                                                     (38.43)
     Post 1st Election                                            0.00358             6.050        20.73         20.61            20.73          20.73            55.50
                                                                 (0.00628)           (4.612)      (9.351)       (9.301)          (9.058)        (10.00)          (23.24)
     Post Open Nominations                                        0.00130                          6.168         6.483            6.168          6.168            12.32
                                                                 (0.00495)                        (10.20)       (10.25)          (9.466)         (9.90)          (19.85)




40
     Post Open Nominations x Religious Fractionalization                                           -3.443                         -3.443         -3.443           -32.17
                                                                                                  (49.68)                        (44.26)        (40.63)          (82.09)

     Controls
     Village FE                                                      Y                 N              Y            Y               Y               Y               Y
     Year FE                                                         Y                 Y              Y            Y               Y               Y               Y
     Village Population                                              Y                 Y              Y            Y               Y               Y               Y
     Population Share of All Religions x Year FE                     N                 Y              Y            Y               Y               Y               Y
     Religious Fractionalization x Year FE                           N                 Y              Y            Y               Y               Y               Y
     Province-Year Trends                                            Y                 Y              Y            Y               Y               Y               Y
     Post Open Nominations x Pop Share of Each Religion              N                 N              N            N               N               N               N
     Post Open Nominations x Religious Polarization                  N                 N              N            Y               N               N               N
     Level of Clustering                                          Village            Village       Village      Village         Province        Province         Village
     Observations                                                  1773              4340          4340          4340            4340            4340             4340
     R-squared                                                     0.911             0.041         0.117         0.117           0.117           0.117            0.118
     Avg Effect: Post 1st Election + Post 1st Election x
     Rel Frac x 0.053 (0.202 for Imputed Rel Frac)                                                15.04                          15.04           15.04            15.00
     Notes: Standard errors are presented in the parentheses. "Y" and "N" indicate the inclusion or exclusion of a control.
      Table 4: The Effect of Religious Fragmentation × the Introduction of Elections on Public Goods Provision and Private Expenditure

                                                                                                  Dependent Variables
                                                                                         Primary                                                         Primary
                                                                                         School       Household                         Household        School
                                                       Tot Gov Pub      Ln Arable       Enrollment   Exp on Agric     Ln Arable          Exp on         Enrollment
                                                            Exp           Land            Rate          Prod            Land            Schooling         Rate
                                                            (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)             (5)               (6)              (7)
     Dependent Variable Means                              14.28          7.35            96.42         8.81            7.95              5.19             96.8

     Post 1st Election x Religious Fractionalization      -107.7           -4.209          -29.80          -95.94          -8.511          11.98           -6.422
                                                         (46.98)          (2.867)         (17.09)         (36.68)         (2.847)         (4.827)         (10.35)




41
     Post 1st Election                                    31.51            0.566           4.724           20.33           1.242           -3.384          1.232
                                                         (13.35)          (0.357)         (2.247)         (12.82)         (0.444)         (1.870)         (1.894)

     Observations                                         4340            3291             2682             873             769             873             841
     R-squared                                            0.117           0.873            0.311           0.551           0.914           0.835           0.303
     Notes: All regressions control for the the full set of baseline controls: religious fractionalization*year FE, the share of religious population*year FE, village
     population, province-year trends, village and year FE. The standard errors are clustered at the village level. Columns (1)-(3) uses data from all village.
     Columns (4)-(7) use data from vilages for which we have household level data. The number of observations vary across columns (1)-(3) and across columns
     (4)-(7) because data on arable land and school enrollment are not available for every year.
Table 5: The Effect of Religious Fragmentation × the Introduction of Elections on Public Goods
Expenditure from Villagers and Election Quality
                                                                    Dependent Variables
                                                                                   Household Tax
                                                                                     Payments to
                                             Government Public Goods Exp by             Village,            Voluntary
                                                    Source of Financing             Township and              Social
                                                                                        County             Organization
                                               All       Villagers Non-Villagers    Governments              Dummy
                                               (1)           (2)         (3)               (4)                 (5)
       Dep Var Mean                          14.279       9.769         4.422           176.19                0.143

       Post 1st Election
        x Religious Fractionalization         -107.4         -97.20       -11.53             -54.99            -0.777
                                             (46.84)        (46.39)       (11.46)           (138.0)           (0.612)

       Post 1st Election                      20.73          21.09         -0.159            32.71            0.0157
                                             (9.351)        (9.761)       (2.052)           (24.00)          (0.0269)

       Observations                           4340          4340           4340              1300             3900
       R-squared                              0.117         0.107          0.076             0.573            0.805

       Notes: All regressions control for the the full set of baseline controls: religious fractionalization*year FE, the
       share of religious population*year FE, village population, province-year trends, village and year FE. The
       standard errors are clustered at the village level. Columns (1)-(3) and (5) use data from the full sample of
       villages. The number of observations in column (5) are fewer due to missing values. Column (4) uses data from
       the villages for which we have househol-level data.




                                                              42
     Table 6: The Effect of Religious Fragmentation × the Introduction of Elections on Electoral Quality and Village Leader Characteristics
                                                                                                                   Dependent Variable
                                                                    (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)                  (6)             (7)              (8)
                                                                                                                              VC Family
                                                                                                 VC was          PS was        was Rich         PS Family was VC was Party PS was Party
                                                                 Electoral         Voter       Persecuted      Persecuted     Farmer or          Rich Farmer      Member          Member
                                                                Procedural      Participation during Cultural during Cultural Landord in        or Landlord in     before          before
                                                               Error Dummy           (%)        Revolution      Revolution      1949                1949       Dntering Office Entering Office
            Dependent Variable Mean                                0.85            74.11           0.05            0.05          0.21                0.17           0.72            0.94

            Post 1st Election x Religious Fractionalization        0.214           -7.253          0.0220          -0.0108           0.594            0.368           -0.428           0.115




43
                                                                  (0.291)         (8.455)          (0.557)         (0.183)          (0.624)          (0.355)         (1.271)          (0.155)

            Post 1st Election                                     -0.213           87.59           0.0614           0.0197           0.113           0.0114          0.0358          -0.00702
                                                                 (0.0561)         (1.854)         (0.0531)         (0.0250)        (0.0659)         (0.0465)         (0.169)         (0.0226)

            Observations                                           4196            4112             3658            3984             3677            4004             3641            4024
            R-squared                                              0.628           0.961            0.625           0.657            0.607           0.687            0.538           0.774

            Notes: All regressions control for the the full set of baseline controls: religious fractionalization*year FE, the share of religious population*year FE, village population,
            province-year trends, village FE and year FE. The standard errors are clustered at the village level.
     Table 7: The Effect of Religious Fragmentation × the Introduction of Elections – Robustness to Controlling for the Correlates of Religious
     Fragmentation
                                                                                                                    Dependent Variable: Total Gov Public Goods Expenditure
                                                                               (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)     (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)             (11)      (12)          (13)
                       Post 1st Election
                        x Religious Fractionalization                         -107.4 -126.7 -162.9 -117.7 -89.63 -110.1 -106.2                      -105.3     -100.7     -99.17      -109.0     -108.2        -131.5
                                                                             (46.84) (61.15) (68.46) (51.16) (41.30) (48.19) (47.12)               (46.97)    (42.60)    (43.20)     (49.85)    (47.76)       (67.95)
                        x Share of All Religious Population                            24.87
                                                                                      (27.76)
                        x Temple                                                                 49.85                                                                                                         52.54
                                                                                                (23.09)                                                                                                       (23.67)
                        x Temple in 1820                                                                   17.29                                                                                               -4.008
                                                                                                          (13.92)                                                                                             (13.36)
                        x Hilly                                                                                       -12.68                                                                                   -12.15
                                                                                                                     (17.30)                                                                                  (18.71)
                        x Mountainous                                                                                 -18.82                                                                                   -3.505
                                                                                                                     (18.15)                                                                                  (13.32)
                        x Surname Fractionalization                                                                             41.62                                                                          19.90
                                                                                                                               (33.76)                                                                        (48.61)
                        x Surname Polarization                                                                                            -15.73
                                                                                                                                         (56.82)




44
                        x Pop Share of Top 2 Surnames                                                                                               -17.81                                                     -33.95
                                                                                                                                                   (32.77)                                                    (57.87)
                        x Lineage Group                                                                                                                        39.94                                           34.63
                                                                                                                                                              (16.96)                                         (15.75)
                        x Avg Pre-Election Tot Gov Pub Goods Exp                                                                                                          2.292                                -0.525
                                                                                                                                                                         (1.198)                              (1.197)
                        x Avg Pre-Election HH Income (10th Percentile)                                                                                                               0.0147                0.0313
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0263)              (0.0280)
                        x Avg Pre-Election HH Income (50th Percentile)                                                                                                               -0.0208               -0.0244
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0219)              (0.0200)
                        x Avg Pre-Election HH Income (90th Percentile)                                                                                                              0.00516                0.00377
                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.00384)              (0.00250)
                        x Avg Pre-Election Gini                                                                                                                                                  42.16         45.87
                                                                                                                                                                                                (98.56)       (165.7)
                       Post 1st Election                                      20.73   20.75   7.797   11.95   27.54 -6.754 30.83                    29.88      0.733      12.20       30.12      9.004         -13.73
                                                                             (9.351) (9.400) (4.681) (6.827) (16.26) (20.03) (34.52)               (21.97)    (5.060)    (7.139)     (14.76)    (25.45)       (74.30)
                       Observations                                          4340      4340      4340      4340       4340     3880      3880      4340       4340       4340         4340       4340         3880
                       R-squared                                             0.117     0.117     0.124     0.119      0.119    0.119     0.119     0.117      0.123      0.121        0.124      0.118        0.140

                       Notes: All regressions control for the the full set of baseline controls: religious fractionalization*year FE, village population, province-year trends, village FE and year FE. The
                       standard errors are clustered at the village level. All regressions except for the one in column (2) additionally control for the share of religious population*year FE.
     Table 8: The Effect of Religious Fragmentation × the Introduction of Elections – Robustness to Additional Controls
                                                                              Dependent Variable:Total Gov Public Goods Expenditure
                                                                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)                 (6)
              Post 1st Election x Religious Fractionalization       -107.4        -97.64       -104.6        -105.0       -107.4              -92.67
                                                                   (46.84)       (45.64)      (46.54)       (47.05)      (46.85)             (45.43)

              Post 1st Election                                     20.73          20.41          20.46          20.09          20.72         19.62
                                                                   (9.351)        (9.390)        (9.207)        (9.705)        (9.348)       (9.621)

              Controls
              Near City * Year FE                                     N              Y              N              N             N              Y




45
              Post Tax and Fee Reform                                 N              N              Y              N             N              Y
              Ever Merged * Year FE                                   N              N              N              Y             N              Y
              Province-Year Squared                                   N              N              N              N             Y              N

              Observations                                          4340           4340           4340           4340          4340           4340
              R-squared                                             0.117          0.123          0.118          0.122         0.117          0.129
              Notes: All regressions control for the the full set of baseline controls: religious fractionalization*year FE, the share of religious
              population*year FE, village population, province-year trends, village FE and year FE. The standard errors are clustered at the
              village level. "Y" and "N" indicate the inclusion or exclusion of controls.
     Table 9: The Effect of Religious Fragmentation × the Introduction of Elections – Robustness to Sample Selection
                                                                  Dependent Variable: Total Gov Public Goods Expenditure
                                                 (1)               (2)                  (3)                  (4)                       (5)

                                             Full Sample,   Omit if Religious     Omit if Relgious    Dep Var is a Dummy       Omit if Pub Goods
                                              Baseline        Share = 0         Fractionalization = 0 for Gov Pub Exp > 0       Exp=0, Baseline
            Post 1st Election
             x Religious Fractionalization      -107.4            -174.9                -174.9                 -0.272                -135.2
                                               (46.84)           (88.57)               (88.49)                (0.161)               (226.5)




46
            Post 1st Election                   20.73             33.64                 33.66                 0.0708                 51.59
                                               (9.351)           (17.50)               (17.48)               (0.0278)               (33.52)

            Observations                         4340                 3280                   3300                    4340                     954
            R-squared                            0.117                0.111                  0.111                   0.194                   0.346
            Notes: All regressions control for the the full set of baseline controls: religious fractionalization*year FE, the share of religious
            population*year FE, village population, province-year trends, village FE and year FE. The standard errors are clustered at the village
            level.
                                            Figure 1: Histograms of Religious Fractionalization Across Villages
                             (a) Raw Data – Full Sample                                                               (b) Raw Data – Bottom Half




                                                                                                      50
         40




                                                                                                      40
                  30
Percent in Sample




                                                                                              Percent in Sample
                                                                                                          30
      20




                                                                                                20
         10




                                                                                                      10
         0




                                                                                                      0
                       0                  .2                        .4             .6                             0     .002          .004           .006          .008   .01
                                        Religious Fractionalization Index                                                      Religious Fractionalization Index




                               (c) Raw Data – Top Half                                                                (d) Raw Data – Top Quarter
         15




                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                      8
               10
 Percent in Sample




                                                                                              Percent in Sample
                                                                                               4         6
5




                                                                                                      2
         0




                                                                                                      0




                       0                  .2                        .4             .6                             0              .2                        .4             .6
                                        Religious Fractionalization Index                                                      Religious Fractionalization Index




                            (e) Imputed Data – Full Sample
         30    20
 Percent in Sample
10       0




                       .1        .2             .3              .4            .5    .6
                                   Religious Fractionalization Index (Imputed)




                                                                                         47
Figure 2: The Estimated Effects on Government Public Goods Expenditure for Each Year Since
the First Election
        (a) The Coefficients for Villages where Fractionalization=0 and the differential Effects between
        Villages where Fractionalization=0 and Fractionalization=1
                                                                                                      &#$                                                                                                  %##$




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !"#$%&#'()*"+*(,#*-'(#./%0"'*"+*1#2&3&"4)*5./%0"'/2&6/0"'*/'7*(,#*8#/.)*9&'%#*(,#*:)(*
                                                                                                      (#$
                                                                                                                                                                                                           &#$


                                                                                                      '#$
        !"#$%&#'()*"+*8#/.)*9&'%#*(,#*:)(*;2#%0"'*




                                                                                                                                                                                                           #$
                                                                                                      "#$




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ;2#%0"'*<4==>*?/.&/@2#)*
                                                                                                      %#$                                                                                                  !&#$




                                                                                                       #$
                                                                                                            !'$         !"$       !%$             #$                %$            "$        '$        ($
                                                                                                                                                                                                           !%##$


                                                                                                     !%#$


                                                                                                                                                                                                           !%&#$
                                                                                                     !"#$




                                                                                                     !'#$                                                                                                  !"##$
                                                                                                                                              8#/.)*9&'%#*(,#*:)(*;2#%0"'*



                                                                                                                  (b) The Effect for the Average Village with Fractionalization=0.053
                                                                                                     &#"
        !"#$%&&"'&(")*&+)*&,-#.&/&012%&345.&6&7!"#8&"'&9:;;<#)&"'&=#5)4&)<>.#&+)*&,-#.?">&6&345.@&




                                                                                                     &!"




                                                                                                     %#"




                                                                                                     %!"




                                                                                                     $#"




                                                                                                     $!"




                                                                                                      #"




                                                                                                      !"
                                                                                                            '&"           '%"           '$"             !"                   $"        %"        &"         ("
                                                                                                                                                       =#54)&A<>.#&+)*&,-#.?">&




                                                                                                                                                             48
                                           Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                                          (1)   (2)          (3)         (4)
                                                                        Source Obs.         Mean      Std. Dev.
                   Village # Households                                  NFS   4340        414.19      275.47
                   Fraction of Highschool Graduates                      NFS   1882         0.05        0.06

                   Avg. Pre-Election Pub Goods Exp (10.000 RMB)           VDS     4340      14.28      135.47
                     Financed by Villagers                                VDS     4340      9.77       119.29

                   Avg Public Goods                                       VDS     4340      14.28      135.47
                     Schools                                              VDS     4340      0.02        0.35
                     Roads and Sanitation                                 VDS     4340      5.07        88.21
                     Electricity                                          VDS     4340      0.73        7.85
                     Irrigation                                           VDS     4340      3.43        66.13
                     Planting Trees and the Environment                   VDS     4340      0.32        12.43
                     Others                                               VDS     4340      2.72        49.70

                   Avg. Pre-Election Income -- 10th Percentile            NFS     3778    5080.40 3638.01
                   Avg. Pre-Election Income -- 50th Percentile            NFS     3778    10512.98 8365.71
                   Avg. Pre-Election Income -- 90th Percentile            NFS     3778    24427.83 36802.13
                   Gini                                                   NFS     3550      0.28     0.08

                   Year of 1st Election                                   VDS     4340     1988.51       5.24
                   Year of 1st Haixuan                                    VDS     2780     1997.45       5.26
                   The full sample uses a panel of 217 villages for the years 1982-2005. Observations vary
                   across variables due to data limitations.




Table A.2: The Effect of Religious Fragmentation for Each Years Since the Introduction of Elections

                                            Dependent Variable: Gov Public Goods Exp
                                            (1)     (2)                                                    (3)        (4)
                                           coef     se                                                    coef        se
        Post 1st Election                                    Post 1st Open Nomination
         x Years Since Election = -3      -62.55 (76.34)      x Years Since Open Nomination = -3         -16.97    (33.58)
         x Years Since Election = -2      -78.39 (73.84)      x Years Since Open Nomination = -2         -25.39    (41.66)
         x Years Since Election = -1      -75.14 (78.70)      x Years Since Open Nomination = -1          -67.6    (95.77)
         x Years Since Election = 0       -115.1 (74.26)      x Years Since Open Nomination = 0           5.954    (44.36)
         x Years Since Election = 1       -99.48 (71.88)      x Years Since Open Nomination = 1           46.63    (70.95)
         x Years Since Election = 2       -171.9 (81.02)      x Years Since Open Nomination = 2           29.08    (53.39)
         x Years Since Election = 3       -177.9 (97.91)      x Years Since Open Nomination = 3          -90.48    (145.0)
         x Years Since Election = 4       -160.3 (92.04)      x Years Since Open Nomination = 4          -58.32    (102.6)

        Years Since Election = -3         13.35    (9.090)    Years Since Open Nomination = -3           -4.112    (5.267)
        Years Since Election = -2         14.01    (9.924)    Years Since Open Nomination = -2           -5.872    (4.863)
        Years Since Election = -1         9.211    (11.47)    Years Since Open Nomination = -1            10.69    (22.40)
        Years Since Election = 0          18.03    (11.49)    Years Since Open Nomination = 0            -7.774    (5.230)
        Years Since Election = 1          39.81    (26.62)    Years Since Open Nomination = 1             15.92    (28.42)
        Years Since Election = 2          26.53    (13.05)    Years Since Open Nomination = 2            -16.61    (9.973)
        Years Since Election = 3          26.87    (17.51)    Years Since Open Nomination = 3             26.85    (26.11)
        Years Since Election = 4          32.68    (17.92)    Years Since Open Nomination = 4            -2.444    (18.15)

        Observations                                                          4340
        R-squared                                                             0.121

        Notes: The regression controls for the the full set of baseline controls: religious fractionalization*year FE, the
        share of religious population*year FE, village population, province-year trends, and year FE. The standard
        errors are clustered at the village level.




                                                                49
                       Figure A.1: Fractionalization versus Polarization – Using Raw Data
         .6       .4
  Fractionalization
.2       0




                        0            .2            .4                  .6     .8            1
                                                        Polarization




                                                         50
