                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              SOLOMONIC SEPARATION:
                    RISK DECISIONS AS PRODUCTIVITY INDICATORS

                                           Nolan Miller
                                       Alexander F. Wagner
                                       Richard J. Zeckhauser

                                        Working Paper 18634
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18634


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




We thank John Pratt for help with the proof of Lemma 1, Carmen Tanner and Michael Kosfeld for
help with the survey, Mario Häfeli and Ramona Westermann for research assistance, and the editor,
the referee, and participants in various seminars for helpful comments. Wagner thanks the Swiss Finance
Institute, the NCCR FINRISK and the University of Zurich Research Priority Program "Finance and
Financial Markets" for support. This paper is forthcoming in the Journal of Risk and Uncertainty.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Nolan Miller, Alexander F. Wagner, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Solomonic Separation: Risk Decisions as Productivity Indicators
Nolan Miller, Alexander F. Wagner, and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 18634
December 2012
JEL No. D82,G31,H12

                                                ABSTRACT

A principal provides budgets to agents (e.g., divisions of a firm or the principal's children) whose expenditures
provide her benefits, either materially or because of altruism. Only agents know their potential to generate
benefits. We prove that if the more "productive" agents are also more risk-tolerant (as holds in the
sample of individuals we surveyed), the principal can screen agents and bolster target efficiency by
offering a choice between a nonrandom budget and a two-outcome risky budget. When, at very low
allocations, the ratio of the more risk-averse type's marginal utility to that of the other type is unbounded
above (e.g., as with CRRA), the first-best is approached. -- A biblical opening enlivens the analysis.


Nolan Miller                                            Richard J. Zeckhauser
College of Business                                     John F. Kennedy School of Government
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign              Harvard University
4033 BIF                                                79 John F. Kennedy Street
515 East Gregory Drive                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
Champaign, IL 61820                                     and NBER
and NBER                                                richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu
nmiller@illinois.edu

Alexander F. Wagner
University of Zurich - Swiss Finance Institute
Department of Banking and Finance
Plattenstrasse 14
CH-8032 Zurich
Switzerland
alex.wagner@post.harvard.edu
1     Introduction

King Solomon, thought by some to be the wisest man who ever lived, anticipated the econo-
mists’ concept of separating equilibria by about 3,000 years. In his most famous case, he
proposed cutting a baby in half to separate the true mother and the false mother. The true
mother said: “No, give him to the other woman,”whereas the claimed mother accepted the
proposed deal. Not only did Solomon perceive a di¤erence in risk preferences – he knew
the true mother would not accept even a small chance of slicing the baby in half – but he
anticipated that the false mother would not …gure out how to pose as the true mother. The
baby was placed in the true mother’s arms.
    Recent archeological …nds discovered a lost scroll that detailed another separation decision
by Solomon, where once again he used risk taking to gauge preference intensity. That decision
merits equal acclaim for its wisdom.



2     The Scroll of the Scribes

2.1    The problem

One day a wealthy man came to Solomon for advice. He observed: “I have two sons, X
and Y. They are both …ne boys, and help me administer my business. I do not spoil them,
but they both receive an adequate income. Alas, the great sadness of my life is that they
do not get along, and I must keep them apart so they do not quarrel. When I die, and
fortunately my health is still good, one must get my business. The other will receive my
worldly possessions, but alas the division will be unequal. The business is worth far more,
and the burden to run it is not great. I can not rely on either to provide an income interest
to the other.
    My sons are equally capable, and I love them equally. Today, knowing what the future
portends, they both spend what they receive. But I know that some people receive more



                                               1
pleasure from consumption expenditures than do others. I would like to leave my business
to the son who receives the greater pleasure. However, when I ask them, they both say their
pleasure is immense. How shall I decide?”
   Solomon responded. “The day after the second new moon, bring your sons to me, and we
shall resolve this problem. I have but one constraint. You must let me resolve this problem,
and you must remain silent as I do so.” The man agreed. The appointed day arrived, and
the wealthy man and his two sons appeared before the King.
   Solomon then spoke to the sons. “Alas, the two of you do not get along. When your
father passes from this Earth, his wish is that one of you receive his business, and the other
his worldly possessions. You will then have no need for further contact with each other.
   “But wonderful things do not come without sacri…ce. You see before you a large jar with
a scorpion and some leaves. One of you will place his hand in this jar for a period of time to
risk his sting. The scorpion may not see your hand for a while. But even when seen, it will
not look like his natural prey; it may be ignored. But should the scorpion sting, it will be
intensely painful, and perhaps worse. I have a papyrus scroll for each of you. You will each
go to a corner of the room and write down how many minutes you are willing to leave your
hand in the jar to be the one who inherits the business.”
   Solomon then explained how he would conduct this as a second-price auction, and the
virtues of that method. The father was sad, because he did not want either son to risk the
scorpion’s sting, but he got false succor from the second-price auction, thinking that it would
lead to less time at risk. But most important, as promised, he remained silent.
   The sons returned to King Solomon and their father. X had written 2 minutes on his
scroll. Y had written 30 minutes. Solomon then decried: “The business shall go to Y upon
your father’s death, because he is the son I have determined would reap greater bene…ts from
the excess income that would o¤er. Moreover, Y need not place his arm within the scorpion’s
bottle. That would be a deadweight loss, conceivably in the literal sense of that term. I
was con…dent that neither of you would decipher this game. Just as I had no intention of


                                              2
dividing the baby in an earlier decision, I had no intention of forcing either of you to take a
dreaded risk."
   He then said: “Unlike judges in the democracies of future centuries, I do not have time
to write down and justify my opinion. But I will explain to the court scribes the principles
underlying my decision, so they may be recorded and available to future generations.”
   The father did not understand what had happened, but Solomon was Solomon. Thus,
he knew the decision was wise. The father lived to a ripe old age. When he died a happy
death, Y took his business, X the worldly possessions.
   As mentioned above, the scroll of the scribes has only recently come to light. It is
reproduced here, together with contemporary comments from modern scholars.


2.2    Solomon’s reasoning

King Solomon observed: “My job was to …nd a way to identify which of two sons would derive
greater utility from a substantially increased income. I have spent many years receiving my
many subjects, from rich, moderate and poor circumstances. I have struggled to perceive
their levels of satisfaction. I have concluded that life in moderate or poor circumstances is
much the same for all. But having riches separates men. Some are possessed of exquisite
taste, and turn their riches to great consumptive pleasures, both for themselves and with
their celebrations for the community. Others, alas, turn riches into little of value. They
purchase ostentatiously to impress, and impress no one, not even themselves.
   I label these groups connoisseurs and boors. A connoisseur bene…ts greatly from securing
riches, and this possibility is, therefore, worth making great sacri…ces for. Hardly so for the
boor. My test was a simple one. Son Y showed himself to be a connoisseur by his willingness
to take a substantial risk to win the business; son X gave away his boorish nature when he
answered a mere two minutes.
   I would like to claim originality for my method, but any fairy tale king who sent suitors
into battle against dragons before they could claim his daughter’s hand understood the


                                              3
underlying principle: Any hopeful dragon slayer faced a 20% chance of death, with only an
80% chance of blissful marriage to the princess. (History is written by the victors, which
is why traditional accounts suggest better odds.) The fairy tale king – anticipating von
Neumann and Morgenstern –recognized the implicit requirement:


                 :8U (marriage to princess) > U (status quo)    :2U (death):


Only the deeply devoted would have such a utility for marriage to the princess."

   Contemporary comment. We will prove the wisdom of Solomon’s idea below. As
we show, a principal is indeed able to use risk taking as a gauge of preference intensity to
great advantage. Not only can she separate connoisseurs from boors, but for a broad class
of utility functions, such as constant relative risk aversion, she can approach the …rst-best.
We also show that the typical lottery for a connoisseur involves the risk that he receives a
very bad outcome (indeed, the worst possible outcome) with a very low probability.
   There is suggestive evidence that in devising this screening mechanism Solomon may have
been in‡uenced as well by family history. His father, King David, won his …rst wife, Michal
(not Solomon’s mom), in an equivalent test gamble. As you remember, Goliath repeatedly
challenged the Israelites for forty days. David, then but a humble shepherd, responded when
King Saul promised a reward to he who defeats Goliath. "And it will be that the king will
enrich the man who kills him with great riches and will give him his daughter and make his
father’s house free in Israel." (Samuel 1, 17:25). (Saul, some believe, was not looking for
devotion to his daughter. He recognized David as a future power threat and perhaps was
hoping he would be killed by Goliath.)
   Solomon continued: "I have now sought to generalize this method to help future ad-
judicators. My method, like the procedure of the fairy tale kings, employs lotteries, but
death-by-dragon (or by scorpion) seems a rather extreme penalty. My methods employ only
risk taking with money. Some day, I am con…dent, a highly respected profession will de-


                                              4
velop that studies money and decisions, and employs experiments. I sought to anticipate
their methods. Thus, I conducted a survey among a sample of my subjects of moderate
means.
   1.     Among our citizens, how much pleasure would you get from a consumption of
50,000 shekels per year? Please rate yourself on a percentile basis relative to your peers.
   2.     Say you were given a lottery o¤ering a 50-50 chance of 20,000 or 100,000 shekels
per year. What certain amount would make you just as well of as this lottery?
   As I expected, there was a strong positive correlation between the answers to the two
questions. That is, if we graph absolute utility as a function of income, the steeper curves
were also straighter. To check for robustness, I then varied these amounts, but found that the
pattern persisted. In these experiments with many subjects I discovered that risk aversion
and reported pleasure from increased consumption were negatively correlated.
   I expect researchers in the far future to retrogress, and to express skepticism about the
use of surveys or any attempt to gauge interpersonal comparisons of utility. But I have
the extreme research advantage of having ruled for 36 years, to have met regularly with my
subjects, and to be blessed with what they call wisdom. This gives me the power to detect
cheap talk, and to make it expensive.
   Generalization can be of one’s method, or of its areas of application. I have found
other areas where citizens can be induced to reveal their true assessments by subjecting
them to some risk. Thus, in dispensing plots for farming for citizens turning 21, beyond
assuring adequate incomes for all and well paid employment for young people, I seek to
create prosperity for the kingdom. Thus, I wish to put substantially more land in the hands
of high productivity workers. The more land combined with any worker, the less per hectare
he will produce, but high productivity workers both get more output from the land and trim
such diminution. The distinguishing feature of high productivity workers is their ability
to manage young workers e¤ectively. Thus, beyond the initial scale, their output increases
linearly with land provided. I discovered that if I o¤er my subjects a choice, two hectares


                                              5
for sure, or a lottery o¤ering an 80% chance of …ve hectares and a 20% chance of 1 hectare,
productivity di¤erentials make the lottery the best choice for the high productivity workers,
the certain two hectares for those of low productivity.
       I hope that this generality – the ability to address two quite di¤erent problems – will
help my methods to gain use in the future.”


Contemporary comment. Solomon would rule for an additional four years. His two
questions have been employed in contemporary surveys by the annotators. We shall return
to our survey results near the end of the paper. As indicated by Solomon, his method also
helps in resource allocations, where productivity of the agent, not personal bene…ts, are at
stake, as is the case in corporate capital budgeting. Before discussing issues in practical
application, we present the theory supporting the separation method identi…ed by Solomon,
what we consider to be the primary contribution of the paper.


2.3       Related work

Private information plays a major role in many economic settings. Screening mechanisms
are widely used to address the problems that arise when information is asymmetrically held.1
This paper relates to several strands of literature, including work in capital budgeting, ran-
dom mechanism design, optimal taxation, and fair division. While each of these literatures
provides us with interesting insights, none directly addresses the class of problems that
Solomon needed to solve, i.e., gauging the bene…t that an agent, who is the source of welfare
for a principal, will generate from an amount of resources. We discuss the di¤erences in
turn.
       The allocation of central resources to decentralized units is the canonical business exam-
ple that motivates this analysis. For example, a corporation center must provide resources
– e.g., capital, marketing capability, R&D support, executive time – to its operating divi-
   1
    The classic reference is Akerlof (1970). Salanié (2005) provides an excellent survey of the basic method-
ology and many applications.


                                                     6
sions.     When studying such situations, it is often assumed that divisions and the center
have divergent interests (see, for example, Harris and Townsend (1981), Harris, Kriebel, and
Raviv (1982) and Antle and Eppen (1985), and Stein (1997)). By contrast, in our paper
agent welfare feeds positively into the principal’s welfare function –an assumption that often
captures the relationship between the center and the division receiving resources. Of course,
the principal would still like to correctly gauge the productivity of each division, and then
fund each division to the level where a dollar of resources equals a dollar of pro…t. A division,
however, being undercharged for such resources, would like far more resources.
       In the literature that does assume that the center bene…ts directly from the productivity
of the agent, the approach has been to establish truthful revelation through auditing, or a
compensation scheme, or both (see, for example, Harris and Raviv (1996), Bernardo, Cai,
and Luo (2001) and Bernardo, Cai, and Luo (2004)). Our mechanism, by contrast, is based
solely on the capital allocations themselves.
       In both Solomon’s examples and our analysis below, random mechanisms elicit private
information.      Other work has also used random mechanisms.2                For example, risk-averse
agents often take on undesirable risk to signal to others certain desirable qualities. Thus,
risk-averse heads of a start-up …rms tend to retain substantial undiversi…ed stakes to assure
the market of their positive views of their …rms’ prospects (Leland and Pyle 1977).                     By
contrast, in the Moselle, Degeorge, and Zeckhauser (2005) model, good types communicate
their quality by choosing less risk. In a di¤erent realm, buyer risk aversion can make it in a
haggling seller’s interest to employ a possibly-…nal o¤er strategy, an o¤er, which if rejected
   2
     See Arnott and Stiglitz (1988) for a typology of situations when randomization is desirable in adverse
selection and moral hazard situations. They neither characterize the shape of the optimal lottery, discuss
when the …rst-best can be obtained, nor consider agents as a source of utility. Random contracts may,
for example, be optimal in a buyer-seller framework where the price discriminating seller (the principal)
wishes to extract the highest surplus possible from the buyer (the agent). High-valuation buyers envy low-
valuation buyers because the latter pay lower prices in the …rst-best. It turns out that random contracts
only dominate deterministic contracts if the high-valuation buyer is more risk-averse than the low-valuation
buyer (Maskin and Riley 1989). By contrast, Solomon considered a situation where the principal and the
agent have proportional utility (except for the cost of resources to the principal). He thus came to the
conclusion that the principal will be able to separate the two types if and only if the connoisseur is less
risk-averse.



                                                     7
may be the …nal o¤er made (Miller, Piankov, and Zeckhauser 2006). Probabilistic insurance
policies can be theoretically appealing (though consumers are reluctant to accept them, an
observation that Wakker, Thaler, and Tversky (1997) explain by reference to the weighting
function of prospect theory).    Three innovations di¤erentiate Solomonic Separation from
these methods: (1) agent productivity plays a central role, (2) risk tolerance on the resource
to be allocated and productivity are correlated, and (3), the principal’s payo¤ is strictly
proportional to that of the agent. Therefore, the principal would like to avoid variability in
budgets.
   The optimal income tax literature has also considered the potential advantages of ran-
domization, in the form of random taxes. High-productivity agents are endogenously richer
than low-productivity agents, and thus have lower marginal utility. The problem for the gov-
ernment is one of redistributing from high-productivity agents to low-productivity agents,
i.e., from richer to poorer, subject to the constraint that individuals choose how much
to work.    Randomization of outcomes for low-productivity agents can theoretically al-
leviate incentive constraints for high-productivity agents su¢ ciently that the additional
scope for redistribution outweighs the immediate welfare losses from the randomization
(Weiss 1976, Stiglitz 1982, Brito, Hamilton, Slutzky, and Stiglitz 1995).     Hellwig (2007)
shows, however, that randomization of taxes is only welfare-enhancing with a particular
type of increasing risk aversion; it is undesirable with weakly decreasing risk aversion. In
Solomon’s problem, unlike in the optimal income tax problem, individuals di¤er in their
utility functions, not in their income earning abilities.
   In fair division problems, the social planner uses agents’ relative preferences between
di¤erent types of goods to divide a set of goods e¢ ciently, while retaining envy-freeness.
(See Steinhaus (1948) for the original problem formulation, Brams and Taylor (1999) for a
popular book on the subject, Pratt and Zeckhauser (1990) for a case study of a practical
application, and Brams (2005) and Pratt (2005) for reviews of existing division rules and
developments of more sophisticated division methods.) Solomon’s approach instead gauges


                                               8
the relative preference between di¤erent amounts of the same good, namely money (though
it could be anything else), to judge how strongly the agent likes the good.3


2.4       Plan of the paper

In what follows, we aim to formalize Solomonic Separation based on risk taking. Section
3 presents the model. It considers a (female) principal who wishes to distribute funds to
a (male) agent.       There are two agent types who di¤er in their level of marginal bene…ts
(either marginal productivity or marginal utility) that they derive from funds and in their
risk tolerance. The central assumption of the model is that the agents who receive higher
marginal bene…ts are also more risk tolerant. Given this condition, the analysis shows how
the principal can screen agents by o¤ering a choice between a nonrandom budget and a risky
budget. Moreover, it proves that an optimizing principal need employ only two prizes with
associated probabilities in the risky budget. The bene…ts of using this screening method can
be substantial.      Indeed, when the ratio of the more risk-averse type’s marginal utility to
that of the other type is unbounded above for a very low payo¤ (e.g., as with CRRA), the
…rst-best outcome can be approached.
       Section 4 discusses the results, and investigates whether marginal bene…ts and risk toler-
ance will be positively correlated, as the model requires. It provides an intuitive argument
showing this is likely to be true in a production setting. For the consumption setting, it
presents supportive evidence from survey results. These results, admittedly only suggestive,
…nd a strong positive correlation between self-reports of utility gains from windfall funds and
risk tolerance. This section contains additional results. For example, it identi…es conditions
under which our screening methods may be feasible but not bene…cial.
       Section 5 concludes, and o¤ers examples of applications.
   3
     Two formal di¤erences are that Solomon works with an expected budget and ensures envy-freeness in
the screening problem between di¤erent types of one agent, while the typical fair division problem involves
a …xed budget and multiple agents. Envy-freeness is not always guaranteed in fair division procedures (see,
for example, the market-like Gap procedure of Brams and Kilgour (2001)).




                                                    9
3    Basic model

Consider a (female) principal and a (male) agent. The principal has or can acquire a stock
of funds she wishes to distribute to the agent. The principal’s bene…t is proportional to that
of the agent. That is, the agent produces bene…ts for the principal through output from
inputs. A corporate division acting as an agent for the corporate center (the principal) is
our prime example. The analysis applies as well when the principal is doling out funds for
consumption (as when a child is an agent for her parents).


Principal. Let x denote a quantity of funds that the principal allocates to the agent. Let
xmin denote the minimum quantity of funds that the principal must give the agent. Often, it
will be reasonable to assume that xmin = 0, i.e., that the principal cannot impose a penalty
on the agent, while in other applications, negative payments will be allowed. The principal
has a linear cost of funds K (x) = cx; and we assume for convenience that the marginal
cost of funds is unity, c = 1: Agent i produces bene…ts Vi (x) ; though some agents generate
greater bene…ts from the principal’s resources than others in a sense made precise below. The
principal derives bene…ts from the agent’s use of resources. For example, both the center’s
and the division’s manager have better career opportunities or bene…t from the company’s
success by way of the compensation plan in place. In particular, we assume that if the
principal gives resources x to a type-i agent, she receives surplus Vi (x)   x. The principal’s
and the agent’s preferences diverge because the principal takes into account both the bene…ts
and costs of funds, whereas the agent only cares about the bene…ts.


Agent. Let i 2 fH; Lg denote the agent’s type as High (H) or Low (L). Let VH (x) and
VL (x) denote the two types’ utility functions. The agent maximizes expected utility.       In
the corporate context, utility would be the output a division can produce utilizing central
resources. Diminishing marginal product would produce the equivalent of risk aversion for a
division that was risk neutral. Because the model is applicable to both the production and


                                              10
the consumption case, we speak of bene…t functions.
       For both agent types, the bene…t function Vi is a strictly increasing and strictly concave
function, i.e., Vi0 > 0; Vi00 < 0. However, agent types di¤er in the bene…t received from being
given resources and in their risk tolerance.
       Regarding marginal bene…ts, we assume that


                             VH0 (x) > VL0 (x) for all x where VL0 (x)      1;                         (1)


which means that the principal recognizes that an additional dollar is worth more to High
than it is to Low in the region of large allocations, where Low’s marginal bene…t is below
the marginal cost of funds.4
       Regarding attitudes toward risk, the central assumption we posit is that High is less risk-
averse than Low in the sense that High’s Arrow-Pratt coe¢ cient of absolute risk aversion is
smaller than Low’s:


                                      VH00 (x)      VL00 (x)
                                               <             for all x:                                (2)
                                      VH0 (x)       VL0 (x)

Note that for (2) to hold, we do not need High’s bene…t function to have a smaller curvature
(-VH00 (x) <     VL00 (x)) everywhere because High has a higher marginal bene…t.
       A natural su¢ cient condition for (1) to hold is that VH0 (x) > VL0 (x) for all permissible x:
However, for some utility functions, as allocations approach the lower bound, Low’s bene…ts
begin to fall more steeply without bound than High’s. Indeed, some of our results will
depend critically on whether the ratio of Low’s marginal bene…ts to High’s marginal bene…ts
is bounded when allocations decrease, i.e., on whether there exists a …nite bound C such
that limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = C < 1. This will be noted below when required.
   4
     Note that the quantity x denotes the change of funds relative to initial wealth. High and Low may have
di¤erent current wealth levels wH and wL : If for bene…t functions VH (wH + x) and VL (wL + x) Low is more
risk-averse than High at x and High has a greater marginal bene…t than Low at x, then there are functions
of x only UH (x) = VH (wH + x) and UL (x) = VL (wL + x) such that they have the same properties. Therefore,
we drop wH and wL for notational convenience.



                                                    11
   There is a fraction    of High types, and a fraction (1              ) of Low types in the population,
where    is common knowledge.


Mechanism. In the main analysis, the agent’s type is private information, giving rise to
the need to design an incentive-compatible mechanism for distributing funds to the agent.
The mechanism we study capitalizes on random allocations to induce the agent to reveal his
type. An allocation for a type-i agent consists of a vector of prizes fxij g, denominated in
                                                                       P
dollars, and their attached probabilities fpij g ; 0 pij 1; such that Jj=1 pij = 1. By this
notation, we mean that the allocation is a lottery that gives type i agent xij with probability
pij : We denote as Ji the number of prizes in the lottery designed for type i. When employing
such a mechanism, the principal maximizes expected net bene…ts, taking into account both
the likelihood of the two types,       and (1       ), and the randomization inherent in the lottery.
That is, the principal chooses fxHj g, fpHj g, fxLj g, and fpLj g in order to maximize:

              "J                                #              "J                          #
               X H                                              X L

                      pHj (VH (xHj )     xHj ) + (1        )          pLj (VL (xLj )   xLj ) .
                j=1                                             j=1


Discussion of marginal assumptions for consumption case. A brief discussion of
the assumptions in (1) and (2), though not required for the corporate resources example,
will be helpful for the pure consumption example. While von-Neumann-Morgenstern utility
uniquely de…nes the Arrow-Pratt coe¢ cient for a particular decision maker, marginal utility
is not uniquely de…ned due to the ability to scale preferences using a positive linear trans-
formation (i.e., to multiply utility by a > 0) without a¤ecting them. Thus, while (2) is a
reasonable assumption, strictly speaking (1) requires making an interpersonal comparison of
utility and, as such, going beyond von-Neumann-Morgenstern utility. While this is true, in
our case condition (1) can be interpreted as an assumption regarding the principal’s view
of the marginal bene…ts received by the two types. Thus, even within the von-Neumann-
Morgenstern framework the assumption is appropriate if the principal judges the High type
to be the connoisseur (and, therefore, wants to give more funds to him) and the Low type

                                                    12
to be the boor (who thus deserves less funds).


3.1      First-best outcome

We begin with the case where the principal knows or can costlessly determine the agent’s
type. The principal, thus, can freely choose the distribution of funds that maximizes her
net welfare. For this case, since all agent types are risk-averse and the principal’s bene…t
is derived from those of the agent, the principal will never wish to introduce variability in
the allocations. Because both she and the agent su¤er from volatile spending, she will try
to avoid it, and straightforward maximization of welfare makes variability zero. The center
thus maximizes, for each agent type i = H; L; her bene…t from this allocation minus her
costs:
                                       max Vi (xi )    xi :                                 (3)
                                        fxi g


The solution is simply
                                         Vi0 xFi B = 1;                                     (4)

where the superscript FB indicates that these are …rst-best allocations.       We also assume
that xFL B >xmin , so that we have an interior solution for the …rst-best. Condition (4) implies
VH0 xFHB = VL0 xFL B : Since the marginal bene…t of High is greater than that of Low at all
levels of funds above Low’s …rst-best, and since bene…ts have diminishing marginal returns,
High must receive a greater allocation than Low. Observation 1 summarizes these results.
Observation 1 (First-best outcome) In the …rst-best, the principal allocates a di¤erent
certainty amount to High and Low, and High receives more. Thus, we have


                                          xFHB > xFL B :                                    (5)




                                                13
3.2       Second-best

When the agent’s type is private information, the principal must design a menu of allocations
designed to maximize her payo¤ given that the agent chooses the allocation that maximizes
his own expected utility.


3.2.1      The full problem

If the principal were to o¤er xFHB and xFL B to the agent, he would choose xFHB , since xFHB > xFL B
and both agent types prefer more funds to less. Thus, as is standard in screening problems,
Low would envy High in the …rst-best allocation, and if the principal asked the agent to reveal
his type, he would claim to be High. The best the principal can do is to o¤er a common menu
to the agent types, consisting of a tuple ffxij g ; fpij ggi=H;L with xij xmin ; Ji 2 N; 0
         PJi
pij   1;   j=1 pij = 1: Our analysis makes use of the Revelation Principle and follows the

typical approach in the screening literature.5 The principal’s complete problem is to
                    "                                         #                   "                                           #
                        X                        X                                    X                      X
        max                    pHj VH (xHj )            pHj xHj + (1          )              pLj VL (xLj )          pLj xLj
 fxij ;pij gi=H;L
                        j2JH                     j2JH                                 j2JL                   j2JL
                                                                                                                          (6)
s.t.

                                       X                          X
                                             pLj VL (xLj )               pHj VL (xHj )                                 (IC-L)
                                      j2JL                        j2JH
                                     X                            X
                                            pHj VH (xHj )                pLj VH (xLj ) :                              (IC-H)
                                     j2JH                         j2JL



       Low’s incentive compatibility constraint (IC-L) requires that Low cannot make himself
better o¤ by choosing the bundle the principal has designed for High. (IC-H) says the
converse for High. Because the principal is giving funds to the agent, we do not consider a
participation constraint (except through a possible ex-post requirement that xij                                    xmin ):
   5
   As is standard in virtually all adverse selection and screening problems, we allow the principal full
commitment capabilities, and permit no post-choice renegotiation.



                                                             14
   For the second-best, the principal can actively choose the probabilities of the lottery. In
practices, the center may only be able to use natural, exogenously given uncertainty, but the
full second-best remains the benchmark for desirable lottery choice.


3.2.2   Simplifying the problem

Three observations simplify solving this problem.
   First, only Low’s IC will be binding. That is because Low envies High in the …rst-best,
but not vice versa. Suppose, by contradiction, that Low’s IC were not binding in the second-
best. Then the principal could reduce Low’s allocation and give some of it to High. That
would produce higher expected utility for the principal.
   Second, the principal will give Low a non-random allocation. Suppose, by contradiction,
that Low receives a lottery. Denote this lottery by L; and let its expected cost to the principal
be K: Let C be Low’s certainty equivalent for this lottery. Consider an alternative allocation
of Low, in which he receives aC + (1     a) L; where a is small. Low is indi¤erent between the
two allocations. For small a, High’s IC is not violated. Since the certainty equivalent, C;
is less than the expected cost K; the principal is better o¤ with the alternative allocation.
Therefore, it cannot be optimal for the principal to give Low a nondegenerate lottery.
   Third, the principal optimally chooses two di¤erent prizes for High, not more. This
important observation dramatically simpli…es the problem, because it implies that we do
not have to choose a possibly very complicated distribution for the allocations, but can
restrict ourselves to …nding two optimal prizes with their associated two optimal probabilities.
Speci…cally, we can show that

Lemma 1 If there exists an N prize lottery for High that solves the principal’s problem,
then there also exists a two-prize lottery that solves the problem.

   Proof. See the Appendix.
   The intuition behind this observation is that if there a solution to the principal’s problem
that o¤ers Low expected utility k and has more than two prizes for High, we can write the

                                               15
lottery for High as a compound lottery consisting of a number of binary lotteries, each of
which o¤ers Low expected utility k. Let VH denote the principal’s expected utility under
the original (optimal) lottery if the agent is High. If the principal has expected utility VH
from the original lottery o¤ered to High, then he has the same expected utility from the
compound lottery as well, since it ultimately o¤ers the same probabilities as the original
lottery. The expected utility for the compound lottery can be written as a weighted sum
of the expectation of each of the binary lotteries. Because the original lottery was optimal,
the expectation of the principal for each of the binary lotteries must be VH . Otherwise,
there must be a binary lottery with a higher expectation of the center’s utility for High,
which contradicts optimality. Thus, there is a binary lottery that does at least as well as the
original lottery.


3.2.3      The simpli…ed problem

Making use of Lemma 1 and the fact that the optimal allocation for Low involves a certain
(non-random) prize, we can simplify the principal’s problem. Let the allocation intended
for High consist of prize b with probability p and prize s with probability 1         p, where b > s.6
Let z denote the non-random amount of funds intended for Low. The center’s simpli…ed
problem is therefore:


            max [fpVH (b) + (1         p) VH (s)g    fpb + (1     p) sg] + (1   ) [VL (z)   z]      (7)
            p;b;s;z



                                 s.t. VL (z) = pVL (b) + (1      p) VL (s) :                     (IC-L)


3.2.4      Analysis

To understand the center’s optimal resource allocation policy, we begin with the case where
Low’s bene…ts fall faster than High’s as allocations approach the minimum. Suppose the
principal o¤ers only a single, non-random allocation, z, that falls between the …rst-best
  6
      Mnemonically, b denotes the big prize and s denotes the small one.


                                                     16
allocations for the two types.    Next, suppose that, in addition to o¤ering z for sure, the
principal also o¤ers a non-degenerate lottery that yields b with probability p and s with
probability 1    p, having expected value z. Since both types are risk-averse, neither type
would choose the lottery over z for sure.      But, since Low is more risk-averse than High,
Low dislikes the new package even more than High. Thus, the principal can increase the
expected value of the uncertain package a little bit to make it attractive for High, and she
can also decrease the certain allocation a little bit without Low starting to prefer the variable
package. Such an adjustment will bene…t the principal whenever the additional cost of the
risk imposed on High is not too great. Below, we show that this is often the case.
   To achieve separation, the center has to take the risk that High receives less than Low
with some probability. In fact, the analysis reveals an important feature of the optimal
lottery that the center o¤ers: The bad outcome for High, s ; is set far below even what Low
would have received in the …rst-best, but the probability of the good outcome, p ; comes very
close to unity. The principal recognizes potential e¢ ciency losses by having states in which
High (and the center) has a marginal bene…t much higher than marginal cost, but because
those states occur rarely, this depresss expected welfare but slightly. Moreover, the principal
is able to allocate more funds to High in the good state. The intuition is that by pushing
High’s funds in the low state towards the lower bound, the principal makes High’s package
more unattractive for Low, at an increasing rate. By doing so, she obtains freedom to push
up High’s allocation in the good state where High has a higher marginal bene…t than Low,
and also to increase the probability that state occurs.
   Proposition 1 summarizes this …rst central result of our analysis:

Proposition 1 (Second-best approximates …rst-best)
If, as allocations approach the minimum, the ratio of Low’s marginal bene…ts to High’s is
unbounded above (i.e., limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = 1 ), then it is possible to approximate the
…rst-best arbitrarily closely.

   Proof. See the Appendix.

                                               17
   If Low’s marginal bene…ts approach in…nity more quickly than High’s as allocations
approach the lower bound, the principal can approximate the …rst-best arbitrarily closely by
o¤ering High a lottery consisting of a very bad prize with small probability and something
close to High’s …rst-best with a very large probability.                Low is given a non-random level
of funds very close to his …rst-best. The condition of Proposition 1 holds, for example,
                                                    1
with CRRA bene…ts, Vi (x) = (1= (1         i )) x
                                                        i   ;   H   <    L;   and xmin = 0; in which case
limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = limx!0 x   L+ H   = 1.
   When the ratio of Low’s marginal bene…t’s to High’s is bounded as allocations decrease,
the …rst-best cannot be approximated arbitrarily closely, but the optimal lottery retains these
                                                                                                          ri x
basic features. (This is the case, for example, for CARA bene…ts, Vi (x) =                  (1=ri ) e            ,
rH < rL ; and xmin = 0; in which case limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = limx!0 e                 rL x+rH x
                                                                                                        = 1:)
Proposition 2 characterizes this solution when the principal …nds it worthwhile to screen.
(We discuss below the conditions for screening to be preferred to o¤ering the same allocation
to all agent types.) In the most general case, what can be shown is that Low receives a …xed
amount greater than his …rst-best and High receives a lottery with prizes above and below
Low’s certain allocation (results 1 and 2 of the Proposition).                    Moreover, in result 3 of
the Proposition, we provide a su¢ cient condition for the principal to o¤er High a lottery
consisting of the worst available prize (xmin ) with low probability and a prize as close as
possible to High’s …rst-best with high probability.


Proposition 2 (Optimal lottery when the ratio of Low’s marginal bene…ts to High’s
is bounded) Suppose limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = C < 1: The principal can still separate
High and Low-productivity types by o¤ering one su¢ ciently variable package and one pack-
age with a non-random allocation. When separating High and Low is worth it, the optimal
allocations can be characterized as follows:
1. xFHB > b > z > xFL B ; s     where the term f g means that xFL B may be greater or smaller
than s :
2. High receives more in expectation than Low: EH = p b + (1                     p )s > z

                                                18
                                                                        VL000 (x)        000 (x)
                                                                                        VH
3. If Low is more downside risk-averse than High, i.e., if              VL00 (x)
                                                                                    >    00 (x) ,
                                                                                        VH
                                                                                                    the principal
chooses s = xmin < xFL B :


       Proof. See the Appendix.
       Thus, three losses of utility are incurred relative to the …rst-best: First, Low’s (non-
random) allocation is greater than his …rst-best allocation of funds.                   Second, both of the
prizes o¤ered to High are smaller than his …rst-best allocation of funds (i.e., even in the
good state, he receives strictly less than the …rst-best amount). Third, High may receive
less than Low (the probability that the bad state is realized is non-trivial). However, these
losses allow the center to screen the agents and earn a higher expected payo¤ than she would
without employing them.
       The strong result in part 3 of our Proposition 2 (which makes use of properties of utility
functions shown in Chiu (2005) and Chiu (2010)) that the optimal lottery may involve the
worst possible outcome for High is particularly striking also because of the condition under
which it is obtained: higher downside risk aversion of Low than High. Not only is downside
risk aversion (or prudence) a plausible property.7 But for many familiar bene…t functions
(in particular for CRRA and CARA bene…ts), we also have that if Low is more risk-averse
than High, he is also more downside risk-averse.8
       Figure 1 plots the optimal allocations for the case of a lower bound of xmin = 0 (a rescaling
that provides an intuitive reference point without sacri…cing generality). For simplicity, the
…gure assumes that the ratio of Low’s bene…t to High’s bene…t goes to unity (and it draws
the x-axis at that level), but this is obviously not required.


   7
     Many commonly used utility functions exhibit it (Gollier 2001), it helps explain actually observed risk
choices such as those at the horse track (Golec and Tamarkin 1998), and prudence is a necessary condition
for absolute risk aversion to be decreasing.
   8
     We use a prudence-based de…nition of more downside risk-aversion. Liu and Meyer (2012) introduce
an alternative de…nition based on decreasing absolute risk aversion (DARA). The de…nitions are closely
connected (see section 4 in their paper).




                                                    19
                        Benefits
                                                                High type




                                                                     Low type

              VL(b*)
              VL(z*)




              VL(s*)
                       s*          xLFB   z*   EH* b* xHFB             Funds



                Figure 1: Second-best screening allocation (Notation given in text.)



     The solid line in Figure 1, connecting the utility levels VL (b ) and VL (s ) ; allows us to
track the expected utility for Low when he mimics High. By Jensen’s inequality, the center
can give High a larger expected allocation than Low, that is, EH = p b + (1            p )s > z :

     Figure 2 presents the solution in an alternative way. Expected utility maximization
models can be represented by a two-moment decision model under some conditions (Sinn
1983, Meyer 1987). Representing the principal’s problem in mean-variance space has the
advantage that we can see immediately the presence of a screening condition. In particular,
in         space (with volatility on the horizontal axis), indi¤erence curves of more risk-averse
agents are more steeply sloped. Under our assumption that Low is more risk-averse, those
with high productivity require fewer additional funds for any increase in fund variability
than those with low productivity. Thus, the indi¤erence curves look as in Figure 2.




                                                    20
                   Expected                                     Low
                   allocation



                    H-FB                                                  High
                                                H-SB




                    L-SB


                    L-FB


                                       Variance of allocation



        Figure 2: Representation of the second-best screening allocation in – space.



    In the …rst-best, zero volatility is optimal, and High receives a larger allocation than Low,
as indicated by the points H      F B and L        F B; respectively. The second-best, compared
to the …rst-best, employs a higher certain allocation for Low (and still no volatility) and a
lower expected and more risky allocation for High, as indicated by the points H            SB and
L     SB; respectively.     The principal trades o¤ giving a larger expected amount to High
against having to do this with greater risk in order to keep Low from mimicking High. The
second-best solution optimally balances these two objectives, such that Low is just indi¤erent
(as can be seen by the fact that L     SB and H            SB lie on the same indi¤erence curve for
Low).



4     Discussion and interpretation

4.1     The correlation between marginal productivity and risk tol-

        erance

The separation of High and Low depends on the positive correlation between marginal pro-
ductivity and risk tolerance. (When High is less risk-tolerant, the best that the principal can


                                                   21
do is to o¤er a …xed budget, i.e., an identical allocation to the two types.) How plausible is
the positive correlation assumption?
   For the production case, it is straightforward to think of situations in which one agent
(a division, for example) is more marginally productive and has a less curved production
function, e¤ectively making the agent more risk tolerant than another agent. The same
factors that lead marginal product to be larger for High plausibly also lead to marginal
product declining more slowly. For example, consider managerial talent. A talented manager
is not only better at making workers productive, but he is also better at maintaining those
productivity gains for additional workers.
   The consumption case is more subtle, but economic intuition suggests that the positive
correlation may be a good starting point. Suppose that two agents receive, in fact, the same
marginal bene…ts from an incremental dollar.      Then the one who is more risk-tolerant –
that is, who has a bene…t function that ‡attens out more slowly – will bene…t more from
a more-than-incremental windfall. To determine the presence or absence of the correlation
between being risk-tolerant and being a connoiseur, we conducted surveys among Masters
and Ph.D. students in Public Policy at Harvard University (the "Harvard sample"), two
separate groups of undergraduate students of economics and psychology at the University
of Zurich ("undergraduate sample 1" and "undergraduate sample 2"), and undergraduate
students of …nance at the University of Zurich (the "…nance sample"). In total, 339 subjects
participated. We pool data from all samples. In the regression analysis we use dummies to
identify each sample.
   The questionnaire consisted of two parts. (See the Appendix for details.)        First, we
employed a widely used format of asking for the degree of risk tolerance, entailing pairwise
comparisons of a risky choice and a certain outcome. In essence, the series of questions we
asked culminated in an answer to the question: Consider a fair lottery where you have a 50%
chance of doubling your income, and a 50% chance of losing a certain percentage, say x%
of your income. What is the highest loss x that you would be willing to incur to agree to


                                             22
taking part in this lottery? Similar questions are proposed by Gollier (2001), Mankiw and
Zeldes (1991), and others.9 Our average …nding of x% = 26% is consistent with the …nding
of Barsky, Juster, Kimball, and Shapiro (1997) who report an average of x=23%.
       Second, we confronted participants with two (imaginary) situations. In situation 1, par-
ticipants were asked to imagine that they had found a Swiss Franc 50 note (US$50 in the
Harvard sample), while in situation 2, participants were asked to imagine that they had just
won in a lottery an amount of Swiss Franc 500,000 (US$500,000 in the Harvard sample). In
both situations, we asked participants to compare themselves to a peer of similar wealth and
income and answer whether they would derive much greater, greater, equal, less or much
less welfare from these positive events. While the average of participants answered that they
would bene…t about the same as their peers, there was substantial variation in the answers.
Figure 3 plots the mean risk tolerance levels in the various categories and the corresponding
standard errors.




   9
     A large literature deals with methods of eliciting risk preferences. Anderson and Mellor (2009) establish
that risk preference estimates can vary greatly across elicitation methods. We opted for a simple approach
because given we wanted to avoid a dependence of the results on the perhaps heterogeneous numerical skills
of survey participants in our overall sample (Dave, Eckel, Johnson, and Rojas 2010). Results in Hey, Morone,
and Schmidt (2009) suggest that pairwise choice methods of the type underlying our survey tend to be less
noisy than alternative methods. Of course, a drawback of our approach is that given the magnitude of
stakes of interest, we had to ask hypothetical questions.


                                                     23
  Figure 3: Risk tolerance and stated marginal bene…ts. The panel on the left plots mean risk
  tolerance levels and standard errors in the …ve marginal bene…t categories for the US$/Swiss
   Franc 50 question (N=275). The panel on the right does the same for the US$/Swiss Franc
  500,000 question (N=232). Total N = 339 (some participants answered both questions). For
                       details on the survey see the text and the Appendix.



       Figure 3 illustrates the central …nding of this analysis: There is a strong positive corre-
lation between risk tolerance and a subjective feeling of being able to use windfall funds in
a more e¤ective, utility-enhancing way than one’s peers.10
       We interpret this as being consistent with the assumption that High marginal utility
types (connoisseurs) are more risk-tolerant. Thus, the …ndings are supportive of Solomon’s
working hypothesis.11 Clearly, this approach is limited and merely exploratory, because it
relies on introspection and subjective assessments, employs solely student subjects, and does
not involve actual monetary stakes.
       Also, there may be unobserved heterogeneity in the population. For example, if survey
participants di¤er substantially on wealth, then answers to our survey question on marginal
utility would miss this unobserved variable. In general, we would expect poorer individuals
to have higher marginal utility of wealth and to be less risk-tolerant. (Evidence in Dohmen,
Falk, Hu¤man, and Sunde (2010) suggests, for example, that credit-constrained individuals
  10
      We coded the answers into the …ve categories and created variables MU50 and MU500k, where MU
denotes marginal utility. Higher numbers denote higher stated marginal bene…ts. Because our marginal
bene…ts variables are ordinal, we used rank-order correlations to statistically determine its relationship with
risk tolerance. Both the Spearman correlation coe¢ cient and Kendall’s tau are positive and indicate a highly
statistically signi…cant relationship, with p-values of 0.05 for the US$/Swiss Franc 50 question and below
0.01 for the US$/Swiss Franc 500,000 question. We also ran regressions with risk tolerance as the dependent
variable and marginal bene…ts as the key explanatory variable (and sample dummies as controls), obtaining
the same …ndings. The detailed results are available on request.
   11
      The data from Solomon’s surveys, alas, are lost in history. Our surveys thus add modestly to the
knowledge about the joint distribution of risk attitudes and preference intensity in the population. Other
researchers, while not yet familiar with Solomon’s Lost Scroll, have also found evidence that is consistent
with his observation. In particular, Dohmen, Falk, Hu¤man, and Sunde (2010) present evidence that
individuals with higher cognitive abilities are less risk-averse. Donkers, Melenberg, and van Soest (2001)
…nd that, controlling for income, education is positively associated with risk tolerance Grinblatt, Keloharju,
and Linnainmaa (2011) show that individuals with higher IQ participate in the stock market to a greater
exent. If the principal wishes to give more funds to an agent with higher cognitive abilities (who may be
able to use these funds more productively for his and the principal’s bene…t), this supports the e¤ectiveness
of Solomon’s screening method.



                                                      24
exhibit a lower willingness to take risks.) Therefore, unobserved unequal wealth levels are
likely to work against the empirical assumption of the model. Thus, our …ndings of a positive
correlation despite the di¤erential wealth factor suggest that the positive relationship holding
wealth constant must be strong. Moreover, in many practical circumstances, we believe, the
principal will have …rm prior information about the wealth level of her agents, which she can
take into account in her allocation decisions.
   Di¤ering decision-making abilities may produce a second realm of unobserved hetero-
geneity. This phenomenon will often work in favor of the assumption: More able agents …nd
more value-generating uses of funds, and they may also avoid the excessive risk aversion well
documented for small gambles (Rabin 2000).
   We recognize, of course, that principals may not merely be interested in allocating re-
sources where they o¤er the highest marginal utility, hence achieving the highest total utility.
They may feel, for example, that less able agents should receive more, even if they will not
put resources to the highest value use. If promoting total utility is not the goal, then our
analysis is silent.


4.2     When is separation not pro…table?

Even when screening is possible, it does not always pay. To see the intuition, consider the
alternative to screening, namely allocating the optimal identical amount to both types. The
principal would solve
                             max [VH (y)] + (1             ) [VL (y)]     y;                (8)
                               y


leading to a y that satis…es


                                   VH0 (y ) + (1        ) VL0 (y ) = 1:                     (9)


Note that as the fraction of one of the two types increases, the …xed budget allocation y
resembles more the …rst-best of that type and less the …rst-best of the other type. In the

                                                   25
limiting case, of course, lim   !1 y   = xFHB and lim   !0 y   = xFL B : There is, however, a crucial
di¤erence between the types: Fixed budgets always give too much to Low, and too little to
High. In addition, this distortion is costlier for High, and hence to the principal as well,
because he has greater marginal bene…ts.
   Of course, no allocation can outperform the …rst-best. We also know that the second-best
approximates the …rst-best arbitrarily closely under the conditions we found above. Thus,
the principal is always able to improve just a little bit on any proposed solution in the second-
best. As the fraction of High types ( ) increases, …xed budgets become more e¢ cient. To
retain the superiority of screening over …xed budgets, as       increases, the principal makes the
lottery ever more extreme, pushing s further and further down towards xmin . Consequently,
it always pays for her to screen in this case. This result is stated in part (i) of the Proposition
below.
   When the principal is constrained in her ability to achieve the …rst-best, things turn out
to be di¤erent and a …xed budget for both High and Low can become a serious competitor
to second-best screening.       When the fraction of High types increases, the principal may
be limited in her abilities to adjust the allocations. As shown, in the typical case, she is
already at the lower limit with the prize in the bad state.          Then, the only way to avoid
Low envying High is to increase the allocation to Low or the allocation to High in the good
state (suitably adjusting the probabilities in High’s lottery so that the associated risk is
su¢ ciently unattractive for Low). It is, however, never optimal to increase High’s allocation
beyond the …rst-best. Doing so would buy the principal a second-order gain at a …rst-order
cost, because at that level of funds, the marginal cost is greater than the marginal bene…t.
Therefore, a single …xed budget may become optimal.
   Conversely, as the fraction of Low types increases ( decreases), the …xed budget strategy
becomes less e¢ cient, because, after all, High’s marginal productivity is higher. Of course,
with many Low and few High types, the screening solution also becomes less attractive. The
Appendix shows that the …rst e¤ect dominates the second. Intuitively, the loss in e¢ ciency


                                                26
from screening comes from distorting High, but if the fraction of High types is small, it costs
virtually nothing to distort them. In sum, if screening pays for some fraction of Low types,
it also pays for all greater fractions.
   A …nal important determinant of the decision whether to screen is whether the types
are su¢ ciently di¤erent, compared to the costs of funds. Intuitively: Even if the fraction
of Lows is high, the center may do well enough with …xed budgets if Lows and Highs are
not that di¤erent and if costs are su¢ ciently high, implying that even in the …rst-best the
principal would give them almost equal allocations. These insights are summarized in the
following


Proposition 3 Consider a …xed budget as an alternative to screening.
(i) If limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = 1, screening is always pro…table.
(ii) Suppose limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = C < 1.
a) If Low is su¢ ciently risk-averse, then it pays to screen.
b) If screening is pro…table at some fraction of Low types, it remains pro…table at all greater
fractions of Low types.


   Proof. See the Appendix.


4.3    Two time periods

While we have framed the screening problem as one of choosing the optimal pair of a non-
random budget and a random allocation, it is also useful to consider the case of two periods
when no learning about productivity takes place between periods. Now we assume that a
bundle the principal can o¤er consists of a certain allocation in each of the periods, and that
agents cannot shift resources between periods. Suppose utility is additive across periods.
   Begin with the case where there are two time periods of equal length, and discounting
is set aside for simplicity. Let xi be the …rst period allocation for type i, and let yi be the
second period allocation for that type. In the …rst-best, xFHB = yH
                                                                  FB
                                                                     > xFL B = yLF B : As


                                              27
before, we know immediately that there is no point in giving di¤erent allocations to Low
(over time). Only High’s allocation needs to be distorted in order to make it unattractive
for Low. The principal’s problem in this case is to


   max [VH (xH ) + VH (yH )      (xH + yH )] + (1      ) [VL (xL ) + VL (xL )   (xL + xL )]     (10)


                              s.t. 2VL (xL )    VL (xH ) + VL (yH )                           (IC-L)

   One solution that is consistent with Low’s IC would be xH = yH : But since not both xH
and yH can be greater than xL = yL , the only solution would be for all spending amounts
to be equal, as in the …xed-budgets case. But it is easy to see that this cannot be optimal
for the principal. Thus, we can check the possibility that xH > xL = yL > yH : (The case
of xH < xL = yL < yH is symmetric.) Doing similar calculations as before, we arrive at the
following

Proposition 4 The principal can separate high and low-productivity types by o¤ering one
su¢ ciently variable package and one package with constant funds over time. In particular:
1. xFHB > xH > xL = yL > xFL B ; yH       where the last term means that xFL B may be greater
or smaller than yH :
2. xH + yH > xL + yL :
                                       xH +yH
   Result 2 can also be written as        2
                                                > xL ; indicating that the expected per-period
allocation to High is bigger than the expected per-period allocation to Low.
   Note that with this scheme the principal will not be able to achieve close to …rst-best
target e¢ ciency. In particular, this case operates as if the principal were restricted to using
lotteries with equal probability on both prizes.     But if time becomes divisible (preferably
in…nitely so), then the principal can shorten the time period spent consuming the low prize
(i.e., reduce the weight on yH ), and lengthen the time period for the high prize. If the
principal can choose both the time periods and the prizes, the problem becomes equivalent
to the main case.

                                                28
4.4      Multiple types

The analysis extends to the case where there are N agent types. Normalize types such that
V10 (x) < V20 (x) < ::: < VN0 (x) for all x: In the …rst-best, xN > xN   1   > ::: > x1 :
   Characterizing the second-best in the case where marginal utility of the lowest type goes
to in…nity faster than that of the other types as funds approach the lower bound proceeds,
in principle, along the same lines as the two-type analysis. Consider, for example, three
types.   Only the local upward incentive compatibility constraints will bind.               The lowest
type receives a non-random prize. The principal needs to make sure that he does not envy
the Medium type. Thus, she gives the Medium type a lottery with a high probability on
Medium’s …rst-best, and a low probability on a very low prize. Also, the center needs to
assure that Medium does not envy High. Thus, High will receive a very high probability on
his …rst-best and a low probability on an even worse prize than the bad prize for Medium.
Note that the proof of the equivalence of an N-prize lottery to a two-prize lottery applies
here as well.
   Depending on the fractions of Lows and Mediums in the population, and depending on
how tight the bounds are on the low prizes for the productive types, the principal may do
far better with screening, or may do no better than with identical budgets. When Low’s
and Medium’s ratios of marginal bene…ts, respectively, to the next higher type’s marginal
bene…ts are bounded, screening may still be desirable. If so, the principal achieves welfare
in between the …rst-best and the …xed budgets allocation.


4.5      Numerical results

We can use numerical simulations to verify the analytical results and to quantify the welfare
gains. The Appendix shows the results of such simulations for CRRA and CARA bene…t
functions.




                                                29
5     Conclusion and applications

In many important contexts, a principal allocates resources to agents who then employ those
resources to create bene…ts for both themselves and the principal. A challenge arises when,
as is frequent, the principal does not know the agents’abilities to create such bene…ts. Such
problems arise in fairy tales, within the family, the corporation, and with nonpro…t and
government programs. In fairy tales, the benevolent king wishes to …nd out which of the
suitors loves his daughter the most. Perhaps the most common everyday example is the
parent distributing resources to a child, not knowing how much bene…t the child will receive
from them. In the business world, a corporate center allocates resources to divisions, not
knowing what level of production or pro…tability will be reaped from those resources. In
academia, deans allocate slots and funds to di¤erent departments, but are likely to be only
partially informed on what bene…ts they will bring to the school. In the world of nonpro…ts,
the philanthropist provides funding to a variety of endeavors, but does not know how e¤ective
each will be in promoting her causes. The common characteristic of all these cases is that
the principal’s bene…t is strongly related, and possibly directly proportional, to those of her
agents. Thus, the agent is the source of the principal’s bene…ts. Nevertheless, a divergence
of interests arises, because an agent is solely interested in his own productivity, and rarely
pays fully for his own budget. The principal is concerned with the productivity of all agents.
    Our central result is that a principal can successfully separate di¤erentially productive
types by using the insight that the degree to which an agent produces marginal bene…ts from
funds can be (and plausibly frequently is) positively correlated with the source’s e¤ective
tolerance for risk. If this correlation between risk tolerance and productivity holds, the
optimal allocation of resources requires giving …xed funds to the less productive type, but
a surprisingly extreme lottery to the productive type. The High producer demonstrates his
capabilities by taking excess risk, such as accepting a very small but positive probability
of receiving a small allocation of resources. When bene…ts to Low fall without bound and
faster than bene…ts to High as resources decrease (as is the case for constant relative risk

                                              30
aversion bene…t functions, which are frequently used in economic modeling), the center is
able to approximate …rst-best expected welfare very closely, even if negative payments are
not permitted. When negative payments are allowed, e.g., if individuals have endowments
that the principal can cut, the principal can always get almost …rst-best welfare for herself
and for the source. Although the extreme lottery required for this outcome may be hard to
implement politically, it provides an important benchmark result for applications.
       In practice, centers can use the external world as a randomization device, even without
necessarily aiming to optimize the probabilities associated with the prizes. Indeed, the model
implies that a center may not wish to minimize uncertainty because of the opportunities it
generates for e¤ective screening. The extreme lottery result of Proposition 2 even suggests
that in many circumstances it is bene…cial to the center to have at its disposal extreme
downside risks that occur with very low probability. As such, the model helps understand
some arrangements in the real world, and it o¤ers recommendations for an improved use of
resources. For example, many individuals pursuing job alternatives have the choice between
a risky and a safe job. The model explains why a …rm (say a university) might want to
have its job risky: This property o¤ers a mechanism for assuring that the person would
bene…t greatly from the position. Thus, the candidate will not leave quickly for another
position. As another example, family companies often encounter the paper’s separation
problem and sometimes use versions of the proposed solution when implementing succession
plans, aiming to give the company to the most deserving heir.12 Finally, as an example of
the concrete normative implications of the model, a venture capital fund, in trying to screen
out unproductive investments, may employ the method proposed here. If it thinks there is a
  12
    Consider the following real case. The founder and CEO of Spedag group, a leading Swiss logistics
company, had three children, A, B, and C. He wanted the child who felt he could get the most value to
lead the company. He did not want to separate ownership and control. (Skill may have been an additional
consideration.) He separated the original company into an operating company (OP), and a holding company
(H). H initially owned everything. Son A received a personal loan from H enabling him to buy OP from
it. OP also rented buildings from H. Daughter B and son C received part of the price that A paid as an
advance on their inheritance, but were excluded from the business. Son A, as sole owner and CEO of OP
bears substantial risk, but in expectation felt his holdings were worth signi…cantly more than the advances
paid to B and C. B and C received enough that they were happy to accept this arrangement.



                                                    31
correlation between productivity and risk tolerance, say because entrepreneurs with a better
idea will have a better fallback, then it could o¤er entrepreneurs a risky package. Thus, the
venture capital investors would not insure entrepreneurs if some extreme untoward event
happened, even though e¢ cient risk spreading would recommend they should. Note that
in principle this has nothing to do with motivating e¤ort, just assessing productivity. Of
course, in real world contexts e¤ort choice will play an additional role.
   Thus, in a variety of settings, gauging the intensity of preferences based on risk taking can
provide a powerful method to increase target e¢ ciency. This screening tool will be e¤ective
whenever there is a positive correlation between marginal bene…ts and tolerance for risk. We
argued that this is a plausible condition when central resources must be allocated to corporate
divisions. Our empirical samples for the consumption case, drawn from Switzerland and
the US, found our required condition satis…ed: Risk tolerance and marginal bene…ts from
resources were positively correlated. Given this straightforward condition, whether dealing
with for-pro…t entities or individuals as bene…ciaries, resource allocation can be implemented
wisely, using the system of Solomon.




                                              32
References
Akerlof, G. (1970): “The Market for ’Lemons,’Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market Mecha-

  nism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488–500.

Anderson, L. R., and J. M. Mellor (2009): “Are risk preferences stable? Comparing an

  experimental measure with a validated survey-based measure,”Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,

  39(2), 137–160.

Antle, R., and G. D. Eppen (1985): “Capital Rationing and Organizational Slack in Capital

  Budgeting,” Management Science, 31(2), 163–174.

Arnott, R., and J. E. Stiglitz (1988): “Randomization with asymmetric information,”RAND

  Journal of Economics, 19(3), 344–362.

Barsky, R. B., T. F. Juster, M. S. Kimball, and M. D. Shapiro (1997): “Preference

  parameters and individual heterogeneity: An experimental approach in the health and retirement

  study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), 537–579.

Bernardo, A. E., H. Cai, and J. Luo (2001): “Capital budgeting and compensation with

  asymmetric information and moral hazard,” Journal of Financial Economics, 61(3), 311–344.

        (2004): “Capital Budgeting in Multidivision Firms: Information, Agency, and Incentives,”

  Review of Financial Studies, 17(3), 739–767.

Brams, S. J. (2005): “Fair division,” in Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, ed. by B. R.

  Weingast, and D. Wittman. Oxford University Press.

Brams, S. J., and D. M. Kilgour (2001): “Competitive fair division,” Journal of Political

  Economy, 109(2), 418–443.

Brams, S. J., and A. D. Taylor (1999): The Win-Win Solution: Guaranteeing Fair Shares to

  Everybody. W. W. Norton, New York.

Brito, D. L., J. H. Hamilton, S. M. Slutzky, and J. E. Stiglitz (1995): “Randomization

  in optimal income tax schedules,” Journal of Public Economics, 56(2), 189–223.

                                                 33
Chiu, W. H. (2005): “Skewness Preference, Risk Aversion, and the Precedence Relations on

  Stochastic Changes,” Management Science, 51(12), 1816–1828.

        (2010): “Skewness Preference, Risk Taking and Expected Utility Maximization,” Geneva

  Risk and Insurance Review, 35(2), 108–129.

Dave, C., C. C. Eckel, C. A. Johnson, and C. Rojas (2010): “Eliciting risk preferences:

  When is simple better?,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 41(3), 219–243.

Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2010): “Are risk aversion and impatience

  related to cognitive ability?,” American Economic Review, 100(3), 1238–1260.

Donkers, B., B. Melenberg, and A. van Soest (2001): “Estimating Risk Attitudes using

  Lotteries: A Large Sample Approach,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 22(2), 165–195.

Golec, J., and M. Tamarkin (1998): “Bettors love skewness, not risk, at the horse track,”

  Journal of Political Economy, 106(1), 205–225.

Gollier, C. (2001): The Economics of Risk and Time. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Grinblatt, M., M. Keloharju, and J. Linnainmaa (2011): “IQ and stock market participa-

  tion,” Journal of Finance, 66(6), 2124–2164.

Harris, M., C. H. Kriebel, and A. Raviv (1982): “Asymmetric Information, Incentives and

  Intra…rm Resource Allocation,” Management Science, 28(6), 604–620.

Harris, M., and A. Raviv (1996): “The Capital Budgeting Process: Incentives and Information,”

  Journal of Finance, 52(1), 111–133.

Harris, M., and R. M. Townsend (1981): “Resource Allocation Under Asymmetric Informa-

  tion,” Econometrica, 49(1), 33–64.

Hellwig, M. F. (2007): “The undesirability of randomized income taxation under decreasing risk

  aversion,” Journal of Public Economics, 91(3-4), 791–816.

Hey, J. D., A. Morone, and U. Schmidt (2009): “Noise and bias in eliciting preferences,”

  Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 39(3), 213–235.

                                                 34
Leland, H. E., and D. H. Pyle (1977): “Informational asymmetries, …nancial structure, and

  …nancial intermediation,” Journal of Finance, 32(2), 371–387.

Liu, L., and J. Meyer (2012): “Decreasing absolute risk aversion, prudence and increased down-

  side risk aversion,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 44(3), 243–260.

Mankiw, N. G., and S. P. Zeldes (1991): “The Consumption of Stock Holders and Non Stock

  Holders,” Journal of Financial Economics, 29(1), 97–112.

Maskin, E., and J. Riley (1989): “Optimal multiunit auctions,” in The economics of missing

  markets and information, ed. by F. Hahn. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Meyer, D. J., and J. Meyer (2005): “Relative Risk Aversion: What Do We Know?,” Journal

  of Risk and Uncertainty, 31(3), 243–262.

Meyer, J. (1987): “Two-moment decision models and expected utility maximization,” American

  Economic Review, 77(3), 421–430.

Miller, N., N. E. Piankov, and R. J. Zeckhauser (2006): “Possibly-…nal o¤ers,” Journal of

  Economics and Management Strategy, 15(3), 789–819.

Moselle, B., F. Degeorge, and R. J. Zeckhauser (2005): “Conspicuous conservatism in risk

  choice,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 35(1), 1–16.

Pratt, J. W. (2005): “Fair (and not so fair) division,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 35(3),

  203–236.

Pratt, J. W., and R. J. Zeckhauser (1990): “The Fair and E¢ cient Division of the Winsor

  Family Silver,” Management Science, 36(11), 1293–1301.

Rabin, M. (2000): “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem,”Econo-

  metrica, 68(5), 1281–1292.

Salanié, B. (2005): The Economics of Contracts: A primer (2nd edition). MIT Press, Cambridge,

  MA.

Sinn, H.-W. (1983): Economic Decisions under Uncertainty. North-Holland, Amsterdam et al.

                                               35
Stein, J. C. (1997): “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources,”

  Journal of Finance, 52(1), 111–133.

Steinhaus, H. (1948): “The Problem of Fair Division,” Econometrica, 16(1), 101–104.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1982): “Self-selection and Pareto e¢ cient taxation,”Journal of Public Economics,

  17(2), 213–240.

Wakker, P. P., R. H. Thaler, and A. Tversky (1997): “Probabilistic Insurance,”Journal of

  Risk and Uncertainty, 15(1), 7–28.

Weiss, L. W. (1976): “The desirability of cheating incentives and randomness in the optimal

  income tax,” Journal of Political Economy, 89(6), 1343–1352.




                                               36
6       Proofs

Lemma 1 If there exists an N prize lottery for High that solves the principal’s problem,
then there also exists a two-prize lottery that solves the problem.
      We will, more generally, prove the following result:
      Lemma A-1.              Let f and g be functions. Let g be monotonically increasing. Let
L = (p1 ; :::pN ; x1 ; :::xN ) be an N prize lottery with xn+1 > xn such that L solves:


                                                  max EL^ f (x)


                                                s:t: EL g (x)         k:

Then there exists a two-prize lottery that also solves the above maximization problem.
      Note that in Lemma A-1, we do not make any assumptions about f: In the model,
f (x) = VL (x)            Kx; i.e., the principal’s objective function.             The parameter k will come
from the certain prize o¤ered to Low.
                                                                                                    PN
      Proof. We will construct a set of binary lotteries B1 ; :::BN such that L =                      i=1   i Bi   and
EBi g (x) = k:
Step 1: Choose the largest and smallest prizes, xN and x1 : Note that g (xN )                           k     g (x1 ) :
Let     1   be the probability on xN such that a binary lottery on x1 and xN has g-expectation
k:

                                        1g   (xN ) + (1        1) g   (x1 ) = k:
                 n             o
                     p1   pN
Let q1 = min           ;
                      1 1    1
                                 : Then L = (1       q1 ) L1 + q1 B1 ; where B1 is the binary lottery that
                                                                  1
puts weight      1   on xN and (1       1)   on x1 ; and L1 =    1 q1
                                                                           (p1   q1 (1   1 ) ; p2 ; :::pN 1; pN     q1    1) :

Note that by construction, L1 puts weight zero on either x1 or xN :
Step 2: Iterate Step 1 applied to L1 using the largest and smallest prizes to which L1 assigns
positive weight. This proceeds after at most N stpes. (Note, if there is a prize xj on L such
that g (xj ) = k; then one of the binary lotteries may be degenerate.)


                                                          37
                                                                      PN
The result is a set of binary lotteries B1 ; :::BN such that L =        i=1   i Bi ;   where each Bi has
g-expectation k (i.e.,   ig   (xi1 )+(1       (xi2 ) = k): By assumption, L maximizes the expec-
                                            i) g
                                                       P
tation of f subject to EL g (x)      k: But EL f (x) = N  i=1 i EBi f (x) : Since the f expectation

of L is a convex combination of the expectations of the Bi ’s, this implies that the expectation
of each of the Bi ’s must equal the expectation of f :


                                          EBi f (x) = EL f (x) :


If not, then there must be a j such that EBj f (x) < EL f (x) : But, in that case there must be
i such that EBi f (x) > EL f (x) : This contradicts the assumption that L was optimal. Thus,
if there is a lottery L (with …nite prizes) that solves the above problem, there is a two-prize
lottery that also solves the problem.

Proposition 1 (Second-best approximates …rst-best)
If, as allocations approach the minimum, the ratio of Low’s marginal bene…ts to High’s is
unbounded above (i.e., limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = 1 ), then it is possible to approximate the
…rst-best arbitrarily closely.
   Proof. We will use the utility o¤ered to Low as the control variable. Let vLF L = VL xFL B
be Low’s utility when he chooses his …rst-best allocation. Similarly, de…ne vLF H = VL xFHB
as Low’s utility when he chooses High’s …rst-best allocation.
We will also use the fact that since High is less risk-averse than Low, there exists a convex
function g () such that VH (x) = g (VL (x)) : Note that, by de…nition, g vLF H = VH xFHB :
Consider a lottery of the following form. With probability p, the lottery o¤ers utility vLF H
(and, thus, High’s …rst-best allocation) to Low. With probability (1             p), the lottery o¤ers
utility m: We will let p go to unity, thus considering a lottery that almost surely allocates
High’s …rst-best funds to whoever chooses the lottery.             At the same time, we will let m
become very small, thus considering a prize close to the lower bound xmin :




                                                   38
Let the lottery keep Low indi¤erent between vLF L for sure and the lottery:


                                   vLF L = pvLF H + (1      p) m:


By convexity, High strictly prefers the lottery to Low’s certain allocation:


                              g vLF L < pg vLF H + (1          p) g (m) :

                                                       F L "v F H
                                                      vL
Consider a sequence of lotteries (p" ; m" ) = ";             L
                                                         (1 ")
                                                                      : By construction, these lotteries
satisfy vLF L = pvLF H + (1   p) m and o¤er Low his …rst-best utility. Note that m" !                1
as " ! 1:
To prove the result, we must show that in the limit as " ! 1; these lotteries also o¤er High
his …rst-best utility. This is indeed true:


                                          p" g vLF H + (1       p" ) g (m" ) =

                               p" g vLF H + (1    p" ) m" (g (m" ) =m" ) =

             lim p" g vLF H   + lim ((1    p" ) m" ) lim ((g (m" ) =m" )) =

                                          g vLF H + vLF L           vLF H   0 = g vLF H ;


where the last line follows from the assumption that limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = 1 and the
fact that, according to L’Hôpital’s rule, limx!xmin VL (x) =VH (x) = limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x).
Since Low earns certain utility vLF L and High’s expected utility approaches VH xFHB ; the
principal’s welfare approaches her …rst-best.

Proposition 2 (Optimal lottery when the ratio of Low’s marginal bene…ts to
High’s is bounded) Suppose limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = C < 1: The principal can still
separate High and Low-productivity types by o¤ering one su¢ ciently variable package and
one package with a non-random allocation. When separating High and Low is worth it, the



                                                 39
optimal allocations can be characterized as follows:
1. xFHB > b > z > xFL B ; s         where the term f g means that xFL B may be greater or smaller
than s :
2. High receives more in expectation than Low: EH = p b + (1                  p )s > z
                                                                       VL000 (x)          000 (x)
                                                                                         VH
3. If Low is more downside risk-averse than High, i.e., if             VL00 (x)
                                                                                   >      00 (x) ,
                                                                                         VH
                                                                                                     the principal
chooses s = xmin < xFL B :


   Proof. The principal’s problem is to


           max [fpVH (b) + (1         p) VH (s)g    fpb + (1    p) sg] + (1            ) [VL (z)      z]     (11)
           p;b;s;z



                                 s.t. VL (z) = pVL (b) + (1    p) VL (s) :                                 (IC-L)

Denote with          the Lagrange multiplier on (IC-L).
1. The proof that xFHB > b > z > xFL B ; s , where the last term means that xFL B may be
greater or smaller than s ; will proceed in three steps.
Step 1: xFHB > b > s : Taking the derivatives of the Lagrangian with respect to b and s;
we obtain (assuming for the time being that p > 0 )


                                        (VH0 (b )   1) = VL0 (b )


                                        (VH0 (s )   1) = VL0 (s ) :

Since (IC-L) is binding (see the main text),          > 0: Thus, the right-hand side of both …rst-
order conditions is positive. Recall that the …rst-best requires VH0 xFHB                    K = 0: But this
implies, by concavity of VH ; that in the second-best, we must have b ; s < xFHB .
Now, if we had b = s ; (IC-L) would collapse into VL (z ) = VL (b ) ; and, thus, z = b :
Thus, the principal would implement …xed budgets, a contradiction to the Proposition’s
premise. For the condition for screening to be worth it, see Corollary 1.


                                                    40
If screening pays, we must have b 6= s ; which implies p 6= 0 and p 6= 1 (justifying the
assumption we made at the beginning of this step):
Step 2: z > xFL B : See the text for the argument that the center will not introduce any risk
into Low’s allocation. Taking the derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to xL ; we obtain


                                (1    ) (VL0 (z )       1) =             VL0 (z ) :


Since     > 0; the right-hand side is negative, and since VL0 xFL B                     1 = 0; we have, by
concavity of VL ; z > xFL B :
Step 3: b > z > s : Clearly this must be the case, because otherwise High (Low) would
receive more than Low (High) for sure and the according IC would be violated.
2. From (IC-L), we have VL (z ) = EVL (b ) : Jensen’s inequality implies EVL (b ) < VL (EH ).
Thus, z < EH :
                                       VL000 (x)             000 (x)
                                                            VH
3. Assume now that we also have        VL00 (x)
                                                   >         00 (x) :
                                                            VH
                                                                        The proof that s = xmin will proceed
in 6 steps. (Per our assumptions, xFL B >xmin , which proves the inequality.)
Step 1: Consider lottery L = (b; p; s; 1           p), a candidate optimum with s > xmin . Consider
an alternate lottery L0 = (y; q; x; 1       q), where b > y > s > x and q > p such that
pb + (1    p) s = qy + (1       q) x and pUH (b) + (1                   p) UH (s) = qUH (y) + (1   q) UL (x).
That is, L and L0 have the same expected value and same expected utiltity for High. It is
easy to show that such L and L0 exists.
Step 2: According to Chiu (2010), Bernoulli lotteries are always (generalized) skewness
comparable. Moreover, distribution F is more skewed to the right than distribution G if and
only if F puts greater probability on the small prize than G does. Hence, L is more skewed
to the right than L0 . Another way to say this is that L0 has more downside risk than L.
Step 3: Theorem 2a in Chiu (2010) establishes that preferences over skewness comparable
lotteries can be represented by a utility function that depends only on the mean ( ), variance
( 2 ) and centralized third moment (m3 ) of the distribution. That is, there exists a function



                                                       41
       2
                                                                                    R
U( ;       ; m3 ) that represents preferences, where U ( ;           2
                                                                         ; m3 ) =       u (x) dF (x). Furthermore,
       2
U( ;       ; m3 ) is increasing in       and m3 and decreasing in            2
                                                                                 if and only if u0 > 0, u00 < 0,
and u000 > 0.
Step 4: Since High is indi¤erent between L and L0 , and m3L > m3L0 , it must be that                         2
                                                                                                             L   >     2
                                                                                                                       L0 .

Otherwise, L would have less risk and less downside risk, and High would necessarily prefer
L to L0 .
Step 5: Corollary 2 (Chiu 2005): Suppose u00 < 0, v 00 < 0, and u000 > 0, and F and G are
                                                                                               v 000 (x)   u000 (x)
strongly skewness comparable, F = G , F > G , and mF > mG . If                                v 00 (x)     u00 (x)
                                                                                                                      and
R               R                  R             R
  u (y) dG (y) = u (y) dF (y), then v (y) dG (y)   v (y) dF (y).
Applying this in our context, it says that the assumption the Low is more downside risk-
                        VL000 (x)        000 (x)
                                        VH
averse than High,       VL00 (x)
                                    >    00 (x) ;
                                        VH
                                                    implies that Low prefers L to L0 .
Step 6:. Whenever s > xmin it is possible to construct lottery L0 that keeps High as well o¤
an has the same expected value as L. Since Low prefers L to L0 , it is incentive compatible for
the Principal to o¤er L0 to High and amount z 0 to Low, where z 0 < z. Since z is greater than
Low’s …rst best, the principal does better o¤ering L0 and z 0 than o¤ering L and z: Hence L
cannot be optimal.




                                                           42
Proposition 3 (Pro…tability of screening)
Consider a …xed budget as an alternative to screening.
(i) If limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = 1, screening is always pro…table.
(ii) Suppose limx!xmin VL0 (x) =VH0 (x) = C < 1. (a) If Low is su¢ ciently risk-averse, then
it pays to screen. (b) If screening is pro…table at some fraction of Low types, it remains
pro…table at all greater fractions of Low types.
       Proof. Part (i) is trivial: Since we know under the stated condition, the second-best
approximates the …rst-best arbitrarily closely, the principal can always …nd a way to do
better than with a …xed budget.
Part (ii)(a): The principal’s problem is to


                        max [fpVH (b) + (1          p) VH (s)g      fpb + (1   p) sg]
                        p;b;s;z

                        + (1      ) [VL (z)   z]                                                   (12)


s.t.
                                      VL (z) = VL (ce (b; s; p)) :                               (IC-L)

where ce (b; s; p) = pVL (b) + (1      p) VL (s) ; i.e., Low’s certainty equivalent for the lottery
(b; p; s; (1   p)) :
Consider the lottery with b = xFHB ; s = xmin and z = xFL B : Three features of this lottery are
worth noting. First, this lottery gives the principal less than the second-best welfare (because
it deviates from the lottery we showed to be optimal in Proposition 3). Second, note that
as Low becomes in…nitely risk-averse, ce (b; xmin ; p) goes to zero. Hence, for Low su¢ ciently
risk-averse, for any p there is a level of risk aversion of Low such that this lottery satis…es
incentive compatibility. Third, assume that the proposed lottery is incentive-compatible.
Then, as p      ! 1; the optimal value of the principal’s objective function approaches the
…rst-best.
                                         1                 1
Construct the following sequence:        n
                                           ; VLn   where   n
                                                               is the probability of the xmin prize, and


                                                    43
VLn is a utility function for Low with the following properties:

                                         dVLn xFL B
                                                    =1
                                             dx

and VLn+1 is more risk-averse than VLn and

                                                       1
                             VLn ce b; xmin ; 1            VL xFL B :
                                                       n

        1
Thus,   n
            represents a sequence of probabilities going to zero, and VLn represents a sequence
of increasingly risk-averse utility functions for Low chosen so that Low prefers his …rst-best
amount for sure to the lottery intended for High.
By construction, this sequence is incentive compatible, and the value of the objective function
converges to the …rst-best as n ! 1: Finally, since no allocation mechanism can do better
than the …rst-best, and since this lottery performs worse than the actual second-best lottery
characterized in Proposition 3, we know that if Low is su¢ ciently risk-averse, it pays to
screen.
Part (ii)(b): Call the optimized value of the principal’s objective function in the above
problem OF ( ) : Note that OF ( ) is continuous by, for example, Berge’s theorem. It is
optimal to screen when there exist p; b; s; and z such that OF ( ) is greater than the
optimal non-screening contract.
     The optimal non-screening contract (yielding a single …xed budget) maximizes VH (y) +
(1      ) VL (y)   y. Let y ( ) denote the y that solves this problem for a particular , and
let V N S ( ) denote the principal’s maximal utility in the no-screening problem. Note that
y (0) = xFL B , y (1) = xFHB , and y ( ) is increasing in .    Since VH (y) > VL (y), and in-
creasing      puts more weight on VH and increases the optimal y, V N S ( ) = VH (y ( )) +
(1      ) VL (y ( ))   y ( ) is increasing in . In other words, V N S ( ) represents the "bar"
for when it is optimal to screen, and this bar decreases as      decreases, i.e., the greater the
fraction of Lows.      The more Lows there are, the easier it is for screening to be optimal,


                                                  44
for a given welfare derived from screening.     It is true that the welfare for the principal
in the screening case also decreases when      decreases. But the …rst e¤ect dominates the
second. To see this, suppose it is optimal to screen when       = ^.    This means that the
value of the constrained is such that OF ^         > V NS ^ .   Since OF ^     is continuous,
OF ( ) > V N S ^ for     close to ^ . For     < ^ , V N S ( ) < V N S ^ . Hence for   < ^ we
have OF ( ) > V N S ^ > V N S ( ). This completes the proof.




                                              45
                                       Appendix


                                   December 12, 2012


This Appendix describes the details of the survey discussed in Section 4.1 of the paper as well
as the numerical results mentioned in Section 4.5 of the paper.


A. Survey
As explained in the paper, we conducted surveys among Masters and Ph.D. students in Public
Policy at Harvard University (the "Harvard sample"), two separate groups of undergraduate
students of economics and psychology at the University of Zurich ("undergraduate sample
1" and "undergraduate sample 2"), and undergraduate students of …nance at the University
of Zurich (the "…nance sample"). The undergraduate sample 1 and 2 participants were paid
a fee of Swiss Franc 15 for …lling out the questionnaire. In addition to …lling out the survey,
the undergraduate sample students had an opportunity to earn another Swiss Franc 15 in a
non-related cognitive task designed for another project. The order of tasks was randomized
and there was no statistically signi…cant di¤erence in answers depending on the order. The
other subjects only …lled out the questionnaire. The …nance sample was collected through
an online survey, the others were collected by paper surveys. In the …nance sample, 63%
of the students answered only the question in situation 1, while 37% of the students only
answered situation 2.
    For the analysis shown in the paper, we only use the questionnaires from individuals who
answered the risk aversion questions consistently (which was the vast majority of individuals).
Thus, we did not use data of indivudals who accepted a lottery where x = 30%, but rejected
one where x = 10%. We also did not use data of individuals who claimed their x was 23%
but still accepted a lottery with x = 50%: Including the data of these (very few) individuals
does not materially a¤ect the results.
    In the survey, the currency of the respective country was used. In the US surveys, this
was the US$. In the Swiss surveys, this was the Swiss Franc.


                                             S-1
    1. Please think about your total yearly income. Please put a checkmark next to the
following elements which form part of your de…nition of income.
    a) Salary and other labor income, such as bonuses
    b) Interests, dividends, rental income, etc.
    c) Financial support from family members
    d) Stipends
    e) Other, please list here ____________

   2. Please consider your total yearly income after taxes. There is no "correct" de…nition;
please keep as comprehensive a de…nition of "income" in mind as possible.
   Let us suppose that you have the chance to double this income with a 50% probability.
But to obtain this chance, you also have to accept the possibility that your income decreases
by x% with 50% probability. That is, we are ‡ipping a coin. Assume, for example, that your
income is $US/Swiss Franc 30,000 and x = 20%. Then, after the coin is ‡ipped, you either
have an income of $US/Swiss Franc 60,000 or your income is reduced to $US/Swiss Franc
24,000. Both events are equally likely, since heads and tails occur with equal probability.
   Are you willing to accept this opportunity and this risk, if
   a) x = 10%, i.e., your income doubles with 50% probability and decreases by 10% with
50% probability
   YES –NO
   b) x = 90%, i.e., your income doubles with 50% probability and decreases by 90% with
50% probability
   YES –NO
   c) x = 20%, i.e., your income doubles with 50% probability and decreases by 20% with
50% probability
   YES –NO
   d) x = 50%, i.e., your income doubles with 50% probability and decreases by 50% with
50% probability
   YES –NO
   e) x = 30%, i.e., your income doubles with 50% probability and decreases by 30% with
50% probability
   YES –NO
   f) x = 40%, i.e., your income doubles with 50% probability and decreases by 40% with
50% probability
   YES –NO




                                            S-2
     3. Assume now that you can choose the maximum loss level that you are willing to
accept, i.e., you can choose x between 0% and 100%. In other words, you will double your
income, or lose x% of it, both with the same probability. How high would you set x% and
still accept to play this "lottery"?
     x = ____ %

    4. Please imagine that you …nd a $US/Swiss Franc 50 note on the street. It is impossible
to identify the owner, and it is, therefore, completely acceptable and morally unobjectionable
that you keep the $US/Swiss Franc 50. Think about your average peer who earns about
the same amount of money as you do, and is approximately equally wealthy. Would you
say that, relative to this average peer, you bene…t

     a lot more

     more

     equally

     less

     a lot less

   from this additional amount of money?

   5. Please imagine now that a very distant relative, whom you have never heard of dies
and happens to leave you $US/Swiss Franc 500,000. Think about your average peer who
earns about the same amount of money as you do, and is approximately equally wealthy.
Would you say that, relative to this average peer, you bene…t

     a lot more

     more

     equally

     less

     a lot less

   from this additional amount of money?




                                            S-3
B. Numerical results
For concreteness, we consider power (CRRA) and CARA bene…t functions. For CRRA
bene…ts,
                                    x1 H            x1 L
                           VH (x) =      ; VL (x) =      ;                  (1)
                                    1  H            1  L

with H <                 L;   implying that High has greater marginal bene…ts than Low for all x > 1: For
CARA,
                                                                 rH x                                                             rL x
                                        VH (x) =    (1=rH )e               ; VL (x) =                                (1=rL )e            ;                                          (2)

with rH < rL ; implying that High has greater marginal bene…ts than Low for all x:
    To make our analysis applicable to both the corporate and the consumption cases, we
choose parameters for the curvature of the bene…t functions that imply typical values for
risk aversion. For CRRA, values in the range of 1 and 5 seem reasonable.1 Calibration
is more di¢ cult for CARA bene…ts, but we choose a range between 0.01 and 0.1. We also
choose marginal costs for the principal to be a meaningful constant for the two respective
cases: cCRRA = 0:5 and cCARA = 0:15.2

                                 CRRA, RRA High=2, RRALow=4                                                       CARA, A RAHigh=0.025, A RALow=0.06
                     0                                                10                                  0                                               1

                    -1                                                9                                                                                   0.9
                                                                                                         -5

                    -2                                                8                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                        -10
                    -3                                                7                                                                                   0.7

                                                                                                        -15
                    -4                                 Utility High 6                                                                         Utility High 0.6
                                                                           Marginal utility




                                                                                                                                                                 Marginal utility
                                                       Utility Low                                                                            Utility Low
         Utility




                                                                                              Utility




                    -5                                 MU High      5                                   -20                                   MU High      0.5
                                                       MU Low                                                                                 MU Low
                    -6                                 MC           4                                                                         MC           0.4
                                                                                                        -25

                    -7                                                3                                                                                   0.3
                                                                                                        -30
                    -8                                                2                                                                                   0.2

                                                                                                        -35
                    -9                                                1                                                                                   0.1

                   -10                                                0                                 -40                                               0
                         0        0.5        1        1.5         2                                           0     20       40          60    80       100




Figure B-1: Marginal bene…ts and costs given CRRA and CARA utility functions. RRA denotes
       relative risk aversion coe¢ cients. ARA denotes absolute risk aversion coe¢ cients.
   1
      In this numerical application we do not distinguish between consumption and wealth. See Meyer and
Meyer (2005) for a discussion of how risk aversion estimates can be compared across these two cases.
    2
      We had set c = 1 for the general analysis above. For CRRA, since the marginal utilities of High and
Low cross exactly at unity, if we had c = 1; the …rst-best would be to give both types the same …xed budget.
If we had c > 1; High should receive less than Low, making the terminology of High and Low inappropriate.



                                                                      S-4
The left panel in Figure B-1 plots bene…ts (left scale) and marginal bene…ts and marginal
costs (right scale) for the case of CRRA bene…ts. The right panel does the same for CARA.
Note that while High is appropriately labeled High because his marginal utility at Low’s
…rst-best is higher than Low’s, it is nonetheless the case that Low’s marginal utility is higher
at very low levels of funds. In the case of CRRA, Low’s bene…ts fall faster without bound
than High’s as funds go to zero. By contrast, with CARA bene…ts, marginal utility is
bounded from above for non-negative funds, and utility is bounded from below. Thus, we
expect almost …rst-best welfare for the principal in the case of CRRA, while only some of
the welfare loss can be recaptured in the case of CARA and non-negative payments.


B.1 First-best
In what follows, we document the setup for CRRA bene…ts. To conserve space, we do
not report the analogous setup for CARA utility. Under perfect information, the principal
                                                                                 1
                  1   i
maximizes (x1i )                                           1
                     cCRRA xi for type i. Thus, xFi B = cCRRA   i
                                                                  : Under our assumptions, this
                 i
implies xFHB > xFL B : Denote the corresponding maximized expected utility of the principal
(net of costs of funds) in the …rst-best by UPF B : In Figure B-1, the …rst-best allocation can
be seen where the marginal bene…ts and marginal cost schedules intersect.


B.2 Fixed budgets
As discussed earlier, when information about productivity is private, one option for the
principal is to allocate identical funds, y, to both types. That is, the principal does not
screen. The corresponding maximized expected welfare of the principal (net of costs of
funds) is UPf ixed :


B.3 Screening through risk aversion
For CRRA bene…ts, the principal’s problem is to

          1                                                                                          1
max                   pb1   H   + (1      p) s1   H      cCRRA fpb + (1          p) sg +(1   )               (z)1   L
                                                                                                                        cCRRA z
      1       H                                                                                  1       L


                                       s.t. z 1   L   = pb1   L   + (1   p) s1       L   :




                                                          S-5
This problem can only be solved numerically. Denote the corresponding maximized expected
utility of the principal (net of costs of funds) by UPSB : We de…ne the recovery rate R as

                                                        UPF B    UPSB
                                        R=1
                                                       UPF B    UPf ixed :

The closer this number is to 100%, the more powerful screening through risk aversion is in
terms of allowing the principal to recapture the welfare losses when only …xed budgets are
available and the agent types cannot be distinguished.


B.4 Results for CRRA bene…ts
Table B-1 illustrates the results for the case of CRRA bene…ts when xmin = 0. Strictly
speaking, there is no solution in this case, as for any candidate solution, the principal can
always improve by moving High’s good allocation closer to the …rst-best, High’s bad allo-
cation further down, the probability on High’s good allocation closer to unity, and Low’s
allocation further down. (Thus, the results obtained in numerical optimization depend on
the sensitivity level one allows for the optimization algorithm.)
    The table holds all parameters except High’s risk aversion …xed at the values given in
the notes to the table. As predicted by the analysis, the principal implements an extreme
lottery for High, which puts almost probability one on High’s …rst-best, and an almost zero
probability on a very low, almost zero allocation. Low receives ever so slightly more than his
…rst-best. For example, when H = 1:5; the principal chooses p = 0:9999987; b = 1:587379
(which is only a little bit smaller than xFHB = 1:5874); s = 0:00271; and z = 1:1893 (which
is only a little bit larger than xFL B = 1:1892):

                                       Table B-1: CRRA bene…ts
                                  First-Best                          Second-Best
    Relative risk aversion                                                                   Recovery
           of High               FB            FB                                             rate %
                               xH         xL             p         b         s        z
            1.00               2.000      1.189          ~1      ~2.000      ~0     ~1.189    ~100%
            1.50               1.587      1.189          ~1      ~1.587      ~0     ~1.189    ~100%
            2.00               1.414      1.189          ~1      ~1.414      ~0     ~1.189    ~100%
            2.50               1.320      1.189          ~1      ~1.319      ~0     ~1.189    ~100%
            3.00               1.260      1.189          ~1      ~1.260      ~0     ~1.189    ~100%
            3.50               1.219      1.189          ~1      ~1.219      ~0     ~1.189    ~100%

 Notes: Relative risk aversion of Low (        L )=   4, marginal cost of funds to the principal (cCRRA )=
    0.5, proportion of High types in the population ( )= 0.5. The approximate numbers for
 second-best allocations are merely illustrative. The problem, strictly speaking, has no solution
                             since more extreme values improve the outcome.

                                                       S-6
   The welfare consequences of using this screening mechanism are striking: Screening
through risk taking achieves virtually the same expected welfare as the …rst-best. The
possibility of a low allocation for High is so remote that even a risk-averse principal is in
expectation almost equally well o¤ in the second-best as in the …rst-best.


B.5 Results for CARA bene…ts
The numerical analysis also helps to illustrate the analytical results for bene…t functions of
the CARA class. Table B-2 shows these results for three absolute risk aversion levels for
High (0.015, 0.025, and 0.05) for a given risk aversion of Low (0.06). In addition, the table
presents the results for di¤erent lower bounds. If there is no lower bound, the …rst-best can
be approximated arbitrarily closely. What is more interesting is to study what happens when
there is a lower bound. With CARA utility, higher risk aversion of Low implies that Low
is also more downside risk-averse than High. Thus, the model predicts that the principal
optimally gives just the lower bound to High in the bad state. The simulation results con…rm
this prediction. Even with that threat, however, the principal cannot approximate …rst-best
welfare as closely as in the CRRA case. The recovery rate with non-negative payments in the
CARA case when High is su¢ ciently di¤erent from Low (0.015 vs. 0.06) is still substantial
at close to two thirds of the welfare di¤erential between the …rst-best and …xed budget. By
contrast, when High has risk aversion 0.025, only 27% can be recovered.
    Things improve dramatically when the principal can threaten to take away initial endow-
ments with even a very small probability. As the rows with lower bounds of -10 and -100
show, the numerical analysis con…rms that the center achieves results closer and closer to
the …rst-best.
    Importantly, and perhaps surprisingly at …rst, the principal and High bene…t if negative
payments are allowed, while Low su¤ers. The reason is that when the principal is constrained
in her design of High’s lottery, she has to distort Low’s allocation and give him too much.
For example, in the Table, when High has risk aversion of 0.015 and the parameters are as
described, Low receives 51.33 for sure when no negative payments are allowed, but only 31.62
(e¤ectively the …rst-best) when negative payments (to High) are allowed. By contrast, even
though High has to accept the possibility of a large negative payment, he is, in expectation,
better o¤ than without the possibility of negative payments. The intuition is that when
another may envy you, opening yourself up to a comparatively cheap (your cost to his)
penalty is likely to be desirable.




                                            S-7
                                   Table B-2: CARA bene…ts


                                     First-Best                     Second-Best
Absolute risk aversion   Lower                                                                 Recovery
       of High           bound     x H FB     x L FB      p        b         s         z        rate %
With c CARA = 0.15
        0.015              0.00    126.48    31.62      0.9545    125.95     0.00    51.33     63.26%
        0.015             -10.00   126.48    31.62      0.9680   126.12     -10.00   47.20     70.92%
        0.015            -100.00   126.48    31.62      0.9996   126.47    -100.00   32.24     98.80%
        0.015               -inf   126.48    31.62        ~1     ~126.48     ~-inf   ~31.62    ~100%
        0.025              0.00    75.88     31.62      0.9502     71.03     0.00    46.03     27.43%
        0.025             -10.00   75.88     31.62      0.9673     72.30    -10.00   43.80     37.73%
        0.025            -100.00   75.88     31.62      0.9997     75.69   -100.00   32.71     94.16%
        0.025               -inf   75.88     31.62        ~1      ~75.88     ~-inf    31.62    ~100%
        0.050              0.00    37.94     31.62      1.0000     34.76      nA      34.76    0.00%
        0.050             -10.00   37.94     31.62      1.0000     34.76      nA     34.76     0.00%
        0.050            -100.00   37.94     31.62      1.0000     34.76      nA     34.76     0.00%
        0.050               -inf   37.94     31.62        ~1       37.94     ~-inf   ~31.62    ~100%
With c CARA = 0.0015
        0.050              0.00    130.05   108.37      1.0000    121.38      nA      121.38   0.00%
        0.050             -10.00   130.05   108.37      0.9999   122.42     -10.00   120.56    0.72%
        0.050            -100.00   130.05   108.37      0.9999   127.41    -100.00   114.47    36.20%
        0.050               -inf   130.05   108.37        ~1     ~130.05     ~-inf   ~108.37   ~100%


 Notes: Absolute risk aversion of Low (rL ) = 0:06: Proportion of High types in the population
                                            ( ) = 0:5:

    If the two types are too similar (such as when one has risk aversion of 0.05 and the other
has 0.06, as shown in the third panel in Table B-2), then screening is not worthwhile even
when the principal can take away up to 100. Only with even larger negative payments in the
bad state can the …rst-best be approached. However, note that the recovery rate in this case
is not a very good measure of the outperformance of screening over …xed budgets. When
the types are very similar, …xed budgets do reasonably well, unless the cost of funds is such
that in the …rst-best the principal would like to give very di¤erent allocations to High and
Low. This is illustrated in the …nal panel. When the cost of funds is signi…cantly smaller,
screening starts to pay, …rst very modestly with moderate negative payments and more so
with higher negative payments. Similarly (not shown), screening pays when the fraction of
Lows increases su¢ ciently.




                                                  S-8
